Christ Crucified: OR, THE MARROW of the GOSPEL, Evidently holden forth in
LXXII Sermons, on the whole 53. Chapter of Isaiah.

WHEREIN The Text is clearly and judiciously opened up, and a great many most
apposite, profoundly spiritual and very edifying points of Doctrine in a
dilectable variety drawn from it; With choice and excellent practical
Improvements made of them.

Wherein also several Adversaries of the Truth, as Socinians, Papists,
Arminians and Antinomians, are smartly, solidly and succinctly reasoned with
and refuted.

Wherein, Moreover many Errors in Practice incident to Professors otherwise
sound and Orthodox in their Opinions are discovered; And not a few grave, deep,
and very concerning Cases of Conscience, soberly and satisfyingly discussed.

By that able Minister of the New Testament Mr. JAMES DURHAM, sometime Minister
of the Gospel at Glasgow, and solemnly called to a public Profession of
Divinity in the University there, and also His Majesty's Chaplain in Ordinary
when He was in Scotland.

1 Cor. 2.2. For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus
Christ, and him crucified.

Gal. 3.1. O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you, that you should not
obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently set forth,
crucified among you?

1 Cor. 1.23. But we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block,
and unto the Greeks foolishness; But unto them which are called, both Jews and
Greeks, Christ, the power of God, and the wisdom of God.

2 Cor. 5.21. For he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him.

1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that
we being dead to sin, should live unto righteousness: by whose stripes ye were
healed.

Augustinus in Psalm 129. Sacerdos noster a nobis accepit, quod pro nobis
offerret; accepit a nobis carnem; in ipsa carne victima pro nobis factus est,
holocaustum factus est, sacrificium factus est.

EDINBURGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the Kings most
Sacred Majesty, Anno DOM. M.DC.LXXXIII.

Unto all Afflicted and Cross-bearing serious Christians, and more particularly
to the right Honorable and truly Noble Lord, WILLIAM Earl of CRAFORD.
IT is one of the greatest Practical Debates and Contests betwixt God and his
own People, privileged with a special interest in him, which they are
naturally inclined longest to keep up, and are loathest to let fall, viz.
Whether he shall guide and govern them, and shape out their lot to them while
they sojourn here in the World, as he himself in his own infinite wisdom shall
think fit, having a blank Submission put by them into his hand, to be filled up
with what kind and quality, with what measure and quantity, and with what
continuance and duration of troubles, trials and afflictions himself pleases:
Or whether he should, as to somethings at least, consult their will and
pleasure, and as it were take their advice, and allow them a liberty to
prescribe to him how he should guide and dispose of them: And indeed to be here
denied to their own will, and absolutely submitted to the will of God, is one
of the highest and most difficultly practicable points of self-denial (to which
notwithstanding all the Disciples and followers of Christ are expressly called,
and wherein he has great delight and complacency, as favoring strong of
entire trust and confidence in him); Yet if we consider these few things, it
will be found that there is all the reason in the World, why they should come
in his will and sweetly submit themselves to it in all things, how cross soever
to their own inclination, without any the least sinful reluctation or
contradiction; which is our privilege and the restoration of our degenerated
nature to its Divine and Primitive integrity.

First, if it be considered that he has most Sovereign, Absolute, and
Incontrollible Dominion over you as the Potter has over the Clay, for ye are
the Clay, and he is the Potter; Nay, he has more absolute Dominion over you
then the Potter has over he Clay, for the Potter makes not the Clay, both the
Clay and the Potter being made by him; Psalm. 100.3. Isa. 64.8.
But he has made you and not you your selves; Ye are all the work of his
hands; He has made you living Creatures, rational Creatures, and new
Creatures, 2 Cor. 5.17
If any man be in Christ he is a new Creature (which is the very flower of the
Creation) and ye are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works:
Ephesians. 2.10
If therefore it be unsuitable and incongruous for the Clay to say to him that
fashioned it, Isai. 45.9
What make thou? Or for a man's work to say to him that he has no hands; It Is
sure much more for you to say to your great Potter and Fashioner, What make
thou of us? Why dealest thou so and so with us? Woe to him that striveth with
his Maker, Romans 9.21
let the potsheard strive with the potsheards of the earth, Jer. 18.6
Has not the potter power over the clay? And are you not not in the hand of
the Lord as the clay as in the hand of the Potter? He might have made you
vessels to dishonor, vessels of wrath fitted to destruction, without being
justly chargeable with any injury done to you; And when he has in the
Sovereignty of his most wonderful free Grace, made you vessels to honor, and
vessels of mercy which he has before prepared unto glory, will ye dare to
quarrel with him for his disposing in his own way of your external condition in
the World, and of these movables and accessories that are wholly extrinsick,
and not at all essential to your Salvation and true Happiness? (For, let all
the pleasures, riches and honors of this World, even all the delights of the
sons of men in their very Extract, Spirits, and Quintessence, and when in a
manner Distilled in a Lembick, till they be made to evaporat the purest
Perfumes of their outmost perfections, be heaped on the Christian; As they make
him no better Christian, nor make any addition at all to his true happiness; So
when he is deplumed and stripped naked of them all, every Bird as it were of
these earthly comforts taking back again from him its own Feather; He is made
never a whit the worse Christian, nor his happiness in the least impared); It
were certainly much more becoming you to say, It is the Lord who can do us no
wrong, and who has undeservedly done us much good, let him do to us what
seems good in his eyes.

Secondly, If it be considered that he is of infinite wisdom, and knows much
better what is good for you then ye do your selves; who often mistake what is
good for you through your corruption, ignorance, partiality, or prejudice; But
he by the most absolute perfection of his blessed Nature is infinitely removed
from all possibility of mistaking what is good in it self, or good for you; and
if you will adventure your Estate and livelihood in the World on able and
faithful Lawyers, when ye your selves are much unacquainted with, and ignorant
of Law, and are disposed to think that the Suit that is commenced against you
will ruin you, while they think otherwise; And if you will commit your health
and life to skilful and painful Physicians or Chirurgions, and receive from the
one many unpleasant and loathsome Potions and Pills; and suffer from the other
such painful Incisions and Injections, such Searchings, Lancings, and Pancings,
such Scarifications, Cauterizings, and Amputations; From all which ye have so
great an aversation, if not abhorrency, Will ye not much rather and much more
confidently commit the conduct and care of your selves and of all that concerns
you to him, of whose undertaking there is no search as to what is good for his
own People, and whose faithfulness in his dealing with them reaches to the
very clouds, Psalm. 36.5. Psalm. 89.33.
and never fails? The skilfullest of these may mistake, none of them being
infallible, and the most faithful of them may possibly at sometimes and in some
things be found unfaithfully neglective, none of them being perfect; But it is
simply impossible for him either to mistake or to be unfaithful, for otherwise
he should deny himself, and so cease to be God, whereof once to admit the
thought is the highest blasphemy; Let therefore your confident trusting of men
in their respective Professions and Callings, make you blush at, and be ashamed
of your distrustings and jealousings of God, and of your quarrellings with him,
even when ye know not for the time what he is doing with you, and when what is
done would have been none of your own choice, but does very much thwart and
cross your natural inclination: Is it not enough that he is infinitely wise in
himself, and for you? May you not therefore safely trust in him, and with
unsollicitous confidence, commit the conduct of your selves and of all your
concerns to him? As knowing that he cannot himself be misled, nor misgovern
you; May you not in Faith without distrustful and perplexing fear follow him,
Heb. 11.18
as faithful Abraham followed him, not knowing whither he went, and cast all
your care on him who cares for you and has made it your great care to be
careful for nothing, 1 Pet. 5.7
Phil. 4.6
and thus even sing care away?

Thirdly, If it be considered, that ye have in your own experience (as the rest
of the People of God have in theirs) found, that in all his by past dealings
with you, even these that for the time were most afflicting, his will and your
true welfare, have been unseparably joined together, and that but very seldom
and rarely your own will and welfare have trysted together; So that ye have
been constrained when at your selves and in cold blood, to bless him that you
got not your will in such and such things, however for the time ye were
displeassed with the want of it; and have been made to think, that if ever ye
had any good days or hours along your Pilgrimage, your most crossed and
afflicted ones, wherein God took most of his will, and gave you least of your
own, have been your best days and hours; Dare you say upon serious and just
reflections that it has been otherwise? Or that ye have not reason as to all
bygone cross providence, even the most apparently crushing of them, since the
day that ye were first brought under the Bond of his Covenant to this day, to
set up as it were your Stone, and to call it Eben-ezer, 1 Samuel 7.12.
The stone of help, saying, Hitherto the Lord has helped us? May you not, and
should you not then humbly and confidently trust him, that ye shall through
grace have reason as to present and future ones how sadly and surprizingly
soever they are or may be circumstantiated, to say, Genesis 22.14
Jehovah-Iireh, the Lord will see or provide? O! but it be a sweet, pleasant,
spiritually wholesome and refreshful Air that breaths in that walk betwixt
Ebenezer and Jehovah-Iireh, wherein a few turns taken by the most afflicted
Christians in their serious, composed, spiritual and lively contemplation,
would through Gods blessing very much contribute quickly to reconcile them to
all their respective Crosses, how cross soever, and to the keeping of them in
better, firmer, and more constant spiritual health.

Fourthly, If it be considered, That by your pettish, fretful male-contented
and unsubmissive contendings, strivings and struglings with him, ye will not
help your selves, ye may well make your own Burden the more uneasy, and your
Chain the heavier; Should it be according to your mind? Job 18.4.
shall the earth be forsaken for you? or shall the rock be removed out of his
place? will ye disannul his judgment? Joh 40.8.
will ye condemn him that ye may be righteous? Job 13.33.
will ye strive against him who gives not account of any of his matters? will
ye tax his Wisdom as if he did not understand what is convenient for you? will
ye teach God knowledge? Job 21.
is it fit that he should come down to your will rather than ye should come up
to his? shall God change and break all his wisely laid measures and methods of
governing his People, and take new ones to gratify your peevish Humors? he
will not be diverted from his Purpose, Job. 23.13, 14.
when he in is one way who can turn him, what his soul desires that he does,
for he performs the thing that is appointed for you: He is more just to
himself (to speak so) and more merciful to you, then to degrade as it were his
infinite Wisdom so far, as to suffer himself to be swayed against the Dictats
of it, by such short-sighted and froward Tutors as you; the great Physician of
Souls is more compassionate and wise than to permit his distempered, and
sometimes even in a manner distracted Patients, to prescribe their own course
of Physic; but he will needs do what he thought fit and resolved to do, Job
34.33
whether ye choose or whether ye refuse; only he would (to say so) have your
consent unto, and your approbation of what he does for the greater peace and
tranquillity of your own minds; Job 34.31, 32.
Surely therefore it is meet, meekly and submissively to be said to God,
whenever and however he chastises, I have born chastisement, I will not offend
any more, that which I know not teach thou me, if I have dane iniquity I will
do no more: It is the surest and shortest way to get our will in so far as may
be for our well, to allow him to take his own will and way with us: for he has
a special complacency in this, and therein gives wonderful vent to the bowels
of his tender compassion toward his chastised and humbly submissive Children;
Jer. 31.18, 19, 20.
Surely (says he) I have heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus, Thou have
chastised me, and I was chastised, as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke; turn
thou me, and I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord my God: surely after that
I was turned, I repented, and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my
thigh; I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of
my youth; Is Ephraim my dear son, is he a pleasant child? for since I spoke
against him, I do earnestly remember him still, therefore my bowels are
troubled for him; I will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord: Thus when
ye come submissively to his hand, he comes as it were sweetly to yours; and as
ye gain nothing by your striving with him, so ye lose nothing but gain much by
your soft stooping and silent submitting to him; If ye humble your selves in
the sight of the Lord, James 4.10. 1 Pet. 5.6.
he shall left you up; humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of
God, that he may exalt you in due time.

Fifthly, If it be considered, That ye stand in need of all the Troubles,
Trials, and Afflictions that ye meet with; whenever ye are in heaviness through
one or more, 1 Pet: 1.6.
or manifold Temptations, it is always and only if need be: And if ye be well
seen in the state and posture of your Soul-affairs; what Graces of the Spirit
are to be quickened and drawn forth into more lively and vigorous Exercise;
what of these precious spices in your Gardens are to be blown upon, not only
by the more gentle and soft South-winds of Consolations, but also by the more
sharp and nipping North-winds of Afflictions and to be beaten as it were in the
Mortar thereof, that they send forth their pleasant and fragrant smell; what
religious Duties are either much neglected, or but very lifelesly, coldly,
formally, lazily, superficially and heartlesly performed, and to what a higher
pitch and peg of Spirituality in the manner of performing them they are to be
scrued up; what Lusts and Corruptions are to be further mo^tified and subdued:
How little your Hypocisie, your Self-love and Self-seeking, your Pride,
Passion, Impatiency, Unplyableness, and Unsubmittedness to the will of God,
your Carnalness, Earthly-mindedness, your immoderate and inordinate love to the
things of the World, your murmuring and fretting at, your dissatisfaction and
discontent with, your present lot; how little these and many other Corruptions
are crucified and brought at under; if, I say, ye be well seen and versed in
the knowledge of your spiritual condition, ye will upon serious and through
reflections find, that ye stand in need of every Affliction ye meet with, as to
all the circumstances thereof; or if ye do not, in so far ye are unacquainted
with, and strangers to your selves and to the state and posture of your
spiritual Affairs; nay, ye will easily find, that all, even your heaviest
Crosses and Afflictions, have enough ado to work you up to what you should be
at; and though sometimes ye may be disposed to think that ye could hardly bear
any more, yet ye will upon due search find that ye could have wanted nothing of
what ye meet with, without a greater prejudice than the Cross has brought
along with it: We are naturally froward and peevish, bent to fretfulness and
discontent, inclining rather to restless endeavoring to have our lot brought
up to our Spirits, then to be at suitable pains to have our Spirits brought
down to our lot; and therefore have much need to be tamed and calmed by the
Cross; This rugged and uneasy temper of Spirit, being the great hinderer, yea
opposite of that stayed and sweet contentation of Heart with and in every
state; which is the very life of a Christians life, Luk 12.15.
consisting (as the Lord says) not in the abundance of the things which we
possess, but in our satisfiedness with them whether abundant or not: To the
attaining unto which blessed temper, the shortest cut and most compendious way,
is, in the first place to be well-pleased and satisfied with God himself, and
with a solidly secured interest in him; and to endeavor in the next place, to
be well-pleasing in his sight, to be gracious in his eyes, to stand well in his
thoughts, even to do always those things that please him; John 8.29.
to which desirable frame of Soul, it we were once through Grace brought
(whereto our bearing of the Yoke, and putting our shoulders under the Cross, is
not a little through Gods blessing contributive;) O! how good natured then and
easy to please would we be found to be, and how ready to construe well of all
that he does to us? seldom out of humor (to speak so) Now, if we stand in need
of all the Afflictions we are trysted with in all their most sad and sorrowful
circumstances (as certainly we do, because God who cannot lie or mistake has
said it,) why should we not submit our selves to his will in measuring them out
to us? or what just reason can there be to be dissatisfied with, or to complain
of Gods giving to, and ordering that for us, whereof we stand in need, and
which we cannot want without being considerably prejudged and worsted by the
want?

Sixthly, If it be considered, That in all your Chastisements and Afflictions
God is graciously driving the blessed design of your spiritual good and profit,
making them all to work together for that desirable end, Romans 8.25. Phil. 1.19.
causing them turn to your salvation through the help of the Prayers of others
of his People, and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ; giving you
assurance by his faithful word of Promise, that thereby your iniquity shall be
purged, Isa. 27.9.
and that this shall be all the fruit (O! strange and admirable condescension
of Grace, all the fruit) to take away sin; and that he will not chastise you as
parents according to the flesh do their children, to wit for their own
pleasure; who however they may have a general design of good to their Children
in their chastising of them, yet through a remainder of corruption in the best
of them, Heb. 12.10.
they are often subjected to such hurries and transports of Passion, when it
comes to the act of chastisement, that they much forget to consult the good and
advantage of the chastised Child, and too much gratify their own pleasure and
humor; but that be will chastise for your profit, that ye may be made
partakers of his holiness: Now, if this be his design in chastising, and if
this be the promised fruit of your Chastisements and Afflictions, why should ye
not therein submit to his pleasure, which has your own profit inseparably
joined within it? if ye your selves do not sinfully lay obstructions in the way
thereof, as otherwise, so particularly by your being displeased with this his
pleasure? which yet his Grace in his own People suffers not to be invincible
nor final: I do not say that our Chastisments and Afflictions do of themselves
produce this profit and bring forth this fruit; for alace! we may from doleful
experience have ere now arived at a sad persuasion, that we are proof against
all applications, excepting that of sovereign efficacious and all-difficulty
conquering free Grace, and that nothing will do at us save that alone: Whatever
means be made use of, this only must be the efficient producer of our profit:
It is a piece of God's royal and incommunicable prerogative which he has not
given out of his own hand to any dispensation, whether of Ordinances never so
lively and powerful in themselves, or of Providence never so cross, loudly
allarming and clearly speaking, abstractly from his own Blessing, effectually
to teach to profit; Isa. 48.17.
and therefore he does (as well he may) claim it to himself alone as his
peculiar privilege, while he says I am the Lord thy God that teaches thee to
profit: Since then this is his design in all the Chastisements inflicted on
his own People, and since he only by his Grace can make it infrustrably take
effect, let him have our hearty allowance and approbation to carry it on
vigorously and succesfully, and let us pray more frequently and fervently, that
by his effectual teaching our profiting may be made more and more to appear
under our Chastisements; and withal in the multitude of our sad thoughts about
them, let his comforts delight our souls, and this comfort in particular, that
in them all he graciously designs and projects our profit, even the making of
us more and more to partake of his holiness.

Seventhly, If it be considered, That all your Trials and Troubles are but of
time-continuance and will period with it; they are but for a season, 1 Pet.
1.6. 2 Cor. 4.17.
yea but for a moment; He will not contend for ever, knowing well if he should
do so, Isa. 37.16.
the spirit would fail before him and the sold which he has made; though they
should follow closs on you and accompany you to your very dying day, yet then
they will leave you and take their last goodnight and everlasting farewell of
you; Rev. 7.15. and 21.4.
sorrow and sighing will then for ever fly away, and all tears on whatsoever
account shall then be wiped from your eyes: It is a great alleviation and
mitigation of the most grievous Affliction, and of the bitterest and most
extreme sorrow, to think that not only it will have a term day and date of
expiration, but that it will quickly in a very short time, even in a moment be
over and at an end; (as a holy Martyr said to his fellow-sufferer in the Fire
with him, It is but winking and our pain and sorrow is all over) and that there
shall be an eternal Tack of freedom from it, and that everlasting solace,
satisfaction and joy without any the least mixture of sorrow and sadness, shall
succeed to it and come in the room thereof: It is but for the little space of
threescore years and ten, Psalm. 90.10
or fourscore (which length most men never come) that his People are subjected
to trouble, and what is that very short moment and little point of time, being
compared with vast and incomprehensibly long Eternity? in respect of which a
thousand years are but as one day, Psalm. 90.4.
or as a watch in the night when it is past. And no doubt the little whiles
trouble, sadness and sorrow of sojourning and militant Saints, is in the depth
of divine Wisdom, ordered so, that it may the more commend and endear that
blessed calm and tranquillity, that fullness of purest joys, and these most
perfect pleasures at his right hand that triumphant Saints shall for evermore
enjoy.

Eighthly, If it be considered that all along the little moment that your
trials and afflictions abide with you, they are, even the sadest and most
severe of them, moderat, and through his grace portable and light; Isa. 27.8.
In measure he debateth with you, and stays his rough wind in the day of his
east wind, And whatever difficulty ye sometimes find undersore pr^ssours, to
get it solidly and practically believed, 1 Cor. 10.13.
yet God is faithful who has promised, and will not suffer you to be tempted
above that which ye are able, but will with the temptation make a way to
escape, that ye may be able to bear it; Isa. 30.18.
He is a God of judgment and discretion, that suits his peoples burdens to
their backs, and wisely proportions their straits to their strength; He puts
not new wine into old bottles: Mat. 9.17. Isa. 42.3. Isa. 57.17, 18.
Neither does he break the bruised reed; And even when he hides his face and is
wroth with his children, and smites them for their iniquity, It is only
Fatherly wrath; And however dreadful that may be and difficult to be born, yet
there is nothing vindictive in it; It is a Fathers anger, but contempered with
a Fathers love, where also love predomines in the contemperature. And indeed
the most extreme, and the very heaviest of all our Afflictions are moderat, and
even light being compared, first with what your sins deserve, exceedingly far
beneath the desert whereof ye are punished, even so far, Ezra 9.13.
that ye may without all complement most truly say, Lam 3.22.
That it is because his compassions fail not that ye are not consumed; That ye
are kept out of Hell, and free from everlasting burnings, to which your many,
various, and grievously aggravated provocations, have made you most justly
liable: So that ye have reason to think any Affliction short of everlasting
destruction from the presence of God, to be a highly valuable piece of
moderation, and to say, Wherefore does a living man complain, a man for the
punishment of his sin? Lam. 3.39. Micah 7.9.
We will bear the indignation of the Lord because we have sinned against him.
2dly, With what, others of the people of God have readily met with, Heb. 12 4.
for we have not resisted to the blood, striving against sin; We have it may be
all this while been but running with the footmen, Je^. 12.5.
when they have been put to contend with horses. 3dly, With what our selves
have sometimes dreaded and been put to deprecat, when horrid guilt has stared
us in the face, and when God was apprehended to be very angry, even threatening
to smite us with the wound of an enemy, Jer. 30.14.
and with the chastisement of a cruel one, to run upon us as a Giant, Job
16.14. and 12. Job 10.16.
to break all our bones; and again to show himself mavelous upon us, by
taking us by the neck, and shaking us in pieces. 4ly, With what our blessed
Lord Jesus suffered for his people, who all the while he sojourned here on
earth, was a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief, Isa. 53.4.
and might most j^stly have said beyond all men, I am the man that has seen
aff^^tion by the rod of his wrath: is there any sorrow like unto mine in the
day when the Lord has afflicted me? And 5ly, Being compared with that far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory which they 2 Cor. 4.17.
work for you. Seeing then that the sharpest and sorest of your afflictions are
in all these and many other respects very moderat, gentle, easy and light, is
there not reason why ye should in them, without grudging, sweetly submit your
selves to his will? heartsomly saying, it might have been much worse, this
falls infinitely short of what we have deserved, blessed be God that it is only
thus, and no worse.

Ninthly, If it be considered, that often when in any more than ordinary
spiritual and lively frame of Soul, ye have in Prayer desired the Lord that he
would take any way, and make use of any means he pleased (wherein your sin
might not be) to make you more serious in the exercise of Godliness, more
effectually to mortify your Corruptions, and to further your conformity to his
Image in Holiness; And ye should through his Grace be content, putting, as it
were, a blank in his hand, to be filled up as himself in his own infinite
wisdom should think fit, declaring that ye were satisfied on the terms
proposed by Jesus Christ, to be his Disciples, and to take up not only a Cross,
or the Cross in general, but your Cross in particular, Mat. 16.24
the Cross that should be shaped out for you however circumstantiated: And when
under some very sad affliction he on the matter bespeaks you thus, I am now
about to grant you your own desire, though it may be in such a way, and by such
a mean, as either would have been none of your own choosing, had it been left
to your choice, or possibly such as ye did not think of; Will ye be displeased
with me, or mistake my hearing of your Prayers, fulfilling your Petitions, and
granting you according to your own hearts desire, because I do it in mine own
way, and by means of my own choising, wherein also ye left and allowed to me a
latitude, and not in your way and by your means, which ye then renounced as not
thinking your selves competent Judges thereof? Alace! here we are often sound
at best to border upon a practical rewing, retracting, and lifting up again of
the Blank-Submission which we professed to lay down before him; and to say by
our freting, repining, dissatisfaction, immoderat heaviness, and despondency of
Spirit, that we were somewhat rash, and not so well advised when we Subscribed
and gave in such a Submission and Surrender of our selves to him; That we did
not think he would have taken such advantage of us, or would have put us thus
sore to it, and, that if we had thought he would have done so, we would have
been better advised before we had thus submitted to him, and with our own
consent put our selves in his reverence; and that if it had been any thing but
this we could have born it (whereas he says nothing but this;) Whereby we do
not only not a little reflect upon him as dealing unkindly, and doing what we
would not have expected at his hand; But also make a sad and humbling discovery
of much unsoundness in our selves as to our offering up of such general
desires, and as to our making of such absolute Submissions to him: Let us
therefore, in order to the justifying of him as both righteous and kind, and to
the vindicating of our selves at least from allowing of any unsoundness,
dissimulation, or unfair, and merely complemental-dealing with God, in our
submitting our selves to him in the general, without any But's or If's, any
Restrictions or Exceptions; Hold at the Submission given; sharply expostulating
with, and severely chiding ourselves for, this discovered practical
contra^^ction and contravention, And we shall find that he has done nothing
unworthy of himself, nor in the least prejudicial to us, but what is according
to our own most deliberat desires, and greatly to our advantage.

It were a very wide mistake if from what is discoursed in this Consideration,
any should conclude that we intend either to commend or allow Christians
praying directly and expressly for Crosses and Afflictions, let be for such and
such Afflictions in particular: For, beside that we neither find it commanded
in the Scriptures, nor allowedly (if at all) presidented or practiced by the
Saints recorded there; And that it seems to be a sinful limiting of the
Sovereign God to a particular mean; We may easily know from sad experience,
with what difficulty, repining and fainting we often bear these Crosses and
Afflictions that we are most clearly called to take on, and that are
unavoidably laid upon us; And how lamentably little for most part we profit by
them; What hope or assurance could we then have that we should either carry
Christianly under, or make suitable improvement of, such Crosses as we should
unwarrantably seek, and pray for to our selves? It Is true, we find some of the
Saints, and these, Stars of the first Magnitude, as Moses, Job, Elias, David,
and Jonas, in their distempered mal-content or fainting fits, passionatly,
preposterously, and precipitantly praying, or rather wishing for death (for
which they were not for the time in so good case); But that was not for death
under the notion of affliction, but rather to prevent future and further
afflictions, or to have a period put to presently incumbent ones. If it should
here be said, why may not Saints pray for afflictions, since they seem to be
promised in the Covenant of Grace, as Psalm. 89.30, 31, 32. Hos. 2.6, 7. and v.
14. And since God has graciously promised to bless all the afflictions of his
people, and to make them turn to their spiritual good, profit and advantage, as
Romans 8.28. and Heb. 12.10. and elsewhere? To the first part of the Objection,
it may be briefly Answered, that these and others such, are not properly and
formally promises of the Covenant of Grace, but rather Covenant-threatnings
(for the Covenant of Grace has its own threatenings suited to the nature
thereof as well as the Covenant of Works has its) though dipped (to say so) in
Covenant-grace and mercy: And to the other part of it as briefly, that God has
promised to bless and to cause to profit by such afflictions and chastisements
as himself thinks fit to inflict and lay on, but not these which we seek and
pray for to our selves: Neither does that Scripture, Psalm. 119. v. 75. I know
-- that in faithfulness thou have afflicted me, say any thing toward
strengthening the Objection, or invalidating the Answers given to it; For the
Psalmist only there humbly and thankfully acknowledges Gods faithfulness in
fulfilling his threatening in afflicting him when he went astray; and in
performing his promise in blessing his affliction to him for preventing his
after-straying, and making him learn better to keep his Commandments; In both
which he is faithful. All that is either expressed or meant in this
Consideration, is, that the Saints often pray God, that he would take his own
way, and use his own means to bring about these great ends mentioned; wherein
there is indeed at least a tacit insinuation, that if he in his wisdom see it
meet to make use of the rod and affliction in order thereto, that they will not
allow themselves to decline the same, nor to mistake him in it; But that rather
they shall through grace be satisfied with, and bless him for fulfilling their
Petitions, and granting them according to their own hearts desires, though it
be by such means: Which is not praying for affliction, but a resolved and
declared Submission to infinite Wisdoms love-choise of his own midses to
effectuat and bring to pass the prayed for ends.

Tenthly, If it be considered, that it now neither grieveth nor troubles any
of all the glorified, triumphing, and Palm-bearing Company before the Throne of
God and of the Lamb, that they were exercised with so many, and so great trials
and tribulations while they were here below; It troubles not John the Baptist
that he was imprisoned, basely murdered and beheaded there in a hole, without
having access to give any public testimony before his death; And at the desire
of a wanton dancing Damsel, through the instigation of her Adulterous and
Incestuous Mother; Nor Stephen (commonly called the Proto-Martyr) that he was
stoned to death as a Blasphemer for giving testimony to the most precious and
comfortable truth of Christ's being the Messiah; Nor Paul that he was thrice
beaten with Rods, and received five times forty stripes save one, that he was
in so many perils by Sea and Land, in the City, in the Country, and in the
Wilderness, by the Heathen, by his own Contrymen, and by false Brethren;
That he was stoned, and suffered all these other things whereof he gives us an
Historical Abridgment in his 2d. Epistle to the Corinthians, chap. 11. Nor does
it trouble any of all these Worthies, of whom the world was not worthy, that
they were cruelly Mocked, Imprisoned, Scourged, Tortured, or Tympanized and
Racked, Stoned, Tormented, Sawen assunder, Killed with the Sword, Tempted,
driven to Dens and Caves of the Earth, and put to wander up and down in Sheep
Skins and Goat Skins, Whose Martyrology the Apostle briefly compendeth, Heb.
11. Nor does it trouble any other of all the Martyrs, Saints and Servants of
Jesus, who have in the several Ages of the Church suffered so many and so great
things while they were here in the World; Nay, all these their sufferings go to
make up a considerable part of their Song of Praise in Heaven, (where the
History of these Wars of and for the Lord, will be very pleasant to them to
read, however sore and bloody they were on earth;) And not only so, but these
of them who have suffered most, wonder much that they have suffered so little,
and that they are come to so excellently glorious a Kingdom through so little
tribulation in the way to it: Believe it, there will be as much matter of
thanksgiving and praise to God found treasured up under the plyes and foldings
(to say so) of the most cross and afflicting providence that ever the People
of God met with here in the World, as under these that for the time were more
smiling and satisfying: Let us then, valuing all things we meet with, according
to the Aspect they have on our spiritual and eternal state, (which is sure the
justest and safest valuation of them) heartily allow him to take his own will
and way in afflicting us.

Eleventhly, If it be considered, that as this Submission to the will of God in
cross and afflicting providence is Chronicled in the Sacred Records to the
perpetual commendation of several of the Saints; Namely of Aaron of whom it is
said, when God had slain his two Sons in a strange and stupendous manner, even
by Fire from Heaven for their presumptuous offering of strange fire before him,
that he held his peace: Levit. 10.3
Of old Eli when he received a sad message, concerning himself and his house by
the hand of young Samuel, who said, It is the Lord, 1 Samuel 3 18
let him do what seems him good: Of Job, after by four several Messengers
(each of them coming immediately on the back of the other, so that he scarcely
got leave to breath betwixt, or the former to finish his lamentable narration)
the terribly allarming tidings were brought him concerning the plundering of
his Oxen and Asses by the Sabeans, and the killing of the Servants with the
Sword; Concerning the consuming of his Sheep and Servants by the Fire of God
falling from Heaven upon them; Concerning the carrying away of his Camels, and
the killing of his Servants by the Caldeans, and concerning the smothering to
death of all his Sons and Daughters while Feasting together, by the falling of
the House upon them; Job 1.21, 22.
who said, The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of
the Lord; In all this not sinning, nor charging God foolishly: Of David, who in
a crowd of crosses says to God, Psalm. 39.9. 2 Samuel 15.25, 26.
I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it: And who, when forced
to flee from Jerusalem by his unnatural and rebellious Son Absalom, and sending
back the Ark thither, with admirable composure and sweet stooping of Soul,
said, If I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again,
and show me both it and his habitation, but if he say thus, I have no delight
in thee, behold, here am I, let him do to me as seems good to him: Of
Hezekiah, when that heavy Message was brought to him by the Prophet Isaiah
concerning the Babylonish Captivity, wherein his Royal Posterity were to have
their deep share, 2 King. 20.19.
who said, Good is the Word of the Lord which thou have spoken, who said
moreover, Is it not good if peace and truth be in my days? If the threatened
doom and sentence shall be for a while suspended and not presently execute: And
of these Christians, who, after they had with much weeping earnestly entreated
the Apostle Paul deservedly very dear to them, not to go up to Jerusalem, where
the Prophet Agabus had foretold he should be apprehended, and put in Bonds, and
perceived that he was inflexibly resolved at any rate of hazard to go thither,
Act. 21, 14
ceased, and submissively said, The will of the Lord be done: As, I say, it is
thus Chronicled to their commendation, so it is a piece of most beautiful and
amiable conformity to the practice of our blessed Lord Jesus, of whom we ought
to be followers as dear children in all these things wherein he is proposed as
a pattern for our imitation, Ephesians. 5.1.
who in a great and grievous agony of trouble, and when most terribly assaulted
by a strong combination of cross and afflicting providence, and after
condition at deprecating of that bitterest Cup and blackest hour, pleasantly,
sweetly, and submissively subjoyned, and said to his Father, Luke 22.42. Mat.
26.32
Nevertheless not my will but thine be done: Not as I will, but as thou will.

Twelfthly and finally, If it be considered, That when the whole contexture and
web of Providence and more especially about the Catholic visible, militant
Church, and every individual Member thereof shall be wrought out, and in its
full length and breadth (as it were) spread forth in the midst of all the
redeemed, perfected, glorified and triumphant company of Saints, standing round
about and with admiration beholding it; there will not be found (to say so) one
misplaced thread, nor one wrong set color in it all, but every thing will be
found to have fallen in, in the fittest place, and in the most beautiful season
and order thereof; O! so rare, so remarkable, so renowned, and so ravishing a
piece as it will by them all unanimously and with one voice be judged and
declared to be? even worthy of the most exquisite Art and infinite Skill of the
great Worker thereof; the severest Critics and most difficultly satisfiable of
them all while here below about more public and more particular
Cross-providences, will then fully and to the height be satisfied, and will
all, without any the least hesitation or jarring, readily and cheerfully bear
him this concordant testimony, Mark 7.37
that he has done all things well, every thing in particular, and all things
in the general; though when he was a doing of them, they often presumptuously
took on them rashly to censure, and to offer their impertinent and crabbed
Animadversions on, and their Amendations and Alterations of several of them;
and will most cordially bless him that he wrought on in his own way about his
Church and each of themselves, without consulting them or following their way,
which would have quite marred the beauty and darkened the luster and splendor
of that most close and curious divine contexture.

Every one of these Considerations has much reason in it to persuade to this
entire and absolute submission to God's will and pleasure, in what is cross to
you, afflicted and sorrowful Christians; but O! how much weight and strength of
sound spiritual reason is there in them all united together (beside the many
other excellent Considerations dispersed up and down these choice Sermons,
stuffed full with strong Cordials, fitted both to recover and to preserve you
from fainting under your many several Afflictions) powerfully to persuade and
prevail with you, even the most averse, untoward, way ward, and cross-gained
(to say so) of you all; without further debate, demur, or delay, in these
things that are most afflicting to you, and do most thwart your inclination, to
come in his will, and pleasantly, without any the least allowed reluctance or
gainsaying to submit to him? how might ye thus possess your Souls in patience,
and how quiet, calm, sedate, and composed might ye be, more especially in
troublesome Times, amidst these things wherewith others are kept in a
continual hurry, almost to the hazard of being distracted by them?

Let them all, my Noble Lord, prevail with your Lordship in particular,
reverently to adore, silently to stoop unto, and sweetly to acquiesce in, the
Lord's sovereign, holy, and wise ordering your many and various complicated
Trials, and more especially his late removing your excellent Lady, the desire
of your Eyes, the Christian and comfortable Companion of your Youth, by his
stroke: As indeed all the ties of nearest and dearest Relations, betwixt
Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children, Brothers and Sisters, etc. are
capable of dissolution, and will all ere long by Death, be actually dissolved;
there being but one tie and knot of Marriage-union betwixt precious Jesus
Christ and the Believer, that by divine ordination is eternally incapable of
any dissolution even by Death it self; which, though it dissolve the
strait-union that is betwixt the Soul and the Body, yet does not at all loose
the straiter bond of Union that is betwixt him and both of them, but it remains
still inviolable; and by virtue thereof, the Believers vile dead Body, shall be
raised again at the last Day, conform to his own glorious Body, and be reunited
to the perfected-soul; which two old Intimats will then meet in far better case
then when they were parted and pulled asunder; for he is an Husband that cannot
grow old, sick or weak, neither can he die; he is an Husband whose Bride and
Spouse is never a Widow, neither has he any Relicts: The drawing on of which
matchless Match and mavelous Marriage, is one great design of these sweet
Sermons, wherein pregnant reasons are adduced by this friend of the Bridegroom,
to persuade Sinners to embrace the offer thereof made to them in the Gospel;
and to make them, who, by his own gracious and powerful insinuations on their
Hearts, have entertained his Proposal, toward making up, and final, closing of
the Match, to bless themselves in their choice, and to bless him, that ever he
was pleased to stoop so very lovv as to become a Suitor to them, with a
peremptory resolution to admit of no refusal, but infrustrably to carry their
Hearts consent to take him for their Lord, Head and Husband, to be to them a
Savior, a Physician, and Treasure, even their All in all, their All above all;
which day of Espousals, as it was the day of the gladness of his heart, so, it
will never be any grief of heart to them. Let all mutinous thoughts about his
dealings with you, be silenced with, It Is the Lord; let not too much dwelling
on the thoughts of your Affliction, to the filling of your heart still with
Sorrow, incapacitate you for, nor divert you from, humble asking the Lord, what
he aims at by all these Dispensations, what he would have you to learn out of
them, what he reproves and contends for, what he would have you amending your
hand in, and what he would have you more weaned, self-denied, and mortified in,
and what he would have you a further length and a greater proficient in; He
has told you the truth, that these things are expedient for you; study to find
them to be so in your own experience. Sure he has by them, written in great,
legible, and capital Characters, yea, even as with a Sunbeam, Vanity,
Emptiness, Uncertainty, Mutability, Unsatisfactoriness, and Disappointment upon
the forehead of all Creature Comforts, and with a loud voice called your
Lordship yet more seriously then ever, to seek after solid Soul-satisfaction in
his own blessed and all-sufficient Self, where it is most certainly to be found
without all peradventure or possibility of misgiving; make haste, my Lord, yet
to come by a more closs confining of all your desires and expectations of
Happiness and Satisfaction to your Soul, to God only, contracting and gathering
them in from the vast and wearisome circumference of earthly Comforts, and
concentering them all in himself as their point; study through Grace, in a
sweet Soliloque, to bespeak your soul, thus, My soul wait thou only upon God,
Psalm. 62.5.
for my expectation is from him: O blessed confinement of desires and
expectations of happiness and satisfaction to the Soul! where it is as
impossible to meet with disappointment as it is impossible not to meet with it
from every other Airth whence it is looked for; alace! it is the scattering of
our expectations and desires of happiness among other objects beside him, that
breeds us all the disquiet, anxiety, and vexation, whereas if we kept our
selves through Grace under a more closs and constant confinement to him, when
this and that, and the other Creature-comfort, whether Person or Thing were
taken from us, there would be no deduction made from, nor any diminution made
of our true Happiness; none of these, how dear and desirable soever being
essentially constitutive of it, nor so much as trenching thereupon; and he in
whom only all our Happiness lies, being the same yesterday, to day, and for
ever, without any variableness or shadow of turning: There are some whom he
loves so well, that he cannot (to speak so) find in his heart to see them thus
to parcel out their Affections, and to dote upon any painted imaginary
Happiness in Creature Comforts; and therefore on design, he does either very
much blast them as to the expected satisfaction from them, or quite remove
them, that by making such a vacuity he may make way for himself to fill it, and
happily to necessitate the person, humbly, prayerfully, and believingly, to put
him to the filling of it; and it is a great vacuity, that he who fills heaven
and earth cannot fill, a little of whose gracious presence and manifested
special love, can go very far to fill up the room that is made void by the
removal of the choicest and most desirable of all Earthly-comforts and
Enjoyments: Happy they, who, when they lose a near and dear Relation or Friend,
or any Idol, they are found of, are helped of God to make Jesus Christ, as it
were, succeed to the same as its heir, by taking that loss as a summonds to
transfer and settle their whole love on him; the object incomparably most
worthy of it, as being altogether lovely, Cant. 5.16.
or all desires; there is no Earthly-comfort, Person or Thing, but has
somewhat in it that is not desirable, and that it would be the better to want,
but there is nothing in him that is not truly desirable, nor any thing out of
him that is worthy to be desired.

I am, my Noble Lord, the more easily prevailed with and encouraged, to address
the Dedication of these Sermons to your Lordship more particularly, when I
remember the unfeigned faith that first dwelt in your Grand mother, as an other
Lois; and in your Mother, as an other Eunice; and more lately, in your own
choice Lady, who, as an other beloved Pers^, labored much in the Lord; and
though she had but a very short Christian race, (in which she was much
encouraged by coming into your Noble Fathers Family, and her beholding how hard
your blessed Mother did run and press toward the Mark, even when in the last
stage and turning in a manner the last stoop of her Christian course); yet it
was a very swift one, wherein she did quite outrun many that were in Christ
long before her; (all three Ladies of Honor, almost (if I need to say almost)
without paralels in their times, in the serious and diligent exercise of
Godliness, and Paterns worthy to be imitated by others); and I trust in your
Lordships self also; yea, and in several others of your elder and younger Noble
Relations (for Grace has had such a draught of Souls amongst you, as it uses
not often to have in Societies of so Noble Extract (for not many noble are
called;) which, as it deservedly draws respect to such of you as are thus
privileged, from the observers of it; so it lays a mighty strong obligation
upon you, to be much for God, and in service to your Generation according to
his will. Further, when I observe your Lordships Christian and Examplary
Carriage, under such a conjunction and combination of so very cross, and almost
crushing calamitous Providence; choosing rather contentedly and satisfiedly to
be (if it so please the Lord, and O! that it may not) the last of that Ancient
and Honorable Family, then to be found endeavoring to keep it from sinking by
any sinful and unwarrantable course, particularly by defrauding just Creditors
(though the Debt was not of your Lordships own contracting) under whatever
specious pretexts and advantages of Law; whereof many make no bones, who, if
they may keep up their superfluities, care not to ruin their Friends engaged
in Suretyship for their Debt, and to live on the Substance of others. Moreover,
when with great satisfaction I notice how much your Lordship makes it your
business to follow your Noble Ancestors in so far as they were followers of
Christ; Which many great Men even in the Christian World, alace, do not much
mind; Not considering that it is true Nobility where God is the Chief and Top
of the Kin, and where Religion is at the Bottom; And what renowned Rauleigh
says, Hinc dictus Nobilis quaesi prae aliis virtute notabilis; And what
another says, Qui ab illustrium majorum splendida virtute degenerarunt Nobilia
pertenta sunt. And finally, when I consider, that in your Lordships retirement
and abstraction from wonted converse and dealing in business, you will have
access at leisure to read them, whereby you may through God's blessing be
sweetly diverted from pensive and not so profitable poring on your affliction,
and be much instructed, convinced, reproved, directed, edified, strengthened,
and comforted. Read them then, my Lord, carefully (as I take it for granted you
will) ponder and digest them well, and I am hopeful, that they shall through
Grace prove contributive to the bringing upon you a considerable growth of
holiness, and to the making of your ways and doings more then ever such, that
others of his people observing the same, shall be comforted, and made to think,
and say, verily God has not done in vain all that he has done to yonder
Nobleman.

That these Substantial and Marrowy Gospel-Sermons may come along to you all,
nay to all the Readers of them, and to your Lordship more particularly, with
showers of Gospel-blessings, is the earnest desire of,

Dearly beloved and afflicted Christians, And my very Noble Lord in particular,
Your Companion in Tribulation, desirous also to be, in the Kingdom and
Patience of Jesus Christ, And your Servant in the Gospel for his sake, J. C.
November 15th. 1682.
Unto the Readers, and more particularly unto the Inhabitants of the City of
Glasgow, of all Ranks.
THough the whole Field of the Sacred and infallibly inspired Scriptures, be
very pleasant and beautiful (a spiritually cool and cleansing, a fructifying,
fresh, refreshful and wholesome air breathing continually there) yet if we may
compare some parts thereof with others, those wherein the treasure, precious
Jesus Christ lies most obvious and open, are certainly most pleasant and
beautiful; And amongst these, such as hold forth his sufferings, and himself as
crucified, most evidently before men's eyes, have a peculiar and passing
pleasantness and beauty in them: If so, then sure this fifty third Chapter of
the Prophesies of Isaiah cannot but be looked at as a transcendantly pleasant,
beautiful, sweet smelling and fragrant piece of Divine Scripture-field, wherein
the Evangelick Prophet discourses of the sufferings of Christ as particularly
and fully, as plainly and pathetically, even to the very life, as if he himself
had been a spectator and eye witness of them. However this sweetest Chapter
from beginning to end, as also the three last Verses of the foregoing, be by
the greatly learned Grotius most miserably perverted, while he industriously
diverts it from the Messiah, and by stretching and curtailing thereof at his
pleasure (as the cruel Tyrant Maezentius did the men he laid on his bed to make
them of equal length with it) wholly applies it to the Prophet Jeremiah in the
first place, only not denying that it has accommodation to Christ, of whom too
he takes but little or no notice in all his Annotations thereon: The
impertinencies and wrestings of which application, are convincingly holden
forth by famous Doctor Owen (who looks on this portion of Scripture as the sum
of what is spoken in the Old Testament concerning the satisfactory death of
Jesus Christ) that Mell of Socinians, in his Vindiciae Evangelicae against
Bidle and the R^covian Catechism, who was a burning and shining light in the
Reformed Churches, though now alace! to their great loss lately extinguished:
And indeed the dealing of that very learned man professing himself to be a
Christian, with this most clear, and to all true Christians most comfortable
Scripture, is the more strange and even stupendous, considering, 1. That
several passages in it, are in the New Testament expressly applied to Christ
Matthew. 8.17. Mark 15.28. Luke 22.27. Acts 8.28. etc. 1 Pet. 2.22. and 24.
, but not one so much as alluded to, in reference to Jeremiah. 2. That the
ancient Jewish Doctors, and the Chaldee Paraphrast, (as Doctor Owen in the
foresaid learned and savoury Book, gives an account) do apply it to him. 3.
That a late Doctor of great note and honor among the Jews, Arabinel,
affirms, that in truth he sees not how one Verse of the whole (several of
which he touches on) can be expounded of Jeremiah; and wonders greatly that
any wise man can be so foolish as to commend, let be to be the Author of such
an Exposition, (as one Rabbi Gaon had been) which is (says he) so utterly
alien and not in the least drawn from the Scripture. 4. That several Jews do
profess that their Rabbis could easily have extricated themselves from all
other places of the Prophets (a vain and groundless boast) if Isaiah in this
place had but held his peace, as Halsius (very late if not present)
Hebrew-Professor at Breda, declares, some of them did to himself. 5. That a
Rabbi by his own confession was converted from a Jew to a Christian by the
reading of this 53. of Isaiah, as the excellent Mr. Boil in his delicate
Discourses on the style of the Holy Scriptures informs us; yea that diverse
Jews have been convinced and converted to the Christian Faith by the evidence
of this Prophecy, as learned and laborious Mr. Pool affirms in his lately
published English Annotations on this Scripture. 6. That the Socinians
themselves have not dared to attempt the accommodation of the things here
spoken of to any other certain and particular person then the Messiah, though,
being so much tortured thereby, they have showed good will enough to it. And 7.
That himself had before written a Learned Defense of the Catholic Faith
concerning Christ's satisfaction against Socinus, wherein also he improved to
notable purpose several Verses of this same Chapter; But in these later
Annotations being altogether silent as to any use-making of them that way; he
as much as he can delivers that Desperado, and his Disciples from one of the
sharpest Swords that lies at the very throat of their cause (for if the Chapter
may be applied to any other, as he applies it wholly to Jeremiah, no solid nor
cogent Argument can be drawn from it for confirming Christ's satisfaction); and
by his never re-inforcing of that defense of his, against the assaults made
upon it by the Socinian Crellius, (though he lived twenty years thereafter) he
seems for his part quite to have abandoned and delivered it up into the hands
of these declared enemies of Christ's satisfaction, yea and of his Godhead. By
which Annotations of his, as by several others on other Scriptures, how much
(on the matter at least) great Grotius has by abusing his prodigious Wit, and
profound Learning subserved the cursed cause of blasphemous Socinus; and
further hardened the already alace much and long hardened poor Jews; And what
bad service he has done to our Glorious Redeemer, and to his Church
satisfied-for, and purchased by his blood, by his sad sufferings, and fore
soul-travel, most clearly and comfortably discoursed in this Chapter, let the
Lord himself and all that love him in sincerity judge; I wish I could and had
reason to say no worse of this admirably learned person here, then that,
Quandoque dormitat Homerus.

Which very many and various, very great and most grievously aggravated
Sufferings, were endured by him, not only in his Body, nor only in his Soul, by
virtue of the sympathy it had with his Body from the in-time and strait union
betwixt them: But also, and mainly, in his blessed humane Soul immediately;
since he redeemed, satisfied for, and saves his Peoples Souls as well as their
Bodies; and the Soul having principally sinned, and being the spring and source
of Sin; Sinners withal deserving punishment in their Souls as well as in their
Bodies; and, being without the benefit of his Mediation, to be punished
eternally both in their Souls and Bodies, and mainly in their Souls; there is
no doubt, the same cogent reason for the Mediator's suffering in both parts of
the Humane Nature assumed by him, that there is for that Natures suffering
which sinned: Which, his sad complaints of the exceeding trouble of his Soul,
putting him to say these strange and stupendous words, What shall I say? Joh.
12.27 Mat. 26.38 Mark 14.33. Luke 22.44 Heb. 5.7
and of the great Sorrow and Heaviness thereof, even to Death, his Amazement,
strong Cries, and Tears, with his Agony and Sweat of Blood, (and that before any
pain was caused to his Body by men, and his conditionate deprecating of that
bitter Cup, put beyond all reach of ranional contradiction: And to think or
say, that only the fear of his bodily sufferings quickly approaching him, did
make these sad impressions upon him, and draw these strange expressions from
him, would make him who is Lord and Master to be of far greater abjectness of
spirit then many of his servants the Martyrs were, and to fall hudgely below
that holily-heroick and magnanimous courage and resolution wherewith they
adventured on extreme Sufferings, and most exquisite Torments; which would be
very unworthy of, and a mighty reflection upon him, who is the valiant Captain
of Salvation, made perfect through suffering, who drank of the brook in the
way, Heb. 2.10 Psalm. 110.7
and therefore lifted up the head: But here is the great and true reason of the
difference betwixt his sad and sorrowful deportment under his Sufferings, and
their solacious, cheerful and joyful deportment under theirs; that they through
his Sufferings and Satisfaction, were persuaded and made sensible of God's
being pacified toward them, and were mightily refreshed by his gracious
comforting presence with them amidst their Sufferings; while be on the contrary
looked upon himself as one legally obnoxious to punishment, fisted before the
terrible Tribunal of the Justice of God, highly provoked by, and very angry at
the sins of his People, who was in a most signal manner, pouring out upon his
soul the vials of his Wrath and Curse, which made him lament^bly and aloud to
cry out of desertion, though not in respect of the perso^al union as if that
had been dissolved, nor yet as to secretly supporting; yet as to such a measure
at least of sensibly comforting and rejoicing presence, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? (here Faith was in its Meridian, though it was dark
Midnight as to Joy); wherewith as such, his Body could not be immediately
affected, spiritual desertion not falling under bodily sense. Whence we may see
how justly the Doctrine of Papists is to be exploded, who deny all suffering in
his Soul immediately, to salve their darling dream of his local descent as to
his Soul, while his Body was in the Grave, into Hell, and to Limbus Patrum to
bring up thence into Heaven the souls of the Fathers; whom, without giving any
reason, or alleging any fault on their part, they foolishly fancy, after
their death till then, to have been imprisoned there, though quiet and under no
punishment of sense, yet deprived of all light and vision of God, and so under
the punishment of less, the greatest of punishments, even by the confession of
some of themselves, whereby they put these holy and perfected souls (for there
they say there is no more purgation from sin, that being the proper work of
their profitable Purgatory) in worse case all that length of time after their
death, then they were when alive on the Earth, where doubtless they had often
much soul-refreshing fellowship with God, and the light of his Countenance
lifted up upon them.

Neither were these his Sufferings in Soul and Body, only to confirm the
Doctrine taught by him (if that was at all designed by him as an end of his
Sufferings so much stumbled at in the time (which yet I will not debate, let be
peremptorily deny) his Doctrine being rather confirmed by his Miracles and
Resurrection) and to leave us an example and pattern how we should suffer (as
non-christian and blasphemous Socinians over) which were mightily to depretiate
and disparage, nay to enervate and quite to evacuate his Sufferings, by
attributing no more to them then is attributable to the sufferings of his
Servants and Martyrs (it is true his Example was an infallible Directory, the
Example of all Examples, but theirs not so, yet this does not at all influence
any alteration of the nature of the end; 2 Cor. 5, 21 Gal. 3.13. 1 Per. 2.24
Isa. 53.5, 6, 8.10, 12 Ephesians. 1.7 Col. 1.14 1 John 2.2
) but also and mainly by them undergone for his People and in their room, and
as sustaining their persons, vice and place, truly and properly by the
Sacrifice of himself to satisfy Divine Justice for their sins: And who I pray
can put any other comment on these Scripture-expressions, whthout manifest
perverting and wresting of them? He has made him to be sin for us who knew no
sin: Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for
us: Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, (which is by
the Apostle subjoyned as a superior end of his sufferings to that of leaving us
an example, discoursed by him immediately before) He was wounded for our
transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, and the chastisement of our
peace was upon him; The Lord laid upon him the iniquity of us all; For the
transgression o my people was he stricken; When thou shall make his soul an
offering for sin: He bare the sins of many; In whom we have redemption through
his blood: Who is the propitiation for our sins; and the like.

Nor did he undergo these sad sufferings for all men in the world, to satisfy
Justice for them, and to reconcile them to God, but only for the Elect, and
such as were given unto him.

For First, The chastisement of their peace only, was laid on him, who are
healed by his stripes, as it is, v. 5. of this 53 of Isai. For the iniquities
of my people was he stricken, says the Lord, v. 8. The same who are called the
Mediators people, Ps. 110.3. for says blessed Jesus to his Father, Joh. 17.10.
All mine are thine, and thine are mine) Who shall, without all peradventure or
possibility of misgiving, be made willing in the day of his power; He only bare
the iniquities of these whom he justifies by his knowledge, v. ii. For
otherwise the Prophets reasoning would not be consequent; He only bare the
iniquities of as many trangressors as he makes intercession for, v. 12. And
that he does not make intercession for all, but for these only who are given to
him, that is, all the Elect, is undenyably manifest from Joh. 17.9. where
himself expressly says, I pray not for the world, but for these whom thou have
given me. Now Gods eternal electing love, and his giving the Elect to the
Mediator in the Covenant of Redemption, to be satisfied for, and saved by him;
and his intercession for them, are commensurable and of equal extent, as is
most clear from Joh. 17.6. Where he says, Thine they were, (to wit by
election) and thou gave them to me, to wit, in and by the Covenant of
Redemption (Gods decree of election being in order of nature prior to this
donation or gift of the Elect in the Covenant of Redemption) compared with v.
9. where he says, I pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for them whom
thou have given me, for they are thine; It is observable, that he says twice
over, I pray for them, manifestly and emphatically restricting his intercession
to them, and excluding all others from it: Why then should not also his
sacrifice (the price of the Redemption of these elected and given ones, agreed
upon in that Covenant betwixt these two mighty Parties) be commensurable with
the former three? Especially since he says, v. 19. For their sakes sanctify I
my self, or separate my self to be a sacrifice. 2. Christ's satisfaction and his
intercession being the two parts of his Priestly Office, and his intercession
being founded on his satisfaction, as it is clearly, v. 12. of this 53. of
Isaiah; (yea, ^ very learned man affirms, that Christ's appearance in Heaven and
his intercession are not properly Sacerdotal acts, but in so far as they lean
on the virtue of his perfected sacrifice); What just, relevant, or cogent
reason can there be to make a disjunction betwixt these parts of his Office,
and to extend the most difficult, operous and costly part to all men, and to
narrow the other which is the more easy part, as that whereby he only deals
for the application of what he has made a purchase of by his satisfaction,
which put him to much sad and sore soul-travel, and to restrict it to the elect
and gifted ones? 3. Does not the Scripture hold forth his death, and the
shedding of his blood, as the great demonstration of his special love to his
own elect people? As is clear elsewhere, so particularly Joh. 15.13. Greater
love then this has no man, then that a man lay down his life for his friends;
Nay, purchased reconciliation through the death of Christ, is by the Holy Ghost
made a greater evidence of divine love in some respect, then the glorification
of the reconciled, according to what the Apostle says, Romans 5.10. For if when
we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more
being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. 4. All the other gifts of God
to sinners, even the greatest spiritual ones, fall hugely below the giving of
Jesus Christ himself, that gift of God by way of eminency; As the Apostle
reasons irresragably, for the comfort of believers, Romans 8.32. He that spared
not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him
also freely give us all things? Will he give the greatest gift and not give the
lesser? As Justification, Adoption, Sanctification and Glorification; Which,
how great soever in themselves, are yet lesser then the giving of Christ
himself to the death; And if it be undeniably certain that he gives not these
to all which are the lesser and lower gifts, why should it be thought that he
has given the higher and greater? 5. Shall that grand expression of the
special love of God, be made common, by extending it to all the world, the
greatest profligats and Atheists not excepted, no not Pharaoh, nor Ahab, not
Judas the traitor, nor Julian the Apostat, nay, nor any of all the damned
reprobates who were actually in Hell when he died and shed his blood? 6. If he
died thus for all, it seems that the new Song of the redeemed, Rev. 5. would
have run and sounded better thus, thou have redeemed us all and every man, of
every kindred and tongue and people and nation to God by thy blood, then as it
there stands by inspiration of the Holy Ghost, Thou wast slain, and have
redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people,
and nation; But who may presume by such an universality to extend and ampliat
what he has so restricted, and to make that common to all which God has
peculiarized to a few favorites? But the Author having much to better purpose
on this Head in these Sermons, I need add no more here.

I shall only further say of these astonishing, in a manner non-plussing, and
surpasing great sufferings of blessed Jesus, that, as they were equivalent to
what all the elect deserved by their sins, and should have suffered in their
own persons throughout all eternity, consistently with the innocence and
excellency of his Person, and with the dignity of his Mediatory Office;
Therefore it is said, v. 9. And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the
rich in his death, or as it is in the Original, In his deaths, in the Plural
Number, as if he had died the death of every one of the Elect, or as if there
had been a conjunction and combination of all their deaths in his one death;
And v. 6. That the Lord laid on him the iniquity of us all, or as the word is,
made the iniquity of us all to meet on him, there having been a solemn tryst,
convocation, and rendezvous (as it were) of all the iniquities of all the Elect
more common and more peculiar, in all their various aggravating circumstances,
not so much as one committed since Adams first transgression, or to be
committed to the day of Judgment, being absent in the punishment of them upon
his person; no wonder that such a load of innumerable thousands and millions of
iniquities made him heavily to groan, and that the consideration thereof made
great Luther say, That Christ was the greatest sinner in all the world, to wit,
by imputation of the guilt of all the sins of all the Elect to him, and by his
having had the punishment of them all laid upon his person: So we may from them
be instructed in these things.

First, Concerning the hight of holy displicence and detestation, that the
Majesty of God has at sin, the only thing in the whole world that his soul
hates, and which in the vile and abominable nature of it has an
irreconciliable antipathy with, and enmity against, his infinitely pure, holy,
and blessed nature, and has a tendency, could it possibly be effected, to seek
after the destruction and annihilation of the very being of God, and is
interpretatively Deicide; The Language of it being, O that there were not a
God; That he cannot behold it in his own sinless innocent, and dearly beloved
Son, though but by imputation (for he was not made formally the sinner, as
Antinomians blasphemously averr) but he will needs in so terrible a manner,
testify his great dislike of, and deep displeasure at it, and take such
formidable vengeance on it, even in his person: Ah! the nature of sin which God
who is of pure eyes, cannot, wherever it be, behold, without perfect
abhorrency of it, is but little thoroughly understood and pondered; Would we
otherwise dare to dally and sport with it, or to take the latitudes in
committing of it at the rate we do? I have sometimes thought, that it is an
error in the first concoction (to say so) of Religion in many Proffessors of
it end pretenders to it; that we have never framed suitable apprehensions of
the most hateful, vile, and abominable nature of sin (which has a great
influence on the superficiariness and overliness of all duties and practices of
Religion) and that many of us had need to be dealt with as skilful
Schoolmasters use to deal with their Scholars that are foundered in the first
Principles of Learning, lest they prove but smatters all their days; to bring
them back again to these; even to be put to learn this first Lesson in Religion
better and more thoroughly to understand the jealousy of God, as to this cursed
thing Sin; For which, though he graciously for the sake of these sufferings of
Christ, pardon the guilt of it to his people, and hear their Prayers, yet will
needs take vengeance on their inventions, Psalm. 99.8
be they never so seriously holy, and eminently serviceable to him and to their
generation according to his will, whereof Moses the Man of God, is a most
memorable instance: That Ancient conceived rightly of the nature of sin, who
said, That if he behoved necessarily either to commit the least sin, or go to
Hell to be tormented there eternally, he would rather wish to desire to go to
Hell, if he could be there without sin.

Secondly, Concerning the severity of Divine Justice in punishing sin, whereof
its punishment in the Person of the Son of God at such a rate, is one of the
greatest, clearest, and most convincing evidences imaginable, to whom he would
not abate one farthing of the Elects debt, but did with holy and spotless
severity exact the whole of it; And though he was the Fathers Fellow, yet he
would needs have him smitten with the awakened Sword of sin-revenging Justice
and Wrath: Zech. 13.7
As if all the executions that had heed done in the earth on men for sin, as on
the old World of the ungodly drowned by the Deludge. On the miscreant
Inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah and of these other Cities, upon whom he
showered down liquid flames of fire and brimstone, even somewhat of Hell in a
manner out of Heaven (Coelum pluebat Gehennam) burning them quick, and frying
them to death in their own skins: On Core, Dathan, and Abiram, and their
associats, upon whom the earth opened and swallowed them up in a most
stupendous manner alive, the rest being consumed by fire sent down from
Heaven. On the one hundred eighty five thousand men of Senacheribs Army, all
slain in one night by an Angel: And on the Israelites, who, by many and various
plagues were wasted and worn out to the number of six hundred thousand fighting
men in the short space of forty years; Reflections on which made Moses, a
witness of all, with astonishment to cry out, Psalm. 90.11
Who knows the power of thy anger? As if, I say, all these terrible executions
of Justice, had been done by a Sword asleep, or in the Scabbard, in comparison
of the execution it did on Jesus Christ the Elects Cautioner, against whom it
awakened was unsheathed, forbished, and made to glitter; So that we may say,
had all the Sons and Daughters of Adam, without the exception of so much as
one, been eternally destroyed, it would not have been a greater demonstration
of the severity of the Justice of God in punishing sin.

Thirdly, Concerning the greatness, incomprehensible vastness, and
unparalellableness of the love of God to the Elect World, which he so loved (O
wonderful so! Eternity will but be sufficient to unfold all that is infolded in
that mysterious so; an (...) that has not an (...), an ita that has not a
sicut, a so that has not an as, That he gave his only begotten Son to suffer
all these things, Joh. 3.16
and to be thus dealt with for them; And of the Mediator who was content, Phil.
2.6, 7, 8. Isa. 53.3 5
though thinking it no robbery to be equal with God, to empty himself, and be
of no reputation, to take on him the shape of a servant, to be a man of sorrows
and acquainted with gri^f, to be chastized, smitten, wounded, and bruised for
their iniquities; To step off the throne of his declarative Glory, o^ of his
Glory manifested to the Creatures, and in a manner to creep on the Footstool
thereof in the capacity of a Worm, and to become obedient even unto the death,
the shameful and cursed death of the Cross: This is indeed matchless and
mavelous love, Joh. 15.13
Greater then which no man h^th, to lay down his life for his friends; But he
being God-man, laid down his life for his enemies that he might make them
friends! Romans 5.10 Ephesians. 39, 10
O! the hight and depth, the bread^h and length of the love of Christ, whereof,
when all that can be said, is said, this must needs be said, that it is a love
that passes not only expression but knowledge, its dimensions being altogether
unmeasurable: So that we may say, if it had seemed good to the Lord, and been
compatible with his spotless Justice, and with his infinite Wisdom, as Supreme
Rector and Governor of the World giving a Law to his Creatures, to have
pardoned the sins of the Elect in the absolutene^s of his dominion that knows
no boundary but what the other Divine attributes set to it, without any
intervenient satisfaction to his Justice at all, (which needs not to be debated
here, especially since God has determined, and in the Scriptures of truth made
publication of his determination, that he will not pardon sin without a
satisfaction, and particularly without this satisfaction made by Jesus Christ);
It would not have been a greater and more glorious demonstration of the
freeness and riches of his love, then he has given, in pardoning them through
the intervention of so difficult and toilsome, of so chargeable and costly a
satisfaction, as is the sad sufferings, and the sore soul-travel of his own
dear Son: Who yet is pleased to account sinners coming to him, and getting good
of him, satisfaction for all that soul-travel: And indeed, which of these is
the greatest wonder and demonstration of his love, whether that he should have
undergone such soul-travel for sinners, or that he should account their getting
good of it, satisfaction to him for the same, is not easy to determine, but
sure both in conjunction together make a wonder passing great, even a most
wonderful demonstration of love.

Fourthly, Concerning what dreadful measure all they may look for who have
heard of these sufferings of Christ, and make not conscience in his own way to
improve them for their being reconciled to God thereby, and whose bond to
Justice will be found still standing over their heads uncancelled in their own
name as proper debtors without a Cautioner; When the innocent Son of God, who
had never done wrong, Isa. 53.9
and in whose mouth no guile was ever found, having but become Surety for the
Elects debt, was thus hotly pursued, and hardly handled, and put (through sad
soul-trouble) to cry, What shall I say? Joh. 12.27
And falling a-groof on the ground with the tear in his eye, in much sorrow and
heaviness even to death, and in a great agony, causing a sweat of blood, though
in a cold night and lying on the earth, conditionally to pray for the passing
of that Cup from him, and for his being saved from that hour; So formidable was
it to his holy Humane Nature, which had a sinless aversation from, and an
innocent horror at what threatened ruin and destruction to it self simply
considered; And which, had it not been mightily supported by the power of the
Godhead united thereto in his person, would have quite shrunk and succumbed
under such an heavy burden, and been utterly swallowed up by such a Gulf of
Wrath: What then will sinners, even all the dyvour debtors, not having
seriously sought after, nor being effectually reached by the benefit of his
suretyship, do, when they come to grapple with this wrath of God, when he will
fall upon them as a giant, breaking all their bones, and as a roaring lion,
Psalm. 50.22. Ezekiel. 22.14. Isa. 33.14. Rev. 6.16, 17.
tearing them to pieces when there will be none to deliver? will their hands be
strong, or their hearts able to endure in the day that he shall deal with them?
then, O! then they will be afraid, and fearfulness will take hold of them, and
make them say, who can stand before the devouring fire, and who can dwell
beside the everlasting burnings? and to cry unto the hills and mountains to
fall on them and to hide them from the face of the Lamb, and of him that fits
on the throne, for the day of his fierce wrath is come, and who is able to
stand? then it will be found in a special manner to be a fearful thing to fall
into the hands of the living God: Heb. 10.31
All such man see in the great sufferings of Christ, as in the clearest glass,
what they are to look for, and most certainly to meet with, for if it was thus
done in the green tree, Luke 23.31
what shall be done in the dry? O! it is a sad, even one of the saddest subjects
of thoughts, to think, that a rational creature shall be eternally supported,
preserved, and perpetuated in its being, by the one hand of God's Omnipotency,
that it may be everlastingly capable of terrible vengeance to be inflicted by
the other hand of his Justice.

Fifthly, Concerning the very great obligation that lies on Believers to love
Jesus Christ, who has thus commended his love to them, by undergoing all these
sad sufferings for their sakes; even out of love to them to become a Curse, to
bleed out his precious life, and to pour out his soul to death for them; which
to do he was under no necessity, nor in the least obliged by them, being
infinitely removed from all possibility of being reached by any obligation from
his creatures, whom be loved, and for whom he designed this grand expression of
his love, the laying down of his life for them, before they or the world had
any being: nay, being by their sins infinitely disobliged: Ah! that most of
these whom he loved so much, should love him (who is altogether lovely) their
duty, his friends and interests for his sake so little; Even so very little,
that if it were possible he could rue or repent of what he has done and
suffered to commend his love to them, they would tempt him to it: And indeed
there is nothing that more speaks forth the freeness of his love then this,
that he should love them so fervently, and continue thus to love them, even to
the end, who are often so very cool in their love to him; Sure, such when in
any measure at themselves, cannot but love themselves the less, and loath
themselves the more, that they love him so little, and earnestly long for that
desirable day, wherein he shall be admired in, and by all them that believe,
and when they shall get him loved as well as ever they desired to love him, and
as well as he shall will them to love him, and when they shall be in an eternal
extacy and transport of admiration at his love.

Sixthly, Concerning the little reason that Believers have to think much of
their small and petty sufferings undergone for him: For what are they all, even
the greatest and most grievous of them, being compared with his sufferings for
them? They are but as little chips of the Cross in comparison of the great and
heavy end of it that lighted on him, and not worthy to be named in one day with
his: All the sad and sorrowful days and nights that all the Saints on earth
have had under their many and various, and sadly circumstantiated crosses and
sufferings, do not by thousands of degrees, come near unto, let be to equal
that one sad and sorrowful night which he had in Gethsemane (beside all the
sorrows and griefs he endured before that time) where he was put to conflict
with the awakened Sword of sin-revenging Justice, that did most fiercely lay at
him, without sparing him; Which terrible Combat lasted all that nighe, and the
next day till three a clock in the afternoon, when that sharpest Sword, after
many sore wounds given him, killed him outright at last, and left him dead upon
the place (who yet, even then when seemingly vanquished and quite ruined, was a
great and glorious Conqueror, having by death overcome and destroyed him that
had the power of death that is the devil, and having spoiled principalities and
powers, Heb. 2.14. Col. 2.15.
making a show of them openly, and triumphing over them in his cross, the
spoils of which glorious victory Believers now divide, and shall enjoy to all
eternity.) Ah! that ever the small and inconsiderable sufferings of the Saints,
should so much as once be made mention of by them where his strange and
stupendous sufferings offer themselves to be noticed.

Seventhly, Concerning the unspeakably great obligation that lies on
Believers, readily, pleasantly and cheerfully, not only to do, but also to
suffer for Christ as he shall call them to it, even to do all that lies in
their power for him, and to suffer all that is in the power of any others to do
against them on his account, who did willingly and with delight do and suffer
so much for them; they have doubtless good reason heartily to pledge him in the
cup of his cross, and to drink after him, there being especially such
difference betwixt the cup that he drunk and that which they are put to drink;
his cup was stirred thick with the wrath of God, having had the dregs thereof
in a manner wrung out to him therein, so that it was no wonder that the very
sight of it made him conditionally to supplicate for its departure from him,
and that the drinking of it put him in a most grievous agony, and cast him in a
top-sweat of blood; yet says he on the matter, either they or I must drink it;
they are not able to drink it, for the drinking of it will distract them and
put them mad, will poison and kill them eternally; but I am able to drink it,
and to work out the poison and venom of it, and though it shall kill me, I can
raise up and restore my self to life again, therefore Father, come away with
it, and I will drink it up and drink it out, this to the everlasting welfare of
these dear souls; not my will but thine be done, for thus it was agreed betwixt
thee and me in the Covenant of Redemption; when as theirs is love from bottom
even to brim (whatever mixture may sometimes be of paternal and domestic
Justice proper and peculiar to God's own Family, and which as the Head and
Father thereof he exercises therein) not so much as one gut or scruple of
vindictive wrath being left therein: Ah! it is both a sin and shame, that there
sho^^d be with such, even with such, so much shyness and shrinking to drink
after him in the cup of his Cross especially considering that there is such a
high degree of honor put upon the suffering Believer for Christ, above and
beyond what is put on the simple Believer in him, so that in the Scripture
account, the suffering Believer is not only but also, according to what the
Apostle says Philip. 1.29. To you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not
only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake.

Eighthly, Concerning what mighty obligation lies on Believers to mourn and
weep, to be sad and sorrowful for sin, how can they look on him whom they have
thus bruised, wounded and pierced by their sins without the tear in their eye,
without mourning for him and being in bitterness as a man is for his
firstborn, and for his only begotten son? when they think (as all of them on
serious consideration will find reason to think) that if their sins kept the
tryst and rendezvous when all the sins of all the Elect did meet and were laid
on him, then sure there came no greater company and more numerous troop of sins
to that solemn rendezvous from any of all the redeemed then came from them; and
that he had not a heavier load and burden of the sins of any then he had of
theirs, whereby he was even pressed as a cart is pressed down under the
sheaves, and was made most grievously to groan, even with the groanings of a
deadly wounded man: and that if he was wounded and pierced by their iniquities,
then surely he was more deeply wounded and pierced by the iniquities of none
then by theirs; O! what mourning should this cause to them? even such mourning
as was at Hadadrimmon in the Valley of Megiddo, on the occasion of the sad
slaughter and death of that good and desirable king Josiah? this is indeed one
of the most genuine and kindly, one of the most powerful and prevalent, one of
the sweetest and strongest springs of, and motives to, true Gospel-repentance,
sorrow and mourning for sin.

Ninthly, Concerning the notable and non-such obligation that lies on
Believers, to study the crucifixion and mortification of sin; Was it not their
sins that crucified and killed precious Jesus Christ, the prince of life? was
it not their sins that violently drove the Nails through his blessed hands and
feet, and thrust the Spear through his side, to the bringing forth of water and
blood? shall they not in their burning zeal and love to him, and in the height
of holy indignation at themselves, be avenged on that which brought such
vengeance on him? shall, they not seriously seek to be the death of that which
brought him to death, and whereof the death and destruction, was one of his
great designs therein, on which he was so intent, that in the prosecution of
it, he did amidst his dying pangs and agonies breathe out his soul? O! let it
never be heard for shame, that ever any of them shall find the least sweetness
in that accursed thing that was so bitter to him; that ever any of them shall
be found to dally with, or to hug that serpent and viper in their bosom, that
so cruelly stung him to death.

But this being the great subject of these following Sermons, wherein the
Preacher being in a good measure wise, Eccles. 12.10, 11.
has sought to find out acceptable words, and words I hope of uprightness and
truth (O that they may be to the Readers as goads and nails fastened by him who
is the great master of assemblies.) I shall insist no further, only I think I
may humbly say, that to my knowledge, none have preached on this whole Chapter
to better purpose every way; many may have done virtuously, but it is probable
he will be found to excel them all: nay if I should say, that for any thing I
know, this Book for so much, is amongst the best Books of this nature the World
has seen, I suppose hardly will any judicious Christian, thoroughly exercised to
Godliness, after he has read it all over, and pondered it, think that I have
greatly, if at all, hyperbolized.

There are in these choice Sermons, deepths as it were for Elephants to swim in
(whereof his surpr^^sing, sublimely spiritual and very deep diving discourses
concerning the Nature of Christ's Intercession, and the right improvement of it,
in the last six Sermons, is a notable instance) and shallows for Lambs to wade
in; Heb. 5.13, 14.
There is in them milk for babes in Christ, and stronger meat for such as are
of full age, who by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern both
good and evil; Nay, I may in a good measure say of these Sermons, as it is said
of the learned Discourses of a late great man, That in the doctrinal part of
several of them, ye will find the deepth of Pole^ical Divinity, and in his
inferences from thence, the sweetness of Practical; somethings that may
exercise the profoundest Scholar, and others that may edify the weakest
Christian; nothing readily is more nervous and strong then his Reasonings, and
nothing more sweetly and powerfully affecting then his Applications: There is
in them, much for information of the Judgment, for warming of the Affections,
and for direction toward a Gospel-becoming Conversation; there is much for
clearing and expeding the doubts and difficulties of more weak and more darkened
Christians, and much for edifying, confirming and establishing of more grown
ones; there is much for conviction, reproof, warning, humbling, for stirring up
and provoking to the serious exercise of Godliness, and much for the comforting
and refreshing of such as stand in need, and are capable of Consolation; there
is much for discovering, rouzing, awakening and all ^raming of carnal, secure,
unsound, hollow-hearted, and hypocritical professors of Religion, and much for
beating and hammering down of the pride of conceity self-justifying Professors;
much for training on of young beginners, and much for advancing and carrying on
in their Christian course such as are entered into it, and have made any
tolerable progress therein; In a woed, 2 Timothy 2.15
he does in a great measure approve himself to God as a workman that needs not
be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth, and as a skilful and faithful
Steward giving to every one his portion in due kind, measure and season.

It may be some Readers will think, that there are in these Sermons, several
co-incidencies of purposes, and repetitions; To which I shall but presume to
say, that beside, that there is a great affinity amongst many of the purposes
delivered by the Prophet in this piece of his Prophesies, if not a holy
co-incidency of them, and a profitable repetition now and then of the same
thing in different expressions; As there is in some other Scriptures, without
any the least imputation to them, as that truly Noble and renowned Gentleman
Mr. Boil shows in his elaborat, eloquent, and excellent Considerations,
touching the style of the Holy Scriptures: And that the same midses, and nearby
in the same expressions, may very pertinently be made use of, to clear and
confirm different points of Doctrine; It will be found, that if there be in so
many Sermons or Discourses on Subjects of such affinity, any co-incidencies or
repetitions, they are at such a convenient distance, and one way or other so
diversified, and appositely suited to the Subject of his present Discourse,
that the Readers will not readily nauseat, nor think what is spoken in its
place, impertinent, superfluous, or needless, though somewhat like it has been
said by him in some other place; Or if there be any not only seeming but real
repetitions of Purposes and Expressions, as they have not been grievous to the
Preacher, Phil. 3.1.
so he with he Apostle Paul judged them needful at the time for the Hearers.

And now, as for you, much Honored, Right Worthy, and very dearly beloved
Inhabitants of the City of Glasgow, let me tell you, that I have sometimes of
late much coveted, to be put and kept in some capacity, to do the Churches of
Christ, and you in particular, this piece of service, in putting to the Press
these sweet Sermons on this choice Scripture before I die; And indeed after I
had gone through a good number of them, not without considerable toil and
difficulty (having all along, had no Notes of his own, but the Sermons as
they were taken hastily with a current Pen from his mouth, by one of his
ordinary Hearers, no Scholar, who could not therefore so thoroughly and
distinctly take up several of the Purposes handled by the Preacher) the Lord
was pleased to give me a stop, by a long continued sharp affliction, not
altogether without some little more remote and gentle threatenings of death; But
he to whom the issues from death do belong, graciously condescended to spare me
a little, that I might gather some strength to go through the remainder of them.
I have much reason to think, that if poor I had been Preaching the Gospel to
you these twenty years past, wherein we have been in holy providence separated
(which has been the more afflicting to me, that ye were in my heart to have
lived and died with you, and if it had so seemed good in the eyes of the Lord,
it would have been to me one of the most refreshing and joyful providence I
could have been tr^sted with in this World, to have had fair access through his
good hand upon me, and his gracious presence with me, to have Preached the
Gospel to you a while before my going hence and being no more) I would not by
very, very far, have contributed so much to your edification, as these few
Sermons may, and I hope through God's blessing shall: Several of you heard them
Preached by him when he was alive amongst you, and now when he is dead, he is
in a manner Preaching them over again to you (O that such of you as then were
not taken in the Preaching of them, might be so now in the serious reading of
them) and by them speaking to these of you that did not then hear them, who, as
I suppose, are now the far greatest part of the City-Inhabitants: You will find
your selves in them again and again ranked and classed according to your
different spiritual estates, and the various cases and conditions of your
souls, and wonderful discoveries made of your selves to your selves, that I
something doubt, if there be so much as one Soul amongst the several thousands
that are in Glasgow, but will find it self, by the reading of these Sermons,
spoken to suitably to its state and case, as if he had been particularly
acquainted with the person and his spiritual condition (as indeed he made it a
considerable part of his work, as the observing Reader will quickly and easily
perceive, to be acquainted very thoroughly with the soul-state and condition of
such at least of the Inhabitants as were more immediately under his own
inspection and charge) and, as if he had spoken to the person by name; O! how
inexcusable will such of you be, as had your lot cast to live under the
ministry of such an able Minister of the New Testement, of such a Scribe very
much instructed into the kingdom of Heaven, who, as a good householder knew well
how to bring out of his treasure things new and old, Mat. 13.52
if you were not bettered and made to profit thereby; God and Angels, and your
own Consciences, will witness, how often and how urgently the Lord Jesus called
to you by him and ye would not hear; and how inexcusable will ye also be, that
shall disdain or neglect to read these Sermons (as I would fain hope none of
you will) that were sometime preached in that place by that faithful servant of
Christ, who was your own Minister, which lays some peculiar obligation on you
beyond others to read them; or if ye shall read them and not make Conscience to
improve them to your souls edification and advantage; which contain more
genuine, pure, sincere, solid, and substantial Gospel then many thousands have
heard it may be in an age, though hearing Preachings much of the while; even so
much, that if any of you should be providentially deprived of the liberty of
hearing the Gospel any more preached, or should have access to read no other
Sermons or Comments on the Scriptures, these Sermons, through God's blessing,
will abundantly store and enrich you in the knowledge of the uncontravertably
great mystery of Godliness, God manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16 3 Tim. 3.15
and according to the Scriptures make you wise unto salvation through faith
which is in Christ Jesus, much insisted on in them: I would therefore humbly
advise (wherein I hope ye will not mistake me, as if by this advice I were
designing some advantage to my self, for indeed I am not at all that way
concerned in the sat of them) that every one of you that can read, and is
easily able to do it, would buy a Copy of these Sermons; at least, that every
Family that is able, wherein there is any that can read, would purchase one of
them; I nothing doubt, but that ye will think that little Money very well
bestowed, and will find your old Minister, desirable Durham delightful company
to discourse with you by his Sermons now when he is dead, and you can see his
face, and hear him speak to you by vive voce no more; whose voice, or rather
the voice of Christ by him, was, I know very sweet to many there now asleep,
and to some of you yet alive; who, I dare not doubt, never allow your selves,
to expect with confidence and comfort to look the Lord Jesus in the face, but
as seriously and sincerely ye make it your business to be found in his
Righteousness, so much cleared and commended to you; and in the study of
Holiness in all manner of Conversation, so powerfully pressed upon you, here:

That these sweet and savoury Gospel-Sermons may come to you all, and more
particulary to you my dear friends at Glasgow, Romans 15.29 Act. 20.32
with the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel, even of the word of his grace
which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance amongst them that
are sanctified, is the serious desire of

Your Servant in the Gospel, J. C.

SERMON I.
ISAIAH LIII.I. Who has believed our report? And to whom is the arm of the
Lord revealed?


WE hope it shall not be needful to insist in opening the Scope of this
Chapter, or in clearing to you of whom the Prophet means, and is speaking: It
was once questioned by the Eunuch, Acts 8.32. when he was reading this Chapter,
Of whom does the Prophet speak this, of himself, or of some other man? And
it is so clearly answered by Philip, who, from these words, began and preached
to him of Jesus Christ, that there needs be no doubt of it now: To Christians
these two may put it out of question, that Jesus Christ and the Substance of
the Gospel is compended and summed up here. 1. If we compare the Letter of this
Chapter with what is in the four Evangelists, we will see it so fully, and
often so literally made out of Christ, that if any will but read this Chapter,
and compare it with them, they will find the Evangelists to be Commentators on
it, and setting it out more fully. 2. That there is no Scripture in the Old
Testament so often and so convincingly applied to Christ as this is, there
being scarce one Verse, at least not many, but are by the Evangelists or
Apostles made use of for holding out of Christ.

If we look then to the sum of the words of this Chapter, they take in the sum
and substance of the Gospel; for they take in these two, 1. The right
description and manifestation of Jesus Christ, And 2. the unfolding and opening
up of the Covenant of Redemption. Where these two are, there the sum of the
Gospel is; but these two are here, therefore the sum of the Gospel is here.
First, Jesus Christ is described, 1. In his Person and Natures, as God being
Eternal, as Man being under Suffering. 2. In all his Offices, as a Priest
offering up Himself as a Sacrifice to satisfy Justice, as a Prophet venting
his Knowledge to the justifying of many thereby, and as a King dividing the
spoil with the strong. 3. In His Humiliation, in the Cause of it, in the End of
it, in the Subject of it, in the Nature and Rise of all, God's good pleasure.
And 4. In His Exaltation, and Out-gate promised Him on the back of all His
Sufferings and Humiliation.

2. The Covenant of Redemption is here described and set out, 1. In the
particular Parties of it, God and the Mediator. 2. As to the Matter about which
it was, the Seed that was given to Christ, and all whose iniquities met on him.
3. As to the mutual Engagements on both sides, the Son undertaking to make his
Soul an offering for Sin, and the Father promising that the efficacy of that
His Satisfaction, shall be imputed and applied for the justification of
Sinners, and the terms on which, or the way how this Imputation and Application
is brought about, to wit, By His Knowledge; All are clearly held out here.

This is only a touch of the Excellency of this Scripture, and of the Materials
(to say so) in it, as comprehending the substance and marrow of the Gospel; we
shall not be particular in dividing the Chapter, considering that these things
we have hinted at, are interwoven in it.

The first Verse is a short Introduction to lead us in to what follows. The
Prophet has in the former Chapter been speaking of Christ as God's Servant,
that should be extolled and made very high, and before he proceed more
particularly to unfold this Mystery of the Gospel, he cries out by way of
regrate, Who has believed our report? Alace (would he say) for as good News as
we have to carry, few will take them off our hand, such is Men's
unconcernedness, yea, malice and obstinacy, that they reject them. And to whom
is the arm of the Lord revealed? to point at the necessity of the Power of God
to accompany preaching, and even the most lively Ordinances, to make them
effectual; how few are they, that the Power of God captivates to the obedience
of this Truth?

For the first part of this Verse, Who has believed our report? To open it a
little, ye shall take these four or five Considerations ere we come to the
Doctrines:

Consider 1. The Matter of this Report in reference to its scope; it is not
every report, but a report of Christ, and of the Covenant of Redemption and of
Grace: In the Original it is, Who has believed our hearing actively, that is,
that which we have proposed to be heard; and the word is turned tidings, Dan.
11.44. and rumor, Jer. 51.46. It Is the tidings and rumor of a suffering
Mediator, interposing himself betwixt God and Sinners; and it may be, hearing
is mentioned, to point out the confidence which the Prophet had in reporting
these News, he first heard them from God, and in that was passive, and then
actively, he proposed them to the People to be heard by them. 2. Consider that
the Prophet speaks of this Report, not as in his own Person only, but as in
the Person of all that ever preached, or shall preach this Gospel; therefore
this Report is not peculiar to Isaiah, but it is our Report, the Report of the
Prophets before, and of these after him, and of the Apostles and Ministers of
the Gospel. 3. Consider that Isaiah speaks of this Report, not only in
respect of what he met with in his owntime, but as foreseeing what would be the
carriage of People in reference to it in aftertimes, therefore John. 2.38. and
Romans 10.16. this same place is alleged to give a reason of the Jews unbelief,
because Isaiah foretold it long before. 4. Consider, that when he complains
of the want of Faith to the report and tidings of the Gospel, it is not of the
want of historical Faith, as if the People would not give Christ a hearing at
all, but it is of the want of saving Faith, therefore Joh. 12.37, 38. it is
said, though he had done many miracles before them, yet they believed not on
him; and this propherick Scripture is subjoined as the reason of it, that the
saying of Isaias might be fulfilled, who said, Lord who has believed our
report? applying the believing spoken of here, to that saving Faith whereby
folk believe and rest upon Jesus Christ. 5. Consider that though there be no
express Party named to whom the Prophet complains, yet no doubt, it is to
God, therefore Joh. 12.38. and Romans 10.16. when this Scripture is cited, it is,
Lord who has believed our report? so it is the Prophet's complaint of the
little fruit himself had, and that the Ministers of the Gospel should have in
preaching of the Gospel, regrating and complaining of it to God as a sore
matter, that it should come to so many, and so few should get good of it, so
few should be brought to believe and to be saved by it.

Though these words be few, yet they have four great things in them, to which
we shall reduce them, for speaking more clearly to them. 1. That the great
subject of Preaching, and Preachers great errand is, to report concerning Jesus
Christ, to bring tidings concerning Him. 2. That the great duty of Hearers
(employed) is, to believe this Report, and by virtue of it, to be brought to
rest and rely on Jesus Christ. 3. That the great, though the ordinary sin of
the generality of the Hearers of the Gospel, is unbelief, Who has believed?
that is, it is few that have believed; it is a rare thing to see a Believer of
this Report. 4. That the great complaint, weight, and grief of an honest
Minister of the Gospel, is this, that his Message is not taken off his hand,
that Christ is not received, believed in, and rested on; this is the great
challenge Ministers have against the generality of People, and the ground of
their complaint to God, that whatever they report concerning Christ, He is not
welcomed, His Kingdom thrives not.

That we may speak to the first, considering the words with respect to the
Scope, we shall draw five or six Doctrines from them: The first whereof is more
general, that the discovery of Christ Jesus, and the making him known, is the
greatest News, the gladest Tidings, and the most excellent Report, that ever
came, or can come to a People, there is no such thing can be told them, no such
Tidings can they hear; this is the Report that the Prophet speaks of by way of
eminency, a Report above, and beyond all other Reports; these are News worthy
to be carried by Angels, Behold, says one of them, Luke 2.20. I bring you good
tidings of great joy; which shall be to all people: And what are these Tidings
so prefaced to with a Behold? for unto you is born this day, in the city of
David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord: these are the good Tidings, that
Jesus Christ is come, and that he is the Savior by Office. We shall not insist
on this, only 1. We will find a little view of this Subject in the following
words, which hold forth clearly Christ, God and Man in one Person, so
completely qualified, and excellently furnished for His Offices. 2. It Is also
clear, if we look to the excellent effects that come by His being so furnished,
as His satisfying of Justice, His setting free of Captives, His triumphing over
Principalities and Powers, His destroying the works of the Devil, etc. there
cannot be more excellent works or effects spoken of. 3. It Is clear, if we look
to Him from whom this Report comes, and in whose Breast these News bred, (if
we may speak so) they are the result of the Counsel of the Godhead; and
therefore, as the Report here is made in the Lord's Name, so He is complained
to, when it is not taken off the Prophet's hand. And 4. it is clear, if we look
to the mysteriousness of these News, Angels could never have conceived them,
had not this Report come; these things tell that they are great, glorious, and
good News, glad Tidings, as it is in the end of the former Chapter, That which
has not been told them shall they see, and that which they have not heard
shall they consider.

The first Use is, To draw our hearts to be in love with the Gospel, and to
waken our estimation of it: Peoples ears are itching after Novelties, and ye
are much worn out of conceit with these News; but is there in any News such an
advantage as in these, when God sends News to Men, they must be great News,
and such indeed are these.

Use 2. Therefore be affrayed to entertain loathing of the plain substantial
Truths of the Gospel; if ye had never heard them before, there would, belike,
be some Athenian itching to hear and speak of them, but they should not be the
less thought of, that they are often heard and spoken of.

Use 3. Therefore think more of the Gospel, seeing it contains the substance
of these good News, and glad Tidings, and think more of Gospel Ordinances
whereby these good Tidings are so often published and made plain to you.

2. More particularly, Observe, that Jesus Christ, and what concerns Him, the
glad and good News of a Savior, and the reporting of them, is the very proper
work of a Minister, and the great subject of a Ministers preaching; his proper
work is to make Him known, or take it thus, Christ is the native subject on
which all preaching should run; this is the Report the Prophet speaks of
here, and in effect, it was so to John and the other Apostles, and should be so
to all Ministers; Christ Jesus and what concerns Him, in His Person, Natures
and Offices; to know, and make Him known to be God and Man; to make Him known
in His Offices, to be Priest, Prophet, and King; to be a Priest, in His
suffering and satisfying Justice; to be a Prophet, in revealing the Will of
God; to be a King, for subduing folks Lusts and Corruptions; and to know, and
make Him known, in the way by which Sinners, both Preachers and Hearers, may
come to have Him to themselves, as follows in this Chapter. This, this is the
subject of all Preaching, and all Preaching should be levelled at this mark;
Paul is 1 Cor. 2.2. peremptory in this, I determined to know nothing among you,
but Jesus Christ and him crucified, as if he had said, I will meddle with no
other thing, but betake my self to this; not only will he forbear to meddle
with civil Employments, but he will lay aside his Learning, Eloquence, and
Humane Wisdom, and make the preaching of Christ crucified his great work and
study, the reason of this is, because Christ stands in a fourfold relation to
preaching. 1. He is the Text, to say so, of Preaching; all Preaching is to
explain Him, Acts 10.43. To him give all the Prophets witness, and so do the
four Evangels, and the Apostolic Epistles, which are as so many Preachings of
Him; and that Preaching which stands not in relation to Him, is beside the
Text and Mark. 2. He is holden out as the Foundation and Groundwork of
Preaching, so that Preaching without Him wants Foundation, and is the Building,
as it were, of a Castle in the Air, 1 Cor. 3.10 -- I have laid the foundation,
and another builds thereon, but let every man take heed how he builds, for
other foundation can no man lay then that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ;
importing that all Preaching should be squared to, and made to agree with this
Ground-stone. 3. He stands as the great End of Preaching, not only that
Hearers may have Him known in their Judgments, but may have Him high in their
Hearts and Affections, 2 Cor. 3.4. We preach not our selves, that is, not only
do we not preach our selves as the Subject, but we preach not our selves as the
end of our Preaching, our scope is not to be great, or much thought of, but our
end in Preaching is to make Christ great. 4. He stands in relation to
Preaching, as He is the Power and Life of Preaching, without whom, no Preaching
can be effectual, no Soul can be captivate and brought in to Him; hence 1 Cor.
1.23. he says, We preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a stumbling block,
they cannot abide to hear him, and to the Greeks foolishness, but to them that
are saved, the power of God, and the wisdom of God.

Use 1. For Ministers, which we shall forbear insisting on; only 1. Were
Christ the subject and substance of our Report, were we more in holding out
Him, it is like it might go better with us. 2. There is need of warriness, that
the Report we make, suit well the Foundation: And 3. the neglect of this may be
the cause of much powerless Preaching, because Christ is not so preached as the
subject matter and end of Preaching, many Truths are (alace) spoken without
respect to this end, or but with little respect to it.

Uses particular for you that are Hearers, are these. 1: If this be the great
subject of Ministers Preaching, and that which ye should hear most gladly, and
if this be most profitable for you, we may be particular in some few Directions
to you, which will be as so many branches of the Use. And first, of all Truths
that People would welcome and study, they would welcome and study these that
concern Christ and the Covenant of Grace most, as Foundation-truths, and seek
to have them backed by the Spirit; we are affrayed there is a fault among
Christians, that most plain and substantial Truths are not so heeded, but
somethings that may further folk in their Light, or tickle their Affections, or
answer a Case, are almost only sought after; which things (it is true) are good,
but if the plain and substantial Truths of the Gospel were more studied, and
made use of, they have in them that which would answer all Cases: It Is a sore
matter when folks are more taken up with Notions and Speculations, then with
these Soul-saving Truths, as, that Christ was born, that he was a true Man,
that he was, and is King, Priest, and Prophet of His Church, etc. and that
other things are heard with more greediness: But, if these be the great subject
of Ministers Preaching, it should be your great study to know Christ, in His
Person, Natures, Offices, and Covenant, what He is to you, and what is your
duty to Him, and how you should walk in Him and with Him; this was Paul's aim,
I count (says he) all things loss and dung for the excellency of the knowledge
of Christ, that I may know him and the power of his resurrection, and the
fellowship of his sufferings, etc. Phil. 3.8, 9, 10. It Is my design, (as if he
had said) not only to make Him known, but to know Him my self; there is little
Faith in Christ, and distinctness in use making of His Offices, and folks take
but little pains to know these things: Therefore, on the one side, let me
exhort you, to make this more the subject of your enquiry; and on the other
side, take it for your reproof, that there is such a readiness to snuff when
plain Truths are insisted on, or when they are not followed in some uncouth or
strange way, which says we are exceeding unthankful to God for giving us the
best things to speak, hear, and think of.

2. Think much of the Preaching of Christ, and to have Ministers to preach of
Him, He is the best News, and God has sent Ministers on this errand to make
them known to you; had He sent them to tell you all the secret things to come
that are in God's purpose, and all the hid works of Nature, it had not been
compareable to these News; what would ye have been? O what would Sabbath Days,
and Weekdays, your lying down and rising up, your living and dying been, if
these News had not been? ye should have had a sinful and sad life, and a most
comfortless and terrible death; therefore think this Gospel a thing of more
worth then ye do, and count their feet beautiful on the Mountains, that bring
these News and glad Tidings, as it is Isa. 52. that good Report of making Peace
betwixt God and Sinners should be most thought of and prized, and counted a
greater favor then we use to count it. 3. By this ye may know who thrives and
profits best under the Gospel, even these that learn most of Christ, which
consists not in telling over words. But first in actual improving of Him, as it
is Ephesians. 3.20. Ye have not so learned Christ, but so as to improve what is in
Him. 2. In an experimental finding of these effects in us, that are spoken of
to come by Christ, which is, that the Apostle means, Phil. 3.10. That I may
know him and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his
sufferings, that I may be conformable to his death; I am affrayed that of the
many that hear this Gospel, there are but few that know Christ this way: But if
He be the great thing that should he preached by us, and that ye should learn,
1. What is the reason that so many should be ignorant of Him, that the most
part look rather like T^^ks and Pagans then like Christians? God help us, what
shall we say of the condition of the most part of People, when the preaching of
the Gospel has not gained this much ground on us, as to make us know Christ, in
His Person, Natures, Offices, our need of Him, and the use we should make of
Him? But 2. If we will try how he is improven, it is to be feared, there be far
fewer that know him in this respect; do not many Men live as if they had never
heard tell of Him? Though they hear that pardon of Sin is to be gotten through
Him, and that virtue to subdue Sin must flow from Him, yet they live as if no
such thing were in Him: If your Consciences were posed, besides the evidences
that are in your practice, this would be found to be a sad truth. And 3. If we
will yet try further, what experience folk have of Christ, what virtue they
find flowing from His Resurrection, what fellowship there is in His Sufferings,
what conformity to His Death, what benefit red^unds to them from His Offices
of King, Priest, and Prophet, to the slaying of Sin, and quickening to holy
Duties, what benefit or fruit from His Death; Alace! no more with most then if
He had never died; what profit or real influence as to any Spiritual change do
any to count upon find? and think ye all these things to be but words? They
know Him not that feel not something of the efficacy of His Death and
Resurrection in themselves.

3. Observe, That the Report concerning Christ, is the main subject and e^rand
that has been, and is, and will be common to all the Ministers of the Gospel to
the end of the World; It Is our Report, it was the Report of all the Prophets,
Act. 10.43. To him bear all the Prophets witness, that through his Name,
whosoever believes on him, should have remission of sins; they all agree, and
have a joint Testimony in these. 1. In one Subject, Christ, and the same things
concerning Him, as, that the pardon of Sin is to be gotten in Him, and through
Faith in Him, and no other way, etc. 2. In one Commission; they have all one
Commission though they be not all equal; all are not Apostles, yet all are
Ambassadors, there is the same Authority for us to report and you to receive
the Gospel, as if Isaiah or Paul were preaching; the Authority depending on the
Commission, and not on the persons of Men who carry it. 3. In one common End
which they all have, and in one common Object they are sent to. 4. In this,
that they all hold of one common Master, being Gifts of one and the same
Mediator, Ephesians. 4. When he ascended on high, he led captivity captive, and gave
gifts to men, to some Apostles, etc.

The first Use is, To teach you not to think the less of the Testimony, or
matter testified, because of these that testify to you; if Isaiah or Paul were
testifying to you, ye would get no other Tidings, though their life and way
would be of another sort and stamp then ours are alace! for the most part, we
are warranded as well as they to make Christ known to you; therefore take heed
of rejecting this Testimony of this Christ that we bear witness unto; it is the
same Christ that the Law and the Prophets bear witness to, There is not another
name given under heaven whereby a sinner can be saved; it is through Him, that
whosoever be- on Him may receive remission of sins; in this ye have not only
us, but the Prophets and Apostles to deall with, yea Jesus Christ, and God
Himself; and the rejecting of us, will be found to be the rejecting of them;
it is the same Testimony on the matter that it was in Isaiah his time; and
therefore, tremble and fear, all ye that slight the Gospel, ye have not us for
your Party, but all the Prophets, and Isaiah among the rest, and our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has said, He that receives you receives me, and he that
despises you despises me; there will be many aggravations of the guilt of an
Unbeliever, and this will be a main one, even the Testimony of all the Prophets
that concur in this Truth which they have rejected; take heed to this all ye
Atheists that know not what it is to take with Sin, and all ye Hypocrites that
coin and counterfeit a Religion of your own, and all ye legal Persons that lean
to your own righteousness; what will ye say when it shall be found that ye have
rejected all these Testimonies? ye must either say, ye counted them false
Witnesses, which ye will not dare to say, or that ye accounted them true, and
yet would not receive their Testimony, and the best of these will be found sad
enough; for if ye counted them true, why did ye not believe them? this will be
a very pungent dilemma.

Use 2. For comfort to poor Believers, they have good ground to receive and
rest upon Jesus Christ, there is never a Prophet, Apostle, or Preacher of the
Gospel but he has sealed this Truth concerning Christ; what needs any sinner
scar at Him or be fearful to close with Him? will ye give credit to the
Testimony of Isaiah and of Peter, Acts 10.43. and of the rest of the Prophets
and Apostles? then receive their Report, and set your selves to be among the
number of Believers, that their Testimony may be rested on: We are persuaded
there is one of two that will follow on this Doctrine, either a strong
encouragement to, and confirmation of believing, and quietly resting on Jesus
Christ for pardon of sin, or a great ground of aggravation of, and
expostulation with you for your guilt, who care not whether ye receive this
Report or not. We shall say no more for the time, but God bless this to you.

SERMON II.
ISAIAH LIII.I. Who has believed our report? And to whom is the arm of the
Lord revealed?


THE Prophet Isaiah, is very solicitous about the fruit of his Preaching, when
he has preached concerning Christ; as indeed it is not enough for Ministers to
preach, and for People to hear, except some fruit follow; and now when he has
been much in Preaching, and looks to others that have been much in that work,
he sadly regrates the little fruit it had, and would have among them, to whom
Christ was, and should be spoken of; a thing, that in the entry should put us
to be serious, lest this complaint of Isaiah stand on record against us; seeing
he complains of the Hearers of the Gospel, not only in his own time, but in our
time also.

We told you, there were four things in this first part of the Verse. 1. The
great errand that Ministers have to a People, it is to report concerning
Christ; and beside what we observed from this Head before, looking to the
Scope, we shall observe further.

1. The end that Ministers should have before them in preaching Christ and the
Gospel, is, That the Hearers of it may be gained to Jesus Christ by hearing, so
as they may be brought to believe on Him; it is in a word, to gain them to
saving Faith in Christ:

2. It is employed, That Jesus Christ is only to be proposed as the Object of
Faith, to be rested on by the Hearers of the Gospel, and as the only ground of
their Peace; there is no name that can be mentioned for the salvation of Souls,
but this Name only; ly; and there is no other Gospel can be proposed but that
which holds Him out to People.

3. Observe, (which is much the same with the former Observation, and to which
we would speak a little more particularly,) That by the preaching of the
Gospel, Jesus Christ is laid before the Hearers of it, as the Object of their
Faith, and proposed to be believed upon by them, else there would be no ground
of this complaint against them; but wherever this Gospel is preached, there
is Christ is laid, as it were, at the foot or door of every Soul that hears
it, to be believed and rested on; this is the great errand of the Gospel, to
propose to People Jesus Christ, as the Object and Ground of Faith, to lay Him
down to be rested on for that very end; when the Apostle is speaking Romans 10.8.
of the Doctrine of Faith, he says, It is not now who shall ascend into heaven,
nor who shall descend into the deep, but the word is near thee, even in thy
mouth, and in thy heart; what word is that? the word of faith which we preach;
now says he, Christ by the preaching of the Gospel is brought so near folks,
that He is brought even to their Hearts, and to their Mouths, so near, that (to
speak so) People have no more to do but to stoup and take Him up, or to roll
themselves over upon Him; yea, it brings Him in to their very Heart, that
they have no more to do but to bring up their Heart to consent to close the
Bargain, and with the Mouth to make confession of it; and these words are the
more considerable, that they are borrowed from Deuteronomy. 30. where Moses is setting
Death and Life before the People, and bidding them choose, though he would seem
to speak of the Law, yet if we consider the scope, we will find him to be on
the matter speaking of Jesus Christ, holden forth to that People under
Ceremonial-Ordinances, and showing them that there was Life to be had in Him
that way, and according to Gods intent, they had Life and Death put in their
choice.

I know there are two things necessary to the acting and exercising of Faith,
The 1. is objective, when the Object or Ground is proposed in the preaching of
the Gospel. The 2. is subjective, when there is an inward, spiritual, and
powerful quickening, and framing of the Heart, to lay hold on, and make use of
the Object and offer; it is true, that all to whom the offer comes are not
quickened, but the Doctrine says, that, to all to whom the Gospel comes,
Christ is proposed, to be believed on by them, and brought near unto them; so
that we may say as Christ said to His Hearers, The kingdom of God is come near
unto you; both Christ and John brought, and laid the Kingdom of Heaven near to
the Jews, and it is laid as near to you in the preached Gospel: This is it then
that Doctrine says, 1. That the Gospel holds out Christ as a sufficient
ground of Faith to rest upon. And 2. with a sufficient warrant to these who
hear it, to make use of Him, according to the terms on which he is offered. And
3. it brings Him so pressingly home, as He is laid to the Doors and Hearts of
Sinners who hear the Gospel; that whoever has the offer, he must necessarily,
either believe in, and receive Christ, or reject Him, and cast at the report
made of Him in the Gospel.

I shall first a little confirm this Doctrine, and then secondly make use of it.

First, I shall confirm it from these Grounds, 1. From the plain offers which
the Lord makes in His Word, and from the warrant he gives His Ministers to
make the same offers; It Is their Commission to pray them to whom they are sent
to be reconciled, to tell them, that God was in Christ reconciling the world to
himself, as it is, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. and in Christ's steed to request them to
embrace the offer of Reconciliation; to tell them that Christ died for the
Sinners that will embrace Him, and that He will impute His Righteousness unto
them; and Chap. 6.1. We beseech you (says he) that ye receive not this grace
in vain; which is not meant of saving Grace, but of the gracious offer of Grace
and Reconciliation through Him; This is Ministers work, to pray People not to
be idle Hearers of this Gospel, for, says he, I have heard thee in a time
accepted, and in a day of salvation have I succored thee; behold, now is the
accepted time; behold, now is the day of salvation; The force of the Argument
is this, if ye will make this Gospel welcome, ye may get a Hearing, for now is
the day of Salvation, therefore do not neglect it; So Psalm. 81.10, 11. (where
God makes the offer of Himself, and that very largely,) Open thy mouth wide
and I will fill it; The Offer is of Himself, as the words following clear, My
people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me; for they
that refuse His Word, refuse Himself; and hence, Isa. 65.1. he says, I am
found of them that sought me not, I said, Behold me, behold me, unto a nation
that was not called by my name, and to the Jews, I have stretched out my hands
all day long to a rebellious people. 2. We may clear and confirm it from these
similitudes, by which the Offer of this Gospel is, as it were, brought to the
doors of People, and there are several similitudes made use of to this purpose;
I shall name but four. 1. It Is set down under the expression of wooing, as 2
Cor. 11.2. I have espoused you as a chaste virgin to Christ, this is ordinary,
and supposes a Marriage, and a Bridegroom, that is by his friends wooing and
suting in Marriage; so that (as we show) wherever the call of the Gospel comes,
it is a bespeaking of Souls to Him, as Cant. 8. What shall we do for our sister
in the day that she shall be spoken for? 2. It Is set out under the expression
of inviting to a Feast, and Hearers of the Gospel are called to come to Christ
as Strangers, or Guests are called to come to a Wedding-feast, Mat. 22.2, 3, 4.
All things are ready, come to the wedding, etc. Thus the Gospel calls not to
an empty House that wants meat, but to a Banqueting House where Christ is made
ready as the Cheer, and there wants no more but feasting on Him: So it is set
out under the similitude of Eating and Drinking, John 6.57. He that eats me,
even he shall live by me. 3. It Is set out often under the expression or
similitude of a Market, where all the Wares are laid forth on the Stands, Isa.
55.1. Ho every one that thirsts come to the waters, etc. and least it should be
said, or thought, that the Proclamation is only to the thirsty, and to such as
are so and so qualified; ye may look to what follows, let him that has no
money come, yea, come buy without money and without price; and to the offer that
is made to those of Laodicea, Rev. 3. who in appearance, were a hypocritical
and formal People, yet to them the Counsel and Call comes forth, Come buy of me
eye salve, and gold tried in the fire, etc. It says, the Wares are even in
their offer, or even offered to them. 4. It Is set out under the similitude of
standing and knocking at a Door, because the Gospel brings Christ a knocking
and calling hard at Sinners doors, Rev. 3.20. Behold, I stand at the door and
knock, if any man will hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him
and sup with him, and he with me; So Cant. 5.2. By the sleepy Bride it is said,
It is the voice of my beloved that knocks; and Psalm. 24. last four Verses,
it is cried, Lift up your heads ye gates, and be lift up ye everlasting doors,
that the king of glory may come in, which is an ^arnest invitation to make way
for Christ Jesus, wanting nothing but an entry into the heart; whereby we may
see, how near Christ comes in the Gospel, and is laid to folks hand. 3. We may
confirm it from the nature of Faith, and of the obedience that is required to
be given to the command of Believing; Wherever this Gospel comes, it tyeth and
obliges all the Hearers to believe on Christ, that is, to receive and welcome
Him; and there could be no receiving of Him, if He were not making an offer of
Himself; thus it is said, Joh. 1.11.12. He came unto his own, but his own
received him not, but to as many as received him, to them gave he power to
become the sons of God; He came to both these who received Him, and to these
who received Him not; but He gave to Believers only, this privilege of
Sonship: If we look to all the names of Faith, as coming to Christ, eating and
drinking of Him, receiving of Him, resting on Him, etc. They all suppose that
Christ is near to be catched hold of, and within speaking and trysting terms to
People that hear the Gospel. 4. It may be confirmed from the many sad
complaints that the Lord has for not receiving Him, and not believing His
Word, and from the dreadful designations by which He holds out the sin of
Unbelief; all which, will make out this, that God lays Christ at Sinners door
in His Word; Hence Joh. 5.40. our Lord says, Ye will not come unto me, that ye
may get life: and Matthew. 23. at the close, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often
would I have gathered thee, and ye would not; This was it that did aggravate
their sin, that He would, and they would not; So Psalm. 81. My people would not
hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me; and Luke 7. it is said, the
Scribes and the Pharisees rejected the counsel of God against themselves; and
Acts 13.45. when the Jews rejected Christ, it is said, they judged themselves
unworthy of everlasting life; and therefore the Apostles say, that they will
leave them and turn to the Gentiles. 5. We may confirm it from this, That in
respect of the Gospel, and Offer made in it, Christ comes alike ne^r to all
that hear it; for if He be near to some, then He is near to all, I mean in
regard of an objective nearness; there is the same warrant to speak and make
the offer to all, before there be some discovery made for qualifying the
Doctrine to some; I^'s true, there is a difference in respect of the power that
accompanies the Gospel, but as it lays out the offer of Christ, and Life
through Him, it comes alike near to ^ll the Hearers of it; the Invitation comes
to all, and in the same terms, to them that refuse, as well as to them that
receive Him, the same Gospel is preached to both. A 6th. Confirmation is from
the nature of God's administration of His external Covenant, which is sealed in
Baptism to both, not one Covenant to one, and another Covenant to another, but
the same Covenant on condition of believing to both: Behold then, in the
preaching of this Gospel, that Christ comes near you, even to your door, in
respect of the mediate Ordinances, as near as He did to Abraham and David;
Although God had His extraordinary ways of manifesting Himself to them, not
common to others; yea, this day, the Gospel is more clear objectively to you
then it was to Abraham, who rejoiced to see Christ's day afar off, when it was
veiled; yea, the Gospel is as clearly preached to you, as those who are now
before the Throne of God, had it preached to them, as to the matter of it,
though we will make no equality as to the manner of it.

Use 1. Advert to this, when ye come to hear the Gospel preached, and think how
ye are living in trysting terms with God, and how near Christ comes unto you;
the word of Faith lays Him so near, that ye have no more to do but to receive
the offer of Him, to believe and close with Him, and step in upon Him, as it
were, to come as living Stones to be built upon Him as a sure Foundation.

But it will be asked, How comes this Gospel so near? How does it bring Christ
so near to Sinners? Answ. In these five steps, 1. As it makes the Report of
Christ, and brings the Tidings of such things, as that He is Born, and that He
has Suffered, and for such an End, and that we may partake of the Benefit of
them on such terms; It makes the Proclamation narratively, and tells what He
did, what Good may be gotten of Him, and how we may come by it. 2. As it brings
an offer of these good things on the terms on which they are to be gotten, so
that it never tells that Christ is come, but it says also, here is Life to be
gotten in Him by you, if ye will take the way proposed to come by it;
therefore, when the Proclamation comes forth, that all things are ready, the
next word is, Come to the Wedding; And when in the one word He says, I stand at
the door and knock, at the next He says, If any man will open the door, I will
come in to him, and sup with him and he with me; and when Isa. 28. it is said,
He is a precious cornerstone, a tried foundation-stone laid in Zion, the next
word is, He that believes on him shall not make haste, or as the Apostle has
it, shall not be ashamed or confounded; this makes the Gospel glad Tidings,
because it comes always with an offer of Christ and of Life in Him. 3. When
the Offer is made, and the precious Wares are exposed to sale in this cried
Fair of Grace, a command comes out, choose Life, come buy the Wares, believe,
receive the Offer, as is clear in all the places we named before; It leaves not
Folks indifferent to receive or nor, but charge them as they would be
obedient to a Command, to receive Him, 1 John 3.23. This is his commandment,
that ye should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ; This is the great
Gospel-command, and Ministers have not only the telling of these News, and
warrant to make the Offer, but a Commission to command to receive it, and
therefore the sitting and slighting of the Offer, is a Sin opposite to the
Command. 4. It not only makes the Offer, and backs the Offer with a Command to
embrace it, but it sweetens the Command with many gracious Promises knit to it,
as Isa. 55. Hear and your soul shall live, and I will make an everlasting
Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David; And whenever the Command of
Believing comes out, it is always with a Promise; as Paul deals with the Jailer,
Act. 16. Believe and thou shall be saved; and Mark 16. toward the close, the
Lord says, They that believe shall be saved, to encourage to Faith in Him. 5.
It presses the Offer, and commands embracing of it with the Promise, with a
certification; for the Offer is not conditional, but alternative, Mark 16. If
ye believe not, ye shall be damned; so Deuteronomy. 30. Death and Life are proposed,
and they are bidden choose: If the Gospel be not effectual in it is Commands and
Promises, it will be effectual in its Threatenings; The Word of God will triumph
one way or the other, and not return to Him void, as is very clear, Isa. 55.11.
and 2 Cor. 2.15, 16. It triumphs in some, while they are brought by the Promise
to give obedience to the command of Believing, and to them it becomes the
savor of life unto life; and to others it triumphs as to the execution of the
Threatening on them for their Unbelief, and to them it becomes the savor of
death unto death: In a word, Christ Jesus comes so near People in this Gospel,
that He must either be chosen and Life with Him, or refused, to the destruction
and death of the Refuser; ye have the same Christ, the same Word, the same
Covenant, the same obligation to Believe, proposed to you, that Believers from
the beginning of the World had, and another ye will not get, and what more can
the Gospel do to bring Christ near to you? when it brings Him so near, that ye
have Him in your offer, and the Authority of God and His Promises interposed,
to persuade you to accept of the Offer; and Threatenings added, to certify you,
that if ye accept it not, ye shall perish; in which respect, we may say as the
Prophet Isaiah does, chap. 5. What could God do more to his vineyard which he
has not done? as to the holding out of the Object of Faith, Jesus Christ to be
rested on by you.

But some will, it may be, object here, 1. But if there come not Life and Power
with the Offer, it will not do the turn; we cannot Believe, nor receive the
Offer. Answ. Whose fault is this that ye want ability? It Is not God's fault, ye
have a sure ground to Believe, His Wo^d is a warrant good enough, the Promises
^re free enough, the Motives sweet enough; the great fault is a Heart of
unbelief in you, that ye will not believe in Christ, nor open to Him when He is
brought to your Door; I doubt, yea, I put it out of doubt, when all that ever
heard the Gospel shall stand before the Throne, that there shall be one found
that shall dare to make this excuse, that they were not able to receive Christ;
the Gospel brings Christ so near them, that they must either say yea or nay, it
is not so much, I cannot, as, I will not believe, and that will be found a
wilful and malicious refusal.

2. It may be objected, But how can this Gospel come to all alike, seeing it
cannot be, that these that will never get good of the Gospel, has it as near
to them, as these that get the saving Fruit of it? Answ. Not to speak of God's
Purpose, or what He intends to make of it, not of the Power and Fruit that
accompanies it to some, and not to all; it is certain, the Gospel and Christ in
its Offer, comes alike near to all that hear it: It objectively reveals the
same glad Tidings to all, with the conditional offer of Life, and with the same
command and encouragement, and certification in Threatenings as well as
Promises; In these respects Christ is brought alike near to all, and when God
comes to reckon, He will let Sinners know in that day, that the Gospel came to
their Door, and was refused; yea, it comes, and where it comes, will take hold
of some to pluck them out of the Snare, and be ground of Faith to them, and to
others it will be a ground of Challenge, and so the savor of death unto death;
for though it take not effect as to its Promises in all, nor in its Threatenings
to all, yet as to either Death or Life, it will take effect in every one, so
as, if Life be refused, Death steps in the room of it.

But it may be asked, Why will God have Christ in the Offer of the Gospel
brought so near the Hearers of it? Answ. 1. Because it serves to commend the
Grace and Love of God in Christ Jesus, when the Invitation is so broad, that i^
is to all; it speaks out the royalty of the Feast, upon which ground 2 Cor.
6.1. it is called Grace, the Offer is so large and wide. 2. Because it serves
for warranding and confirming the Elect in the receiving of this Offer, for
none of the Elect could receive Him if He were not even laid to their Door;
It Is this which gives us warrant to receive that which God offers; it is not
because we are elected or beloved of God before time, or because He purposed to
do us Good, that we believe, these are not grounds of Faith, being God's secret
Will; but we believe, because God calls and makes the Offer, inviteth and
promises, knowing that He is faithful, and we may trust Him; Hence David says,
I will never forget thy Word, and, in God will I praise his Word; for the Word
in its Offer speaks alike to all, and to none particularly: Indeed when it
comes to the Application of Promises for Consolation, that is to be made
according to the qualifications in the Persons, but the Offer is to all. 3.
Because by this means the Lord has the fairer access to found His Quarrel and
Contraversie against Unbelievers, and to make their Ditty and Doom the clearer
in the day of the Lord, when its found that they never received the Offer, My
people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me, therefore I
gave them up to their own hearts lusts, and they walked in their own counsels;
and this is an approbation given to Justice here, it is well-wair'd seeing they
would not receive Thee, that they get worse in Thy room.

Use 2. Seeing Christ comes near you in this Gospel, and this is one of the
Market days, I entreat you, while He is near, receive Him, call upon Him while
He is near; or take it in the plain words of the Apostle, open to Him, take Him
in, give Him welcome while He bodes Himself, to say so, on you; there is not a
Conscience in any Man that hears this Gospel, but he will have this testimony
from Him in it, that He came near them, was in their sight, and within their
reach and grips, as it were, if they would have put out their hand to receive
Him, and seeing it is so, O receive this Gospel, give Him room; while He is
content to sup with you, take Him in, make sure your union with Him; this is
the end why this Report is made, and Christ is laid before you, even that ye
may lay your selves over on Him.

I would follow this Use a little, by way of Exhortation and Expostulation
jointly, seeing the Doctrine will bear both, for when Christ is brought so near
even to the Mouth and to the Heart, it will be great ground of reproof and
expostulation if He shall be rejected. Be exhorted therefore to be in earnest,
seeing 1. It is a matter of such concernment to you; many Nations, Kings and
Kingdoms have not had Christ so near them as ye have, neglect not such an
opportunity; do ye think that all that is said in the Gospel concerning this,
is for naught? Is it for no use that such a Report is made, and Preaching
continued so long among you? And if it be for any use, is it not for this, that
ye may receive the Report, and may by doing so, get your souls for a Prey? To
what use will Preaching be, if this use and end of it be missed? Will your
hearing the Gospel make your Peace with God if Christ be not received? 2.
Consider the Advantages ye may have by receiving the Gospel that others have
not, is it a little thing to be called to God's Feast, to be married to Christ,
to be made Friends with God, and to enjoy Him for ever? the Day comes when it
will be thought an Advantage, and are there Motives to persuade to any thing,
like those that are to induce to that? 3. Consider what it is that we require
of you, it is no strange nor hard thing, it is but Believing, and this is nothing
else, but that the Report concerning Christ be received, yea, that He be
received for your own good; that is it that the Gospel calls you to, even to
betake you to a Physician for Cure, to betake you to a Cautioner for your Debt;
if ye could escape a Reckoning and Wrath another way, it were something, but
when there is no other way to obtain pardon of Sin and Peace, or to escape
Wrath and obtain favor and friendship with God, but this, and when this way
(to speak so) is made so easy, that its but to stoop down, and to take up
Christ at your foot, as it were, or to roll your selves on Him, how inexcusable
will ye Unbelievers be, when ye shall be arraigned before His Tribunal? But 4.
look a little farther to what is coming; If ye were to live always here, it
were hard enough to live at feed with God; but have ye faith of a Judgment
after Death? if so, how will ye hold up your Faces in that Day that now refuse
Christ? will not horrible confusion be the portion of many then, and will any
ground of confusion be like this, the slighting of Christ? when He shall be
seen coming to judge Slighters of Him, what horror will then rise in
Consciences when He shall appear and be avenged on them that were not obedient
to this Gospel? as is most clear, 2 Thessalonians. 1. When our Lord Jesus shall be
revealed in flaming fire, with his mighty Angels from Heaven, to take vengeance
on all that know not God and obey not the Gospel. 5. Consider, that Death and
Life are now in your option, in your hand as it were, choose or refuse; I speak
not, nor plead here for Free Will, but of your willing electing of that which
ye have offered to you; for one of two will be, either shall ye willingly
choose Life, which is a fruit of Grace, or refuse Life, and choose Death, which
will be found the native fruit of your Corruption; ye may have Life by
receiving Christ who is laid to your Door, and if ye refuse Him; Death will
follow it; as now in Hearing this Gospel ye carry in choosing or refusing, so
will the Sentence pass on you at the great Day, and so your Sentence, in a
manner, is written down with your own hand, as it is said Act. 13.46. Ye judge
your selves unworthy of eternal life, not out of humility, but maliciously: Now
when the matter is of such concernment, beware of playing the fool; if ye will
continue presumptuous and secure, following your Idols, what will the Lord say,
but let it be so, ye get no wrong when ye get your own choice, and He, but as
it were, ratifies the Sentence which ye have past on your selves. 6. I shall
add but this one word more, and beseech you that ye would seriously lay this to
Heart, as a weighty thing, considering the Certification that follows on it;
It Is not only Death, but a horrible Death, Wrath, and Wrath with its
aggravation from this Ground; like that of Capernaum that was lifted up to
Heaven in this respect, having Christ brought so near them; to whom this Gospel
is not the savor of Life unto Life, it shall be the savor of Death unto
Death, and think not this a common Motive, though it be commonly used, it will
bring Wrath upon Wrath, and Vengeance upon Vengeance on the Hearers of this
Gospel, beyond that of Sodom, if ye be still Rejecters of it; sure, none of you
would think it an easy thing to be punished as Sodom was, nor digest well the
Curse that came on them; is there any of you but ye would think it uncouth and
strange, yea stupendous, to enter into their Judgment, and to have your Lands
turned in a stinking Loch, and your selves eternally tormented with them? but
there is more wrath and vengeance following on the sin of Unbelief, and
rejecting of Christ when He comes to your Door in this Guspel. To close up all,
Consider that Christ is near you, and has been long near you, and wooing you,
ye know not how many Days or Years ye shall have, how soon this Gospel may be
taken from you, or ye from it, how soon ye may be put in the Pit, where ye will
gnash your Teeth, gnaw your Tongues, and blaspheme God; therefore be serious
while Christ is in your offer, and roll your selves over upon Him while ye have
Him so near you, welcome this Hearing or Report while it sounds in your Ears,
that there may be no just ground of this Complaint against you, Lord, who has
believed our report?

SERMON III.
ISAIAH LIII.I. Who has believed our report? And to whom is the arm of the
Lord revealed?


THe most part of Men and Women think not much of the preached Gospel, yet if
it were considered what is the Lord's end in it, it would be the most
refreshful News that ever People heard, to hear the Report of a Savior; that
is, and should be, great and glad Tidings of great Joy to all Nations; and we
should be so composed to hear such News from God, and concerning His Will and
our own well, as to be sutably affected with them; It Is a wonder that God has
sent such a Report to People, and in it has laid Christ so near them, that He
puts Him home to them, and lays Him before them, even at their Feet as it were;
and as great a wonder, that when the Lord has condescended to give such a
Savior, and b^ought Him so near, that all He calls for is Faith, to believe
the Report, or rather Faith in Him of whom the Report is, which is the second
thing in the words.

The second thing then, is, The Duty that lies on People to whom the Lord sends
the Gospel, or this Report concerning Christ, and ye may take it in this
general; That it lies on all that hear the Gospel to believe the Report that it
brings concerning Christ, and by Faith to receive Him who is holden out to them
in it; this is clearly employed, Isaiah and all Ministers are sent to report
concerning Him, and to bear witness of Him, and its the duty of all Hearers to
believe it, and this is the ground of his and their complaint when People do
not believe it: By comparing this Text with Romans 10.16. and John 12.38. we show
that it is saving Faith that is here to be understood.

I shall take up this Doctrine in three Branches, which we will find in the
words, and which will make way for the Use. 1. That a People to whom Christ is
offered in the Gospel, may warrantably accept of Christ, or, the offering of
Christ in the Gospel is warrant enough to believe on Him; otherwise there had
been no just ground of expostulation and complaint for not believing; for
though the complaint will not infer that they had ability to Believe, yet it
will infer they had a warrant to Believe; for the complaint is for the neglect
of the Duty they were called to. 2. That they to whom Christ is offered in the
Gospel are called to Believe, it is their Duty to do it, thus, Believing, in all
that hear this Gospel, is necessary, by necessity of command, even as Holiness,
Repentance, etc. are. 3. That saving Faith is the way and mean by which these
that have Christ offered to them in the Gospel, come to get a Right to Him, and
to obtain the Benefits that are reported of to be had from Him; thus Believing
is necessary as a mids to the end of getting Christ, and all that is i^ Him:
This is also here employed in the regrate made of the want of Faith, which
prejudgeth Men of Christ, and of the Benefits of the Gospel.

We shall shortly put by the first of these, which is, That all that hear the
Gospel preached, have Warrant to believe and receive Christ for their eternal
Peace, and for making up of the breach betwixt God and them; this preached
Gospel gives you all Warrant to accept of Jesus Christ, and ye would not seek
after, nor call for another. I shall first premit two distinctions to clear
this, and then secondly confirm it. As for the first of the two distinctions
that serve to clear it, We may take up the Gospel more largely and complexly,
in a Covenant-form, holding out Christ and His Benefits on condition of
Believing; or we may take it up as it holds out a Promise, without particular
mentioning of a Condition: Now, when we say that the Gospel commands and
warrands all that hear it to accept the Offer, we do not mean the last, that
all that hear the Gospel have Warrant to accept the Promise without a
Condition; but the first, that is, that all the Hearers of the Gospel are
commanded to accept of Christ offered; there is by the preaching of it, a
Warrant to close with the Report, and then to meddle with, and take hold of the
Promises, and the things promised; so that it is the Gospel conditionally
proposed that gives warrant to Believe, as Believing rests on Christ for
obtaining Life in Him. The second Distinction is, That we would consider Faith,
as it rests on Christ for obtaining Union with Him, and Right to the Promises;
or, as it applies and makes use of the Benefits to be gotten in and by Christ;
the Offer of the Gospel gives not to all a Warrant to apply the Benefits to be
gotten by Christ instantly, but it warrands them to close with Him first, and
then to apply His Benefits.

Secondly, For confirmation of this Truth, That the general preaching of the
Gospel is a Warrant for believing and exercising Faith on Jesus Christ, for
making our Peace with God: It Is clear from these Gr^^nds. 1. From the nature of
the Gospel, it is the Word of God, as really invitng to do that which it calls
for, as if God were speaking from Heaven; it is the Word of God, and not the
word of Man, and has as real Authority to call for Obedience, as if God spoke
it immediately from Heaven; and the Word of Promise is as really His Word, as
the Word of Command, and therefore to be rested on and improven, as well as we
are to endeavor obedience to the Command; and if we think that God's Testimony
is true, and if we lay any just weight on these three Witnesses testifying from
Heaven, and on these other three testifying from Earth, 1 John 5.7. then we may
rest on Jesus Christ offered in this Gospel, and believe, that these who rest
on Him shall have Life; for it is, as we said, as really God's Word, as if He
were speaking it audibly from Heaven. 2. It may be confirmed from these solemn
things, the Word and Oath of God, whereby He has mightily confirmed the
external Offer of the Gospel, even the two immutable things wherein it is
impossible for Him to lie, that these who are fled for refuge, to lay hold on
the Hope set before them, may have strong Consolation, as it is Heb. 6.18. And
God having thus said and sworn anent this external Covenant, for this very end,
that the Hearers of the Gospel may know, that they who receive Christ offered
therein, shall have Life, it is Warrant sufficient to believe on Him for Life:
It Is also for this end that He ha^h put Seal^ to the Covenant, Circumcision and
the Passover in the Old, and Baptism and the Lords Supper in the New Testament;
which are extended, not only to the Elect, but to Professors in the visible
Church, that every one who is baptized and admitted to the Communion, may have
confirmation of this, that the Offer that God makes of Life through Christ, is
a true and real Offer, and will be made good to the Persons that shall receive
it, and so perform the Condition. 3. It may be confirmed from the End for which
God has appointed the Word and Ministry in His Church, even to make the Offer
of Christ and Life through Him, John 20.31. These things are written, that ye
might believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and that believing, ye might
have life through his Name; the Word is both written and preached for this very
End. 4. And lastly, It Is confirmed from the experience of all the Saints, and
from the ground on which they believed, which was the same that we have; they
had no other ground but the same Gospel and Word that we have; it was not the
secret operation or instinct of the Spirit, it is that indeed which works Faith,
but it was the Word which was the ground of their Faith, for there is no
warrant for Faith but in the Word; and as many Believers as have gone before
us, are as so many instances and experiences to confirm this Truth to us.

Use. It serves for good use to such as may fall to doubt and dispute what
warrant they have to Believe, we say, ye have as good warrant as Abraham,
David, Paul, or any of the Godly that lived before you had; ye have the same
Gospel Covenant and Promises, it was always God's Word preached which was the
ground of Faith; and there needs not be much disputing what is God's Purpose,
for we are not called to look to that in the matter of Believing more then in
the matter of our Duty; and as it were evil reasoning to dispute what may be
God's Purpose in the matter of Duty when we are called to it, it is as bad
reasoning to dispute His Purpose in the matter of Faith: And therefore we leave
this Use with a word of Adver^isement, That this Gospel as it lays Christ
before you, it gives you Warrant to receive Him, and rest upon Him, and we may
say as Paul did, Acts 13.38, 39. Be it known unto you therefore men and
brethren, that through this Name is preached unto you forgiveness of sins, and
by him all that believe are justified from all things, from which they could
not be justified by the Law of Moses; There is the Way held out for obtaining
pardon of Sin, and Peace, the Lord has made the Offer, and laid a fair Bridge
over the Gulf of Distance betwixt God and Sinners, though ye should never get
good of it, and though ye should never set a Foot on the Bridge; none needs to
fear to step forward, behold our Lord Jesus has holden out the Golden Scepter,
His Call may be Warrant enough to come; the Preaching of this Gospel stops all
Disputing, and banisheth debating of the Business; it Calls all the Hearers of
it, and gives them Warrant to come forward; and it is such a Warrant as they
will be found Slighters of the Great Salvation offered, who had this Door
opened to them and did not step forward, for as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 6.
Behold now is the day of salvation, behold now is the accepted time; and Heb.
2.2. If the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every transgression and
disobedience received a just recompense of reward, how shall we escape if we
neglect so great salvation? which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord,
etc. It Is the same Gospel that from the beginning has been preached to
Sinners, and this is the reason why the Gospel is called Grace, in that 2 Cor.
6.1. We beseech you that ye receive not this grace of God in vain; and Gal. 2.
at the ciose, I do not frustrate the grace of God; for many get the Warrant and
Pass to come and receive Christ, who put it up in their Pocket as it were, and
make no use of it, as the Man that hid the Talent in his Napkin; the Bonds of
Marriage are proclaimed, and the Warrant given forth, and yet they halt and
come not to the Wedding.

We shall add the second Branch, which is, That this Gospel where it comes and
offers Jesus Christ to Sinners. Men and Women are not only warranded to come,
but required and commanded to come, the great Duty that the Gospel calls for is
Believing; it leaves it not indifferent to Believe or not, but peremptorily
lays it on as a Command; ye hear many Preachings, and Christ often spoken of,
now this is the great thing called for from you, even Believing in Christ, and
while it is not performed, there is no Obedience given to the Gospel.

We shall first confirm, and then make use of this Branch of the Doctrine.

1. For Confirmation, take these Grounds, 1. From the manner how the Cospel
proposes Faith, it is by way of Command in the Imperative Mood, Believe, Come
ye that are weary, etc. Come to the Wedding, open, etc. wherein somewhat of the
nature of Faith is held out, all these being the same with Believing. 2. It Is
not only commanded as other things are, but peculiarly commanded, and there is
a greater weight laid on the obedience of this Command, then on the doing of
many other commanded Duties; It Is the sum of all Christ's Preaching, Mar. 1.
Repent and believe the Gospel; it is the only command which Paul proposes to the
Jailer, Acts 16. Believe in the Lord Jesus, etc. 3. It Is as it were the
peculiar Command that Jesus Christ has left to His People, 1 John 3.22. This
is his commandment, that we should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ;
and this Command of Believing on Him, is the peculiar Command left to, and laid
on Ministers to press. 4. It will be clear, if we consider, that the great
Disobedience that He quarrels for, is, when there is not Believing, when
Sinners will not come to Him, this is His Quarrel, John 5.40. Ye will not come
to me that ye may have life, and here, Who has believed our report? so Matthew.
23. I would have gathered you and ye would not; and John 12.37. Though he did
many mighty works among them, yet they believed not on him. 5 Look to the
nature of the Offer made by Christ, and to the End of it, and ye will find that
the great thing called for, is the receiving of it, which is nothing else but
Believing; and all our Preachings of Christ, and of His Benefits, are useless
without it; without this he wants the satisfaction he calls for, for the travel
of his Soul; and without it the Hearers of this Gospel profit not, 1 Pet. 1.9.
Receiving the end of your faith, the salvation of your souls; the subordinate
End of Preaching, to wit, the salvation of our Souls, cannot be attained
without Faith.

The Uses are three. 1. It serves to be a ground for us to propose the main
Gospel-Duty to you, and to teach you what is the great and main thing ye are
called to; it is even to Believe in Jesus Christ, to exercise Faith on Him;
it is not only that your Life should be civil, and formal; that ye should Read,
Pray, frequent Ordinances, learn the Catechism, and such like; but this is it,
to Believe on Jesus Christ for the obtaining of Life, and remission of Sins
through Him; and it is not a thing indiff^rent to you, but commanded, and with
this certification, that if ye Believe not, ye shall never get Life nor pardon
of Sin; and therefore, as we tell you that remission of Sins is preached to you
through Christ, so we command and charge you to believe on Him, and receive
this Gospel, wherein He is offered, for the remission of Sins.

For clearing of this Use, and that we may have the more ready access to
Application, We shall speak a word to these three. First, To several kinds of
true Faith, three whereof are no^ saving; or to the ordinary distinctions of
Faith. Secondly, To the Scripture expressions that hold out the nature of
saving Faith. Thirdly, To some differences betwixt this saving Faith, and false
and counterfite Faith, or these acts of true Faith more generally taken, which
yet are not saving.

For the first of these, When we speak of Faith, we shall draw it to these four
kinds ordinarily spoken of, and shall no^ alter nor add to the common
distinctions of Faith, though there may be more given. The first is Historical
Faith, which may be called true, being it whereby we assent to the truth of a
thing, because of his supposed fidelity that tells it; as when an Author
writes a History, we give it credit upon report that he was an honest Man that
wrote it: So Historical Faith is, when People hearing the Word preached or read,
they assent to the truth of it all; and do not question but that Christ came to
the World, that He was God and Man in one Person, that He died and rose the
third day, and ascended to Heaven, that they that Believe on Him shall be
saved, etc. and taking the Word to be God's Word, they may give to it a higher
assent then they give to any Man's word, because God is worthy, infinitely worthy
of more credit than any Man, yea then all Men, and Angels too: There may be, I
say, in this Historical Faith of Divine Truths, a higher or greater assent then
there is in believing of any Humane History, which may be the reason why many
mistake Historical Faith, and yet it is but of the same kind, and a thing which
many Reprobates have, as John 2. at the close, it is said, Many believed on him
when they saw the miracles which he did, but Jesus did not commit himself unto
them; they were brought to believe from the Signs which they saw, that He was
more than a mere Man, and that it was the Word of God which He spoke, and yet
it was but a Historical Faith; yea this Faith may be, and is in Devils, who are
said James 2.9. to believe and tremble; there are many, who, if they believe
Christ to be God and Man, and the Word to be true, think it enough; yet James
having to do with such, tells them, that the Devils believe as much as that,
and more thoroughly then many that h^ve that Histor^cal Faith; he knows God to be
true, and One that cannot lie, and he finds it to his cost; he knows that such
as Believe cannot Perish, for he cannot get one of them to Hell; he knows that
there is a time set when Christ will come to judge the World, and himself among
the rest, and therefore he says often to Him, torment me not before the time;
and as the Devil has this Faith, so there are many in Hell that have it too,
the rich Glutton had it, therefore he bids go tell his Brethren that they come
not to that place of torment, and its told him, they have Moses and the
Prophets, etc. which says that he then felt the truth of many things he would
not believe before: This I speak, that ye may know, that this Historical Faith
is the first step of Faith, but it may be in Hell, and so in many in whom
saving Faith is not; its really a wonder that Folks that are called Christians
should own this to be saving Faith, and think they are well come too, when they
are only come the Devils length in Believing, yea, there are many that never
came his length, else they would tremble more. The second sort of Faith, is,
the Faith of Miracles, which is often spoken of in the New Testament, as when
the Lord says, If ye had says as a grain of mustard seed, ye should say to
this mountain, be thou removed and cast into the sea, and it should be done;
there was an active Faith to work Miracles, and a passi^e Faith to receive the
particular effect the M^racle did produce; some had the Faith of Miracles to
heal, and others to be healed; this is an extraordinary thing, and Folks may go
to Heaven without it, and go to Hell with it, though they cannot go to Heaven
without Historical Faith; hence it is said, Many shall come to me in that day,
and shall say, we have casten out devils in thy Name, to whom he will say,
depart from me ye workers of iniquity: And the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 13.2. If I
had all faith, and could remove mountains, if I want charity, it avails me
nothing; this Faith of Miracles avails not alone to Salvation, because it
acts not on Christ holden out in the Promises, as a Savior to save from Sin,
but on Christ, as having power and ability to produce such an Effect; which may
be where there is no quiting of a Man's own Righteousness, and if there be not
Grace in the Person that has it, it is an occasion of Pride: We call you then
to Historical Faith, as necessary, though not sufficient, but not to this Faith
of Miracles, it being neither necessary nor sufficient. A third sort of Faith
is Temporary Faith, spoken of Matthew. 13. and set out under the Parable of the
Seed sown on stony Ground, which soon springs up, but withers; so some Hearers
of the Gospel receive the Word with joy, and are affected with it, but endure
not: The difference betwixt this and Historical Faith, is, that Historical
Faith as such, consists in the Judgment, and reaches not the Affections, at
best it reaches not the affection of Joy, for though the Devils tremble, yet
they are never glad; Temporary Faith reaches the Affections, and will make a
Man, as to tremble at the Threatenings, as Felix did; so, some way to delight
himself in the Promises of the Gospel, and to smack then as it were from the
apprehension of the sweet taste and relish he finds in them: It is even here
(as it were) told a whole Man, that a Physician is come to Town, he is neither
up nor down with it, but tell it to a sick Man, and he is fain, from an
apprehended possibility of a Cure, yet the apprehended possibility of the Cure,
never sends him to the Physician, nor puts him to apply the Cure. The fourth
sort is Saving Faith, which goes beyond all the rest, and brings the sick Man
to the Physician, and to make use of the Cure; there may be some measure of
true Saving Faith, where there is not much Temporary Faith, or moving of the
Affections, and there may be a considerable measure of Temporary Faith, where
there is no Saving Faith at all, even as a fallen-Star may seem to glance more
then a fixed one that is over-clouded, yet it has no solid Light. Know then,
that Faith is called for, but take not every sort of Faith for Saving Faith; it
would make tender Hearts bleed to see so many mistake in the matter of their
Faith; there are some who say, they had Faith all their days; O that ye were
convinced of the lamentable deceit and delusion that ye are under, and that ye
could distinguish betwixt Faith and Presumption, betwixt Historical and
Temporary Faith, and true Saving Faith, though the two former be not Delusions,
but in so far as ye rest on the same, and take them for Saving Faith, ye are
deluded, for Saving Faith puts you out of your selves to rest on Jesus Christ.

SERMON IV.
ISAIAH LIII.I. Who has believed our report? And to whom is the arm of the
Lord revealed?


THE Gospel is a sweet Message, and ought to be glad News when it comes to a
People; and therefore, when this Report of our Lord Jesus Christ is made to
Sinners, O! but it is a sad Complaint that follows on the refusal and not
welcoming of it; there is no better News a Minister can carry, then these
brought to the Shepherds by the Angels, Luke 2.10, 11. Fear not, behold we
bring you glad tidings of great joy to all people; unto you is born in the city
of David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord; but were it an Isaiah, it will
weight him when he looks on a fruitless Ministry and despised Gospel, and will
make him complain, Who has believed our report? O! that we may experimentally
know the cheerfulness and gladness that follows the Gospel where it is
embraced, and that we may not know the sorrow and sadness that will follow the
challenge for dispising of it; one of these two the preached Gospel will be,
either it will be joyful News to you, or a sad ground of complaint to God
against you.

We entered to speak of the great Duty of a People that hears the Gospel, and
the great mean whereby these News become delightsome, and that is, by Faith to
receive the Report of the Gospel, or to Believe on Christ reported of in it;
This is clearly employed, for the regrate which holds out the sin, is, Who has
believed our report? and therefore the great Duty must be, to Believe, and by
Faith to receive the Report. We come now to speak of the Use, and because it is
the great design of the whole Gospel, yea, it is the design of the Law also,
both of which level at this End and Scope, even Faith in Christ. It will be
expedient, and no ways impertinent, that we insist a little on this, especially
when so many thousands are utterly ignorant of Faith, being Strangers to what
Believing in Christ is, and so great Strangers to the native End of the Gospel,
and out of the way of getting good by the Preaching of it, so that to this day,
they have not learned this one Lesson, to wit, concerning Faith in Christ, and
other Lessons will be to little or no purpose till this be learned.

We shall not insist to speak at large of the Doctrine of Faith, but only in a
plain way, glance at what this great Duty is, that is required of the Hearers
of the Gospel; it is Believing in Christ savingly, or Saving Faith, for no other
thing will hold off the Complaint against you; ye will be complained of, though
ye would believe with all other Faith, therefore it is this Faith that is here
meaned.

That we may come the sooner to that which we would be at, we shall premit two
or three words. First, When we speak of Believing here, we presuppose these
things that are necessary for clearing the Object of Faith and capacitating us
to Believe, though they be not Saving Faith; As namely, 1. That the Offer of
the Gospel must come to People, that the Object of Faith be held out to them,
that it be told them, that there is a way for a Sinner's Justification through
Christ Jesus, and that Sinners may be accepted before God on His account, or
through Him. There must also, 2. Be an understanding of this, a conceiving in
the Judgment what it is; Folks cannot Believe except they Hear, and Understand
what they Hear, in so far as distinctly to fix their Faith on the thing known;
they must know and understand the Mediator's fullness, the Covenants freeness,
and the efficacy of Faith to make Christ theirs. Yea, 3. It Is necessary there
be some acquaintance with our own condition, as that we are naturally under
Sin, that we are lost, and under the Curse, sick, and utterly unable, and even
desperate to get our selves recovered, by any thing that is in, or by any thing
that we can do of our selves, that we are for ever undone if we get not a
Savior, that our mouth may be stoped. 4. Not only must we know this, but it is
necessary there be an Historical Faith of it, to Believe that there is Fullness
and Sufficiency in Christ, that He is able to cure, and take away the guilt of
Sin in all that rest on Him; these must be believed in general, ere ever
Sinners can rest on Him for their own Salvation; which supposes that there may
be an Historical, where there is not a Saving Faith. Now when all this length
is gone, Saving Faith is that which the Gospel calls for, and it is the
Hearts acting according to what sound light and conviction it has, on Jesus
Christ as holden out in the Promise, for obtaining of Life and Salvation
through Him; so that when the Soul is lying still under its conviction, and
knows it cannot have Life but by resting on Christ, and hears that there is a
Sufficiency in Him for up making of all its wants, then the work of the Spirit
prevails with the Soul, to cast it self over on Him for obtaining of Life, and
of every other thing needful; it brings the Soul to embrace and lay hold on
Him, not only as one able to save Sinners, but to save it self in particular;
and this is the native work of Faith that waits the Soul to Christ, and pu^s it
over the bound-road, or march of all Delusion; it is like a sinking Man's
leaping to catch hold of a Rock or Rope; it is the b^inging of a lost Sinner
from the serious apprehension of his own naughtiness and undone Estate, to cast
himse^f over on Jesus Christ for the obtaining of Life through Him.

Secondly, When we speak of Faith, we would premit this, That even this true
and Saving Faith, which is not only in kind true, that is, such as has a real
Being, but is Saving, may be considered in its different acts or actings for
its different needs or necessities: Though the Covenant be one, yet the acts of
Faith are many, we having to do with Pardon of Sin, with Sanctification in its
parts, Vivification, and Mortification, with Peace, etc. Faith differently acts
on Christ and the Promise for obtaining of these. Now, the Faith that we would
insist on, is, the Faith that rests on Christ for Pardon of Sin, on which all
the rest of the acts of Faith depend; it is that Faith whereby a Sinner receives
Christ, and casts himself over on Him; that Faith whereby Union with Christ is
made up.

Thirdly, We would premit, That there is a great difference betwixt Faith, and
the Effects of it, as Peace, Joy, Assurance of God's Love, and these other
Spiritual Privileges that follow Believing: It Is one thing actually to
Believe, another thing to have the Peace and Joy that follows upon, and flows
from Believing; the one being as the putting out of the Hand to receive the
Meat, and the other as the feeding on it: It Is the first of these we mean, and
intend to speak of, even that Faith whereby we grip Jesus Christ Himself, and
get a Right to all these Privileges in and through Him.

Fourthly, We premit, That even this Saving Faith has its degrees, as all
other Faith has; some have more weak Faith, some stronger; some have that full
Assurance spoken of Heb. 10. or a Plerophory, not only as to the Object that
it is sufficient, but as to the apprehending and obtaining of Life through that
Object; so that they are able to say, neither height nor depth, nor any thing
else, shall be able to separate them from the Love of God in Christ Jesus; we
say then, that Saving Faith has its degrees, though the degree be not that
which we speak of; but it is the kind of this Faith, whether weaker or more
strong, whereby a lost Sinner rolls it self over on Christ; the Faith which
puts the Sinner off the Ground it stood on, ever on Him; the Faith which brings
the Soul from the Covenant of Works to a new holding of Life by Christ and His
Righteousness. We shall then speak a little, 1. To what we conceive this act of
Saving Faith is not for precaveating of mistakes. 2. What way the Scripture
expresses it; when then we say that such a thing is not Saving Faith, ye would
know that thing is not it that ye must lippen to; and when we say such a thing
is Saving Faith, ye would labor to act and exercise Faith according to it.

First, For what Saving Faith is not. 1. It is not the knowing that Christ is
God and Man, that He was Born, was Crucified, Dead, and Buried, and Rose again;
Ask some, what true Saving Faith is? they will say it is a true Knowledge; Ask
them again, how long is it since they Believed? they will say since ever they
knew Good by Ill; ye would know that apprehensive or literal and speculative
Knowledge is needful, but it will not be taken for Saving Faith. 2. It Is not a
touch of warmness or liberty in the Affections in a natural way, which may be
in unregenerate Men, yea possibly in Pagans, as in a Felix, who in the mean
time, have not so much as Temporary Faith, because it rises not from the Word,
but from dispensations of Providence, or from Temporary things; and if it rise
from the Promises of the Word, if there be no more, it is but temporary Faith.
3. It is not Convictions, which many take for Faith, and take it for granted if
they be convinced of Sin, they Believe, and will say, whom should they Believe
on but Christ, and yet they never follow the Conviction, to put in practice
what they are convinced of. 4. It Is not simply a Resolution to Believe, as
others take Saving Faith to be, who being convinced that their own
Righteousness will not do their turn, resolve to Believe on Christ for
Righteousness, but they will take a convenient time to do it; and many maintain
their Peace with this, though it be no true Peace; but a bare resolution to
Believe is not Faith; ye use to say, there are many good Wishers in Hell. I
remember the words of a dying Man in this Place, who thought he believed
before, and being asked what difference he conceived to be betwixt the Faith he
had before, and the Faith he now had attained to? he answered, before, I
thought or resolved to Believe, but never practiced it, now I practice
Believing: There is such a subtilty and deceit in the Heart, that if it resolve
to Believe, and if it observably thwart not with Faith, it will sit down on
that as if all were done, therefore the Word is, To day if ye will hear his
voice, that is, to day if ye will Believe, harden not your heart: This
resolving to Believe, is like a Man sinking in the Water, and having a Rope
cast out to him, he resolves to grip it, but does it not; So, many think they
have the Promise beside them, and resolve to make use of it, but do not
presently make use of it, and the Ship sinks down, and they perish, while the
Promise abides and swims above. 5. It is not Prayer; There are many who think
they Believe when they some way Repent, Pray, and put their Hand to other
Duties, and they know no more for Believing but something of that kind; it is
true indeed, Prayer may help to Believe, yet it is not always with Faith, it is
not every one that says, Lord, Lord, that believes; many will seek to enter
that shall not be able: Folks very often have these two miserable mistakes
about Prayer, either they put it in the room of Christ, or in the room and
place of Faith, not considering that they are different things; for Faith
exercises it self on Christ as Mediator, and Prayer takes Him up as God, the
true Object of Divine Worship; though if it be not founded on Christ as
Mediator, it has no access; the acting of Saving Faith is properly on Christ
held forth in the Word, and Prayer is a putting up of Suits according to the
Word: There are many that know no more what use to make of Christ, then if He
had never been incarnate, nor had come under that relation of a Mediator, and
make their Prayers serve to make up all; whereas Faith, not only respects
Christ as God, but His Merits as Mediator and His Offices. 6. Nor is Faith only
a believing this Word of God to be true, though we could wish many were come
that length; it would make a Man tremble to hear the blasphemous words that
some will have, when they are asked concerning their believing the truth of the
Bible; but though ye were that length, it were not enough, the Devils believe
and tremble; the Faith that we call you to, is more then Historical, it is to
resting on Christ, to cordial receiving of the Message which He sends to you;
as, suppose a King should send an embassage to a Person to woo her to be his
Wife, it is one thing to know that there is such a King, another thing to
believe that he is real in his offer, and that the Woman by consenting to marry
him, may be, and will be happy, and (which is yet more) actually to receive the
Message, and to consent to go and marry him; It Is here as when Abraham's
servant is sent to Rebekah, Genesis 24. She and her Friends believe all the report
that the Servant made of his Master and of his Son, that it was true, and then
it is given to her option if she will go with the Man, and she consents to go,
and actually goes; this is it we press you to, to go with us and close the
Bargain, and to accept of Him, and of Life through Him; by the same similitude
ye may know what Saving Faith is, and what is the difference betwixt it and
Temporary Faith; when the great, rich, and brave offer comes to be made to
Rebekah, by a Man with many Camels, Gold, and Bracelets, when she believes that
it is true, and that it is made to her, she is fain, and it may be over fain, if
not somewhat vain also, that is like Temporary Faith; but when it comes to the
articles of the Contract, it is said to Sinners, ye must subject to Christ, and
follow His Will and not your own, this, this casts the Bargain; thus many when
they hear there is a possibility of Life to be had in Christ, and much more
when they hear it is to be had on good, easy, and free terms, it will make them
smile, but when it comes to that, Psalm. 45.10. Hearken, O daughter, and
consider, forsake thy fathers house, or the fashions of thy Fathers House, it
halts there, and they suspend and demur to close the Bargain, but Saving Faith
goes further on, and with Rebekah, finally closes the Bargain.

Secondly, The next thing is, What is Saving Faith, or what is it to Believe in
Christ? and would to God ye were ready to Believe, and as ready to receive the
Invitation as to ask the Question, and that in asking the Question ye were in
earnest; for by the way, many have asked the Question, What shall we do to be
saved? where if they had been in earnest, they might have been soon resolved;
The Answer is at hand, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall be
saved: But to them that desire further clearness or confirmation in this
concerning Business, we shall speak a little, yet ye must know, that it is such
a thing as is impossible to be made plain to a proud humoured or unhumbled
Sinner, it is the poor humbled Soul that will take it up, and to such a Soul,
half a word will help to take it up.

The plainest way to set it out, as we conceive, is, to name some Scripture
Expressions, and Similitudes, that hold it forth, The first whereof is in that
of Mat. 11.28. Come to me all ye that are weary and heavy laden; and John
6.35. He that comes to me shall never hunger, and he that believes in me
shall never thirst; readily these Expressions hold out these three. First, An
Evil which Men cleave to. Secondly, A Good that is offered to them. Thirdly, A
passing from the Evil to the Good, and so, come to me implies. 1. A hazard that
Folks are in by being at a distance from Christ. 2. That there is access to
Jesus Christ for remeiding that evil, and removing of that hazard. 3. A passing
from the one to the other, a passing from our own Righteousness to Christ's
Righteousness, a passing from our natural condition to Jesus Christ, a real
passing from Death in our selves, to Life in Him: Most part, think Faith to be
a conceit, a humor, or a guessing, that they think they may have and never
know how; but it is a real thing, a coming from our own Righteousness, as I
said, to His, from a Covenant of Works, to rest on Christ and His
Righteousness, held forth in the Covenant of Grace; this is somewhat explained,
Romans 7. where two Husbands are spoken of, a Woman cannot marry another Man till
her first Husband be dead, so, till a Sinner be dead to the Law, he cannot
marry Christ, there must be a divorcing from the Law and Covenant of Works ere
ye can close with Christ.

The second Expression is, John 1.12. Where Faith is held forth as a receiving
of Christ, To as many as received him, he gave them power to become the sons of
God, even to as many as believed on his Name; and it is well expressed in the
Catechism, to be a receiving of Christ as He is offered in the Gospel; this
supposes that Christ is offered to us, and that we are naturally without Him;
The Gospel comes and says, Why will ye die, O house of Israel? come and receive
a Savior; And the act of Faith is a gripping to that Offer, a receiving and
embracing of it, a being well content to take a free Discharge through His
Blood.

A third Expression is, Phil. 3.12. Where Faith is set out as an apprehending
of Christ, and Heb. 6.18. It Is called a laying hold on the Hope set before us,
and Isa. 56.4. a taking hold of the Covenant; all which suppose Folk to have a
choice, as it were, laid to them, and Christ to be holden out as a City of
Refuge, and a Shelter from that which we are in hazard of; Christ is held out
in the Gospel as the City of Refuge, and the exercise of Faith is to run from
the hazard to Him, as a Child that is chased by an unknown and uncouth Body,
flees unto the Mothers Arms, or as the Manslayer fled from the Avenger of
Blood to the City of Refuge; and Faith having run to Him, casts it self on Him,
or thrusts it self (as it were) into Him.

A fourth Expression is, rolling or casting of our selves over upon the Lord,
as Psalm. 55.22. Cast thy burden on the Lord, and Psalm. 37.5. Commit thy way to
the Lord, it is on the Margent, roll thy self on the Lord, or rest, as it is
verse. 7. and ease thy self on the Lord; the Gospel lays Christ, as it were, at
Folks feet, and Faith rolls them over on Him; it is even the Souls finding it
self through the work of the Spirit, unable to stand under the Burden; rolling
it self on Christ, as a crafie and weak Body casts it self on a Doun-Bed for
ease; This is a very emphatick, significant, and active Expression of Faith,
setting out a Man quiting his own Legs or Feet, as unable to stand on them, and
laying himself over on Christ; This is it that we call you to, even to quite
your own Feet, and to roll your selves over on Christ.

A fifth Expression is, Romans 10.3. Where it is called a submitting to the
righteousness of God; which is held out in the Gospel, thus, as if a King were
proclaiming a Pardon to Rebels, and saying to them, for as many heinous Crimes
as ye have committed, and are guilty of, if ye will take with them, and betake
your selves to my grace and mercy, sincerely resolving to be henceforth
faithful and dutiful Subjects to me, I will freely pardon you; which gracious
offer they most gladly accept of, and submit themselves to it: Submitting, is
an acquiescing in the terms of the Gospel, as it is proposed; It Is even as if
ye should say, we hold the Bargain, and are well-content and satisfied with it;
In a word, Faith carves not to God the way of Salvation, but sweetly submits
to the way He has carved out.

A sixth Expression is, Hiding of our selves in God, or in Christ, so the word
trust in God, signifies, to hide our selves in Him as in a place of Refuge,
according to that Prove. 18. The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the
righetous run unto it and are preserved, or hid, or, they flee to it as Doves
do to their Windows; and this is it the Apostle has, Phil. 3.9. That I may be
found in him not having my own righteousness, etc. so that if ye ask, What is
Faith? It Is a Man's betaking himself to Christ, that when he shall be called
for, it may be answered, Lord, I am in Christ not having mine own
Righteousness, etc. it is not to be lippenning to the Man's good Hopes, to his
good Prayers, or to his good Meaning, but to Christ's Satisfaction, and God's
Promise; By Faith, when rightly exercised, the Sinner holls and hydes himself
in Christ, till (to speak so) a bit of the Man cannot be seen; and this is well
set out by the Lord, when He says, Isa. 23.26. Come my people, enter into your
chambers, shut the doors about you, hide your selves for a little while, etc.
come in under the Mediator's Wings, lock in your selves by Faith there, and so
make all sure.

A seventh Expression is, 2 Chronicles. 30.8. Where, when Hezekiah is writing to the
degenerate Tribes to come home again, he bids them, yield themselves to the
Lord, in the Original it is, give the hand to the Lord, even as two Men who
have been at odds and variance, or have broken the ties that were betwixt them,
come to renew the Friendship, they chop Hands: Now God is brought in stretching
out His Hands to you, Isa. 65.2. therefore come and close with Him, yield to
Him, give Him the Hand, or chop Hands with Him, and make the Bargain and
Engagement sicker for the time to come; all these Similitudes borrowed from
Men, are partly to make the Nature of Faith obvious and clear, partly to
strengthen and confirm Believers Faith.

An eighth Expression is that of opening to Christ, Cant. 5.2. Open to me my
dove, etc. Rev. 3.20. Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man open the
door to me, etc. Acts. 16. it is said, the Lord opened the heart of Lydia: When
the Word comes, Sinners Hearts are locked on God, Christ comes by His Word, and
knocks hard to be in, bids open and take in the Savior, and Faith discerns His
Voice, and gives Him entry; it is the letting of the Word sink, the making of
Him welcome; it is not only the crediting of the Word as true, but the receiving
of Him whom the Word offers, for the End for which He is offered; and this is,
when the work of the Spirit with the Word, wakens up a stichilling, or
flightering (to say so) within, and makes the Heart to open to take in Christ;
as one worded it well and significantly, my Heart clecked as a Lintseed-Boll to
Christ; and wherever Christ has a design of Grace on the Soul, and comes with
Powet, He continues knocking, rapping and calling hard and aloud, till Doors
and Gates be cast open to Him.

A ninth Expression or Similitude under which Faith is held forth, is that
which is ordinary, of a Marriage, or of covenanting or consenting, whether in
Marriage or otherwise, but more especially in Marriage: When Christ takes on
Him the place of an Wooer, Ministers are His Ambassadors, the Word is their
Instructions, wherein He bids them go tell Sinners, that all things are ready,
and to pray them to come to the Marriage, or to marry and match with Him; and
Faith is a coming-away to this Husb^nd, a receiving of the word of Invitation,
a consenting to the Marriage: It Is not so much a local, as a qualitative change
or mutation, we change Fashions, we subscribe the Contract on the terms it is
laid out to us: In the Bargain of Grace, something is offered by God, and that
is Christ and His Fullness, and there is something done on our side, and that
is, acccepting of Him by Faith; and this is not so much a saying with the
Tongue, as it is a believing with the Heart, as it is Romans 10.10. With the
heart man believes unto righteousness; it is the Hearts present subscribing the
Marriage-Contract, and going away with Christ, to live and cohabit with Him,
though Confession will be readily with the Mouth also, as He calls for it.

A tenth Expression or Similitude, is that of buying, Ho every one (cries the
Prophet Isa. 55.1.) that thirsts, come to the waters, and he that has no
money, come buy, etc. so Rev. 3.18. Buy of me eye salve, etc. It says this
much, that God in the Gospel sets forth as in a Market, to Sinners, rich and
rare Wares, and good cheap, or at very low and easy Rates; and that Believing
is like buying up of the Wares; Life Eternal is holden out on condition of
believing on Christ, and the poor Sinner thinks that a good Bargain, for it
takes no Money from him: Rev. 22.17. This is called willing, whosoever will,
let him come and take of the water of life freely; the Soul has a good will to
the thing. It is held forth by several other Expressions in the Scripture, it
is called a cleaving to the Lord, or sticking to him, Josh. 23.8. and Acts
11.23. it is called hearing, hearkening, and enclining of the ear, Isa. 55, 2,
3. an attentive concerned, and holily greedy listening to, and taking hold of
this Offer; it is a cleaving to the Lord, as Woodben or Ivy cleaves to an Oak,
because its life depends on it: And Deuteronomy. 30. and Josh. 24. it is called a
choosing of the Lord, and that upon deliberation, as knowing that we have need
of Him, that He is a Savior suited completely to all the necessities of our
Souls, and that we are warranded to Believe on Him; it is the native act and
exercise of Faith to choice Christ among all the Wooers that are courting the
Soul: So likewise it is set out under trusting and committing, Psalm. 37. Commit
thy way to the Lord, trust in Him; I know says Paul, 2 Timothy 1.12. He is able
to keep that which I have committed to Him; it is to give Christ the credit of
your Salvation; it is one thing to give a Man the credit that He is true, and
another thing to concredit Him with our greatest concerns; we will credit many
whom we will not thus concredit our selves to, nor commit our concerns to; the
former (when these are applied to God) is Historical Faith, but this latter is
Saving Faith, when we dare trust and lippen our selves to Him, and to His Word,
and we think this Expression holds forth as much of the nature of Saving Faith
as any of the former, if we could take it up, when we dare concredit our selves
to Him because He has said the word: Thus also to act and exercise Faith on
Him, for Temporal, or for Spiritual things, it is to expect the event from God,
but so, as we expect and look for it on this ground, that Christ has purchased
it, and we have accepted Him on His Offer, which gives us a right to these
things needful for us, and purchased by Him: It Is said Matthew. 22.5. when the
Invitation comes, that some made light of it, but Faith, on the contrary, is a
laying weight on it, and a concrediting of our selves to God on that ground:
It Is called Romans 6. a delivering up of our selves to the word, and to Him in
it; it is even to put a Blank in Christ's Hand, to be filled up as He pleases,

Ye see then what ye are called to, it is to open to Christ, to come to Him, to
marry Him, to roll your selves on Him, to commit your selves to Him, to give
Him credit, etc. and is there any of these unreasonable or prejudicial to you?
and if they be very reasonable and advantageous, (as indeed they are,) we would
exhort you to come to Him, to receive Him, to apprehend Him, to flee to Him, to
take hold of Him, to marry Him, etc. Believe on Him, and by believing, be
united to Him, and get a right to Him, and to all His Purchase; give Him the
credit of saving your Souls: This we call for from you, and if ye do it not,
the complaint in the Text will stand against you, Who has believed our report?

SERMON V.
ISAIAH LIII.I. Who has believed our report? And to whom is the arm of the
Lord revealed?


It Is a great matter once to get the Gospel brought amongst a People, and such
Messengers, as may make the savoury Report of Jesus Christ unto them; yet this
is not all, there is a greater work behind, and that is, to get Christ believed
on, and to get the Report concerning Him received by the People to whom it is
made; This being the greatest and gravest work of the Prophets, and of the
Ministers of the Gospel, and the most eminent, not so much to get a word to
say, as to get the Word believed; and this is Isaiah's complaint, that though
he himself brought the Report concerning Christ, and foresaw many more would
bring it, yet, that the exercise of Faith in these who should hear it would be
very rare.

We spoke of the great thing called for from a People to whom this Gospel
comes, and the Report of Christ is made, and that is to Believe on Him, to
receive and rest on Him of whom the Report is made; except this be, though
there were never so many Preachers, and encouragements to Preach, though ye
should flock to the Ordinances every day, the ground of Complaint will still
remain, if there be not Saving Faith in Jesus Christ, which is the substance of
the Gospel.

After confirmation of this Point, We show what Faith is from the several names
the Scripture gives it, and wherein the exercise of Saving Faith is holden
out, all which imply these three. 1. A great hazard and danger that the Hearers
of the Gospel are in, whether they be sensible of it in such a measure at
least, or not, we speak not now, yet they are so really; so much fleeing,
coming, laying-hold, apprehending, etc. insinuate. 2. A fullness and sufficiency
in Christ Jesus holden forth to them, as the object of their Faith, as one that
can deliver out of that danger, and can right what ever is wrong. 3. An act,
wherein mainly the exercise of Faith is holden forth, and it is the act of the
Soul under that danger and distress, betaking it self to Christ's fullness for
help: It Is a fleeing from the Curse of the Law, to Him, as to the City of
Refuge; so every name that Faith gets, sets out a Man acting and moving some
way for Christ's remeeding the evil, and removing the hazard he is in.

Having spoken a little to this, that Faith is the main duty that is called
for, we may now follow the Exhortation to press you to it, it being to no
purpose to speak of Christ and of Faith in Him, except He be received; This is
the end of the Word written and taught, John 20. at the close, even to believe
in the Name of the Son of God, and by believing to receive Life in and through
Him.

And therefore, Secondly, Seeing this is the main Duty called for by the Gospel,
that by Faith ye should receive it, and Christ offered in it, we earnestly
exhort you to it; It is not so much to this or that particular Duty, though
these be employed; it is not so much to attendance on Ordinances, nor to
submission to Discipline and Censures, though these also be Duties that we
exhort you to; but it is to obedience to the great command of Faith, even to
believe on Him whom the Father has sent and sealed; It is to receive this
Gospel, to submit to the Righteousness of Faith, to open to Him that is
knocking at the Door, to yield to Him and to give Him the Hand, that bygone
Quarrels may be removed, and taken out of the way; except this be, we profess to
you in His Name, that ye bring not forth the Fruit that this Gospel calls for
from you, and that no less will be acceptable to God, nor taken off your Hand
by Him.

And to add here the third Branch of the Doctrine, We say, that no less will do
your turn as a necessary mean for attaining the Promise and that which is
promised. 1. Look to all the Promises, whether of Pardon of Sin, or of Peace
with God, of Joy in the Holy Ghost, of Holiness and Conformity to God; there is
no access to these, or to any of them but by Faith; this is the very proper
condition of the Covenant of Grace, and the Door whereby we step into it; and
if ye think Pardon of Sin, Peace with God, and Holiness to be necessary, then
this great Gospel-Duty of Believing is no less necessary; for the Lord says,
John 3.36. He that believes not is condemned already. 2. Look to the
performance of any Duty, or mortification of any Lust or Idol, and Faith is
necessary to that, 1 John 5.5. It is by Faith we obtain victory over the world;
it was by Faith ( Heb. 11.) that all the Worthies spoken of there, wrought
Righteousness, etc. 3. When any Duty is done, of whatsoever nature it be, there
is no acceptance of it without Faith; It is not our Praying, or coming to the
Church, that will make Duty to be accepted, but it is Faith, the word profited
them not, says the Apostle, Heb. 4.2. because it was not mixed with Faith: And
that for making the Duty acceptable, Faith is necessarily requisite, we may
clearly see, Heb. 11.6. where it is expressly said, that without Faith it is
impossible to please God; And how is it that Abel offers a more excellent
Sacrifice than Cain, it was nothing sure in Cain's Sacrifice it self that made
it be casten, nor any thing in Abel's that made it be received or acceptable,
but Faith in the Messiah to come, that was found to be in the one, and was a
missing in the other; Is there not reason then to press this Duty on you? and
to exhort you not to think this a common and easy thing, though the most part
think it to be so; if we look to the benefits of it, to the difficulty of it,
and to the rarity of it in the World, there is no Duty had need more to be
pressed than this, even that Christ Jesus should get the Burden of your
immortal Souls cast on Him by this Saving Faith. I shall therefore, in the
further prosecution of this. First, Show, what mainly ye would eshew and avoid,
as that whereat Folk more ordinarily stumble. Secondly, What it is we would
press you to, and on what Grounds.

For the first, I know the deceits and mistakes in Men about the Exercise of
Faith, are so many, that they are more then can well or easily be reckoned up,
yet we shall in some generals, spoken of before, hint at a few of them; for so
long as ye continue in the same Snares, they must be still pointed out to you,
and endeavors still used to undeceive and extract you out of them; and
therefore, 1. Beware of resting on a Doctrinal Faith, which before, I called
Historical; We know it is hard to convince some that they want Faith, yet we
would have you to consider, that it is not every kind of Faith, but Saving
Faith, that will do your turn; it is the want of that which the Prophet
complains of: And therefore, to open this a little, ye would consider, That
there may be really such a Faith as is an assent to the truth of the Word, in a
natural Man, yea in a Reprobate, but that Faith will never unite to Christ, nor
be waited with the Pardon of Sin. First, I do not say, that every one that is
in the visible Church has this Doctrinal Faith, to believe a Heaven and a
Hell, that the Scripture is the Word of God, and that all that believe in
Christ shall get Pardon of Sin and Life; the carriage alace! of many testifies
that they have not this much, whatever fleeting notions they may have of these
things, or whatever esteem they may seem to put on the Gospel, and whatever
profession they may make, that they believe the truth of it, yet in their deeds
they deny it; for if there were a fixedness in the Doctrinal Faith of the
Gospel in Men, they durst not for their Souls live as they do. Neither yet
Secondly, Do we say, that all they that have this Doctrinal Faith of the
Gospel, or somewhat of it, do believe every passage in it alike, but often as
they please them, they believe them: Hence many believe what the Word speaks of
Mercy and of Pardon of Sin, and will not question that; but what it speaks of
Holiness, and of the severity of God's reckoning with Men for Sin, they do not
so credit that part of the Word; it is true, where the Faith of the one is, the
Faith of the other will some way be; but because the one agrees better with
their Corruption than the other, therefore the one is not so so received as the
other; and it is very frequent with such, to be found diminishing from one
place, and adding to another, of the Word of God. Nor Thirdly, Do we say, that
all Men do in a like and equal degree, believe the truth of the Word; there is
in some more Knowledge, in some less, in some more Convictions, in some fewer;
and though we preach to you all, yet there are some that believe not this to be
God's Ordinance, albeit there are many who will not be saved, that takes this
Word to be the Word of God, and believe what is the meaning of it, because the
Word it self says it is so: And the reason of this is, 1. Because there is
nothing that is not Saving, but a Natural Man may h^ve it; now, this Doctrinal
Faith is not Saving, and so a Natural Man may have it, yea, the Devils believe
and tremble; and James does not dispute with these to whom he writes on this
account, that they believe not thus, but tells them, that Historical Faith was
not enough; and we think a man in Nature may have a great persuasion of the
truth of the Word of God, and that what it says will come to pass, and yet
still continue but a Natural Man. A second Reason is, Because the Scripture
speaks so often of many sorts of Faith that are not Saving, as Exodus 14. at the
close, it is said, the People believed the Lord; and Psalm. 106.12. then they
believed His Word, and sang His praise; and John 2.23. many believed on Christ
to whom He did not commit himself; there was Faith in them, which His Signs and
Miracles extorted from them, which was not Saving; and Matthew. 13. two or three
such acts of Faith are spoken of in the Parable of the Sower, that were not
Saving, however sound they might be in their own kind, and 1 Cor. 13. we have
such a Faith spoken of, as a Man dare not deny the truth of the Word, though he
should bring his Body to be burnt by his avouching of the same. A third Reason
is, Because, as much credit may be given to the Word as is given to any other
History that is creditably believed; and it is on this ground that we believe
there was such Men as Caesar, Pompey, Wallace, etc. and it being certain, that
there may be impressions on the Consciences of Hearers, that this is God's
Word, backed with some common work of the Spirit, and that it is generally
received to be the Word of God, in the part of the World we live in; what
wonder is it that Folk believe thus, and drink in this Historical or Doctrinal
Faith of the Word, so as they may even dare to suffer to Death for it? and yet
in the mean time, they may want Saving Faith, the Devils being as sure as any
Natural Man is, that God is true, and that His Word will be performed, and
therefore they say to Christ, Art thou come to torment us before the time; the
Pa^gs of a Natural Conscience in Men will assure them of a Judgment coming,
though they tremble to think on it.

And therefore ere we proceed further, take a word of Use from this, and it may
let you see the great and very general mistake of the most part of the Hearers
of the Gospel, in resting on this Doctrinal Faith; If ye tell them that they
have no Faith, they will not by any means take with that; they believe there is
a Savior, and that He is God and Man, and that such as believe on Him shall be
saved, and on this they rest: It Is such as these who think they have believed
all their days since ever they had any Knowledge, because the Word was always,
or very long since, received in the Place where they lived, for the Word of
God, and they believe it to be so also; and know no difference betwixt
believing the Word, and believing on Christ holden out in it; though alace many
of you believe not this much, for if ye were among the Jews, ye might be soon
brought to question the truth of the Gospel; But though ye had the real Faith
of the truth of the Word, take not that for Saving Faith, for as there is a
real Sorrow that is not the Saving Grace of Repentance unto Life, so there is a
sort of real Faith that has a real Object, and a real being in the Judgment,
which yet is not a real closing with Christ, and so, not Saving Faith; as,
suppose a Man pursued by his Enemy, should see a strong Castle-door standing
open, or one in hazard at Sea should see dry Land, if he should stand still
while the Enemy were pursuing him, or abide still in the sinking Vessel, the
sight of the Castle-door open, nor of the dry Land, would not save him; so it is
not the believing that there is a Savior come into the World to save Sinners,
that will save, except there be a resting on Him as He is holden out in the
Wo^d of the Gospel: Historical Faith, is only (as it were) a looking on the
Savior, but Saving Faith grips to Him, and rests on Him; Historical Faith
looks on Christ, but acts not on Him, closes not with Him; and therefore such
as have it only, and no more, sink and perish without getting good of Him: We
would think it a great matter to get many of you as far on in Believing as the
Devil is, who believes and trembles; the little trembling that is, shows that
there is but little of this Historical Faith, yet, as I have often said, this
is not all, ye may have this, and yet if ye halt there, ye will certainly
perish if ye were never so confident to be saved; the Apostle does well
distinguish these, Heb. 11.6. He that comes to God, must believe that He is,
and that He is a rewarder of them that diligently seek Him; where these two are
presupposed. First, Believing that God is, or has a Being. And secondly,
Believing that His Promise is sure and sicker, that He is Faithful that has
promised, and will make His Word good. And then thirdly, On both these follows
a coming to Him as a Rewarder of diligent Seekers of Him. The first two take in
Historical Faith; for to believe that God is, is Natural, and to believe that
God is Faithful in His Promise, may be in Natural Men; but to come to Him, to
get the hazard that the Soul is in, removed through Jesus Christ, is a thing
few do attain: This then is the first thing we would be aware of, not aware to
believe the truth of the Word, but to be aware of resting on it as Saving
Faith; it is not enough to look on Christ, and to grant that it is He, but the
Man must never be satisfied till he get himself rolled on Christ, and the
weight of his Salvation and Peace laid on Him in His own way.

The second thing ye would beware of, is, Some common and quickly transient
work on the Affections, that may accompany Historical Faith; Whether the
Affection of Grief, or the Affection of Joy be stirred thereby, both are unsafe
to be rested on; when ye cannot prove your resting on Christ, or where there is
no relevant ground to prove it by, though ye should tremble as Felix did, and
be under allaruming convictions of Conscience and fears of your hazard, or
though ye should be affected with Joy as the Temporary Believer may be, and
sometimes is, what will that profit you? it is a great mistake to take some
small work on the Affections, which at the best is but an effect of Historical
Faith, for a Saving work of the Spirit. Or secondly, If it be not an effect of
Historical Faith, it is an effect of a challenge of Conscience, and smiting of
the Heart, as in Saul, who could say to David, Thou art more righteous than I,
my son David. Or thirdly, It Is some common work of the Spirit, such as was in
Simon Magus, of whom it is said, he believed, and who could say, pray for me;
for Folks to conclude on this ground, that they are brought out of Nature into
a State of Grace, is to build upon a Sandy Foundation: The Apostle speaks 2
Cor. 7.10. of worldly Sorrow, as well as of a godly Sorrow and as there may be
a wordly Sorrow, so there may be a carnal Joy, a piece of fainness, to speak
so, in Prayer, or at hearing of a Preaching, or at a Communion, which is not
Saving Faith; some hear the Word with Joy, Matthew. 13. who yet endure not; and
John Baptist's Hearers rejoiced in his Light for a season; even as a sick Man,
who hearing (as we hinted before) that a Physician who is skilful and able to
cure him, is come to Town, he grows fain in the contemplation of a Cure of his
Disease; but here is the stick, when the Physician tells the Man that he must
be so and so abstemious, and keep himself under such a strict Diet, he dow not
abide that, and so, all his joy evanishes: There is something like this in
Tempory Faith, where some remote expectation of Salvation will cause a carnal
Joy and Fainness; but when it comes to this, that a Man is called to quite his
Lusts, or his Estate, or, in the World to undergo Trouble and Persecution for
the Gospel, by and by he is offended, he thinks (to say so) a Fowl in his hand
is worth two fleeing; and therefore when the Storm blows in his Teeth, he turns
his Back and runs away: Especially we will find this to be with Men in
Sickness, they will have mints and seriousness, and sometimes flashes of Sorrow
under Convictions or Challenges, and sometimes flashes of Joy that will evanish
when they come to Health again: When we speak of some common work on the
Affections, we would take in liberty and some warmness of Spirit in Prayer,
which, no question, even unrenewed Men may find more at one time than another,
as when they are in some great hazard or strait, they will be more than
ordinary serious in that Duty, and yet that may be but an effect of Nature;
This proves a great Stumbling and Neck-break to many, that they think they are
well enough if now and then they get utterance in Prayer, as sometimes they
will get words beyond what they expected, and when upon reflecting, they find
that they have been in earnest, though it has been but with Moral seriousness,
that blows them up; upon which ground it is, that many shuffle in Prayer in the
place of Saving Faith, and when they Pray with warmness, they trow they
Believe, when in the mean time they never knew what it was, in good earnest to
lay themselves over on Chist Jesus; therefore when we invite you to Believe,
this is another thing we would bid you beware of, that ye put not a flash of
Sense in the room of Faith.

3. There is yet a more subtle, though no less dangerous Mistake, that ye
would beware of, and that is, When Faith is confounded with Obedience, and is
looked on in Justification as a piece of new Obedience, with Love, Repentance,
and other duties of Holiness; so some think they Believe, because they have
some Natural awe of God in their Walk, and some fear of Sin, and do perform
some duties of Religion, and walk Honestly, as they think, according to the
Rule; which is to confound the Covenant of Works and of Grace, and to make the
Covenant of Works a Covenant of Grace, or to turn the Covenant of Grace into a
Covenant of Works; only with this difference, that though their works be not
perfect, but defective, yet wherein they are defective, they think there is
worth in their Faith to make up that want, and to supply that defect; and so by
Faith they think they will obtain the acceptance of their works, and of their
Persons on account of their works; they look upon their works as pleasing to
God, but because they are not perfect, they will believe, or exercise Faith, to
make up their defects, to which the way of Grace is quite contrary, which makes
the Tree first good, and then the Fruit; This way that many take, is not to
draw the evidences of Believing from works of Holiness, which is warrantable,
but the founding of Faith, or their hope of Heaven on works, and the use they
make of their Faith, is to ward off Challenges for the imperfection of their
works, and to make Faith procure aeceptance (as I just now said) to their
works, and acceptance to their Persons for their works sake.

4. Beware of that which ye ordinarily call a certain assurance, or sure
knowledge of your Salvation, and that all the Promises are yours, whereby ye
think your selves in no hazard; a hope and assu^ance of Heaven that ye can give
no ground for, nor proof of, only ye think ye are sure of Pardon of Sin, and
coming to Heaven, and that ye are obliged to maintain that groundless hope; but
that is not Saving Faith, for it is a hope of Heaven that can give you no right
to Christ; there must first be a fleeing to Him, and closing with Him, before
ye can have any true and well-grounded hope of Heaven; but your hope and
confidence is, never to question the matter, ye are like Laodicea, who thought
her self rich, and to stand in need of nothing, when she was beggarly Poor; or
like these Men, who, when God was threatening them with Judgment, yet would
needs presume to think that they leaned on the Lord: I think, among all the
Persons that God has indignation against, it is in a special manner against
these: who have this sort of hope, and to whom God discovers the
groundlesness of it, and yet they will still stoutly maintain, and stand fast
by their hope; it is to these He speaks, Deuteronomy. 29.19. who despise and tush at
God's Threatenings, and say, We shall have peace, though we walk in the
imagination of our own hearts, and add drunkenness to thirst; the Lord there
pronounces a Curse, and to the Curse adds an Oath, that He will not spare
such Persons, but will separate them for Evil, and cause all the curses of the
Law to overtake them; judge ye now, what a condition this is for Persons to be
in, to be believing that all the Promises are theirs, and yet in steed of that,
to be (in the mean time) liable to all the curses threatened in the Word of God;
it is this that we call presumption, and the hope of the Hypocrite that will
perish, Job 8.13. the confidence of such shall be rejected and sweeped away as
a Speeders Web, and shall be rooted out of their Tabernacles, and bring them to
the King of Terrors; they think they Believe always, when they are not
troubled nor disquieted, they never want Faith, but have a great deal of it,
which yet is but a guessing, which cannot support and uphold them when they
come to a strai^; when they are more secure they Believe very well, and they
think when they are more awakened and disquiet'd, they believe less, and their
fancied Faith ebbeth quite on them; when they hear of any exercise of Mind, or
trouble of Conscience in others, they wonder that they will not Believe, and all
this work is to maintain their deep Security and strong Delusion, this is then
the fourth thing ye would beware of, for it is not the Faith that will turn away
the Complaint, Who has believed our report? and yet how many are there of this
sort? who say they shall have Peace, and please themselves with this their good
Hope, say the Word what it will. O! be persuaded, that this is nothing else but
woeful Unbelief and Presumption; and we preach to you Terror and the Curse of
God, though ye cry Peace to your selves; the Lord complains of such Persons,
Jer. 5.12. saying, They have belyed the Lord; He sent His Prophets to denounce
Judgments in the days of Josiah when there was a fair profession of Religion
and Reformation, yet they would believe and hope that no evil should overtake
them.

That which we aim at in this part of the Use, is to make way for what follows,
even to give you a cleanly ground for exercising of Faith on Jesus Christ, when
all these Stumblings and Mistakes are rolled out of the way: We therefore
exhort you, to lay your Hand to your Heart, and narrowly to try, if ye have
called, or accounted any of these to be Saving Faith; for there are hundreds,
nay thousands, that perish under these Pretexts, deceiving themselves, and
deluding others, with a Faith they were born and brought up with, and they have
no more but their groundless hope to prove their Faith by, and they will stick
by it, be said to them what will; but be not deceived, for God will discover
you; ye think a strong presumption is Faith, and that ye can by such a Faith
drink in the Promises, but God will make you vomit them up, and ye shall be
declared to be void of Faith in the great Day; therefore be more jealous over
your Faith, and seek to have your grips of Christ sickered, which is done, when
from the belief of your Hazard and Self-emptyness, and of Christ's fullness, ye
go to Him and close with Him, to make up all ye want, in Him; and this Faith is
especially qualified by the account on which we go to Him, and rest on Him,
even as a conscientious Duty is that which flows from a Command, as obedience
to it, so, one of the main things that qualifies this Faith, is a receiving
Christ as Christ, or as He is holden out in the Gospel, which is therefore well
put in the description given of Faith in the Catechism; and it is called a
believing on Him whom the Father has sent, which is not to Believe on Christ
simply, but as He is holden out in the Word of the Gospel; Presumption may look
on Christ and His Fullness, and few or none will readily dare to give Him a
direct and downright refusal, or to reject Him professedly and avowedly when
they hear of such Happiness that is to be had in Him; but that which we say
qualifies Faith, is to desire, receive, and embrace Him according as He is
holden out in the Gospel, for wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. when He is lippened to with an Eye to the Promise, and
when that which makes us rest on Him is the Word of God; for though Christ be
the material Object of Faith, yet the Word is the formal Object, whereby we get
a Right to Him, and there is no gripping or getting hold of Christ, but in, and
according to His Word; and therefore the generality of People (who on the
Matter, take the Antinomian way) think they have no more to do, but to apply
Christ, and to count Him their own at the very first; but through their not
exercising Faith on the Word of Promise, they miss Him; this is, as I have
said, a main qualification of Saving Faith, even to rest on Christ as He is
holden out in the Word, and by the Word, to take hold of Him, and rest upon
Him; Saving Faith does not simply rest on Christ because He is Merciful and
has all Fullness in Him, but it rests on Him and His Fullness as received in the
Word, and offered by God in His Word; Faith takes God's Faithfulness in His
Word, and lays hold on Him by that, Christ is the thing that makes H^ppy, but
God's Faithful Promise is the Right by which we get a Title to that thing; we
would never love nor like of that Faith that knows not the use of the Word,
that betakes it self to Christ, or the things in the Word, but meddles not, nor
has any dealing with the Word that holds them out, when as it is only this
Word that gives us warrant to expect that His Fullness shall be made
forthcoming for our up-making, and for the supply of all our need; many
desire, and expect good of God, but get it not, because their expectation is
not founded on His Word, and God's Faithfulness in His Word is not closed
withal: In a word, I would have you to think that Faith is neither an easy,
nor an insuperably difficult thing, but that it is easy to go wrong, and
difficult to go right, and that without God's special and powerful guiding, ye
cannot believe nor exercise Faith, nor walk in the way of believing in Him, and
dependence on Him, that ye may be helped to make a right use of Christ, and to
build upon Him, that ye may not slip nor stumble, and fall on the
Stumbling-stone laid in Zion, on which so many fall every day and break
themselves to pieces.

SERMON VI.
ISAIAH LIII.I. Who has believed our report? And to whom is the arm of the
Lord revealed?


IF it were not recorded in the infallible Scriptures of Truth, we would hardly
believe that there could be so much powerful and sweet Preaching of the most
excellent Instruments that ever were employed, and yet that there should be so
little Fruit following on it; who would believe that Isaiah, so excellent, so
sweet, and so evangelick a Prophet, should have preached so many pleasant,
plain, and powerful Sermons to a People from the Lord, and yet that he should
have so many sad complaints as he has? Chap. 6, 28, and 58. that he should be
put to bring in the Lord, saying, All the day long have I stretched out my
hands to a rebellious People, chap. 65. and that here, himself should have it
to say, Who has believed our report? It Is scarce one Man here or there that
has Savingly believed on Christ; and this is the third thing in the Words,
that now we would speak to, and it is a very sad, though a very clear Truth.

The Doctrine is this, That there may be much powerful Preaching of the Gospel,
and yet Unbelief generally among the Hearers of it; Or take it with dependence
on the former two, namely, 1. That the great work of the Ministry, is, to
propose and make Christ known to a People. 2. That the great Duty of a People
that have Christ proposed to them, is, to Believe on Him. Then this 3. Follows
on the back of these, That a People may have Christ propos^d to them, brought
to their Heart and Mouth, and though it be but Believing that is called for
from them, yet that cannot be obtained from most of them. This Gospel-duty of
Believing is often slighted by the Hearers of the Gospel; this is clearly
holden forth here, Who has believed our report? we have called for Faith, but
it is a rare thing among the multitude of Hearers to get one that believes
Savingly.

To make out, and prove this a little further, we would consider this
Complaint, with these Aggravations of it, which will make it the more clear,
and so the more to be wondered at, As, 1. These of whom the Complaint is made,
it is not Heathens, but God's own People, as the Lord complains, Psalm. 81, 10,
11. My people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would have none of me;
our Lord Jesus complains of Jerusalem, Matthew. 23. at the end, O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thee, and thou would not; that the
Lord's own professing People should not believe, nor receive the Report that is
made of Him, hightens the Complaint, and aggravates their guilt exceedingly. 2.
It is not a Complaint as to one Sermon, or as to one Time, but it is a Complaint
frequently repeated as to many fruitless Sermons, and as to many Times, yea
Generations; Isaiah preached long in many Kings Reigns, and yet all along his
Prophecy he complains of it, as Chap. 6.11. How long Lord shall their eyes be
blind, and their ears heavy, etc. and Chap. 28.9. Whom shall I teach Doctrine?
them that are weaned from the milk, and drawn from the breasts, precept must be
upon precept, and line upon line, here a little and there a little; and Chap.
65.2. All day long I have streatched out my hands to a rebellious people, and
here again, Who has believed our report? much and long, or many years
Preaching, much plain and powerful Preaching, and yet little or no Fruit; they
are snared and taken, and fall backward, for all that: And this was not in
Isaiah's days only, but in Christ's days, John 12.37, 38. and in Paul's days,
Romans 10.16. where the same very words in the Text are repeated; nay, it runs
down from the first spreading of the Gospel, even to these latter days wherein
we live, many hear, but few receive the Report. 3. Consider how many they are
that complain, it is not one or two, or a few, but all the Preachers of the
Gospel; it is not, Lord who has believed my Report, but, who has believed our
Report? it is complained of by Isaiah here, and in several other places named
before; it is complained of by Micah, Chap. 7.1. Woe is me, for I am as they who
have gathered the summer-fruits, as the grape gleanings of the vintage, there
is no cluster to eat, the good man is perished out of the earth, and there is
none upright among men, etc. it is complained of by Hosea, Chap. 11.7. Though
they called them to the most High, none at all would exalt him, that is, none
would give Him the glory of His Grace in believing on Him; Ah sad word! as is
that also in Psalm. 81. the Lord calls, Hear O my people and I will testify to
thee, open thy mouth wide and I will fill it, but my people would not hearken
to my voice, and Israel would none of me; and what Prophet is there almost (if
I need say almost) but has one way or other this Complaint? that though the
Lord streatched out His Hands all day long, yet it was to a rebellious and
gainsaying People: Look forward, and see what our Lord says of John Baptist,
and of Himself, Whereto shall I liken this generation, it is like children
sitting in the marketplaces, saying one to another, we have piped to you and
ye have not danced, we have mourned to you and ye have not lamented, that is,
there is much Preaching of Men endowed with several Gifts, but none of them
does the People much good; John preached with much holy austerity, like one
Mourning; the Son of Man most sweetly, like one Piping, yet neither the one nor
the other prevailed; there are some Boanarges, sons of Thunder, allaruming and
thundering Preachers; some Barnabasses, sons of Consolation, sweetly comforting
Preachers, yet all gain but little on the Hearers; our Lord says, Mat. 23. O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered you? this is the ordinary
Complaint, ye would not. A 4th. Aggravation is, If we consider who they are
that meet with this Unbelief and Unfruitfulness in them they preach to, if it
were poor coldrife Preachers, such as we, alace in a great measure are, or such
as the Scribes and the Pharisees were, or if it were they who had Learning
only, and not Piety, it were not so great matter to see them meet with Unbelief
and Unfruitfulness in their Hearers; but its even these whom the Lord sent and
sharpened, as Arrows out of His Quiver, as this Prophet was; it is even his
Preaching that is Fruitless in a great measure, and was there ever a more
sweet, plain, powerful, and delectable Preacher than Isaiah was? that even the
very reading of his Preachings may affect the Readers, yet is there any that
complains more, or so much, as he does in the Chapters before cited? it is like
ye will think, that if Isaiah were Preaching now, he would be as a Stone, that
would not be moved thereby, and yet his Preaching got the same return and
entertainment that our gets now; and Hosea called his Hearers to the most High,
yet none at all would exalt Him; it was their work to streatch out their Hands
all the day long, but they hardened their Necks, and refused to return, Jer. 8.
and Zech. 7. But 5ly. Consider all these are Servants and Preachers under the
Old Testament, and you may be disposed to think that ye under the Gospel, when
the Vail is laid by, and when Christ Himself, their Lord and Master, and His
Apostles come to Preach the Gospel, it should be otherwise; yet John the
Baptist, who was Christ's Harbinger, who was a burning and a shining Light, a
stayed and fixed Man, not a Reed shaken with the Wind, (as many of us much
are,) a Prophet, yea more than a Prophet, yet when he preached, many of his
Hearers rejected the counsel of God against themselves, Luke 7. John comes
preaching austerely, and they say he has a Devil, and if there was any
rejoicing in his Light, it was but for a Season; and Paul that chosen Vessel,
how often was he persecuted? and he has the same Complaint, in the same words
that Isaiah has here of his Hearers, especially the Jews, Acts 13.46. and
28.28. and was constrained to tell them, that he and his Fellow preachers
behoved to quite them, and betake themselves to the Gentiles; and how does he
complain of the Corinthians and Galatians, and of their being bewitched, and
suddenly seduced, and drawn away from the truth and simplicity of the Gospel,
by some Self-seeking Lown-Ministers, coming with a glancing Countefite among
them. We shall close this with the consideration of our Lord Jesus, who was a
nonesuch Preacher, of whom it is said, Matthew. 7.29. that He spoke with power
and not as the Scribes, and Luk 4. when he is opening that sweet Text, Isa.
61.1, 23. it is said, They all wondered at the gracious words that proceeded out
of his mouth; and the Officers that came to take Him, say, that never man spoke
as He spoke, and yet this same is His Complaint, Matthew. 23.37. How often would
I have gathered you, and ye would not; and John 1.11. it is said, He came to his
own, and his own received him not: Chorazin, Bethsaida and Capernaum were
lifted up to Heaven by the Lord's preaching to them in Person, and yet woe
after woe is denounced against them, because they believed not, for all His
Preaching and Miracles; and it is a wonder, if we look through the History of the
Gospel, how many a sweet Preaching He had, and with what Weight and Power He
spoke, and sometimes with Tears, and withal, backed His Word with Miracles,
that made His Hearers acknowledge the Finger of God, and yet how few were
brought to Believe on Him? so that He was put to take up this very Complaint of
Isaiah here, John 12.38. Is it not a wonder, when He and His Apostles have
preached so much, and so long, that the Church is so little a Flock, and that
Believers are so few in number, even after His Ascension? need we any further
proof, that the Gospel where it comes gets but little welcome? the Carriage of
many among our selves is a sad proof of it, for we are afraid that many of you
do not Believe to this Day, though there has been amongst you, much, long, or
many Years, and powerful preaching of the Gospel, but are still living without
Faith, and Perishing.

If this be not enough to clear the Doctrine, 1. See how Christ speaks of it,
Matthew. 13. in the Parable of the Sower of the Seed, where there are three sorts
of Ground that never bring forth good Fruit, and there He speaks, not only of
the time of His own Personal Ministry, but of all times. 2. Look to the
ordinary and daily effect, or rather consequent of this preached Gospel, and it
will prove it; do not many Perish? do not many crowd thick in the broad Way
that leads to Destruction? do not but very few Fruits of Faith appear? is there
not little, lamentably little, real Change in the Way and Walk of most to be
seen? To clear it yet further, Go through the several Ranks of Persons, that in
God's account are Unbelievers, and lay them by, O! there will be exceeding few
Believers in Christ found: First, Then lay by the grossly Profane, that are
never so much as civilized. Secondly, The Ignorant, Stupid, and Senseless, that
never have mind they have Souls, are never feared for Wrath, nor in the least
exercised to make their Peace with God. Thirdly, The Earthly-minded, that mind
no other thing save the World. Fourthly, These of a Civil outward Carriage,
that have some good Works, and as they think, good Days too, and yet come not
near Christ to close with Him. Fifthly, The Hypocrites, and that of all sorts,
both the presuming Hypocrites, that will thank God they are better than their
Neighbors, and yet lippen not to Christ, and free Grace through Him, but seek
to establish their own Righteousness, gross as it is; and the legal Hypocrites,
that never denied their own Righteousness, nor submitted to the Righteousness
of Christ: Lay aside all these, I say, and we leave it to your own Consciences
to judge, how few will be found to have Saving Faith; and therefore I am
persuaded, if there be any truth of God delivered to you, that this is a truth,
that though the Gospel be preached to many, yet there are but few Hearers of
it, that do actually Believe in Jesus Christ to the saving of their Souls.

Use 1. The first Use of it is, To beseech you to let this sink deep into your
Minds as the Truth of God, for these Reasons. 1. Because it is a most useful
Truth, and if it were believed, it would make Folks very watchful over
themselves, and to tremble for fear, lest they be found amongst the multitude
that Believe not, and put them t^ secure and sicker their Interest in God, and
not to rest on a Fashion and Form of Religion, without observing what Fruit
follows on the Gospel; among the many Evils that undo not a few, we think
this is not the least, that this Truth is never thoroughly fixed in them; they
think there are many Heathens and Turks without the Church, and many gross
Swearers, Drunkards, and others such within it, that will Perish, but none
others, or at least, that they are but very few, who among a professing People
Perish; neither can they be induced to think it is such a hard matter, to get
one, or a very few that are Believers in a Country side, so that if Isaiah
were now alive to cry, Who believes our report? each of them would be ready to
answer, I believe. 2. Because for as certain and useful a Truth as this is, yet
generally it is not believed, Folks cannot think that so few Believe, and that
Believing is so difficult and rare a thing: I would ask you this Question, Was
it ever a difficulty to any of you to Believe? If not, what is it that makes
Believing so rare? what should move the Prophet thus to complain, Who has
believed our report? I shall shortly give you some Evidences that many of you
do not really believe this Truth. The first is, That so few of you tremble at
the Word of God; the Historical Faith that the Devils have, makes them tremble,
but ye have not that much; this is given as a Property of a suitable Hearer of
the Gospel, to whom the Lord will look, Isa. 66.1, 2. that he is one who
trembles at the Word; but the most part of you that hear this Gospel, are like
these Pi^lars on which this House stands, who are never so much as once moved
at the Word; ye either take not Faith to be an absolutely necessary thing, and
that ye cannot but Perish without it, or ye think that the Faith ye were Born
with, will do your turn; ye do not Believe that ye are naturally under the
power of the Devil, and led Captive of him at his will, and that without
Holiness, and a spiritual gracious Frame, and stamp on your Heart and Way, ye
shall never see God; what wonder then that ye come not to rest on Christ, when
the very Letter of the Gospel is not credited. A second Evidence is, That there
is so little preparation made to prevent your eternal Hazard, it is said of
Noah, Heb. 11. that Noah being warned of God, prepared an Ark, and this is
attributed to his Faith; it is not possible that ye would live so negligently
and carelessly, if ye believed that the Curse of God were pursuing you, and that
ye will be brought to reckon for that which ye have done in the Body, and that
ye will meet with God as an Enemy; if this were believed, though your Hearts
were harder than they are, it would make you tremble, and put you to other sort
of thoughts and seriousness. A third Evidence is, That there is no Fruit of
Faith among many of you, for where it is, it will not be got altogether
smuthered, but will kythe and show it self one way or other; and if ye will
still assert your Faith, I would say to you as James does to these to whom he
writes, Show me your Faith by your works; if ye shall say, God knows: I answer,
that ye shall find that to be a Truth that He knows, and He will make you know
that He does so; but alace! that poor Shift will not avail you when it comes to
the Push, O try your Faith then by your Works; see what Mortification of Lusts,
what Repentance from dead Works, what grouth in Knowledge, what shining of
Holiness in your Conversation, is attained to; many of you, as to your very
Knowledge, are as if ye lived among Heathens, many of whom have been as free of
Vice, and more profitable to others, than many of you are, and cared as little
for the World as many of you do; how comes it to pass then, that ye have lived
as if ye could have Faith, and yet have no Fruit? ye must either say, that
Faith is not necessary, or that ye may have Faith without Fruit, for we are
sure your Fruit is not the Fruit of Faith: To live honestly, as you call it,
what is that? there are many Heathens who have gone beyond you in that; we will
not say, that Moral Honesty is nothing, but sure it is not all; all the Fruits
of mere Moral Honesty, are but sour Fruits, that will set your Teeth on edge:
Neither is it your Hearing of the Word only, but your Believing and Doing of
it, that will profit you; it is very sad, that most plain obvious Duties are
not at all followed, as the studying of Knowledge, the exercising of
Repentance, one of the very first Duties, which is never separated from Faith,
the humbling of the Soul before God, the loathing of your selves for all ye
have done, the Love of God, etc. for there may be Challenges for gross Evils in
Heathens; and Fear is not Repentance, but Godly Sorrow that causes Repentance
not to be repented of. A fourth Evidence is, The want of that Work of God's
Spirit that accompanies Faith, Faith is a special Work of the Spirit, and the
gracious Gift of God, it is wrought by the exceeding mighty Power of God,
whereby He raised Christ from the Dead, and by that same Power He works in
them that Believe; now, knew ye ever what this Work meaned? found ye it ever to
be a difficult Work to Believe? knew ye ever what it was to have the Spirit of
God constraining your Heart to Believe? I speak not of any extraordinary thing;
but certainly, Faith is not Natural, nor comes from pure Nature, and wherever
it is, it manifests it self by Works, and evidenceth the Power of the Spirit in
the working thereof: There are some sad Evidences of, and bitter Fruits that
spring from this Root, to wit, Folks being Strangers to the experimental
Knowledge of the Work of Faith: As, 1. When Men know no more difficulty to get
Christ, and to rest on Christ, then to believe a Story of Wallace, or of Julius
Caesar. 2. When Folks say that they believed all their Days, and believed always
since ever they knew Good by Ill; and though their Faith be no true Saving
Faith, but a guessing, yet they will not quite it, yea it is impossible for Men
to get them convinced that they want Faith. 3. When Men never knew what it is
to be without Faith; it is one of the great Works of the Spirit, John 16.8. to
convince of the want of Faith; Folks will be easily convinced, that breach of
the Sabbath, that Stealing, that bearing false Witness, etc. are Sins, where
the special Work of the Spirit is not; but how many of you have been convinced
of the want of Faith? we are constrained to say this sad word when we look on
this Text, that it is lamentably fulfilled in your Eyes, and in this our
Congregation; think not that we wrong such of you who have believed our Report;
Ah it is few, even very few of you, that Receive and Believe this Gospel.

Use 2. The second Use is for Conviction, If it be ordinary for the great part
of the Hearers of the Gospel not to Believe, let it sink in your Hearts that it
is no extraordinary thing that has befallen you; are ye not such Hearers as
many of these were, who heard Isaiah, and Jesus Christ? and if so, will not
this follow, that there are many, yea, even the thick and throng of the Hearers
of this Gospel, that Believe not? and who if Christ were gathering Sinners by
this preached Gospel, would not be gathered; if where the Gospel comes many do
not Believe, then here in this City where the Gospel is preached to a great
multitude of professing Members of the visible Church, there are readily many
that do not Believe; or let me ask of you a Reason why ye do except your
selves, either this Truth holds not so universally, or many of you must fall
under it, or else give a Reason why you fall not under it; the Truth which
Isaiah preached, has been preached to you, and yet ye remain Unbelieving, and
Dispisers of the Invitation to the Marriage of the King's Son, as the Jews did;
we are not now speaking of Jews, Turks, nor Heathens, nor of the Churches in
general, nor of other Congregations, but of you in Glasgow, that have this
Gospel preached amongst you, and we say of you, that there are few that believe
our Report: Think it not our Word, the Application flows natively from the
Text, not from necessity of the thing, but from the ordinary course of Men's
Corruption; are not the same Evidences of the want of Faith, which we spoke of,
among you? how many are there in their Life Profane? how many rest on Civility
and Formality? is there not as little Repentance now as was in Isaiah's time?
as little denying of our own Righteousness, and making use of Christ's, though
the Word be taught by Line upon Line, here a little and there a little? It may
be, though ye think that the Doctrine is true in the general, ye will not, ye
cannot digest the Application, That among so many of you visible Professors of
Faith, there are but few real Believers; therefore we shall follow the
Conviction a little further, by giving you some Considerations to make it out,
that we have but too just ground to make Application of the Doctrine to you,
especially considering the abounding of Corruption that is amongst you, that ye
may be put to fear the Wrath that attends Sin, and to flee to Christ for Refuge
in time. 1. Consider of whom it is that the Prophet is speaking, and of what
Time, Is it not of the Times and Days of the Gospel? had not the Spirit (in
dictating this Text of Scripture) an Eye on Scotland, and on Glasgow? and do
not our Lord Jesus Christ and Paul apply it in their Days? and why then may not
we also in ours? and when the Spirit speaks expressly of the last Times, that
they shall be perilous, and of the falling away of many, should it not give us
the hotter alarm. 2. Do not all things agree to us as to them? is not this
Gospel the same? is our Preaching any better than theirs? nay, had they not
much more powerful Preaching? and if that Preaching which was much more
powerful had not efficacy as to many to work Faith in them, what may we expect
to do by our Preaching? are not your Hearts as deceitful? are not your
Corruptions as strong? are ye not as bent to Back sliding as they were? what
sort of Folks were they that were unfruitful Hearers? were they not Members of
the visible Church as ye are, circumcised under the Old Testament, as ye are
baptized under the New? was it not these who had Christ and His Apostles
preaching to them? yea, they were not among the more Ignorant sort who did not
Believe, but Scribes and Pharisees, and these not of the prophanest sort only,
but such as came to Church, and attended on Ordinances, as ye do, yea, were
such as had Gifts, and cast out Devils, and preached in Christ's Name, as you
may see, Luke 13.26. Now when there are so many, and of such Ranks, who get no
good of the Word, and of such, a great many that will seek to enter in, and
shall not be able, to whom Christ will sall say, depart, I know you not ye
Workers of Iniquity; What can be the reason that many of you do so confidently
assert your Faith, when there are scarcely any characters of Unbelief but ye
have them? or, what can be your advantage in keeping your selves carnally
Secure, when the strong Man, in the mean time, is in the House? and to shut
your Eyes, and make your Necks stiff, and to resolve, as it were, not only to
ly still, but to die in your Unbelief; I persuade my self, that many of you ere
long, will be made to wonder that ever ye thought your selves Believers, and
will be galled when ye think upon it, that what ever was said to you, ye would
needs maintain your presumptuous Faith. When we bid you suffer the Conviction
to sink, let none put it from themselves to others, but let every one take it
Home to himself; although we would not have any of you casting loose what is
indeed made fast and well secured, nor overturning a slender and weak Building,
though it were, to speak so, but of two Stone height, if it be founded on a
right Foundation, on the Rock; but we speak to you that cannot be brought to
suspect your selves, when ye have just reason to do so; sure, this Challenge
and Charge belongs to some, yea to many, and we would ask what ground have ye
to shift it? how can ye prove your Faith more than others that have none at
all? that ye hope ye have Faith, will not do your turn, that is no solid proof;
ye cannot come to Christ except made suitably sensible of your distance, and of
that ye have never been convinced as yet; do ye think to roll your selves on
Christ sleeping, and ye know not how? certainly when the Pins of your
Tabernacle come to be a loosing, ye shall find that your fancied Faith shall
not be able to keep out a Challenge; ye could never endute to think your selves
to be Christ's Enemies, or that ye wanted Faith, but when Death comes,
Conscience will awaken, and the Challenge will needs be in upon you, whether ye
will or not; many of you think that ye get wrong when your Faith is questioned
or reproved, as if it were an odd and rare thing to be Graceless, or to be
living as Members of the visible Church, and yet want Faith; and it irritats
you to be expostulated with in private for your lying in Unbelief: But suffer
this word now to take hold of you, I b^se^ch you, and if ye could once be
brought to suspect yourselves, and to think thus with your selves. What if I be
one of those many that Believe not? I fear I be in hazard to be mistaken about
my Faith, and from that, put to follow on to see how ye will be able to ward
off the Challenge, and to prove your Believing to be sound, we would think ye
were fair on; O if ye had the Faith of this Truth, that among the many Hearers
of the Gospel, there are but few that Believe, and were brought thereby to
examine and try your selves; there is no Truth that Christ insists more on than
this, that strait is the Gate, and narrow is the way to Heaven, and that but
few find it, and that there are few that Believe, and few that be Saved; If ye
did once in earnest look on your selves as in Hazard, and were brought to
reflect on Matters betwixt God and you, it might be the Lord would follow the
Conviction, we desire Him to do it, and to Him be Praise.

SERMON VII.
ISAIAH LIII.I. Who has believed our report? And to whom is the arm of the
Lord revealed?


It Is a sad matter, and much to be lamented, when the carrying of such good
News as is the Report of Jesus Christ in the Gospel, becomes unprofitable to
them that hear it, and thereby burdensome to them that carry it; Folks would
think that such glad Tidings as make the Heavenly Host of Angels to sing, would
be very joyful and welcome News to Sinners, and also most heartsome to them
that carry them; and where the former is, there the latter will be also; where
the Word becomes useless and unprofitable to Hearers, it is burdensome as to
the concomitant and effect, to honest Ministers that speak it; though Isaiah
brought these News in a very plain, powerful, pleasant and sweet manner to the
People he preached to, and that frequently, yet in the midst of his sweet
Prophesies, he breaks out with this Complaint, who has believed our report? he
is carrying glad Tidings, yet taking a look of the Unbelief of his Hearers now
and then, he complains of it to God in his own name, and in name of all the
Ministers of the Gospel that should come after him.

We show that it was a very ordinary thing where the Gospel comes in greatest
Plenty and Power, for the Hearers thereof to meet it with much Unbelief, a Truth
that was verified in Isaiah his time, and that he foresaw would be verified in
the Days of the Gospel; and therefore it is our Report, not only is it the
Report of Isaiah, but it is the Report of Christ, and of Paul, who make the
same Complaint, and Cite the same words of Isaiah, and need we doubt of the
truth of it, when Isaiah in the Old, and Paul in the New Testament, thus
complain? Not to speak of their, and our Lord and Master, who came to his own
and his own received him not, and of whom when He came they said, this is the
heir come let us kill him; need we, I say, doubt of the truth of the Doctrine,
or to think it strange to see it so in our Time, and that we have the same
Complaint, when the Means (at least the Instruments) are incomparably far below
what they were then, though it be still the same Gospel?

The Prophet's scope is, to give Advertisement and Warning to the Hearers of
the Gospel for the Time to come, of this rise Evil, even the abounding of
Unbelief in them that hear it. 1. That he may prevent the Scandal of the
unfruitfulness of the Word where it comes. 2. That he may add a Spur of
excitement to the Hearers of the Gospel to endeavor to make use of it, and not
to rest upon Means, how powerful and lively soever they be, but to press
forward to the End they aim and shoot at. 3. That he may put Folks to the
Trial, and that they may be brought to look in upon themselves, whether they
be, or be not, in this black Roll of them that receive not the Report; and we
think, if any thing put Folks to be suspicious of themselves, and to commune
with their own Hearts about their Souls estate, this should do it; especially
when they consider how this Evil agrees to all Times, and yet more especially
to the Times of the Gospel, and how it is an Evil that abounds, not only among
the Profane, but among these who are Civil and Zealous too for the
Righteousness of the Law, it should make them put themselves to the Trial, and
not to take every thing to be Faith that they fancy to be Faith; for either
this Doctrine is not true, that wherever the Gospel comes, it meets with
Unbelief in most part of its Hearers, and cannot be applied to this Generation,
or, that there is much Faith in this Generation that we live in, that will not
be counted Saving Faith: If all of you were Believers, there were no ground for
this Complaint, and if we will take Folks on their own word, we can hardly get
a Person but will say he Believes, so that the generality of Men's Hearts run
quite contrary to this Truth; and therefore we say, it is the scope of this
Doctrine and the like, to give Folks the alarm, and to put them to suspect and
try themselves; I do not mean that any should cast the work of Faith where it
is indeed, for that is also a part of our Unbelief, and ordinarily when
Unbelief falls on the one side, the Devil makes it up on the other, and
makes tender Souls question their Faith when they begin to Believe, as if they
could mend Unbelief with Unbelief; but it is to such that we speak, who cannot
be brought to suspect their Faith; certainly, ye will wonder one day, that ye
should have heard such a plain Truth, and yet would not so much as ask your own
Hearts whether there was reason to suspect your want of Faith, as it is said
that Christ marvelled at their Unbelief who heard Him, so may we at yours, and
who ere long, ye shall also marvel at your selves on this account.

Before we prosecute this Use, and the rest any further, we shall speak to
another Doctrine, and it is the last that follows from these words, tending to
the same scope to make us scar at Unbelief, which the Prophet makes such a
heavy ground of Complaint. The Doctrine then is, That if there were never so
many under Unbelief, and never so many who refuse to receive Jesus Christ, yet
Unbelief is a Sin, and a most sinful Sin, which, though Folks had no more, will
seclude them from Heaven; there were no ground for this Complaint if it were
not so, even as the Prophet would have had no ground to complain of the Peoples
Unbelief if there were not many Unbelievers; so Unbelief is a very great Sin in
whomsoever it is, and makes them exceeding sinful: Or take the Doctrine thus,
It is a very great Sin for a People to whom Christ is offered in this Gospel,
not to receive Him, and rest upon Him for Salvation, as He is offered to them
therein; and it arises from this ground, That where Christ is not received,
there the Ministers of the Gospel have ground of Complaint, for it supposes a
great defect in their Duty, seeing it is their Duty to Believe, yea the great
Gospel duty on which all other Duties hang, and which is called for by many
ties and obligations, This is his commandment, says John in his first Epistle,
chap. 3.23. that ye believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, therefore it
must be a great Sin not to Believe.

There are shortly three things comprehended in this Doctrine, (speaking now of
Unbelief, not only as opposite to Historical Faith, which we commonly call
Infidelity, but as it is opposite to Saving Faith, which we show is that which
is called for here:) 1. That Unbelief, or not receiving of Christ, is a Sin, or
a thing in its own nature sinful: It Is a Sin as well as Adultery, Murder,
Stealing, Lying, Sabbath-breaking, etc. are; yea, and in the Aggravations of
it, a Sin beyond these; it is as contrary to the Word and Will of God, and is
as contrary to the Divine Majesty, as Drunkenness, Murder, Adultery, or any
other Sin is, the positive command of Believing being as peremptory, plain, and
particular, as these negative ones are, the breach of it must be as sinful. 2.
That there is such a kind of Sin as Unbelief, beside other Sins, and such a
distinct Duty as Believing, that if Folks could do all other Duties, if this
Duty of Believing be wanting, they will be still sinful, and there will be
still ground of Complaint; and if Faith be a particular Duty required, and
distinct from other Duties and Graces, as it is clear it is, Gal. 5.21. then
Unbelief must be a particular Sin, distinct from other Sins, though it has
influence on other Sins, as Faith has on other Duties; so Rev. 21.8. it is
ranked among the most abominable Sins, the reason why we mark this, is, because
there may be some in whom some gross Sins, as Adultery, Bloodshed, and the
like, do reign, and they get that name to be called Adulterers, Murderers,
etc. others may possibly be free of these, who yet have Unbelief reigning in
them, and therefore they get that name to be called Unbelieving, and are ranked
with the grossest of Evildoers. 3. That even many in the Times wherein the
Scriptures were written, and in every Age since, are found guilty of this Sin,
and condemned for it, who are as to several other things commended; hence it is
said Romans 10.3. of the Jews, that they had a zeal of God, which in it self is
good, though not according to knowledge, yet it was their main let and
obstruction in the way to Life, that being ignorant of God's righteousness,
they went about to establish their own; for as much zeal as they had for the
Law of Moses, seeing they did not receive Jesus Christ, and His Righteousness by
Faith, it made any other good thing they had unacceptable, and the reason why
we mark this, is, that Folks may see that it is not only for gross Sins, and
with gross Sinners that the Gospel complains and expostulats, but it is also for
not submitting unto, and not receiving the Righteousness of Christ, and
therefore ye are far mistaken that think your selves free from just grounds of
Challenge, because forsooth, ye are free of Murder, Adultery, Drunk^nness and
the like; do ye not consider that Unbelievers ar^ in the same Rank and Roll
with abominable Whoremongers, Sorcerers, Idolaters, and Dogs? and is not
Unbelief contrary to the Command of God, as well as Murth^r, Adultery, and
these other gross Sins? and therefore because Folks think little of Unbelief,
though it be very rife, if they be free of other gross Sins. 4. We shall add a
fourth thing which the Doctrine implies. That Unbelief though there were no
other Sin, is exceeding sinful, and is first. The great ground that makes God
expostulate with the Hearers of the Gospel, and that makes them come under the
Complaint, John 5 40. Ye will not come to me that ye may have life, and Matthew.
23.37. How often would I have gathered you, and ye would not; and for
substance, it is the Lord's great complaint of most of His professing People,
Psalm. 81.11. I am the Lord thy God, open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it,
but my people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me, and
then follows, O that my people had hearkened unto my voice; there is no Sin the
Lord complains more of than of this, and it is the great complaint of all His
Servants. Secondly, B^hold how the Lord threatens this Sin, and punishes for
it, see Psalm. 95.7. and Heb. 3.7. and Heb. 4.8. where He swears in His Wrath
against Unbelievers, that they shall not enter into His Rest; Adultery and
Murder do not more certainly keep Men from Heaven than this Sin of Unbelief
does, yea, they are classed together, Rev. 21.8. see also Luke 12.46. where the
severest Judgment that is executed, is upon Unbelievers; and in the Man that
had the offer of Christ, and did not receive it, and put on the Wedding
Garment, Mat. 22.12, 13. see it also in the words that are pronounced against
Chorazin, Bethsaida and Capernaum, Matthew. 11. and our blessed Lord Jesus loves
not (to speak so) to pronounce woes, but to bless His People, yet when they
have the offer of Life through Him, and will not receive it, He pronounces woe
after woe upon them, and of what sort were they? even beyond these that came
upon Tyrus and Sidon, upon Sodom and Gomorrah; we think such Threatenings as
these, should make Folks not to think Unbelief a light, or little Sin, and that
there is no ground of quietness, so long as they are in a
Self-righteous-condition, and have not their Peace made with God through
Christ. Thirdly, Look further, to the greatness of this Sin, in the strange
names that the Lord puts upon it, 1 John 5.11. He that believes not, has made
God a liar; and is there any Sin that has a grosser name or effect than this?
for it receives not the Report which He has given of His Son; He tells Folk
that Happiness is to be gotten in Him only, and they think to be Happy though
they take another way; they believe not the Report, for if they believed it,
they would receive Christ as their Life: See further what names are given to
it, Heb. 6.6. and Heb. 10.20. which though they be there given, with other
Aggravations of sinning wilfully, with despite, etc. with respect to the
unpardonable Sin, yet who are they that live under the Gospel and Believe not,
but in a great measure they will be found capable of most of them at least?
It Is called a crucifying of the Son of God afresh, a putting Him to an open
shame, etc. and who are they that do this, and on what ground? it is Unbelievers
through their Unbelief, they think not Christ worth the having, and reject all
that is spoken of Him, and cry away with Him, as the Jews did; and as to their
particular Guilt, they crucify Him, for they cannot refuse Him, without
affronting Him, and can there be such an affronting of Him as when He
condescends so very low, to think so little of Him? Fourthly, Consider the
Expressions under which He sets out His being affected, (to say so,) with this
Sin; He was so affected with it, Mark 3.5. that it is said, He was grieved for
their unbelief, He had many Sorrows and Griefs, and suffered many things, but
this grieved Him someway more than they all did; and it is said, Mark 6.6. that
He marvelled because of their unbelief, it is not said that He marvelled at
their Adulteries, and their gross Sins, but that when He was taking such a
convincing way to demonstrate to them His Godhead, yet they would not Believe
on Him, He marvelled at that; so Luke 19.41. it is said, that when He came near
to Jerusalem, He weeped over it, and why? the following words tell us, O that
thou had known in this thy day, the things that belong to thy peace, that is, O
that thou had believed, and received the Gospel, at least in this thy day,
(though thou did it not before,) when thou were, and art so plainly and
powerfully called to this Duty; and ye may know that it behoved to be some
great thing that made Him to weep, when all that the Devil and Pontius Pilate,
and the Jews could do, made Him not to weep: It Is said Mat. 11. that He
upbraided these Cities that He had preached much in, on this ground; sure, when
He that gives liberally and upbraids none, does upbraid for this Sin, it shows
how much He was pressed with it; and Luke 14.21. it is said of this Sin, that it
angered Him, and He is not easily angered; Sinners need not fear to anger Him
by coming to Him, but when they come not, He is angry; it is said Matthew. 22.7.
He was wroth at this Sin, and it is on this ground, that Psalm. 2.12. we are
bidden kiss the Son, lest He be angry, that is, to exercise Faith in Him, for
if we do it not, He will be angry, and we will perish. There are other
Aggravations of this Sin, which we leave till we come to the Application.

Use 1. Is there not as much here, though Folks had no more but their Unbelief,
as may make them know it is an evil and bitter thing, and as may make them skar
at it, and flee from it, and to fear lest they be found under the Guilt of it,
when called to a reckoning, especially when Unbelief is so rife, that but few
suspect themselves or fear it; there is hardly any ill but ye will sooner take
with it, then with this of Unbelief, and there is no Duty nor Grace that ye
more readily think ye perform and have, then this of Faith, and it is come to
that height that Folks think they Believe always, and know not what it is to
misbelieve; do ye think that this presumptuous and fancied Faith will be
counted for Faith, or that Christ who sifts Faith narrowly will let it pass for
Saving Faith? no certainly.

Use 2. Is there not here ground of Advertisement, wakening, rousing, and
alaruming to many, that think themselves free of other Challenges; if the
Spirit were coming powerfully to convince of Sin, it would be of this, because
they believe not, as it is John 16.9. and we are persuaded many of you had need
of this Conviction, that never once questions your having of Faith, or care not
whether ye have it or not: Put these two Doctrines together, That Unbelief is
an abominable Sin, and that it is notwithstanding, a very rife Sin, and let
them sink deep into your Hearts, and they will put you to other thoughts of
Heart, if this plain Truth of God prevail not with you, we know not what will
do it; but the time comes when ye shall be undenyably convinced of both, that
Unbelief is a great Sin, and that it is a very rife Sin, and of this also, that
it is an abominable and loathsome thing, and very prejudicial and hurtful to
you.

Use 3. And therefore, as a third Use, If it be so, let us ask this Question,
How comes it to pass, that so many in trying their State, and in grounding of
it, lay so little weight on Faith, and think so little of Unbelief? I am
speaking to the generality of you, and let not others wrong themselves, nor
mistake the intent of this Scripture; How is it, I say, that the generality of
you that hear this Gospel, come under this common and epidemick Temper, or
rather Distemper, to maintain your Peace and Confidence, when ye can (in the
mean time) give so little proof of it? think ye that Faith cannot be a missing,
nor mistaken, or that it is ordinary and common, or that it is indifferent
whether ye have it or not? we are persuaded, that many of you think, that if ye
have a good Mind, (as ye call it,) and a square civil honest Walk, and keep
still your good Hope, that all will be well; ye never doubt nor question
whether ye have received Christ or not, but if Unbelief ly in your Bosom, (I
mean not doubting-desperation, or questioning of the Godhead, but the not
receiving of Christ and His Righteousness,) though ye had more than ordinary
Hypocrites have, ye will for this Sin of Unbelief find your selves under the
standing Curse of God, for our Lord says, John 3.18. He that believes not is
condemned already, and verse. 36. the wrath of God abides on him.

In pressing of this Use, I shall show by a few Aggravations of this Sin, why
the Lord lays so much weight upon it, and that, not so much as it opposes
Faith, as as it is a condition of the Covenant of Grace, and a mean to unite us
to Christ, but mainly as it is (...) Sin thwarting His Command: And, 1. It
thwarteth with both the Law and the Gospel, it thwarteth with the Commands of
the first Table, and so is a greater Sin than Murder or Adultery, nay than
Sodomy, though these be great, vile, and abominable Sins; which may be thought
strange, yet it is true, it makes the Person guilty of it, more vile before God,
than a Pagan-Sodomite; the nature of the Sin being more heinous, as being
against the first Table of the Law, in both the first and second Commands
thereof, it being by Faith in God that we make God our God, and worship God in
Christ acceptably: Next, its not only a Sin against the Law, but a Sin against
the Gospel, and the prime Flower (to speak so) of the Gospel; it comes in
contradiction to the very design of the Gospel, which is to manifest the glory
of the Grace of God, in bringing Sinners to believe on Christ, and to be saved
through Him; but He can do no great things of this sort amongst unbelieving
People, because of their Unbelief; it binds up His Hands, as it were, (to
speak so with reverence) that He cannot do them a good turn. 2. It strikes more
nearly against the Honor of God, and of the Mediator, and does more prejudice
to the Ministry of the Gospel, and causes greater destruction of Souls than
any other Sin; it is possible, notwithstanding of other Sins, that Christ may
have satisfaction for the travel of His Soul, and there may be a relation bound
up betwixt Him and Sinners notwithstanding of them, but if this Sin of Unbelief
were universal, He should never get a Soul to Heaven; the salvation of Souls is
called the pleasure of the Lord, but this obstructs it, and closes the Door
betwixt Sinners and access to God; it strikes also at the main Fruit of the
Ministry, it makes them complain to God, that the Word is not taken off their
Hand, it frustrats the very end of the Ministry, and it comes nearest the
destruction of immortal Souls; we need not say, it brings on, but it holds and
keeps on the Wrath of God on Sinners for ever, He that believes not, (as we
show before from John 3.) is condemned already, and the wrath of God abides on
him. 3. More particularly, There is nothing in God, (even that which is most
excellent in Him, if we may speak so, not excepte^,) but it strikes against it,
It strikes against His Grace, and frustrates that; when Christ is not received,
some sort and degree of despite is done to the Spirit of Grace, Unbelievers
thwart with Him in the way of His Grace, and will have no spiritual Good from
Him; it comes in opposition to His Goodness, for where Unbelief reigns, He has
no access, in a manner, to communicate it; it strikes against His Faithfulness,
there is no weight laid on His Promises, it counts Him a Liar; in a word, it
strikes against all His Attributes. 4. There is no Sin that has such a train
of sad Consequents following on It; it is that which keeps all other Sins livly,
for none has victory over any Sin but the Believer, the Unbeliever lies as a
bound Slave to every Sin, and it is impossible to come to the acceptable
performance of any Duty without Faith, for none can come sutably to any Duty
without a Promise, and can any but a Believer comfort himself in use-making of
any Promise?

We shall close our Discourse, with speaking a word to that which we hinted at
before, even to let you see, not only the rifeness of Unbelief, but the great
hazard that flows from it, and the exceeding great evil of it; if we be only
convinced of the rifeness of it, it will not much trouble us, except we be also
convinced and believe the hazard of it; but if we were convinced of both,
through God's blessing it might affect us more and necessitate us to make more
use of Christ; ye that stand yet a distance from Christ, can ye endure to ly
under this great Guilt and ground of Contraversie that is betwixt Him and you?
do ye think little to hazard on His Upbraidings and Woes, even such Woes as are
beyond these that came on Sodom, the heavy Curse and Malediction of God? and
yet we say to you who are most civil, discreet, formal, and blameless in your
Conversation, if there be not a fleeing in earnest to Christ, and an exercising
of Faith on Him, the Wrath of God not only waits for you, but it abides on you;
O tremble at the thoughts of it, it were better to have your Head thrust in the
Fire, than your Souls and Bodies to be under the Wrath and Curse of God for
ever; it is not only the Ignorant, profane Drunkard, Swearer, Adulterer,
Whoremonger, etc. that we have to complain of, and expostulate with, but it is
the Unbeliever, who, though He be lift up to Heaven, shall be cast down to the
Pit of Hell: If ye ask, what is all this that we would be at? it is only this in
a word, we would have you receiving Christ, if ye think that Unbelief is an
exceeding great Evil, and that it is an horribly hazardous thing to ly under it,
then haste you out of it to Christ; O! haste, haste you out of it to Christ;
kiss the Son lest He be angry, embrace Him, yield to Him; there is no other
possible way to be free of the Evil, or to prevent the hazard.

SERMON VIII.
ISAIAH LIII.I. Who has believed our report? And to whom is the arm of the
Lord revealed?


It Is a great encouragement and delight to the Ministers of the Gospel, and
it is comfortable and refreshing to Hearers, when the Message of the Gospel is
received, and our Lord Jesus Christ is welcomed; but on the contrary, it is
burdensome and heavy when there are few or none that believe and receive the
Report, when their labor and strength is spent in vain, and when all the
assemblings of them together that hear the Word of the Gospel, is but a trading
of the Lord's Courts in vain; if there were no more to prove it, this Complaint
of Isaiah, speaking in His own name, and in name of all the Ministers of the
Gospel, is sufficient; for as comfortable Messages as he carried, (and He
carried as comfortable Messages as any that we hear of,) yet there was a
general non-profiting by the Word of the Gospel in his Mouth; when we meet with
such words as these, our Hearts should tremble, when we consider how general
and rife an Evil Unbelief and the not receiving of Christ is, how horrible a
Sin, how abominable to God, and how hazardous and destructive to our selves it
is, and how rare a thing it is to see or find any Number believing and
receiving this Message of the Gospel.

We spoke from these words to these Doctrines. First, That where the Gospel
comes, it makes offer of Jesus Christ to all that Hear it. Secondly, That the
great thing called for in the H^arers of the Gospel, is Faith in Him. Thirdly,
That yet notwithstanding, Unbelief is an exceeding rife Evil in the Hearers of
the Gospel. Fourthly, That it is a very sinful, heavy, and sad thing not to
receive Christ and believe in Him, all which are employed in this short, but sad
Complaint, Who has believed our report?

We would now prosecute the Use and Scope of this. The last Use was an Use of
Conviction of, and Expostulation with the Hearers of the Gospel, for their
being so Fruitless under it, serving to discover a great Deceit among Hearers,
who think they Believe and yet do it not; whence it is that so many are
mistaken about their Souls S^ate, and most certainly the generality are
mistaken, who live as if Be^ieving were a thing common to all Professors of
Faith, while as it is so rare, and there are so very few that Believe.

The next Use is, an Use of Exhortation to you, That seeing Unbelief is so
great an Evil, ye would by all means eschew it; and seeing Faith is the only
w^y to receive Christ, and to come at Life through Him, ye would seek after it
to prevent the Evil of Unbelief: This is the scope of the words, yea, and of
all our Preaching, that when Christ, and Remission of Sins through Him, is
preached to you, ye would by Faith receive Him, and rest upon Him for obtaining
Right to Him and to the Promises, and for preventing of the Threatenings and
Curses that abide Unbelievers. We shall not again repeat what Faith is, only in
short it comes to this, That seeing Christ has satisfied Justice for Sinners,
and His Satisfaction is offered in the Gospel to all that will receive it, even
to all the Hearers of the Gospel, that Sinners in the sight and sense of their
lost condition would flee unto Him, receive and rest upon Him and His
Satisfaction, for Pardon of Sin, and making of their Peace with God: Is there
need of Arguments to persuade you to this? if ye be convinced of your
sinfulness, and of your lost estate without Christ, and that there is a
Judgment to come when Sinners must appear before Him, and be judged according
to that which they have done in the Body, and if ye have the Faith of this,
that Sinners that are not found in Christ, cannot stand; (as by the way, woe to
that Man that is not found in Him, if it were a Paul, for even he, he is only
happy by being found in Him not having his own Righteousness but Christ's,) and
withal, that there is no other way to be found in Him but by Faith, (which is
that which Paul has for his main scope, Phil. 3.9, 10.) Then to be found in
Him by Faith, should be your main work and study; this is it that we should
design and endeavor, and to this we have access by the Gospel; and it is in
short, to be denuded of, and denied to our own Righteousness, as to any weight
we lay upon it for our Justification before God, and to have no other thing but
Christ's Righteousness offered in the Gospel, and received by Faith to rest
upon for Justification, and making of our Peace with God: This is it that we
command you to flee to, and by all means to seek an Interest in, that when the
Gospel makes offer of Christ, and Righteousness through His Satisf^ction, and
commands you to Believe on Him, when it lays Him to your Door, to your Mouth
and Heart, that ye would roll, and lay your selves over on Him for the making
of your Peace, and the bearing of you through in the day of your reckoning
before the Tribunal of God.

That we may speak the more cle^rly to this Use, We shall shortly show you, 1.
What Ground a lost Sinner has to receive Christ, and to lippen to Him. 2. What
Warrands and Encouragements a Sinner has to lean and lippen to this Ground. 3.
We shall remove a Doubt or two that may stand in the way of Sinners resting on
this Ground. 4. We shall give some Directions to further you to this. And. 5.
We shall give you some Characters of one that is tender^y t^king this way of
Believing: And because this is the way of the Gospel, and we are sure there is
not a word ye have more need of, or that through God's Blessing may be more
useful, and there is not a word more uncontravertible, which all of you will
assent to the truth of, to wit, that there is a great good in Believing, and a
great evil in Unbelief, we would exhort you the more seriously to lay it to
Heart; O! think not that our coming to Speak and Hear, is for the Fashion, but
to Profit; Cast your selves therefore open to the Exhortation, and let the
word of Faith sink down into your Hearts, considering that there is nothing ye
have more need of, than of Faith, and that ye will not find it safe for you to
hazard your Souls on your own Righteousness, or to appear before God without
Christ's Righteousness, and that the only way to come by it is Faith; This may
let you see the necessity of Believing, and that it is of your concernment to
try how it is with you as to that; and therefore again and again, we would
exhort you in the fear of God, that ye would not neglect so great a Salvation,
which through Faith is to be obtained, but lay it to Heart, as ye would not
have all the Servants of God, who have preached the Gospel to you, complaining
of you; It is our Bane that we suspect not our selves, and indeed it is a
wonder that these who have immortal Souls, and profess Faith in Christ, should
yet live so secure, and under so little care, and holy solicitude to know,
whether they have believed or not, and should with so little serious
concernedness, put the Matter to a trial: But we proceed to the Particulars we
proposed to speak to.

And first to this, That ye have a good solid Ground to Believe on; for
clearing of which, we would put these three together. 1. The Fullness and
Sufficiency of the Mediator Jesus Christ, in whom all the Riches of the Gospel
are treasured up, in whom, and by whom our Happiness comes, and who wants
nothing that may fit Him to be a Savior, who is able to save to the uttermost
all that come unto God by Him. 2. The well-orderedness, freeness, and fullness
of the Covenant of Grace, wherein it is transacted, that the Fullness that is in
the Mediator Christ, shall be made forthcoming to Believers in Him, and by
which lost Sinners that by Faith flee unto Him, have a solid Right to His
Satisfaction, which will bear them out before God; by which transaction,
Christ's Satisfaction is made as really theirs, when by Faith it is closed
with, as if they had satisfied and paid the Price themselves, 2 Cor. 5.21. He
who knew no sin, was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness
of God in Him; and this Consideration of the legality and order of the
Covenant, serves exceedingly to clear our Faith as to the Ground of it, because
by this Covenant it is transacted and agreed upon, that Christ shall undergo the
Penalty, and that the Believer in Him shall be reckoned the righteous Person;
if there be a reality in Christ's Death and Satisfaction to Justice, if He has
undergone the Penalty and paid their Debt, there is a reality in this
Transaction, as to the making over of what He has Done and Suffered, to
Believers in Him; and the Covenant being sure and firm as to His part, He
having confirmed it by His Death, it is as sure and firm as to the Benefit of
it to the Believer in Him. 3. The nature of the Off^r of this Grace in the
Gospel, and the nature of the Gospel that makes the Offer of the fullness that
is in Christ by virtue of the Covenant; It is the Word of God, and has His
Authority when we preach it according to His Command, as really as when He
preached it Himself in Capernaum, or any where else, even as the authority of a
King is with his Ambas^ador, according to that, 2 Cor. 5. penult verse. We are
ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, there, is the
Father's Warrant and Name interposed, and for the Son's, it follows, We pray
you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled to God; add to this, the nature of the
Offer, and the terms of it, there is no condition required on our part, as the
precise condition of the Covenant, but Believing; Now, when these are
conjoined, we put it to your Conscience, if ye have not a good Ground to lippen
to, and a sufficient Foundation to build on? and if so, it ought to be an
powerfully attractive Motive to draw you to Believe in Him, and to bring you to
rest on Him by Believing.

Secondly, We have also many Warrands and Encouragements to step forward, and
when Christ in His Fullness lays Himself before you, to roll over your selves on
Him, and to yield to Him; If we could speak of them sutably, they are such as
may remove all scarring that any might have in coming to Him, and may serve to
leave others inexcusable, and unanswerably to convince them that the main
obstruction was in themselves, and that they would not come unto Him for Life,
He called to them but none would exalt Him. 1. Do ye not think that the Offer
of this Gospel is a sufficient Warrant, and ground of Encouragement to Believe
on Him? and if it be so to others, ought it not to be a sufficient Warrant and
Encouragement to you? when He says, Psalm. 81.10. Open thy mouth wide and I will
fill it, what excuse can ye have to shift or refuse the Offer? if ye think
Christ real in His Commands, is He not as real in His Offers? 2. He has so
ordered the Administration of this Gospel, as He has purposely prevented any
ground that Folks may have of scarring to close with Christ; He has so
qualified the Object of this Grace in the Gospel, that these in all the World
that Men would think should be secluded, are taken in to be Sharers of it, for
its Sinners, lost Sinners, Self-destroyers, Ungodly, the Sheep that have
wandered, the Poor, the Needy, the Naked, the Captives, the Prisoners, the
Blind, etc. according to that of Isa: 61.1, 2. The Spirit of the Lord God is
upon me, He has sent me to preach glad tidings to the meek or poor, to bind up
the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, the opening of the
prison to them that are bound, etc. and Isa. 55.1. These who are invited to
come to the cried Fair of Grace, are such as are thirsty, and such as want
money; who among Men use to be secluded, but in Graces-Mercat they only are
welcome, it is to them that Grace says, He come, and Rev. 22.17. Whosoever will,
let him come and take of the water of life freely, it is not only, to say so
with reverence, these whom He wills, but it is, whosoever will; and so if thou will come, Grace puts the Offer into thy Hand, as it were, to carve on; to let
us know that He allows strong Consolation on Believers, and that either the
Hearers of this Gospel shall Believe, or be left without all excuse; He has it
to say, as it is, Isa. 5. what could I have done to my vineyard that I have not
done; If ye had the Offer at your own carving, what could ye put more in it? it
cannot be more free than without money, it cannot be more seriously pressed
than with a Ho, and Oyes, to come; Sometimes He complains, as John 5.40. Ye
will not come to me that ye might have life, and sometimes weeps and moans
because Sinners will not be gathered, as Luke 19.41, 42. and Matthew. 23.37. can
there be any greater evidences of reality in any Offer? A third Warrant is from
the manner and form of Christ's Administration, He has condescended to make a
Covenant, and many Promises to draw Folks to Believe, to which He has added
His Oath, swearing by Himself, when He had not a greater to swear by, for our
Confirmation and Consolation, as it is, Heb. 6.16, 17. And among Men, ye know,
that an Oath puts an end to all Contraversie, and what would ye, or could ye
seek more of God, than His Saying, Writing, and Swearing? He has done all
this, that the heirs of Promise may have strong consolation, who are fl^d for
refuge to the hope set before them; O! will ye not trow and credit God when He
swears? Among other Aggravations of Unbelief this will be one, that by it ye
make God not only a liar, but perjured, a heavy, heinous, and horrid Guilt on
the score of all Unbelievers of this Gospel. 4. To take away all Contraversie,
He has interposed His Command, yea it is the great Command, and in a manner,
the one Command of the Gospel, 1 John 3.23. This is his commandment, that ye
believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, and therefore the Offer of the
Gospel and Promulgation of it, comes by way of Command, Ho come, believe, etc.
whereby the Lord would tell the Hearers of the Gospel, that it is not left to
their own option, or as a thing indifferent to them to Believe or not to
Believe, but it is laid on them by the necessity of a Command to Believe; and if
ye think ye may and should Pray, sanctify the Sabbath, or obey any other
Command because He bids you, there is the same Authority enjoining and
commanding you to Believe, and as great necessity lies on you to give
obedience to this Command as to any other, do not therefore think it Humility
not to do it, for Obedience is better than Sacrifice.

For your further Encouragement to Believe, I would say three words which ye
would also look upon as Warrands to Believe, and by them know that it is a
great Sin not to Believe. 1. Ye have no less Ground or Warrant than ever any
that went before you had; David, M^s^s, Paul, etc. had no better Warrant; my
meaning is, ye have the same Covenant, the same Word and Promises, Christ and
His Fullness, God and His Faithfulness offered to you, the same Warrant that God
has given to all His People since ever He had a Church; and do ye not think
but it will be a sad and grievous ground of Challenge against you, when ye
shall see others that believe on the same Grounds that ye have, sit down in the
Kingdom of Heaven, and your selves as proud Rebels shut out? what ever
d^fference there be as to the main Work of Grace, and of God's Spirit on the
Heart in the working of Faith, yet the Ground of Faith is the Word that all
hear who are in the visible Church, and ye having the same Ground and Object of
Faith in your offer, there will be no excuse for you if ye do not Believe. A
second Encouragement is, That the Ground of Faith is so solid and good, that it
never disappoints any one that leans to it; and count the Gospel a feckless and
insignificant thing who will, it shall have this Testimony. which damned
Unbelievers shall carry to Hell with them, that it was the power of God to
salvation to them that believed, and that there was nothing in the Gospel it
self that did prejudge them of the good of it, but that they prejudged
themselves who did not lippen to it; Therefore the Word is called Gold tried in
the fire; all the Promises having a Being from Jehovah Himself, on jot or one
title of them cannot fail nor fall to the Ground. 3. If ye were to carve out a
Warrant to your selves, as I hinted before, what more could ye desire? what
miss ye in Christ? what Clause can ye desire to be insert in the Covenant that
is not in it? It contains Pardon of Sin, Healing of your Backslidings, and what
not? and he has said, sealed, and sworn it, and what more can ye require?
Therefore we would again exhort you in the Name of Jesus Christ, and in His
stead, not to neglect so great a Salvation, O! receive the Grace of God, and
let it not be in vain.

In the third place, Let us speak a word or two to some Objections, or
Scruples, which may be moved in reference to what has been said. And, First,
It may be some will say, that the Covenant is not broad enough, because all are
not elected, all are not redeemed nor appointed to be Heirs of Salvation; upon
which ground Temptation will sometime so far preva^l, as to waken up a secret
enmity at the Gospel: But, 1. How absurd is this Reasoning? Is there any that
can rationally desire a Covenant so broad, as to take in all as necessarily to
be saved by it? there is much greater reason to wonder that any should be Saved
by it, then there is if all should Perish; beside, we are not now speaking to
the Effects, but to the Nature of the Gospel, so that whoever Perish, it is not
because they were not elected, but because they believed not; and the Bargain
is not of the less worth, nor the less sure because some will not Believe; and
to say, that the Covenant is not good enough because so many Perish, it is even
as if ye should say, it is not a good Bridge because some will not take it, but
adventure to go through the Water and so drown themselves. 2. I would ask, Would
ye overturn the whole Course of God's Administration, and of the Covenant of
His Grace? did He ever a priori, or at first Hand, tell Folks that they were
elected? who ever got their Election at the very first revealed to them? or,
who are now before the Throne that ever made the keeping up of this secret from
them, a Bar or Impediment to their Believing? God's Eternal Purpose or Decree
is not the Rule of our Duty, nor the Warrant of our Faith, but His revealed
Will in His Word; let us seek to come to the knowledge of God's Decree of
Election a posteriori, or by the Effects which is a sure way of Knowledge; our
thwarting with His Word to know His Decree, will not excuse, but make us more
guilty; He has showed thee O man, says Micah, chap. 6.8. what is good, and
what does the Lord require of thee; and if any will scruple and demur on this
ground to close the Bargain, let them be aware that they provoke Him not to
bring upon them their own fears, by continuing them under that scrupling and
demurring condition; Ye cannot possibly evite hazard by looking on only, and
not making use of Christ; therefore do not bring on your own ruin by your
fear, which may be by Grace prevented, and by this way of Believing shall be
certainly prevented.

But secondly, Some may object and say, I am indeed convinced that Believing is
my Duty, but that being a thing that I cannot do, why should I therefore set
about it? Answ. 1. This is a most unreasonable and absurd way of Reasoning, for
if it be given way to, what Duty should we do? we are not of our selves able to
Pray, Praise, keep the Lord's Day, nor to do any other commanded Duty, shall we
therefore abstain from all Duties? Our ability or fitness for Duty, is not the
rule of our Duty, but God's Command; and we are called to put our Hand to Duty
in the sense of our own Insufficiency, acknowledging God's Sufficiency, which
if we did, we should find it go better with us, and may not the same be
expected in the matter of Believing as well as in other Duties? 2. None that
ever heard this Gospel shall in the Day of Judgment have this to Object, none
shall have it to say, that they would fain have believed, but their mere
Infirmity, Weakness, and Inability did imped them; for though it be our own Sin
and Guilt that we are unable, yet where the Gospel comes that is not the
Contraversie; But that Folks would not come to Christ, would not be gathered,
that when He would, they would not; for where there is a will, to will and to
do go together; But it is Enmity at the way of Believing, Security, Stupidity,
Senselesness, and Carelessness what become of the Immortal Soul, that ruins
Folks; for the Soul that would fain be at Christ, shall be helped to Believe,
the reason is, because the nature of the Covenant of Grace, and of the Mediator
thereof, is such, that all to whom He gives to will, He gives them also to
perform, and His Faithfulness is engaged so to do: It must therefore return to
one of these two, That either ye will not receive Him, or else ye are willing
though weak; and if ye be willing, Faithful is He that has called you, who
also will do it; but if it halt at your Perverseness and wilful Refusal of the
Offer, there is good reason that in God's Justice ye should never get good of
the Gospel; nay, there is never one to whom the Gospel comes, and who does not
Believe, but formally, as it were, he passes a Sentence on himself, as the
word is, Act. 13 46. Ye judge your selves unworthy of eternal life, which the
Apostle gathers from this ground, that they did not, neither would accept of
Jesus Christ offered to them in the Gospel; as the event is that follows on the
Offer, so will the Lord account of your receiving of it.

Fourthly, As for Directions to help and further you to Believe, it is not
easy, but very difficult to give them, it being impossible to satisfy the
curiosity of Nature; neither can any Directions be prescribed that without the
special work of God's Spirit, can effectuate the thing; the renewing of the
Will, and the working of Faith being Effects and Fruits of omnipotent Grace;
yet because something lies upon all the Hearers of the Gospel as Duty, and it
being more suitable and congruous, that in the use of Means, then when Means
are neglected, Believing should be attained; And because oftentimes these that
desire this Question to be answered, to wit, how they may win at Believing? are
such as have some beginnings of the work of Grace and of Faith. We shall speak
a few words to such as would be at believing and exercising of Faith on Jesus
Christ; And, 1. Folk had need to be clear in the common fundamental Truths of
the Gospel, they would know what their Natural Estate is, what their Sin and
Misery is, and they would know the way how to win out of that State; Ignorance
often obstructs us in the way of Believing, How shall they believe on Him of
whom they have not heard? Romans 10.14. when Folks Believe not, it is as if they
had never heard. 2. When ye have attained to the knowledge of the common Truths
of the Gospel, as of your Sin and Misery, the nature of the Covenant, the
Mediator and His Fullness, etc. Labor to fix well the Historical Faith of them,
we are sure that many never come this length to believe the History of the
Gospel, and till that be, they can advance no further; for as the word is, Heb.
11.6. He that comes to God, must believe that He is, and a rewarder of them
that diligently seek Him; I say, these common simple Truths of the Gospel would
well be fixed by a Historical Faith; and yet this would not be rested on,
because though they be excellent Truths, yet they may be known and historically
believed where Saving Faith and Salvation follow not. 3. Be much in Thinking,
Meditating, and Pondering of, and on these things, let them sink down into your
Hearts, that the Meditation of them may fix the Faith of them, and that they
may deeply affect us, we would seek to have a morally serious feeling of them,
as we have of the common works of the Spirit; But there are many like the Way
sidehearers, who, as soon as they hear the Word, some Devil, like a Crow, comes
and picks it up; therefore to prevent this, ye would seek to have the Word of
God dwelling richly in you, ye would meditate on it till ye be convinced of
your hazard, and get the Affections some way stirred according to the nature of
the Word ye meditate upon, whether Threatenings or Promises; the most part are
affected with nothing, they know not what it is to tremble at a Threatening, nor
smile as it were, on a Promise, through their not dwelling on the thoughts of
the Word that it may produce such an Effect. 4. When this is done, Folks would
endeavor a full up-giving with the Law of Righteousness as to their
Justification, that if they cannot so positively and stayedly win to rest on
Jesus Christ and His Righteousness, yet they may lay the weight of their Peace
with God on no other thing; they would lay it down for a certain conclusion,
that by the works of the Law they can never be justified, and would come with a
stoped Mouth before God; thus tender Christians will find it sometimes easier,
to give up with the Law, then to close with the Gospel, as to their distinct
apprehension of the thing. 5. When this is done, Go as it were to the top of
mount Nebo, and take a look of the pleasant Land of Promises, and of Christ
held out in them, and let your Soul say, O! to have the Bargain well closed, to
have my Heart stirred up to love Him, and to rest upon Him, O! to have Faith
and to discern it in its actings; for when the Life of Faith is so weak that it
cannot speak, yet it may breath; and though ye cannot exercise Faith as ye
would, so as to grip to, and catch fast hold of the Object, yet essay seriously
to do that far, as to esteem, love, and vehemently desire it; In this respect
the Will is said to go before the Deed, though as to God's begetting of Faith
there be a contemporariness of the Will and the Deed, yet as to our sense the
Will outruns the Deed, even as in another sense (though it makes well for this
purpose,) the Apostle says, To will is present with me, but how to perform that
which is good, I know not; for we ought to have our Will running after Christ,
and Believing on Him when we cannot attain to the distinct actings of it.

But it may be here objected and said, Is not this Presumption? Answ. If this
were Presumption, then all we have said of the Warrant of the Gospel to
Believe, is to no purpose; Christ never counted it Presumption to desire and
endeavor in His own way to believe on Him for attaining of Life through Him;
To desire Heaven and Peace with God, and to misken Christ and pass Him by, were
indeed Presumption, but it is not so, to desire these through Him. 6. When ye
have attained to this Heart desire, if ye cannot distinctly to your
satisfaction act Believing on Christ, ye would firmly resolve to believe and
essay it, and say, This is the way I will and must take, and no other, as David
says, Psalm. 16.2. O my soul, thou have said unto the Lord, thou art my Lord;
Hence the exercise of Faith is called a choosing of God, Deuteronomy. 30.19. and Josh.
24. and seriously, sincerely, and firmly, to resolve thus, is our Duty when we
can win to do no more; and it is no little advancement in Believing, when such
resolution to Believe, is deliberatly and soberly come under. 7. When this is
done Folks would not hold at a resolution, for to resolve and not to set
forward will be found to be but an empty resolution; therefore having resolved,
(though still looking on the resolution as his gift,) we would set about to
perform and believe as we may, and when we cannot go, we would creep, when we
cannot speak words of Faith, we would let Faith breath; when it can neither
speak nor breath distinctly, we would let it pant: In a word, to be essaying
the exercise of Faith, and often renewing our essays at it, which if we did, we
should come better speed in Believing then we do; thus though ye were walking
under a Conviction, that ye would do no more at this then a Man whose Arm is
withered can do, to streatch it forth, yet as the Man with the withered Hand at
Christ's word of Command essayed to streatch it forth and it went with him, or
as the Disciples when they had toiled long, even all the Night, and caught
nothing, yet at Christ's word let down the Net and enclosed a multitude of
Fishes; so, though ye have essayed to act Faith often, and yet come no speed,
yet essaying it again on Christ's calling to it, it may, and will through Grace
go with you. 8. When yet ye come not speed as ye would, your short-coming would
be bemoaned and complained of to God, laying open to, and before Him the Heart,
who can change it; and ye would have it for a piece of your weight and burden,
that your Heart comes not so up to, and abides not so by Believing; I would
think it a good Frame of Spirit, when the not having of the Heart standing so
fixed at Believing, is an Exercise and a Burden. 9. When all this is done, in
some measure, ye would wait on in doing thus, and would continue in this way,
looking to Him who is the Author and Finisher of Faith, for His influence to
make it go with you, to look to Him to be helped, is the way to be helped to
Believe, or to Pray to Him to better and amend Faith, is the way to have it
bettered and amended; it is said Psalm. 34.5. They looked to him and were
lightened, and their faces were not ashamed: And if it be said, How can one
look that sees not? It Is true, blind Folk cannot look, yet they may essay to
look, and though there be but a glimmering, as the looking makes the faculty of
Seeing the better and more strong, so the Exercise of Faith makes Faith to
increase, this is it that the Psalmist has, Psalm. 30. v. last. Be of good
courage, and he shall strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in the Lord; that
is, if ye be weak, wait on and He shall strengthen you, Believe, and give not
over, though to your Sense ye come not speed: Beginners that are looking
conscienciously to their way, though they have but a glimmering weak sight of
Christ, and be as the Man that at first saw M^n walking as Trees, yet if they
wait on, they may attain to a more distinct seeing, and to a more close and
firm gripping of Christ.

We close with this word of Advertisement, That as we speak not of these things
as being in Man's power to be performed, so neither can they be gone about to
purpose, but where there is some Faith and Love; yet when they are at first
looked on, they are some way more within our reach then the distinct Exercise
of Faith, which is a great Mystery. The Lord bless His Word, and make it useful
to you.

SERMON IX.
ISAIAH LIII.I. Who has believed our report? And to whom is the arm of the
Lord revealed?


IF Folks soberly and gravely considered of what concerment it is to make use
of the Gospel, and what depends upon the profitable or unprofitable hearing of
it, how serious would both Speakers and Hearers be? This same poor, mean and
contemptible-like way of Speaking or Preaching, is the ordinary way that God
has chosen to save Souls, even by the foolishness of Preaching, as the Apostle
has it, 1 Cor. 1.21. and where Ministers have been tender, how near has it
lain to their Hearts, whether People profited or not: They that will read
Isaiah, how he resented and complained of it, and how he was weighted with it,
will easily be induced to think that he was in earnest, and that it was no
little matter that made him thus cry out, Who has believed our report?

We show that four things were comprehended in the words. First, That the great
Errand of Ministers is, to bring the glad Tidings of Jesus Christ the Savior
to Sinners. Secondly, That it is the great Duty of People to believe and
receive the Offer of Jesus Christ in the Gospel. Thirdly, That it is the great
Sin of a People that Hear the Gospel not to believe and receive Jesus Christ
when He is offered unto them. The fourth and last thing which now we are to
speak of, (having gone through the first three) is, That the great and heavy
Complaint that a faithful Minister of the Gospel has, is, when these good News
are not received and welcomed, when they have it to say, Who has believed our
report? when it is but here one and there one that closes with Christ.

Considering these words, as they hold out the Prophets Resentment and
Complaint, we shall from them draw four Observations which we shall speak
shortly to, and reserve the Use and Application to the close of all.

Observe. 1. The first is, That its meet for, and the Duty of a Minister of the
Gospel, to observe what Fruit and Success his Ministry has among a People, and
whether they Believe or not; Isaiah speaks not here at random, but from
consideration of the Case of the People, and as observing what fruit his
Ministry had among them; we would not have Ministers too curious in this, as to
the state of particular Persons, neitner would we have them selfy or anxious in
seeking any ground of boasting to themselves, yet they would seek to be so far
distinct and clear anent their spiritual Case and Condition, as they may know
how to speak suitably to it, and how to speak of it to God; that they may say
as they have ground for it, that in such a Place, among such a People, a great
door and effectual was opened unto us, as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 16.8. And
in such another Place, and among such a People, Who has believed our report?
as here the Prophet does. It Is said Luke 10.17. and Mark 6.30. the Disciples
returned, and with joy told Christ all that they had done, and how the Devils
were subject to them, they made acccount what success they had in their
Ministry; so it is necessary that a Minister know what success He has among a
People, that he may know, 1. How to carry before God in reference to them, what
to Praise for, what to Lament for, and what to Pray for. 2. It Is necessary as
to the People, that he may carry right to them for the gaining of Strangers to
God, and helping forward these who are entered into the Way, and that he may
know what report to make of them. 3. It Is necessary for a Minister himself,
though no^ simply as to his Peace, for that depends on his faithful discharge
of his Office, yet as to his Joy and Rejoicing, to know when he labors in
vain, and when not, among a People.

We would not then (as a passing word of Use.) have you to think it curiousity,
though something be said now and then, and asked at you, that some of you may
possibly think impertinent; For it becomes a Physician to seek to know the
state and condition of these whom he has under his Hand and Cure, and ye would
not take it ill, though after observation, we now and then speak and tell you,
what we conceive to be your condition.

Observe. 2. The second Observation is, That it is most sad to a tender
Minister, and will much affect him to see and observe Unbelief and
Unfruitfulness among the People that He has preached the Gospel to; This must
be a certain and clear Truth, if we consider what it was that put Isaiah to
this, even to cry, Who has believed our report? Though a Minister should have
never so great exercise of Gifts, never so much countenance and respect among a
People, if he be tender, he will be more grieved and weighted with their
Unbelief and Unfruitfulness then with Stripes and Imprisonment, there will be
no suffering to this in his esteem, nothing so sad a ground of Complaint; This
makes the Prophet, Mic. 7.1. to cry, alace and woe is me, I am as these who have
gathered the summer-fruits, as the grapegleanings after the vintage, there is
no cluster to eat, the good man is perished, and there is none upright among
men, and he insists in this Complaint. How often was our Lord Jesus, the most
excellent and tender Preacher that ever preached, put to this Complaint? All
the Affronts and Reproaches He met with, grieved Him not so much as the
Unbelief and Hardness of Heart that were in the People; It Is said, Mar. 3.5.
that He looked round about on them with anger, and was grieved for the hardness
of their hearts; And it is said Mar. 6.6. that He marvelled because of their
unbelief; yea, it so affected Him, that ( Luke 19.42.) it is said, that when He
came near the city He wept over it, saying, O that thou had known in this thy
day the things that belong to thy peace. There is a fourfold Reason of this,
that has a fourfold Influence on the sadning of a serious and tender Minister
of the Gospel. 1. Respect to Christ Jesus his Master, in whose stead he comes
to bespeak and woo Souls to Christ; What would an Ambassador think of personal
Respect and Honor, if his Master were reproached, and his Message rejected and
despised? and can an honest and faithful Ambassador of Christ look on, and
his Heart not be wounded, to see the Gospel Fruitless? the Lord's pleasure as
it were Marred, and the work of Gathering in of Souls, Obstructed in his hand,
and his Lord and Master Affronted and Slighted. 2. The Respect that a Faithful
Minister has to the Peoples Souls, has influence on this; A tender Shepherd
will watchfully care for, and wish the Sheep well, and be much affected when
they are in an evil condition, and where the relation is of a more Spiritual
nature, and the Flock off far, very far greater worth and concernment, what
wonder the Shepherd be more affected? as Paul bespeaks the Galatians 4.19. My
little children, of whom I travel again in birth till Christ be formed in you;
To be traveling and bringing forth but Wind, cannot but prick and wound an
honest Minister of the Gospel at the very Heart, so 2. Cor. 11.29. Paul says,
Who is offended and I burn not? The very hazard of a Soul, will be like a Fire
burning the Heart that is tender and zealous of the spiritual good of Souls. 3.
The respect that a Faithful Minister has to the Duty in his Hand, has
influence on this; for such a one loves to neat his Duty, and to go neatly and
lively about it, and the Unbelief and Unfruitfulness of the People clogs him in
his Duty, and makes him drive heavily; hence it is said Mat. 13.58. and Mark
6.5. that our Lord could not do many mighty works there, or among that People,
because of their unbelief; Unbelief straitens and shuts the Door, and makes
Preaching become a very Burden to a Faithful Minister, therefore the Apostle
exhorts, Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and watch for your
souls, that they may do it with joy and not with grief, for that is
unprofitable for you; A necessity lies upon Ministers to go about their Work,
but when the Word does no more but buff on them, so to speak, it makes them to
cry as this same Prophet does, Chap. 6.11. How long Lord? And 4ly. This also
has influence on their being so much weighted, even the concern of honest
Ministers own Joy and Comfort; It is true, as we hinted before, that neither a
Faithful Minister's Peace, nor his reward of Grace does depend on it simply, I
have spent my strength in vain, says Isaiah, chap. 49.4. yet my labor is with
the Lord, and my reward from my God; As to that, there is no necessary
connection, and it is of Grace it is so; yet as to a Minister's Satisfaction and
Joy there is a connection, as we may see Philip. 2.16. where Paul says, That I
may joy in the day of Christ, that I have not run in vain, and labored in
vain; And from his expostulation with the Galatians, chap. 4.9, 10, 11. I am
afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you labor in vain.

I shall not prosecute the Use of this neither; only see here, that it is no
marvel though sometimes we be necessitate to complain of you, and to
expostulate with you; and considering the Case of People generally, if our
Hearts were suitably tender, it would make us even burst for Grief to see so
many sleeping securely and senslesly in their Sins, and in that pitiful posture
posting to the Pit, if God prevent not.

Observe. 3. The third Observation is, That a Minister may, and sometimes will
be put to it, to make report to God of what Fruit his Ministry has, and
sometimes to complain to Him of the Unbelief and Unfruitfulness of the People
among whom he has long preached the Gospel; Isaiah (sure) is not carried to
this Complaint out of hatred to the People, neither from any pleasure he has
in it, nor any delight to tell ill Tales (to speak so) of them; The Lord needs
no Information, yet he complains, and that to the Lord, as we show from Romans
10.16. where it is said, Lord, Who has believed our report? So then. Prophets
and Apostles complain of this; It Is Ezekiel's Complaint no doubt to God, as it
was the Lords to him, This people are a rebellious house, and they will not
bear; And Isaiah speaks here in his own name and in name of other Ministers of
the Gospel, that they may join with him in this Complaint; and there is reason
for it, if we consider, 1. The Relation that a Minister stands in to God, He
ought to give an account to Him, who gives Obedience and who not, and what Is
done by his Embassage, there being no Talent given, but a Reckoning how it was
employed, will be called for. 2. The Subordination that a Minister stands in to
Christ, wherein it is requisite he be kept, as knowing the Work is the Lords
and not his, pleads for this. 3. That a Minister may be kept from Carnalness
and Vanity on the one hand, and from Discouragement on the other, he ought to
be acquaint with, and to hold up both the Fruitfulness and Unfruitfulness of
the People to God. 4. It Is meet for the Good of the People it be so, not to
irritate, but kindly to affect the People, that when he complains to God, they
may be convinced that it is to get the Evil complained of amended, if so it may
be.

This complaining will we fear be the result of much Preaching among you; for,
either there must be more Faith and Fruits, else ye will have the more
Complainers, and the more Complaints against you.

Observe. 4. The fourth Observation is, That it is and ought to be a very sad
and weighty thing to a Minister, and also to a People, when he is put to
complain to God of their Unbelief amongst whom he is laboring; It Is the last
thing he has to do, and he can do no more, and it is the greatest and highest
of Witness and Ditty against them, when a Minister has been Preaching long,
and observing the Fruit of his Ministry, and is out-wearied with their
Unfruitfulness, and forced to cry, Lord there are none, or but very few that
have believed the Report that I have brought to them; It Is the heaviest and
hardest word that Christ has to say to Jerusalem, Mat. 23.37. and Luke 19.31.
when He complains of their Unfruitfulness, harder and heavier then all the Woes
He pronounced against the Scribes and Pharisees, or on other accounts, and at
least equivalent to them pronounced on the same account; for the same Woe and
Wrath follows both; O! says He, that thou had known in this thy day the
things that belong to thy peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes; This
comes as the last and sadest word, holding out the desperateness of their
Condition, when the powerful preaching of the Gospel has no gracious Force,
nor saving Effect following it, when Directions prevail not, when no sort of
Ministerial Gifts do a People good, when it comes to that, Mat. 11.16.
Whereunto shall I liken this generation, it is like children sitting in the
marketplace crying to their fellows, we have piped to you and ye have not
danced, we have mourned to you and ye have not lamented; when both the sweet
Offers of Grace and the terrible Threatenings of the Law, come forth to a
People, and both are followed for a long time without Fruit, then comes out
that word, Whereunto shall I liken this generation? John came neither eating
nor drinking, and ye say he has a devil; his austere way of Living and
Preaching did you no good, ye could not away with it; The son of Man came
eating and drinking, in a familiar way, and ye say, behold a man gluttenous, a
wine-biber, a friend of Publicans and Sinners; They stumble on both unjustly,
and so it is still even to this day, many stumble at the Messenger, cast at the
Message, and then follows the sad Complaint.

It Is meet that now we speak to a word of Use, but we profess we know not well
how to follow it, there is so much ground to Complain, and we are not (alace!)
suitably sensible of our own unfitness to follow the Complaint, which makes us
think that it would become another better; But what shall we say? It Is the Word
of the Lord, and it were needful that both ye and we should forget and take our
eyes off Man, and remember that it is the Lord God, and some commissioned from
Him, that we have to do with, that so we may accept of the Message. 1. Then, We
may say that it is no pleasure to us to be hewing you, and speaking sadly to
you, (the Lord knows,) would to God there were more that needed
Healing-Medicines, and that fewer had need of Hewing and Wounding; but the
truth is, Carnal Security, Spiritual Pride, Hypocrisy and Formality, are so
rife, and become so much the Plague of this Generation, that People believe not
their hazard. Neither 2ly. Is it our desire nor design to speak to all of you
indifferently and without Discrimination, for as the Lord says, Mat. 11.19.
Wisdom is justified of her children; Though the Generality despise this Word,
yet we are confident the Lord has some that He allows not to be grieved; and
we shall desire, that such may not wrong themselves nor mar our freedom in
speaking the Word of the Lord to others. 3ly. We shall not desire to speak
peremptorly as to the Case of particular Persons, though we will not deny nor
conceal our Fears and sad Apprehensions as to many of you; only what we have to
say, ye would know and be assured that it is not spoken at random by us, but as
having some acquaintance with many of your Conditions, and we may gather from
these what is very probably the Condition of others.

And now as to what we would say to you; Some have been preaching this Gospel
to you who are flitted and removed to another part of the Vineyard, other some
are gone to another World, and some are yet continued Preaching to you, but
what Fruit is brought forth by the Ministry of all? If we were put to make a
report of you, as we will be put to it, what could we say? we are afraid to
speak our apprehensions; O! how little is this Gospel, as to it is Fruit and
Success, upon the growing hand among you? We shall therefore forbear to speak
of that which we think has deep Impressions on our selves concerning you, but
we would have you to look through Matters how they stand betwixt God and you,
and if we may humbly lay claim to any measure of the judgment of Discerning;
may we not ask where is there a Man or a Woman amongst most of us, that has a
Conversation suitable to this Gospel? If we begin at the great Folks that have
the things of the World in abundance, it is their work for most part not to be
Religious, but to gather and heap up Riches, and to have somewhat of a Name, or
a piece of Credit in the World, this is the farthest that many of such design:
And if we come and take a look of the way of the Poorer sort, they live as if
they were not called to be exercised to Godliness; and this is the condition of
the Generality, to live as if God were not to call them to a reckoning; ye will
say, we are poor ignorant Folks, and are not Book-learned, but have ye not
Souls to be saved? and is there any other way to be saved then that royal Way
wherein Believers have walked? But if we should yet look a little further
through you, how many are there that have not the very form of Godliness, who
never studied to be Christians, either in your fellowship with others, nor when
alone, or in your Families; There are some, O! that I might not say, many, who
are hearing me, that will not once in the Year bow their Knee to God in their
Families, many of you spend your time in Tippling, Jeasting, Loose-speaking,
which are not convenient; yea, I dare say, there are many that spend more time
in Tippling, Jeasting, and Idle-speaking, then in the Duties of Religion, either
in public or in private, what report shall we make of you? Shall we say that
such a man spent three or four Hours every day in going up and down the
Streets, or in Tippling and Sporting, and would not spend half an Hour of the
Day on God and His Worship; and further, how many are yet ignorant of the first
Principles of Religion, a fault that is often complained of, and yet we would
be ashamed to have it heard of, that such Ignorance should be under half a
Years preaching of the Gospel, that is in this Place under many Years preaching
of it, and this not only among the Poorer sort, but even amongst those who hold
their Heads very high, and are above others, who can guide and govern their own
Affairs, and give others a good counsel in things concerning the World, yet if
we come to speak with them of Repentance, or of Faith in its Exercise, of
Convictions and Challenges for Sin, of Communion with God, of the working of
God's Spirit in the Regenerate, or of the Fruits of the Spirit, they have not a
Mouth to speak a word of these things; and if they speak any thing, O! but it
looks wersh, tasteless, and thieveless like; Put them to discourse of Religion,
it has no gust, (to say so,) it relishes not, they have no understanding of
it, at least, that is experimental; does this look like Folks that have heard
and received the Gospel? let me say it, the Wisdom of this World, and the
Knowledge of Christ, are far different things; and if some of you go that
length as to get the Questions of the Catechism, which is well done in it self;
if we put you but to express them in other words, ye cannot, which says plainly
that ye are not Masters of your Knowledge: And what shall we say of others? of
whom we cannot say but we get respect enough from them, yet how do Selfishness
and Worldly-mindedness abound in them? and how Graceless and Christless are
they found to be, when put to the trial? We would also say to you, that there
is great difference betwixt Civility and Christianity; Fairfashions will never
pass in Christ's account for the suitable Fruits of the Gospel, and will never
hinder us from having a just ground of Complaint against you; How many have a
Form of Religion, and want the Power of it? who think themselves something,
when they are indeed nothing, and their Profession is so thin and holled, to
speak so, that their Rottenness and Hypocrisy may be seen through it. Though
these things be but general, yet they will comprehend a great many of you that
are here in this Assembly; and if so, is there not just ground of Complaint of,
and Expostulation with you, as a People among whom this Word has no suitable
Fruit: And as for you that live Profanely and Hypocritically, what shall we
say to you? or how shall we deal with you? we bring the Word to you, but ye
make no more use of it then if ye had never heard it; no more Religion shows
it self in you, then if ye lived among Heathens; Shall we say to God, the Fruit
of the Gospel is there? Dare we be answerable to God, or can we be faithful to
you, to flatter you over, as if all were well with you? and must not our
Complaint then rather be this, Lord they have not believed our report; though
we be feckless, and though there be ground of Complaint of us, yet the Word is
His Word and will take hold of you. I know that Folks do not readily digest
such Doctrine well, and it may be some think that few Ministers are better
dealt with then we are; but we say, that that is not our Complaint; we confess
if we look from the beginning of the World to this Time, there will be few
Ministers of the Gospel, found to have been better dealt with as to outward and
civil things, but alace! should that stop our Mouth? yea rather ought it not to
be the more sad to us to be so dealt with, and to live in civil Love with Men
and Women who yet do not receive the Gospel, nor deal kindly with our Master;
Do not think that we will take external respect to us for the Fruit of the
Gospel; as we have no cause to complain of other things, so let us not be put
to complain of this, but receive Christ in your Heart, let Him and His precious
Wares have Change and go off amongst you, make use of Him for Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, and go not for the fashion about
the Means that should bring you near Him, but be in good earnest, and this
would satisfy us much, and prevent Complaints. Lastly, I would ask you what
will come of it, if we shall go on in Preaching, and ye in Hearing, and yet
continuing still in Unbelief? will there not be an account craved of us? and
must we not make a report? and if ye think we must report, can we report any
other way then it is with you? Shall we, or dare we say, that such a Man was a
fine civil Man, and that therefore he will not be reckoned with though he
believed not in Christ? No, no, but this must be the report, that such a Man,
and such a kind of Men, though Christ was long wooing them, would not embrace
Him, though He invited them to the Wedding, yet they would not come, nay they
mocked and spurned at it, they trod the Blood of the Covenant under Foot, and
counted God a Liar in all His Offers, and said by their Practice, that they
should be happy though they took not this way; many of you who would not take
it well if we should speak this to you in particular, will find it to be a
Truth one day: And if ye shall say, What would we be at? The answer is at hand,
Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and ye shall be saved; This is the End of the
Gospel, and the mean of your Happiness; it is the great and the main thing that
we call for, which if it be not obtained, the ground of the Complaint will
continue: And do you think this any strange, hard, or uncouth thing, that when
we bring to you the Offer of Christ in the Gospel, we bid you receive it, and
flee in to Him to hide you from the Wrath to come; and yet this is all we seek
of you; it is neither your Shame nor your Skaith that we seek, but that ye may
take with your Sin, that ye may judge and condemn your selves, that your Mouth
may be stopped before God, and that ye may flee to Jesus Christ in earnest, and
close with Him on His own Terms: As therefore ye would prevent the greatly
aggravated Sin, to wit, sinning against the Gospel, and the Complaint of the
Ministers thereof against you, and the terrible Vengeance of the Mediator, Kiss
the Son, cast open the everlasting Doors of your Hearts, and let the Gospel,
and Christ the King of Glory have access: We pray you stand not in the way of
your own Happiness, refuse not to do Him that much pleasure and satisfaction
for all the travel of His Soul, as to give Him your Souls to be saved. Now God
Himself keep you from this Folly and Soul-destroying madness.

SERMON X.
ISAIAH LIII.I. Who has believed our report? And to whom is the arm of the
Lord revealed?


WE have spoken somewhat these days past, to sundry Doctrines from this part of
the Verse, and particularly of the sad Complaint which Isaiah has in his own
name, and in the name of all the Ministers of the Gospel, that the savoury
Report concerning Jesus Christ is not received, and that though Life and
Salvation through Him be offered to many, yet there are but few, scarce here
one and there one that do embrace it, this is the sad result, Lord, who has
believed our report? Words, that being spoken by such a Prophet, and so often
mentioned in the New Testament, may and should as often as we speak, hear, or
re^d them, put both Ministers and People to a holy demur, and to look what
becomes of all our Preaching and Hearing, when this was all the Fruit, even of
Isaiah's Preaching, as to the greatest part of his Hearers.

Ere we leave this part of the Verse, it will not be unmeet that we speak a
little to these three. First, To what may be the Causes why, when the Gospel is
powerfully Preached, there are so few Believers. Secondly, How it comes to
pass, seeing so few Believe, that generally so many think they Believe, and so
few suspect their own Faith. And Thirdly, To the necessity that lies on the
Hearers of the Gospel, to enquire at, and try themselves concerning their
Faith, and to have some solid Satisfaction in it.

Although we mention no particular Doctrines now, yet considering the Doctrines
we spoke to before, these things will not be unsuitable to them, nor
impertinent to you.

For the first, The Causes why so few believe the Gospel, we cleared to you
already, That generally the powerful Preaching of the Gospel has been with
little Fruit, so that Isaiah has this sad Complaint, Lord, who has believed
our report? and our Lord Jesus has it also on the matter, Mat. 11.7. We have
piped to you and ye have not danced, we have mourned to you and ye have not
lamented, and in the same express words, John 12.38. And when it is so with
sweet Isaiah in the Old Testament, and with our blessed Lord in the New, that
spoke with such Power and Authority, ye may see there is reason for us to
enquire into the Causes, why it is that so few Believe? In speaking to which.
1. We intend not to touch on all the Reasons that may be gathered together, of
Peoples not profiting under the Gospel, but of these that ye have most reason
to look to, and that are most obstructive of Faith in you. 2. Though we might
speak of Reasons on the side of them that speak to you, for who is sufficient
for these things? and we shall not deny but we have culpable accession to your
Unfruitfulness, yet it were not much to your edifying to insist on these. 3.
Neither will we speak to these sovereign Causes on God's part, who in His Holy
Justice gives up People to Unfruitfulness, when they receive not the Truth in
Love. Neither 4ly. Shall we insist on these Causes that may arise from the
Devil, who waits on wherever the Word is preached, to mar the Fruit of it, as
we may see Mat. 13.19. the evil Spirits, like as many Crows, when the Seed of
the Word is sown, waiting on to pick it up, and ye would know, that ye never
come to hear the Word, but there are, as it were, Flocks of Devils attending
you; Hence it is that some are rocked and lulled asleep, some have their Minds
filled with worldly Thoughts, some forget all that they Hear ere they go out of
Doors, thus it is with many Hearers of this Gospel, their Hearts are trod upon
as the Way-side by Devils and Foul-Spirits, that never a word takes impression
on them, and though ye may think such expressions uncouth-like and strange, yet
they are sadly true; Satan waited on when Christ preached, and sure he will
scar no more to do so at our Preaching than he did at His, if he stood at
Joshua's right Hand to resist him, he will no doubt be at ours; But we say we
will not insist on these. But 5ly. We shall speak a little to these Causes that
are common in you, which ye your selves might know if ye would observe them,
and we would exhort you to take notice of them, when we tell you of them.

First, Then we offer, or rather assert this for a Cause, The want of serious
minding the great concernment of the work of your Salvation, and that this
preached Gospel is the Word of the Lord by which ye must be saved; Alace!
though ye have immortal Souls, and though this Word be the mean of your
Salvation, yet there are Hundreds of you that never lay it to Heart, that your
Souls are in hazard, and that this Word must be it that ye must live by, and
live upon; I appeal to your Consciences if ye think upon this seriously, want
of this Consideration fosters Security, breeds Laziness, and makes and keeps
you Careless and Carnal; I shall instance the want of it in three respects. 1.
Look how ye are affected toward this Word, and your own edification by it
before ye come to hear it, How few are hungering and thirsting, or preparing
for benefit by it, or preparing to meet with God in it? In effect ye come not
with a design to profit; so that if it were known, it would be wondered at,
wherefore ye come to hear the Word, as Christ says of some, They came not
because they saw the miracles, but because they did eat of the loaves and were
filled; so may we say of you, that ye come not to profit by the Word, but on
some crooked carnal design. 2. Look how ye carry when ye are come, How many
sleep a great part of the Sermon? so that it is a shame to look on the face of
our Meetings, when in every corner some are Sleeping, whose Consciences God
will waken ere long, and the Timber and Stones of the House will bear witness
against them; Were you in any other Meeting, about ordinary Business, there
would not be such Sleeping; But when ye are Waking, what is your Carriage? for
ye may be Waking, and your Heart far away, or fast asleep, how seldom can ye
give account of what is said? though your Bodies be present, your Hearts are
wandering; ye are like these spoken of Ezekiel. 33.31. who sat before the Prophet
as God's people, but their hearts went after their covetousness; how often
while ye are sitting here is your Heart away? some in their Thoughts running
after their Trade, some after their Merchandice, some after one thing, some
after another: This is one sad instance of it, that there are many of you who
have had Preaching forty or fifty Years, that can scarce tell one Note of it
all, and no wonder, for ye were not attentive in the Hearing of it. 3. Look how
ye carry after the Word is heard; What unedifying Discourse will ye be engaged
in ere ye be well at the Door? how carnally and carelessly do many rush unto,
and go away from hearing of the Word? and when ye get a word that meets with
your Souls Case, do ye go to your Knees with it before God, desiring Him to
breath on it, and to keep it warm? or do ye meditate upon it? Now put these
three together, your Carriage before, in the time, and after your Hearing the
Word, ye will find that there is just cause to say, that the most part that
hear this Gospel are not serious, what wonder then that it do them no good? In
the end of that Parable of the Sower, Matthew. 13. Mark 4. and Luke 8. its said
by the Lord, Take heed how ye hear, for whosoever has, to him shall be given,
etc. If ye improve well your Hearing, ye will get yet more, but so long as ye
take no heed how ye hear, ye cannot profit.

A second Ground or Cause is this, That the most part of Hearers never come to
look on this Word as the Word of God, they come never almost to have a
Historical Faith of it, it is said Heb. 11.6. He that comes to God must believe
that He is, and that He is a rewarder of them that seek Him diligently; But
when Folk do not really believe that God is, what wonder they seek Him not,
that they fear neither Judgment nor Hell, and that they study not Holiness?
they say in their Hearts they shall have Peace, though they walk in the
imagination of their own Hearts, and that the way to Heaven is not so narrow as
Ministers say it is, that God will not condemn poor christened Bodies, this is
the language of many Hearts and of some Mouths; Need there any evidences of it
be given? if ye believed that the way to Heaven is so strait, and that Holiness
is so extensive, could ye possibly with any seriousness reflect on your Heart
and Way and not be affrighted? But the truth is, this Word gets not leave to
sink in you as the Word of God, therefore says our Lord to His Disciples,
Luke 9.44. Let these sayings sink into your ears; There are these things I fear
ye do not Believe, and let me not be thought to take on me to judge your
Consciences, when there are so many that profess they know God, but in works
they deny Him, as it is Tit. 1.16. when we see such things in your Carriage, we
know that there is a principle of Unbelief whence they spring. 1. There are
many of you that really believe not there is a God, or that He is such as His
Word reveals Him to be, to wit, Holy, Just, Powerful, etc. else ye durst not
live at feed with Him, The fool has said in his heart there is not a God, they
are corrupt, etc. your practical Atheism and Prophanity say ye believe not
there is a God. 2. Ye never believed the ill of your Nature, Do ye think (as
James bespeaks these he writes to, chap. 4.5.) that the Scripture says in
vain, the spirit that is in you lusts to envy? Ye do not think, that your Heart
is deceitful and desperately wicked? though we should Preach never so much on
this Subject, yet ye lay it not to Heart, ye take it not to you in particular.
3. We are afraid that many of you believe not a Judgment, and your particular
and personal coming to it, nay there are among you, who are like to these
Mockers spoken of by Peter in his second Epistle, chap. 3. ver. 3, 4. who say,
where is the promise of his coming? And as there were in Paul's days some that
denied the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. so there are still, who do it on the
matter, at least; Ye have the same corrupt Nature; We would think that we had
prevailed to some purpose, if ye were brought really to believe that there is a
God, Life to come, and a Day of Judgment; and if ye did so, ye would be more
serious in Duty, and would come more Hungry and Thirsty to the Word. 4. The
Mean and Mids of Salvation is not believed, to wit, That the way to Peace with
God is Faith in Jesus Christ, and that there is no way to Heaven but the way of
Holiness; If all your thoughts were spoke out, it would be found that ye have
another mids than Faith, and another way than that of Holiness; And to make out
this, we need go no further then to your Practice, we are sure many of you live
in Prophanity, and yet ye have all a hope of Heaven, and what says this? but
that ye think not Faith and Holiness necessary, but that ye may come to Heaven
another way, and this is an old Fault and Deceit, it was in Moses his days, for
some are brought in ( Deuteronomy. 29.19.) saying, I shall have peace though I walk in
the imagination of my own heart, and add drunkenness to thirst, though I tipple
daily at my Four Hours, though I follow my Lusts and Pleasures, and take my
fouth and fill of the World, we cannot be all Saints, etc. The Lord will not
spare that man, but His anger and jealousy shall smoke against him, and all
the curses that are written in this book shall ly upon him, and the Lord will
blot out his name from under Heaven; and though this be not now believed, it
shall be found verified; There are many when they come to Judgment, that will
know to their cost, the truth of many things they never believed before? as we
find in that rich Man, who says to Abraham, Send some to tell my brethren, that
they come not to this place of torment, it says as much, as that He in his
lifetime did not believe how terribly-tormenting a place Hell is, and it is
even so still; Though Men and Women have immortal Souls, yet they go on
following their sinful way, and believe not that any evil shall befall them,
till God's Curse and Vengeance overtake them.

A third Ground or Cause is, That Folk never think themselves in hazard, nor
suffer their hazard to affect them, and therefore they seek not after the
Remedy, hence the J^ws, Scribes, and Pharisees rejected Christ, why? they were
righteous Persons whole, and needed not the Physici^n; And thus it is with many
of you, ye will take with it that ye are Sinners, but not with the gracelesness
of your Nature, and this makes it, that when Life, and Reconciliation with God,
are offered, we have almost none to accept of it, why so? ye are generally in
your own opinion, good Friends with God already, none of you almost think that
ye have hatred at God, and so ye carelessly and unconcernedly let the
opportunity of making your Peace with Him slip over, even like these Jews spoke
of Joh. 8.44, 45. who when Christ said to them, Ye have the devil to your
father, answered, he had a devil, and that God was their Father, that they were
come of Abraham, and were not born of fornication; So it is with many of you,
ye could never endure to even your selves to Hell, nor to take with it that ye
were heirs of Wrath, as if ye had been born with other Natures then the
ordinary Race of Mankind is, and this keeps so many of you that ye get no good
of this Gospel, for it seeks Sinners to pardon them, and Enemies to reconcile
them, and till the Feud be once taken with, the Friendship will never be sought
after, nor will it find Merchants, though when once the Enmity is taken with,
the Gospel has many sweet, peaceful, and comfortable words to speak to the Man
afterward.

A fourth Ground is, The love of Money and of the World, which is the root of
all ill, This is given as a main Cause, Matthew. 13. why the Word profits not,
The seed is sown among thorns, and the thorns spring up and chock it, the
cares of this life and the deceitfulness of riches chocked the Word; This is
not oppression nor stealing, but entanglement with, and addictedness to the
things of this present World, Folks allowing themselves too much satisfaction
in their Riches and Pelf, counting themselves as if all were well if they have
it, and grieved if they want it, as if there were nothing but that to make
Happy, being wholly taken up about it, and leaving no room for the concerns of
their Souls, for Prayer and Seeking of God, nor for Challenges to work on them,
they are so wholly taken up with their Callings and Business; for they lay it
for a Ground that they must be rich, and then they give themselves wholly to
all things that may contribute to that end, and that chockes and suffocates the
Word that it never comes up, that nothing comes to perfection, therefore Christ
says, Luke 21.24. Take heed ye be not overcharged with surfeiting and
drunkenness, and cares of this life; I am afraid that many more among you who
are civil, and esteemed virtuous and frugal, shall perish in this Pit of
Worldly-mindedness, then shall perish by Drunkenness, Gluttony, Fornication, or
the like, and yet there is nothing more frequent in Scripture, then words
spoken to scar Folk from Earthly-mindedness, How hard is it (says Christ) for a
rich man to enter into the kingdom of Heaven? and such a Man is he that is
taken up with Riches, and places his Happiness and Contentment in them, whether
he have more or less of them; We speak not this to foster Idleness in any, but
to press Moderation in the use of lawful things; Ye think it enough if we
cannot charge you with Oppression, Stealing, Whoring, and the like, but this
Gospel will charge you with the love of Money, and if it find the love of the
World in you, the love of the Father will not be found in you; Does not your
experience tell you, that it is not an easy matter to be much taken up with the
World, and to win at a suitable disposition for Duties of Religion, and to be
painful in them?

A fifth Ground is, Folks little prizing of the Gospel and the Benefits that
come by it; They look not upon it as their Happiness to have Communion with
God, they who are invited to the Marriage of the King's Son, Mat. 22. will not
come, and the reason is given, they made light of it, the Offer of the Gospel
has no weight, it relishes not; If a Market of fine things at a cheap Rate
were procla^med, ye would all run to it, but ye delight not in the Word of God,
ye prize not the Gospel and the precious Wares that it exposes to sale amongst
you: And to evidence and make out this, I would ask you these few Questions,
And 1. I would ask you how often, or rather how seldom have you sitten down
purposly and thanked God for sending the Gospel to you? ye have given thanks
for your Dinner, but how often have ye given Him thanks that ye have the Gospel
Sabbath Days, and Weekdays? 2. How little do many of you wait on the Preaching
of it? were there a Message sent to you but from some ordinary Man, let be from
a great Man, ye would straiten your selves and your Business too somewhat that
ye might hear it, and yet it is a wonder to think how some in this Place, except
on the Sabbath, will hardly be seen in the Church from one end of the Year to
the other. 3. Had ye any evident to draw of House or Land, ye would seek to
have it drawn very well and sure, but many of you never sought to have the
evidents of Heaven made sure; ye know, how interruptions of, and threatenings to
remove the preached Gospel from you, never troubled you; That business of the
Tender gave a proof, that if ye might brook your ease and the things of the
World, ye cared not what became of the Gospel and of the Liberties of Christ's
Kingdom among you; nay we may say, the Gospel was never less set by, never more
reproached, despised, and trod upon, then in the time wherein we live, and who
lays it to Heart? If it were well tried, there is more pains taken on seckless
particulars in a Week, then ye take upon your Souls in a Year, and which may be
spoken to the shame of some, more time taken up in Tippling, Drinking and
Debauching, then in Prayer, or any other Religious Duty; And is not that an
undeniable evidence that ye make light of the Gospel? They made light of it,
and went their ways, etc. saying on the matter, care for yonder Invitation who
wili, as for us, we have somewhat else to do.

A sixth Ground or Cause, though possibly it be not so rife, is a shifting of
Convictions and Challenges, a quenching of any begun Exercise in the
Conscience; Some of you have been made sometimes to tremble as Felix did, but
ye shifted it, and put it off to another time, and went away to some Company or
Recreation, that so ye might stifle it, and drive it out of your thoughts; Is
there any of you, but in Sickness, or under some other sad Cross, or at a
Communion, ye have had your own Convictions, Challenges, and Frights about your
Souls estate? and yet ye have smothered, extinguished, and put them out again.

A seventh Ground or Cause (which is as large and comprehensive as any,) is
Folks resting and sitting down, before they have any solid Ground to rest upon,
taking a counterfite Work for a real one, like these spoken of Hosea 7.16. of
whom it is said, They return, but not to the most High; Some attain to a sort of
outside Reformation, and they trow that on that account they are well enough
and in good terms with God, and when such are called to return, they say as
these do, Mal. 3.7. Wherein shall we return? they think they are returned, and
that their Peace is made already; They cannot endure to be bidden Believe, or
to lay a new Foundation, for they think it is laid already: In a word, as
Laodicea did, they think themselves rich and increased in goods, when yet they
are poor, blind, miserable, wretched and naked, but they know not, and so are
well satisfied with themselves as gracious Persons; resting on these and the
like Grounds, As 1. It may be they Pray and think something of that. 2. They
think they have Faith enough, if they have a Historical Faith. 3. It may be
they have had some resolutions, and fits of a sort of Tenderness, and these
they rest upon: We shall not insist to show the rottenness of these Props, but
shall only say, it were in some respect good for many of you, that ye had never
had the little pieces of Profession ye have: There is a sort of civil, legal,
formal, fairfashioned Men and Women among us, whose Conversation and
Communication relishes to none but themselves, and speak the Word who will,
they think that they are without the reach of it; I must say this sad word,
that I think many of you have as much believing as keeps you from Faith in
Christ, that is, ye have as much Presumption and Security as makes you that ye
are never serious with the Lord to amend it, and to bring you indeed to
Believe, so that it is a greater difficulty, to beat you off from your rotten
Grounds, then it is to get you right, though both require the Omnipotent Power
of God; ye think ye Believe always, and ye have no Doubts about it, and
therefore ye think ye have Faith enough to do your turn; Ah! when will ye know
that Security is no Faith, and that there is great difference betwixt
Presumption and solid resting by Faith on Christ?

Eighthly, We think that this wrongs many of you, because ye are not among the
worst sort, and others esteem well of you, ye think ye are well enough, and
this makes us, that as to many of you we know not whether to be more familiar
with, or to stand at a distance from you, because ye are ready to rest on so
very slender Grounds; It is not the commendation of Men, but the commendation
of God that ye should seek mainly after, and yet if ye think good Men esteem
well of you, ye apprehend ye are good enough; This was it that mad^ the foolish
Virgins so secure, because the wise took them and retained them in their
Company, and this is the neck-break of many, especially when they look about
them and observe some Sin in others which they have win to abstain from; As if
it had been enough in Herod, and a sufficient proof of the reality of his
Religion, That he heard John gladly, and did many things on the hearing of him.

A ninth Ground is (and it is a very poor one,) Folks sitting down on the Means
when they have them, as if when they have gotten the Gospel they were in no
hazard, and could Believe when they list; I make no question, but where the
Gospel is powerfully in any measure preached, there are many more secure and
fearless then if they had it not, and it is very probable somewhat of this is
hinted at, Luke 13.26. where some are brought in saying to Christ, We have
eaten and drunken in thy presence, and thou have taught in our streets, who
when He boasts them away from Him at the great Day, they will in a manner
hardly believe that He is in earnest, and they give this for the reason of it,
that they have heard Him Preach, and they have run out to the Fields after Him;
It were good to fear while ye have the Word, lest ye miss the Fruit of it;
compare to this purpose Heb. 3. at the close, with Heb. 4.1. and we will find
this commended to us, So we see, says the Apostle, that they could not enter
in because of unbelief, let us therefore fear lest a promise being left us of
entering into his rest, any of us should seem to come short of it; It Is much,
yea the first step to Faith, to get Folks made suitably afraid to miss the
Fruit and Blessing of the Ordinances while they have them; It Is good to be
afraid, to come to the Church and not to get good of the Preaching, or to go
and read a Chapter of the Bible and not profit by it, always to put a
difference betwixt the Ordinance and the Blessing of it, and to be afraid in
the use of the Ordinances to miss the Blessing of them.

There may be many other Causes, and we would not stint and limit you to these,
but sure these are Causes why this Gospel profits not: We may add these few,
1. There are some that stumble at the Messenger, some at the Message; Some
thought Christ a Friend of Publicans and Sinners, and said He had a Devil, and
so they said of John Baptist; There are some that can abide neither free nor
fair Speaking, and they think it is not the Word but the Speaker that they
offend at, but Prejudices against the Carriers of the Word have never done
good, but much ill; and ye would guard against them. 2. Sometimes there is a
stumbling at the Spiritual Truths of the Gospel, and a sort of new-fangleness
in the Hearers of it that lasts not; John's Hearers rejoiced in his light for a
season; something of it also was in Christ's Hearers, but they soon turned the
Back on Him when He tells them of eating His Flesh and drinking His Blood, and
of the necessity of it, else they could have no Life in them; This (say they)
is a hard saying and who can bear it? If we would consider these things, we
might see convincing Causes of our little Thriving, and they might also
(through God's Blessing) be made use of for directions to Thriving, and if we
could once bring you to be single and serious in Hearing, and spiritually
Thrifty, in making use of every Sermon and Sabbath for edification, we had
gained a great point of you.

SERMON XI.
ISAIAH LIII.I. Who has believed our report? And to whom is the arm of the
Lord revealed?


IF we would soberly consider the frame of the most part of Men and Women that
live under the Gospel, it would be hard to know whether it were more strange
that so few should receive the Report, and be brought to believe for all that
can be said of Jesus Christ; or whether that among the generality of Hearers
that do not receive the Report, there are so few that will let it light but
that they Believe; It Is wonderful and strange to see Unbelief so rife, and it is
as strange and wonderful that among these many Unbelievers there are so few
that think they want Faith.

Ye remember the last day, we proposed to answer this Doubt or Question, What
can be the reason, that when so few Believe, all, almost think they Believe?
and then to speak a word to the last Use that rises from the Matter that
formerly we have handled on these Words: We show you, and we think the
Scripture is very clear for it, That among the generality that hear the Gospel,
they are very rare and thin sawen that do believe it, and yet go through them
all, there will not one among many be found, but will assert they B^lieve, and
they will (to speak so) be crabbed and picqued to tell them that they want
Faith, and so the most part of Hearers live and die in this Delusion; a thing
that Experience clears as well as the Word of God, and a thing that doleful
Experience will clear at the great Day, therefore some are brought in saying,
Luk, 13.26. We have eaten and drunken in thy presence, and thou have taught in
our streets, to whom Christ will say, I know you not, depart from me; which
does import this much, that some will come (as it were) to the very Gate of
Heaven, having no doubt of their Faith and Interest in God, or of their entry
into it, and will therefore in a manner plead with Christ to be in, and who
would never once doubt of it nor put it in question, but they were Believers
and in Friendship with Him; Although there will be no such debate or dispute
after Death, or at the Day of Judgment, yet it says this that many Hearers of
the Gospel have drunken in this opinion which goes to Death with them, and no
Preaching will beat them from it, that they are Believers, and in g^o^ ^erms
with God, till the intimation of the S^ntence of Condemnation do it, and the
Wrath and Curse of God meet them in the Face; And O how terrible a
disappointment will such meet with in that Day? May it not then very reasonably
and justly be enquired, what can be the reason and cause, when this is granted
so generally to be a truth, that there are few Believers, that yet it should be
^s true that few question or make any doubt of their Faith, and how this comes
to pass? I shall give you some reasons of it, which if ye would think upon, and
suffer to sink down in your Hearts, ye would not marvel that so many are in
this Mistake and Desusion, and would put many of you, to have quite other
thoughts of your own condition then ye have; We shall only speak to such
Reasons as are sinful, culpable upon your part.

The Reasons then are these. First, The most part never seriously think on the
matter whether they Believe or not, or they never put their Faith to a trial,
if the foolish Virgin light her Lamp, and never look whether there be Oil in
it, and take on a fair outward Profession of Religion, and never look what is
within it, or how it is lined, to speak so, what wonder she go up and down with
the Lamp in her hand, and never know whether there be Oil in her Vessel or not,
since she never considers, nor puts the Matter to proof and trial? The People
are expostulated with ( Isai. 44. from ver. 9.) for making of Images, That a
Man should cut down a Tree, and with one piece of it should warm himself, with
another piece of it should bake his Bread, and of a third piece should make a
god and fall down and worship it, and this is given for the ground of it, ver.
18, 19. They have not known and understood, and none considers in his heart,
or as the word is, sees to his heart; they consider not that that cannot be a
god; Folks would think that natural Reason might easily discover this folly: We
are persuaded that some of you will think your Faith as great a Folly, when
there shall be as clear evidences to prove the ro^tenne^s of your Faith and
Hope, as there were even to common Sense to prove the Image made of a piece
Tree, not to be God; when it shall be found and ^ecl^red, that though ye were
never convinced of Sin, nor of your Misery and lost Condition, were never
humbled nor touched under the kindly sense of it, never fled to Jesus Christ in
earnest, nor never had the exercise of Grace, yet out over the want of all
these, ye would needs keep up a good opinion of your Faith and Hope; We say,
the reason why ye entertain this conceit and opinion, is, because ye never sit
down seriously and soberly before God to consider the Matter, nor do ye put
your selv^^ to Proof and Trial; Let me therefore pose your Consciences, if ye
who have this opinion of your Faith, durst assert to Him, that this Faith of
yours is the result of your serious Examination and Trial; is it not rather a
guessing of fanciful opinion that ye Believe? And do ye think that such a Faith
as that will abide the Trial before God, that never did abide your own Trial?
It will doubtless be a sore beguile to go off the World with such an opinion of
Faith, and to have the Door shut in your very Teeth; Alace! there will be no
amending or bettering of your Condition after Death; The Day comes when many of
you, if God graciously prevent not, shall curse your selves that ever ye should
have been such Fools as to have trusted your own Hearts, or to have taken up
this opinion of your Faith without ground: We would therefore seriously
recommend to you the putting of your Faith more frequently to the trial, and
that ye would often read and think on that place, 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your
selves whether ye be in the Faith, prove your own selves, etc. O! do not think
that a matter of such concernment should be left lying at conjecture and utter
uncertainty, who loses, when ye are so palpably accessory to your own Ruin,
by not endeavoring to put your selves to so much as a Trial? Do not say here
for excuse, We have no more Grace then God gives us; when ye never endeavored
to be so much as at the form of the Duty, or to go the length ye might have
gone in putting your selves to the Trial; The deceit then, being desperate and
irredeemable, if continued in, do not, for the Lord's sake, after all that is
said to you, continue beguiling your selves.

A second Reason is, Folks settling themselves on unsound evidences and
principles of Peace that will not bear them through before God; I do not say
that they have nothing to say in word for themselves, but that all they have to
say will be no ground to prove their Faith, or to bear it through before God
that they do believe indeed; It will be found at the best to be but a lie, as
it is said of that Man, Isa. 44.20. A deceived heart has turned him aside, he
feeds on ashes, he cannot deliver his soul, nor say, is there not a lie in my
right hand? He may have a seeming reason for his Faith, but it is no reason
indeed: If many of you were going now to die, what reason have ye to prove your
Believing by? some will say, God has always been good, kind, and gracious to
me, I was in many straits and difficulties, and I prayed and got many
deliveries; Thus all the ground of thy Faith is but Temporal Favors or
Deliveries, which is even as if Israel should have made their receiving of
Temporal Deliveries and their acknowledging of them, and having some sort of
Faith of them, to be ground enough to prove their receiving of Jesus Christ
^avingly; There is a doleful proof of the unsoundness of this ground, Psalm.
78.34, 35, 36, 37. When he slew them, then they sought him, and returned and
enquired early after God, they remembered that God was their rock, and the high
God their redeemer; They looked to God's bygone Favors for them when they
were in the Wilderness, and at the Red Sea, and they believed that he could do
so still; But they did flatter him with their mouth, and lied unto him with
their tongue, for their hearts were not right with him, neither were they
steadfast in his Covenant; whereupon He destroyed them, and through their
Unbelief they did not enter into God's Rest; It Is also said a little before in
that Psalm, verse. 32. For all this they sinned still; There may be many
Temporal Favors and Deliveries, and these acknowledged too, and yet no
receiving of Christ for making our Peace with God, for removing the Quarrel
betwixt Him and us, and for making us cease from Sin: Consider if it will be a
good ground to plead with God upon, to say to Him, Lord thou must bring me to
Heaven because I was in Sickness and thou raised me up, I was in this and that
strait, and under this and that Cross, and thou carried me through and brought
me out of it; The Lord will say to such that have no more to say, ye had so
many evidences of my Power and yet ye sinned still; and yet this will be all
the Pleading and Reasoning that will be found with many of you, and the sad
Reply you will meet with from God.

A third Reason is, Folks giving an external Countenance to Ordinances, and
their formal going about of them; They trow they have Faith, because they keep
the Church and are not open Contemners and Misregarders of Ordinances as some
others are, because they Pray, Read, Hear, etc. It seems it was something like
this, that the persuasion of these spoken of Luke 13.26. is built upon, Lord
(say they) we have heard thee preach, and have eaten and drunken in thy
presence; It Is not simply that they heard Christ Preach, for many heard Him
Preach who stoned Him, but that when others stoned Him, they followed Him and
were not openly Profane, nor professed Contemners of Him and of His Preaching,
as these others were; such like words fall sometimes from your Mouths: Ye will
possibly say, what would we have of you? ye are not Profane, ye wait on
Preaching, and live like your Neighbors, and ye content your selves with that;
Alace! this is a poor, yea, a doleful Fruit of Ordinances, and of your
attendance on them; If there be more security, presumption, and desperate
hazarding on the Wrath of God, and less taking with the Quarrel betwixt Him and
you on that ground.

A fourth Reason is, Folks Hope, even such a Hope, that contrair to the nature
of Hope, will make the most part of you ashamed; Ye trow ye Believe, because ye
hope ye Believe, and that ye will get Mercy, because ye think ye hope in God's
Mercy, and ye will not let any thing light to the contrair, nor so much as
think that ye may be deceived; The opinion that Folk have of obtaining Mercy,
that is maintained without any ground but their vain hope, is the rifest, most
unreasonable, and prejudicial evil that is among the Professors of this Gospel;
henc^ if any ground and evidence of their Peace be asked for, they will answer,
that they Believe; If it be again ^sked, how know ye that ye Believe, they
answer, we hope and believe it is so, and can give no ground for it. Many are
like these spoken of Isa. 57.10. Thou have found the life of thine hand,
therefore thou was not grieved; They have a Faith and a Hope of their own
making, and this keeps them off, that the Word of God takes no hold on them; We
preach that ye are naturally at Feed with God, and offer Peace and
Reconciliation through Jesus Christ, but ye are Deaf, for ye think your Peace
is made already; and but very few come sensible of a Quarrel with God, to this
Word as to the Ministry of Reconciliation; This is wondered at (in a manner) by
the Lord Himself, Micah 3.11. where we have a People whose way is very unlike
the Gospel, The heads judge for a reward, and the priests teach for hire, and
the prophets divine for money, yet will they lean upon the Lord and say, is not
the Lord among us? none evil can come upon us; It is not for real Believing
that they are charged, but for their confident asserting their Believing when
there was no ground for it; So it is with many, they will say, they hope to
escape Hell, and to get their Sin pardoned, and to win to Heaven, and they
believe it will be so, when in the mean time there is no ground for it, but
clear ground to the contrary.

A fifth Ground is, Folks spiritual and practical Ignorance of the
Righteousness of God, whereof the Apostle speaking, Romans 10.3. says, Being
ignorant of the righteousness of God, they go about to establish their own,
etc. that which I mean is, Folks being ignorant of their Natural Condition, of
the Spiritualness of God's Law, what it requires, and of the way of Faith, and
of the command of Believing, and the nature of it: It Is from the ignorance of
these three, to wit, of the Mischief that is in them by Nature, of the
Spiritualness of the Law, and of the Spiritualness of Faith, and of the
Exercise of it, that they sleep on in Security, and think they have Faith when
they have it not; And though sometimes they will say their Faith is weak, yet
they cannot be beaten from it, but that they Believe; and their Faith is up and
down as their Security stands or falls: This the Apostle makes clear from his
own experience, Romans 7.9. where before his Conversion he says, he was a living
Man, but after his Conversion he begins to think himself nothing but a dead and
gone Man, the reason is, because before Conversion he knew not himself, he knew
not the Law, nor the nature of the Covenant of Grace, Before the Law came
(says he) I was alive, he knew not the spiritual meaning of it, and therefore
he thought he observed it, and so thought himself sure of Heaven, and had no
doubts nor disputings concerning his Interest in God; But (says he) when the
commandment came, sin revived, and I died; I saw my self then to be lost and
gone, and in every thing guilty, that which I thought had been Humility. I saw
it to be Pride, that which I took for Faith, I found it to be Presumption an^
Unbelief, and my Holiness, I found to be Hypocrisy; not that his Sin grew more
upon his hand, but the Sin that before was veiled, was now discovered, and
staired him in the face; This is a sad truth, yet a most real truth; The good
Believing (as many of you call it) and the Faith that ye have is a surer ground
of your strangeness to God, and of your Unbelief, then any other thing ye have
can be a ground whereupon to conclude ye have Faith and are good Friends with
God; ye are yet alive, Strangers to God, Strangers to your Selves, Strangers to
the spiritual meaning of the Law, and to the exercise of Faith; If ye would set
your selves to ponder seriously this one Consideration, I think ye might be
somewhat convinced of it; Do ye not see many that understand more of God then
ye do, and that are more tender in their Walk then ye are, who yet are loather,
more difficu^ted and afraid to assert their Faith and Confidence in God then
ye are? and they are oftener brangled and put to question their Faith, will ye
then consider what can be the reason that ye have so strong a Faith that ye
never doubted, and they are troubled with doubting sometimes, yea often, though
they Pray more, and are more diligent in the use of all the Means, and holier
in their Conversation then ye are, and ye will (it may be) say, well's them
that are like such a Person; this is the reason of it, they see their Sin, and
the spiritualness of the Law, and the nature of Faith, and are dead to the Law;
but ye are yet alive in your conceit; Do ye, or can ye think, that much
Praying, Reading, Meditation, and Tenderness in Folks Walk, will weaken Faith
and occasion Doubting? or is it not rather like, that Faith will be more
confirmed by these, then by the neglect of them? how is it then that ye are so
strong in your Faith, when they find themselves so weak and doubting? or have
ye an infused Faith without the Means? or does God deal with you in a more
indulgent way then He uses to deal with His People? how is it then that these
of whom ye cannot say but they are more tender then ye are, cannot almost name
Faith, or assert their confid^nce in God, without trembling and fear that they
presume; and yet ye dare very confidently take a mouthful of it without any
hi^k or ^esitation, and yet live carnally and without fear? Do not many of you
wonder wh^t ails some Folks, what need they to be so much troubled, and why do
they stand in need of some to Pray for them and with them, and to answer their
Doubts, and ye (mean while) need no such thing; and all your remedy is, that ye
assure your selves ye Believe, and think the questioning of your Security is
the very undoing of your Faith; God help, ye are in a woeful taking.

A sixth Reason is, That Folk drink in some Carnal Principles that have no
warrant in the Word of God, and accordingly square every thing that comes in
their way. 1. They lay it for a Ground, that Folk should never doubt of God's
Mercy; we do not say that Folk should doubt of God's being most real in His
offer of Mercy to Sinners in the Gospel, but from that it will not follow, that
never one should doubt of God's love to them, or of their coming to Heaven,
whether they close with the Offer or not; Are there not many whom God curses?
and should not these doubt? A second Carnal Principle is, That there is no such
reality in the Threatenings of God as there is in His Promises, as if He were
utterly averse from executing a Threa^ning, and as if it were a rare thing to
Him to condemn any; and is there any thing more opposite to Scripture then this
Principle is? Has He not said in the same place, to wit, Ex. 34. where He
proclaims Himself to be gracious, merciful, long-suffering, etc. That He is a
God that will not clear the guilty; And has not the Scripture said, that it is
but a remnant that are saved, but (as it were) here one and there one, and that
there are many damned for one that is saved; But know it of a certain, that He
will make you one day vomit up these Principles, with exquisite torment, when
out of your own Mouth He will convince you of your Mistake and Delusion. 3.
When Folks want many things, they supply all with an honest Mind; This supplies
your want of Knowledge, your want of Faith and of Repentance, and of every
thing whereof ye are said to be shor^; Though ye live and should die Carnal and
Unrenewed, yet ye think still ye have an honest Mind or Heart for all that, and
what, I pray is your honest Mind? but a rotten and profane Heart that vails
your Hypocrisy with a pretext of Honesty; Would ye think that Man honest,
spoke of Isa. 44.19. who with one part of the Tree warmed himself, and with
another part made a god and fell down and prayed to it? and yet in your Sense,
he has an honest Mind, for he follows his light which is but darkness, and
the deceit of his Heart carrying him away from God, though he cannot see it; he
discerns not, because he considers not that there is a lie in his hand, and
that a deceived heart has led him aside, so it is with you; and if many of you
saw what is latent under that honest Mind and Heart, there would be nothing
that would make you loath your selves more; a little time will convince you,
that that which ye looked for most good from, was your greatest and most
traitorous Enemy; He that trusts in his own heart is a fool, says Solomon,
Prove. 28.26. it supposes that Folks are ready to lippen to their Heart, and to
hearken to the language of it concerning their Spiritual Estate, but it says
also, that they are Fools that do so, for it betrays them, and there is no
folly comparable to that whereby a Man betrays his own immortal Soul; and that
he does who trusts in his own Heart.

A seventh Reason is from the deceitfulness of our Heart, and the natural
Corruption that sticks to us; There is naturally in us, Pride and Self-conceit,
we are disposed and given to think any thing that is our own, though it be but
a show, is as good as others reality; to think our own Light and Knowledge, our
own other Parts and Gifts to be as good as those of any others, whosoever they
be; And with Pride there is joined Self-love, we dow not abide to think evil of
our selves, or to suspect our selves; Though this Self-love be indeed
Self-hatred, and is but love to our Corruptions, and makes us that when we live
in hatred of God, to think that we love Him, so that we cannot be induced to
think that we love Him not, for we know that love to God is good, and we love
our selves so well, that we cannot endure to think that we want it; hence it is
said of some in the last Times, 2 Timothy 3.2, 3. That they shall he covetous,
proud, boasters, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy,
without natural affection, truce breakers, etc. having a form of godliness, and
denying the power of it, and the foun^ain of all is Self-love, for (says he)
men shall be lovers of their own selves; And as Self-love is the fountain of
much Evil, so it is the fountain of Self-deceit, and keeps out any thing that
may make Men question their own Condition, so that if a word come in and say,
thou have no ground for thy Faith, the Heart will be ready to answer and say,
it cannot be that I am a Self-deceiver, and Self-love as a partial Judge will
offer to vindicate the Man, and so makes him shift the Challenge. Now when all
these are put together, you may see how many Grounds Folks have to go wrong
upon, and Men having Hearts disposing and inclining them to go wrong, and
little pains being taken to discover the deceit of them, is it any wonder that
they think they Believe, when indeed they Believe not, and be empty and
toom-handed, having little or nothing to rest upon, while they think they are
Rich and want nothing; These are not fancied and far fetched things but
obvious, and at Hand, and may easily be gathered from your daily Practice; In
all which, it is our design and scope to bring you to try your long unquestioned
Peace; do not therefore think that it is impossible to be thus persuaded, as
many of you are, and yet to be mistaken, (which is another Ground of Folks
deceit,) for Laodicea was very confident in thinking her self to be rich and
increased in goods, and to stand in need of nothing, when she was in the mean
time, poor, blind, miserable, wretched, and naked; and the Galatians, as we may
see chap. 5.8. had a persuasion which was not of God; As there may be a
persuasion of a point of Doctrine as being right, which yet is an error, so
there may be a persuasion of a Man's Spiritual State as being right, and which
he will stoutly maintain to be so, while in the mean time that persuasion is
not of God that calls him, but a strong Delusion; If all that be Faith that
ye call Faith, then certainly the way to Heaven is much broader then the
Scripture has chalked it out, and Ministers needed not say, Who believes our
report? for all should thus believe it: It will then, and must then turn to
this, that your persuasion is not of Him that calls you; and if a deceit may
ly and lurk under this persuasion of yours, ye have certainly so much the more
need to put the business to trial.

And this is the last Use, which we cannot now insist on, That seeing so many
think they Believe who Believe not, and that there are but few that believe the
Report, and indeed rest on Christ for their Salvation, as He is offered to them
in the Gospel, it is of your concernment to endeavor to put your selves
without the reach of this Complaint, and to make it sure that ye have believed
and received the Report; Is there any thing of concernment if this be not? even
to mak^ your Calling and Election sure; and that cannot be made sure as to you,
till your Faith be made sure; If we could prevail this far with you, we would
count it a blessed Fruit of this and of many other Preachings, even that some
of you who have never qu^stioned your Faith, might be engaged first seriously
to close with Christ, and then to put your selves to the trial, that on
distinct grounds ye might be able to say, I know in whom I have believed, and
that he is able to keep that which I have committed to him against that day;
There are many of you that talk of Faith, and yet cannot only not assert your
Interest in Christ distinctly, but cannot so much as give any solid grounds of
your Believing, and should not this, think ye, put you to try it? Is there not
a Day coming wherein ye will all be tried, whether your alleged Faith was true
Faith, or but Presumption? and wherein the Conscience which is now quiet, and
which it may be never kept you from an hours Sleep, shall awake and put forth
its Sting, and shall bite and gnaw, and ye who shall continue under the power
of this Delusion, will be put to gnaw your Tongues for pain and horror under
the gnawings of your Conscience; Ye that never knew all along your life what
these things mean'd, had need to stand the more in awe, and to be afraid when
ye come near Death. Though it be a sad matter, that when we should be
Preaching, and would fain preach the Doctrine of Faith, it should, by reason of
your Delusion, be the great part of our work to be thus digging you out of your
Presumption, and overturning your carnal and ill-grounded Hope; yet we have the
greater confidence and the more peace, to speak to, and insist in these Truths,
because they ly so near to the great design of the Gospel, and to your immortal
Souls Salvation; and though we were able to preach more plausible and sweet
things to you, yet if these Doct^ines profit you not, these would not; S^ing
therefore they are so profitable, we should not weary to speak, and ye should
not weary to hear them spoken of; Would to God ye were seriously and sincerely
aiming to be clear and through in the matter of Believing, and that ye stood in
need, and were more capable of more pleasant Truths; if so, we might have more
comfor^able, though we will not say more profitable Doctrines to insist upon to
you.

SERMON XII.
ISAIAH LIII.I. Who has believed our report? And to whom is the arm of the
Lord revealed?


WE have spoken at several occasions to this first part of the Verse, and
before we leave it, there is one Use several times hinted at already, to which
there is good ground to speak, it being the design and purpose of these words
to hold forth of what great concernment Believing is, and of what great
difficulty it is, and so many being to the ruin of their Souls mistaken about
it, there is ground to draw this Use of Exhortation from it, to wit, That then
all the Hearers of this Gospel would be exhorted to advert well to this, that
they make Faith sure in it self, and that they make it sure to themselves,
seeing, as I said, so many are mistaken about it and beguile themselves; The
more pressingly that the Gospel calls for Faith in Christ, and the more
weightily the Lord expostulates with the Hearers of the Gospel because of their
Unbelief, they are doubtless so much the more concerned to receive it in its
Offer, and also to look well that they content not themselves with guessing at
Faith, and that they never think that things are well with them, except they
can give good proof and warrant that they are so, and that it is Saving Faith
that they have, seeing there are so many that satisfy themselves as being
Believers, when yet so few are Believers ind^ed; The s^d mistake and
disappointment of many, should have so much influence upon us as to put us to
more watchfulness, and to a more narrow trial of our own state and condition,
that we may know how it is with us; All that we have spoken to the Doctrines of
this first part of the Verse, may be as so many Motives to stir you up to both
these, and would to God we could be persuaded to this as the Use of so many
Preachings, once to admit and take it for granted that it is the Truth of God;
that there is a necessity, an absolute necessity for us to be really rolled and
casten over upon Jesus Christ by Faith, for attaining of Life through Him;
Though this be a very common Doctrine, and ye would think a very common Use of
it, yet it is the great thing that God requires in the Gospel, and the neglect
of it, or not receiving His Son, the very contest and quarrel that God has
with the Hearers of it, and the cause of the ruin of so many Souls that perish
under the Gospel; We shall therefore propose to you some Considerations that
may stir you up to this, and briefly answer a Question in each of these two
branches of the Use.

And first, For stirring you up to this receiving of Christ by Faith, 1.
Consider if there be not a standing Quarrel and Contraversie betwixt God and
you for Sin; and if there be, as no doubt there is, consider how that
Contraversie is to be removed, is there any other possible way but by Faith in
Christ? If we were Preaching to such as had never sinned, and were never under
the hazard of the. Wrath of God, there might possibly be a difficulty to
persuade to a receiving of Christ; But when ye have all this in your
Conscience, that there is Sin, and a Curse following Sin, and that there is no
other way for removing that Curse but by Jesus Christ, is there not reason to
expect that ye should receive this Truth? will any of you think to stand and
bide it out against God? and if not, then there is sure a necessity of
Believing in Jesus Christ, or of lying under the Wrath of God for ever.

2. Consider that this Gospel and Word of Salvation is preached to you in
particular; When we speak of Salvation, we do not say, that Christ was once
preached to the Jews, or that in such a far-off Nation there is a door opened
for Salvation in the Gospel; but we would turn over the words of the Apostle (
Acts 13.38.) to you, and say to you in his words, Be it known to you therefore,
men and brethren, that through this man (to wit Jesus Christ,) is preached to
you remission of sins, etc. and this brings the Gospel near you, even to your
door; it lays before you the way of access to God by Christ, and puts it so
closs and home to you, that Christ must either have a refusal, or a welcome
from you: The first consideration of your own Sinfulness and Misery might put
you to seek after a Savior, though he were at a great distance, but this other
brings Him to your Heart and Mouth; and is it fit (think ye) to neglect such a
fair occasion? and will it be wisdom, when Salvation follows you, and cries
after you, and Wisdom lifts up its voice in the Streets, saying, O ye simple
ones, how long will ye love foo^ishness, etc. to stop your ear, or to turn away
from Christ, and to run upon your destruction? Do ye think that this Gospel
will be silent always, or that your Conscience will be deaf and dumb always?
There are many Nations that have not the Gospel so near them; and it is hard to
know but the day may come when ye would be content to buy an offer of the
Gospel at a dearer ra^e, and when there shall not be a Tryster nor a D^ys-man
to be had between God and you, and these days will then be remembered with
horror, which now ye securely slip over:

3. Consider what will come of this if ye do not believe the Gospel; Know ye
not that many perish that hear the Gospel, and that upon this same very ground,
that they did not receive Christ and Salvation through Him offered to them
therein, and whereof they are now deprived? Are there not many this day cursing
in Hell, under the Wrath of God, that they let slip and passed over so many
golden Opportunities of the Gospel without improvement? and know ye not that it
will come to the same sad pass with you, if ye do not receive it? Do Men live
always? Is there not an appointed time for all Men upon Earth? If before we
have savingly exercised Faith on Him for making Peace with God, we be drawn to
a reckoning before His Tribunal, what will come of it? and are not our precious
Opportunites apace and always sliping by? and is not the work of Faith by
delays still the more difficult? are not our Bonds still the more strengthened?
and does not our Indisposition still grow the greater? and is it not very
ordinary to see these who have slighted the work of Faith in their Youth. to
live stupid in their old Age, and die Senseless?

4. Consider what sort of Folk they are, of whom the Scripture speaks as
Unbelievers, and whom the Word of God holds forth to be eternally secluded from
the presence of God for the want of Faith; Many think that it is but the grossly
Profane, or such as never had so much as the form of Religion, and such as
others would scunner and loath to hear them but mentioned, that it is (I say)
only such that are accounted Unbelievers; But the Scripture speaks of some that
seek to enter in and shall not be able; that desire to be in Heaven, and take
some pains to win in, and yet are never admitted to enter into it, and what is
the reason, because they took not the way of Believing for the obtaining of
Life and coming to Heaven; they took the way of Works, they took the way of
Prayer, of Purposes, Promises and Resolutions to ammend and grow better, quite
overlooking Christ and the way of Believing in Him, and so took the way of
Presumption, and promised themselves Peace when there was no true Peace, nor
any solid ground for it.

5. Consider (which is of affinity with the former Consideration) them that are
secluded from the presence of God for the want of Faith, they are even Men and
Women as we are, that lived in the same Kingdom and City with us, that prayed
in the same Company with us, that thought themselves as sure of Heaven as many
of us do, that were guilty of the same or like Sins, that we are guilty of,
that have heard many of the same Preachings that we have heard, and yet they
perish for want of Faith, for not believing in the Son of God; Why then should
we think that impossible as to us, that is so common and frequent in others? Is
not the same Nature in us that is in others, and are not our Hearts naturally as
deceitful and corrupt as those of others? and so may not we be beguiled as well
as others? And is it not the same rule that He will walk by in judging of us,
that He walked by in judging of others? What can be the reason, that Folk will
read and hear the Word, and will promise to themselves Heaven, when the same
Word clears it plainly, that Destruction is that which they have to look for
from the Lord: It is nothing else but this confident and proud Presumption that
many take for Faith. Let not your precious opportunities slip away, and beguile
not your selves in such a concerning matter as Faith is; ye will never get this
loss made up afterward if ye miss Faith here.

Lastly, Consider the great necessity that the Lo^d has laid upon all Men and
Women, by a peremptory Command and Charge, to believe in the Son of God; He
has not with greater peremptoriness required Prayer, nor dependence upon Him,
nor any other Duty, then He has required this, 1 John 3.23. And this is his
commandment, that we should believe on the Name of His Son Jesus Christ; yea
it is singled out as His main Commandment: If that great iniquiry be made, What
shall I do to be saved? this is the answer, Believe on Jesus Christ; Do ye
think that our Lord, (who has so marked and signalized this Command in so
special a manner,) will never take account for the slighting of it? or do ye
think to satisfy Him by your other Duties without minding this? It cannot be;
Suppose ye should mourn all your Lifetime, and your Life were a pattern to
others, yet if ye want this one thing, Faith in Christ, ye will be found
Transgressors, as having neglected the main work.

Now for the Question, ye will say, What this is we are bidding you do when we
bid you Believe? Answ. When we call you to Believe, we call you, 1. To be
suitably affected with the sense of your own Naughtiness, Sinfulness, and
H^za^d; Till there be something of this Faith in our Lord Jesus has no access,
nor will ever get welcome; Deep apprehensions of the Wrath that is coming, and
a standing in awe at the thoughts of our appearing before Him, contribute much
to it; I am not preaching Desperation to you, as some mutter, but we would
press upon you the Faith of the Word of God, that tells you what we are, and
liveliness under that impression, that ye may not be stopped or let till ye
come to a through closure with Christ; The most part of Hearers come never this
length, and this is the reason why many stumble in the very Threshold, and make
never Progress. 2. We call for and commend this to you, that ye would study to
be through and clear as to the Usefulness and Excellency of Jesus Christ, as to
the efficacy of His Death, as to the terms of the Covenant of Grace, whereby a
Sinner comes to obtain Right to Him; to be sensible of Sin and Hazard without
this, is only the way to make a Man desperate and mad, but when this is clear,
it makes an open door to the Sinner that he may see whither to run from the
Wrath to come; I do not only mean that ye would get the Cat^chism, and be able
to answer to all the Questions concerning the Fundamentals of Religion
contained therein, but that ye would also and mainly seek to have the Faith of
these things in your H^arts, and to have Faith in God, that ye may be
persuaded, that He that was, and is God, died for Sinners, and that by the
application of His Satisfaction, Sinners may obtain Life, and that there is a
sufficient Warrant given to a Sinner to hazard himself upon Him. The first of
these speaks the necessity of some Sense, the second holds out the necessity of
a general Faith, according to that word, Heb. 11. He that comes to God, must
believe that He is, and that He is a rewarder of them that diligently seek Him;
We must know that there is a Warrant to come, and ground to expect Acceptance
from God upon our coming, or else we will never come to, nor believe in Christ.
The third thing that we call you to, when we call you to Believe, is, That the
Sinner would actually stretch out that Faith, as the Souls Hand for the
receiving of Christ, and for the Application of Him to himself, and would
actually cast himself upon the Satisfaction of Jesus Christ for covering that
Sinfulness that is in him, and would catch hold of, and grip to Him that is an
able Savior, for keeping the Sinner from sinking under the weight of Sin that
he lies under; This is the Exercise and Practice of Faith when it flows from
the general Doctrine of the necessity of believing such things to be Truths in
themselves, and when it is extended and put forth in Practice, that we who are
so certainly and sensibly lost, must needs share of that Salvation which we
believe to be in Jesus Christ, and so for that, roll our selves on Him; The
first piece of Sense may be in a Reprobate, the second piece of Faith, that
there is a sufficient Salvation in Christ to be gotten by them that believe in
Him, may be in a Devil; But this third of actual use-making of the Satisfaction
of Christ, for paying our Debt, and rolling our selves upon Him, that is the
Faith and Exercise of it that is peculiar to a sound Believer, and the very
thing that constitutes a Believer, and it is that which we commend to you, that
ye may not stand and please your selves with looking only upon Christ, but that
ye may cast and roll your selves over upon Him, that Christ may get your
Weight, and that all your Burdens and Wants may be upon Him, which to do ye
must be enabled by the mighty Power of Grace, whereof in the next part of the
Verse.

The second Branch of the Use which follows upon this, is, That we would desire
you not only to follow this way of making your Peace with God, but to follow
the trying and proving of it to your own satisfaction, that ye may be
warrantably confident that it is so: There is a great difference betwixt these,
to believe in Christ, and to be clear and certain that we do believe in Him; As
there is a necessity of the first, without which there cannot be Peace with
God, so there is a necessity of the second, though not simply, as without which
there can be no Peace with God, yet upon this account, as without which we
cannot be so comforted in God; And seeing there are so many who do not Believe,
who yet think themselves to be Believers, and seeing there is nothing more
common among the Hearers of the Gospel, then to reject Christ offered in it,
and to Misbelieve, and yet nothing more common then to be confident that they
do Believe; There is good ground here to exhort you to put your Faith to the
Touchstone, that ye may know whether ye can abide the Trial, and whether ye
may confidently assert your own Faith upon good ground, and abide by it: We
would think if it were remembered, and seriously considered, how great a
scarcety there is of Believers, and how rare a thing it is to get any to
receive Christ, that Folk needed not be much pressed to put their Faith to the
Trial; and when there will not be one among many found who will pass under the
account of a real Believer with Jesus Christ, should not the most part suspect
themselves, seeing the most part that hear the Gospel are the object of this
Complaint, Who has believed our report? or very few have believed it; ye would
study to have some well grounded confidence in this, that ye are not guessing
and presuming, and going upon grounds that will fail you at last, but that ye
be in case to say on solid grounds with the Apostle, I know whom I have
believed, etc. There is a Faith and Hope that will make many ashamed; and
certainly, in the day of Judgment, when Christ shall have to do with these
Persons, that never once thought to be thrust away from Him, they of all Men
shall be thrust away from Him with greatest Shame; O! the confusion that will
fill and overwhelm them who had a profession of Christ, and yet had never the
root of the matter in them above and beyond many others: Dare many of you, upon
the confidence ye have, look Death in the Face? It Is no great matter to be
confident in the time of Health; but will ye then be able to comfort your
selves in the Promises of God? do not promise to your selves the things in the
Covenant, except ye be endeavoring in God's way to be sure ye are Believers
indeed. Our Life depends upon our Faith, but our Consolation depends much upon
our clearness that we have Faith, and that we are in Christ, and therefore
there is much need to press this upon you; There is no way to rid you of the
Terrors of God, and to make you comfortably sure of your particular Interest
in the Promises of God, but by making it sure and clear that ye are Believers
in Christ indeed.

There are three or four sorts of People to whom we would speak a little here.
1. There are some who think that if they could do other Duties, though they
should never do this, to wit, to make their Calling and Election sure, they
would be and do well enough; Are there not many of you that never so much as
set your selves to try whether your Faith would abide God's trial or not? Ah!
Ah! an atheistical Indifferency, a slighting of the Consolations of God,
abounds amongst many, so that they think the Promises and the Consolation
that is to be gotten in the Promises, are not of so much worth, as to be
thereby put to take pains to try and see whether they belong to them or not;
but the Day will come that many of you will curse your selves for your
neglecting and slighting of this. A second sort are these, who because they
were never sure of Peace with God themselves, and because they were never sure
of their own Faith, neither ever concernedly endeavored to be, they think it is
all but fancy that is spoken of assurance of Faith, and of Peace with God, they
think it is but guessing at the best; There is such a sort of Persons, who think
they may be doing as they dow, and need not trouble themselves with such
fancies or nice things, but if ye ask them what will come of them at last? they
will tell you, they will lippen that to God: Think ye it for naught that God
has laid so many Commands on you to make your Calling and Election sure? and
think ye it for naught that He has given so many Marks to try it by? and that
some of the People of God do holily and humbly glory and boast so much of their
Communion with God out of their assurance of His love to them, and of their
special interest in Him? do not all these say that there is such a thing as
this to be had? There is a third sort that please themselves with mere
conjectures about this Matter, and the greater their Security be, they persuade
themselves the more that they have Faith; This is as sad as any of the former,
when they grant all, that Folks should make their Calling and Election sure,
and should endeavor to be sure of their Faith, but in the mean time take Peace
with the Devil, and Peace with their Lusts for Peace with God, and a Covenant
with Hell and Death, for a real Bargain with God: This is as true as this Word
of God is, that there are many that put by all Challenges by this, and never
suspect their Faith, they hope that all shall be well, and they must always
Believe; as if that were the whole Duty of Faith to keep down all Challenges. A
fourth sort is, even of the generation of them that have some thing of God in
them, who scar in a manner to make all sure, and think it is a piece of
Humility. and of holy and tender walking to maintain Doub^ing, even as others
think it Faith to ma^^tain Presumption; They are always complaining, as if all
things were wrong, and nothing right in their Case and so foster and cherish
Misbelief; There is such a thing as this, that marreth even serious Souls in
their endeavors to make their Calling and Election sure, and as long as this
is, they cannot win to the suitable discovery of this excellent Grace that God
calls them to Exercise, even Faith in the Lord Jesus: Need we make use of
Motives to press you to this trial of your Faith, and to this giving of all
diligence to make it sure, who have especially hitherto neglected it? If ye
knew any thing of the vexation that Unbelief has with it, and what horror in
Conscience from the sense of distance from God were, ye would think it a great
matter to be clear in this thing; and if it were known and believed how this
delusion and unsickerness of Faith destroys the most part of Men in the World,
even of the visible Church; Durst Men ly in their Security as most do, without
all endeavors to make it sure on good ground, that they do indeed Believe?
Durst they ly still under God's Curse, if they thought themselves to be really
under it, and did not foolishly fancy that it is otherways with them? Durst Men
treasure up Wrath to themselves, if they thought not that the Hope they had
were good enough? O! but Presumption beguiles and destroys many Souls; and
particularly this same Presumption of Folks thinking themselves right when they
are wrong, has destroyed, and does destroy, and will destroy more Members of
the visible Church, then Prophanity, Drunkenness, Whoredom, Theft, Desperation,
or any other of these gross, and much abhorred Evils do; This is the thing that
locks Folk up in their Sin, even their Presumption, when they say on the
matter, We shall have peace though we walk in the imagination of our own heart?
It Is this that makes Men without fear, Steal, and Lie, and commit Adultery,
etc. that they say, Is not the Lord among us? Is not this the thing that keeps
many of you that ye never tremble at the Word of God? we have Faith in God (say
ye,) we lippen and trust in Him; therefore seeing Presumption is so rife, have
ye not need to try your Faith? If there were so much counterfeit Money in the
Country, that it were a rare thing to get one good and upright piece of Money,
ye would think your selves greatly concerned and obliged to try it well, lest
ye were cheated with base and counterfeit Coin; Is there not need then, yea
infinitely much more need for them that would be so wise as not to be beguiled
about the salvation of their Souls, to search and try whether their Faith will
abide God's trial or not?

Ye will readily move this Question, What then are the Characters or Evidences
of a solid and sicker Faith that will abide the trial, by which the pretended.
Faith that is among the Men of this Generation may be examined and put to just
trial?

I shall first name some direct Scriptures holding out somethings essentially
accompanying Faith, and then shall add others having more condescending
Characters for the more particular differencing of this, helping to the
decision of this great Question.

The first Mark whereby ye may try your Faith is, The ground and rise of it, or
that whereby it is begotten and cherished; Faith comes (says the Apostle, Romans
10.10. by hearing; Doctrinal Faith comes by the preaching of the Gospel, and
Saving Faith is wrought instrumentally by the same Word of God, it being the
power of God to salvation; it being this Word that is the very ground of our
Faith; I would ask you where from your Faith comes, and what hand the Word of
God has in it? There are many that have a sort of Faith not only without, but
contrary to the Word of God, whereby they believe that they will get Heaven,
while in the mean time the Word of God does directly exclude them, Get ye your
Faith maintained without ever knowing the necessity of a Promise for that
effect? Can ye maintain your Peace and not have so much as any foundation in
the truth and faithfulness of God to build it upon? Love never that Faith that
hungers not after the Word, that is supposed to be lively without being ever
fed by the Word, that cannot claim either its rise and original, or its growth
from the Word; I will not say from this or that word in particular, or at this
or that time read or heard, but from the Word of God; the Word is the very
foundation that Faith builds upon: If we look to what either accompanies or
follows Faith, there are some plain Scriptures that will make that clear, as
Acts 15.9. and put no difference between us and them purifying their hearts by
faith, (there was indeed once a great difference between Jews and Gentiles, but
now when he has brought both to believe in Christ, the difference is removed,)
There is an efficacy in it to circumcise the Heart, to purify it, and to
banish Lusts out of it, for it closes and unites with Christ, and so brings him
home to dwell in the Heart, and where Christ dwells He commands, and so
whatever opposes Him is banished; Faith gives Christ welcome, and will give
nothing welcome to dwell with Him that is opposite and displeasing to Him, Faith
improves Christ for the subduing of its Lusts and mortifying its Corruptions;
whereas before there might be an fair outside of a Profession, and something
clean outwardly, and much filthiness and rottenness within, but when Faith is
exercised on Christ, it purifies from all filthiness of the Spirit as well as
of the Flesh, it applys the Promises for that end, even to get the inside made
clean as well as the outside; yea, its main work is, to have the inside, the
Heart purified, that being the fountain of all the pollution that defiles the
Man, and brings the other necessarily along with it; never love that Faith that
leaves the Heart as a Swines-sty to Lusts, that leaves it swarming with unclean
and vain Thoughts, or that leaves the Heart just as it was before; or that
Faith that only cleanses the outside and does no more; such a Faith, however
esteemed by the Man, will never be accounted for true Saving Faith before God;
I do not, I dare not say that Believers will always discern this heart-purity
or cleanness; but this I say, that true Faith will set the Man a work to purify
the Heart, and will be making use of Christ for that end, not only to have the
arm of the dominion of Sin broken, but to have the Soul more and more delivered
from the indwelling power of it, and this will the design that he will
sincerely drive, to get the Heart purified within as well as the outward Man;
inward Heart-abominations will be grievous and burdensome to him as well as
scandalous out-breakings.

A second place is, Gal. 2.20, 21. I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I
live, yet not I but Christ lives in me, and the life, etc If ye would know a
Companion of true Faith here is one, it has a life of Faith with it; There is
one life killed, and another life is quickened, the life that is killed is that
whereby the Man sometime lived to the Law, I am dead to the Law (says the
Apostle,) a Man's good conceit of himself, that once he had is killed and taken
away, he wonders how it came that he thought himself Holy, or a Believer, or
how he could promise to himself Heaven in the condition he was in; There is
another life comes in the place of that, and it is a life that is quickened and
maintained by, and from nothing in the Man himself, but it is wholly from and by
Christ; The Believer has his holiness and strength for doing all called for
Duties, and his comfort also from Christ. and he holds withal his very Natural
Life, his present Being in the World from Christ. his all is in Christ; his
stock of life, strength and furniture is not in himself, but he lives by a
continual Traffic, as it were on Bills of Exchange betwixt Christ and him;
when he wants, he sends a Bill to Christ, and it is answered in every thing that
he stands in need of, and that is good for him; He is a dead Man, and he is a
living Man, and wherever true Faith is, there the Man is dead and there the
Man is living; Do not I pray mistake it, by thinking that true Faith is but
vented, puts forth it self only in reference to this or that particular, or at
this or that particular time only, for Faith must be exercised not only at
starts, as when when we are under Challenges for Sin, or at Prayer, but we must
design and endeavor to exercise Faith through all our Life; that is, we must by
Faith look for every thing that is useful and needful for us from Christ, and
be always endeavoring to drive on a common Trade of living this way; we must
be habituating our selves to seek after Peace, Strength and Consolation, and
what else we need, out of the fullness that is in Him; This Life of Faith is to
see the want of all things in our selves, and yet to have all things by making
use of Christ in all things; contenting and comforting our selves that there is
Strength in Him though we be weak in our selves, and that He has gotten the
victory over all His and our Enemies, and that we shall at last through Him, be
victorious in our own Persons, contenting and satisfying our selves that He
has complete Righteousness, though we be Bankrupt and have none of our own,
and betaking our selves allenarly to that Righteousness for our Justification
before God; Thus making a Life to our selves in Him, He living in us by His
Spirit, and we living in Him by Faith? O sweet and desirable but mysteriou^
Life!

The third place is Gal. 5.6. In Christ Jesus, neither circumsion avails any
thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith that works by love; He does not simply
say Faith, but faith that works by love; for Faith is an operative Grace, and
this is the main vent of it, the thing by which it works, it works by Love;
Faith is the hand of the new Creature, whereby every thing is wrought, it
having Life from Christ, and we may say that Love is in a manner the hand of
Faith, or rather like the fingers upon the hand of Faith, whereby it handles
every thing tenderly, even out of love to God in Christ, and to others for His
sake; Faith works, and it works by Love; that is a sound and good Faith that
warms the Heart with love to Christ, and the nearer that Faith brings the
Believer to Him, it warms the Heart with more love to others; And therefore
love to the People of God is given as an evidence of one that is born of God, 1 John 5.1. because, wherever true Faith is, there cannot but be love to the
Children of God flowing from love to Him that begets them; That Faith that is
not affected with God's dishonor out of love to Him, and that can endure to
look upon the Difficulties, Sufferings and Afflictions of the Children of God,
without sympathizing and being kindly affected therewith, is not to be taken
for a sound Faith, but to be suspected for a Counterfeit.

The fourth place is James 2 14. Show me thy says by thy works, etc. True
Faith has always sound Holiness with it, in all manner of Conversation in the
design and endeavor of the Believer, which is withal through Grace in some
measure attained; What avails it for a Man to say that he loves another, when
being naked or destitute, he bid^ him depart in Peace, be warmed, be filled,
and yet in the mean time gives him nothing that he stands in need of, would not
such a poor Man think himself but mocked? Even so, will not God reckon you to
be but Mock-believers, or Mockers of Faith when ye profess your selves to be
Believers in Christ, while in the mean time ye have neither indeed
Heart-purity, nor Holiness in your outside Conversation? that is but such a
Faith as Devils may have that will never do you good: Ye would believe this for
a truth, that there will never a Faith pass for Faith in God's account, and so
there should never a Faith pass for Faith in your account, but that Faith that
sets the Man a work to the study of Holiness; that Faith that works by Love,
that Faith that purifies the Heart, and that Faith that puts the Person in whom
it is, to study to have Christ living in him, and himself living in Christ.

I promised to name a few Scriptures that speak out some more condescending
Characters of Faith. And 1. I would think it a good token of Faith, to have
Folk feared for missing and falling short of the Promises, which may be
gathered from Heb. 4.1. that stout confidence that thinks it is impossible to
miss the Promises, is a suspect and dangerous Faith, not to be loved; it is a
much better Faith that fears, then that Faith that is more stout, except there
be a sweet mixture of holy stoutness and fear together; It Is said Heb. 11.7.
that by Faith Noah being moved with fear, prepared an Ark, etc. Noah had the
Faith of God's Promise, that he should be kept free from being drowned by the
Deluge with the rest of the World, and yet he was mourning and trembling in
preparing the Ark; If there were much Faith among you, it would make many of
you more holily feared then ye are; Love not that Faith the worse that ye never
hear a threatening but ye tremble at it, and are touched by it in the quick. 2.
It Is a good token of Saving Faith, when it has a discovery and holy suspicion
of Unbelief wairing on it, so that the Person dare not so lippen and trust his
own Faith, as not to dread Unbelief, and to tell Christ of it; There is a poor
Man that comes to Christ, Mat. 9.23, 24. to whom the Lord faith, If thou can
believe, or can thou believe? yes Lord (says he) I believe, help thou mine
unbelief; there was some Faith in him, but there was also Unbelief mixed with
it; his Unbelief was so great that it was almost like to drown his Faith, but
he puts it in Christ's hand, and will neither deny his Faith nor his Unbelief,
but puts the matter sincerely over upon Christ, to strengthen his Faith, and to
amend and help his Unbelief; It Is a suspect Faith that is at the top of
Perfection at the very first, and ere ever ye wot; There are some serious
Souls, that think because they have some Unbelief, that therefore they have no
Faith at all, but true Faith is such a Faith that is by and beside suspected
and feared or seen Unbelief; That Faith is surest where Folk fear and suspect
Unbelief, and see it, and when they are weighted with their Unbelief, and cry
out under it, and make their Unbelief an errand to Christ, it is a token there
is Faith there. 3. The third Character is, That it will have with it a sticking
to Christ, and a fear to presume in sticking to Him; There will be two things
striving together, an eagerness to be at Him, and a fear that they be found
presumptuous in meddling with Him, and an holy trembling to think on it; yet
notwithstanding it must and will be adventured upon; the Woman spoken of Mark
5.28. lays this reckoning with her self, If I can but touch his clothes I
shall be whole; and she not only believes this to be truth, but crowds and
thrimbles in to be at him, yet verse. 33. when she comes before Christ, she
trembles as if she had been taken in a fault, not having dared to come openly
to Him, but behind him, she behoved to have a touch of him, but she durst not
in a manner own and avouch her doing of it till she be unavoidably put to it;
It Is a suspect and unsound Faith that never trembled at minting to Believe;
there is reason to be jealous that Faith not to be of the right stamp, that
never walked under the impression of the great distance between Christ and the
Person, the sense whereof is the thing that makes the trembling, I say not
desperation, nor any utter distrust of Christ's kindness, but trembling arising
from the consideration of the great distance and disproportion that is between
Him and the Person; Faith holds the Sinner a going to Christ, and the sense of
its own sinfulness and worthlesness keeps him under holy fear and in the
exercise of Humility; Paul once thought himself a jolly man, (as we may see
Romans 7.9.) but when he was brought to believe in Christ, he sees that he was a
dead and undone man before: I give you these three marks of a true Faith from
that Chapter. 1. It discovers to a Man his former Sinfulness, and particularly
his former Self-conceit, Pride and Presumption, I was, says Paul, alive
without the Law once, etc. a man living upon the thoughts of his own Holiness,
but when the Law came I died; he fell quite from these high thoughts. A second
Mark is, A greater restlesness of the Body of Death, it becoming in some
respect worse Company, more fretful, and struggling more then ever it did
before; Sin revived says Paul, though he had no more Corruption in him then he
had before, but it wakened and bestirred it self more; I dare say that though
there be not so much Corruption in a Believer as there is in a natural Man, yet
it strugleth much more, and is more painful and disquieting to the Believer,
and breeds him a great dale more trouble, for says the Apostle on the matter,
when God graciously poured Light and Life into me, Sin took that occasion to
grow angry, and to be enraged that such a neighbor was brought in beside it,
it could not endure that; as an unruly and currish Dog barks most bitterly when
an honest Guest comes to the House, so does Corruption bark and make more noise
then it did before when Grace takes place in the Soul: There are some that trow
they have the more Faith because they feel no Corruption stir in them, and
there are others that think they have no Faith at all, because they feel
Corruption str^gling more, and growing more troublesome to them; but the
stirring and struggling of Corruption, if Folk be indeed burdened, and affected,
and afflicted with it, will rather prove their having of Faith then their
wanting of it; Love that Faith well that puts and keeps Folk bickerring (to say
so) in the Fight with the Body of Death; for though this be not good in it self
that Corruption stirs, yet Sin is of that sinful nature, that it flies
always more in their face that look God and Heavenwards, then of others that
are sleeping securely under its Dominion. A third Mark is, When the Soul has
never Peace in any of its Conflicts or Combats with Corruption, but when it
resolves in Faith exercised on Jesus Christ, as it was with Paul, in that
Chapter after his Conversion; That is a sound Faith that only makes Peace at
first by Christ, but that cannot (to say so) fight one fair stroke in the
Spiritual Warfare, nor look Corruption in the face, nor promise to it self an
outgate from any assault of the Enemy, but by Faith in Jesus Christ, as it was
with the Apostle, who toward the end of that Chapter, lamentably cries, O!
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? yet
immediately subjoyns Faiths triumphing in Christ, I thank God through Jesus
Christ our Lord; he, belike, before his Conversion thought he could do well
enough all alone, but it is not so now, when he can do nothing without Christ,
especially in this sore War with his Corruption; That is a sound Faith that
makes the Sinner to make use of Christ in every thing he is called to, that
yoaks him (I mean Christ) to work on every occasion, and particularly when it
comes as it were to grapling and hand blows with this formidable Enemy the Body
of Death this Monster, whereof when one H^a^ is cut off, another as it were
starts up in its place.

For a close of this Purpose, I be^eech and obtest such of you as are strangers
to Saving Faith (who are I fear far the greatest part,) to consider seriously
all I have spoken of the nature and native evidences of it, that you may be
undeceived of your Soul-ruining Mistakes about it; and let sincere and sound
Believers, from a^l, be more cleared, confirmed, and comforted in their Faith.

SERMON XIII.
ISAIAH LIII.I. -- And to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?


THere are many mistakes in the way of Religion, wherewith the most part are
poss^ssed, and amongst the rest there is one, that generally the Hearers of the
Gospel think it so easy to Believe, that there is no difficulty in that by any
thing; they think it hard to Pray, to keep the Sab^ath, to be Holy, but the
most part think there is no difficulty in Believing, and yet Unbelief is so
rife, and Faith so rare and difficult, that the Prophet Isaiah here in his own
name, and in name of all the Ministers of the Gospel cries out, Lord who has
believed our report? he complains that he could get but very few to take the
Word off his hand; and because it weighted him to find it so, and because he
would fain have it to take impression on his Hearers, he doubles expressions to
the same purpose, and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? which in sum is,
there is much Preaching and many Hearers of the Gospel, but little believing of
it, few in whose Heart the work of Faith is wrought; It Is but here one and
there one that this Gospel has efficacy upon, for uniting of them to Jesus
Christ, and for working a work of Saving Grace in them; the effectual working
of God's Grace reaches the Hearts but of a few.

For opening the words, we shall speak a little to these three. 1. To what is
meant by the Arm of the Lord. 2. To what is meant by the revealing of the Arm
of the Lord. 3. To the scope and dependence of these words on the former.

For the first, In general know, the Arm of the Lord is no to be understood
properly; the Lord being a Spirit. has no Arms, Hands, nor Feet as Men have;
But it is to be understood figuratively, as holding out some Property or
Attribute of God; By the Arm of the Lord then we understand in general the
Power of God, the Arm of Man being that whereby He exerceth His Power,
performs Exploits, or does any Work: So the Arm of the Lord is His Power
whereby He produces His Mighty Acts; as it is said in the Psalms, The right
hand of the Lord has done valiantly, His hand and his arm has got him the
victory; and because the Power of God is taken either more generally for that
which is exerced in the Works of common Providence, or more particul^rly for
that which is put forth in the Work of Saving Grace; We t^ke it here in short
to be the Grace of God exercing its Power in and by the Gospel, for the
converting of Souls, and causing them savingly to Believe, so Romans 1.16. I am
not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God to salvation to
every one that believes; not simply as it consists in speaking of good, sweet,
and seasonable words, but as it comes backed by the irresistible Power of the
Grace of God, as the word is, 1 Cor. 1.23, 24. We preach Christ to the Jews a
stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness but unto them who are called
both Jews and Greeks, the power of God and the wisdom of God; and that it is so
to be taken here, the con^^^^ion of these words with the former will make it
clear, for sure he is not speaking of the Power of God in the works of common
Providence, but of His Power in the conversion of Souls to Christ, even of that
Power which works Saving Faith in the Elect.

For the second, The revealing of the Arm of the Lord, By this we do not
understand the revealing of it objectively as it is brought to light by the
preaching of the Gospel, for thus it is revealed to all the Hearers of the
Gospel, it is in this respect not kept hid, but brought forth clearly to them
in the Word: And therefore secondly, The revealing of this Arm or Power of the
Lord, is to be understood of the subjective inward manif^sting of it, with
efficacy and life to the Heart, by the effectual operation of the Spirit of the
Lord; as it is said of the great things prepared for them that love God, 1 Cor.
2.10. But God has revealed them unto us by his Spirit; it is that which is
called 1 Cor. 2. the demonstration of the spirit and of power, which makes
plain and powerful to the spirit of the Hearer inwardly that which the Word
preaches outwardly to the Ear, which without this would strick only on the
Ear, and yet remain still an hidden Mystery; This is the revealing of the
Lord's Arm that is here spoken of, because it is that on which Believing
depends and of the want whereof the Prophet sadly complains, even where
there was much Preaching.

For the third, to wit, the Scope, Dependence, and connection of these words
with the former, We conceive they come in, both for Confirmation and for
Explication of the former words. 1. For Confirmation, There are (as has been
said) but few that Believe, for there are but few that have this saving and
effectual work of God's Grace re^ching their Heart; though they have the Word
preached to them, yet they have not the Arm of the Power of God's Grace
manifested to them, and so He confirms His former Doctrine concerning the
paucity of Believers under the preaching of the Gospel. First, By asserting the
fewness of them that are brought to Believe, to be converted, and effectually
called by the Gospel; which comes to pass through their own Unbelief: And
Secondly, By asserting their fewness in respect of God's sovereign applying of
His Grace in the Gospel, which is but to few; it is but few that Believe, for
it is but few that He makes effectual application of His Grace to. 2. We say it
comes in to clear and explicate the former words, whether we take it by way of
a Reason, or of an answer to an Objection; For if it be said, how can it be
that Isaiah, Paul, yea, and our Lord Jesus Christ himself, should preach so
powerfully, and yet that so few should Believe? he answers, it is not to be
marvelled at, in respect of God as if he were frustrate of his design, no such
matter; It Is because the Power of Jesus Christ is revealed but to few; and we
take this the rather to be the meaning of these words, because when Christ is
preaching and many take offense and stumble, Joh. 6.43, 44. he says, Murmr
not among your selves, no man can come to me, except the Father which has sent
me, draw him; there must be an effectual work of the Grace of God put forth on
the Heart, else none will believe on me: So its said Joh. 12.37, 38. that they
believed not on Him, that the saying of Isaias might be fulfilled which he
spoke, Lord who has believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed? therefore they could not believe, because that Isaias said again, He
has blinded their eyes, etc. he speaks not so, to appologize for, or to
excuse their Unbelief, but to show the connection that is betwixt these two, the
not revealing of the Arm of the Lord, and their not Believing; even so here,
the Lord shows the connection that is betwixt the efficacy of the work of Grace,
and believing or turning to God, that where the powerful and effectual work of
His Grace goes not forth with the preached Gospel, there will be then no
believing nor conversion, no saving change of the Person from Nature to Grace.

That which we would say from these words, may be drawn to three Doctrines,
which I shall first propose, and then clear and apply them for use. The first
is, That in the work of Conversion and begetting of Saving Faith, there is
requisite and necessary, beside the preaching of the Word, a distinct, inward,
peculiar, real, immediate, efficacious, and powerful work of the Spirit of the
Lord on the Hearts of as many Hearers as are converted by this Gospel. 2. That
it is but few of many Hearers in whom the Lord thus efficaciously and
effectually works by His Spirit and the Power of His Grace, it is but here one
and there one, a very few who are thus wrought upon and converted. 3. That
there is a necessary and inseparable connection betwixt this inward and
efficacious work of the Spirit, and Faith or Conversion; Where this work of
Grace is not, there cannot be Faith, and where it is, Faith necessarily must
be, otherways these two could not be commensurable of equal extent and
reciprocal, Who has believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed? He is not, neither can be a Believer to whom it is not revealed, and
he is, and cannot but be a Believer to whom it is revealed.

For the first, We say there is in the work of Conversion, and begetting of
Faith, beside the preaching of the Gospel, a distinct, inward, peculiar, real,
immediate, efficacious, and powerful work of the Spirit of the Lord requisite
and necessary for Conversion and begetting of Faith, to convince of Sin, and to
humble for it, to enlighten the Mind in the Knowledge of Christ, to renew the
Will and Affections, and to persuade and enable the Soul of the Sinner to
embrace and receive Jesus Christ as He is offered in the Gospel. We shall first
take notice of, and clear some words in the Doctrine, and then confirm it.

First, For clearing of some words in the Doctrine, we say, 1. It is a distinct
work of the Spirit, distinguished and separable from the Word; though it goes
along as He pleases with the Word, yet it is not as if there were some Power
infused into the Word, and went always and necessarily along with the Word,
which is the foolish and groundless conceit of some, for albeit it accompany
the Word, yet it is from a distinct Agent, working, and a distinct work, and is
separable (as I said) from the Word, though it be wrought on the Heart of the
same Sinner to whose Ear the Word is preached. 2. It Is an inward work of the
Spirit, for beside the outward and external preaching and calling by the Word,
there is an inward, powerful, effectual work and calling of the Spirit in the
conversion of a Sinner, which speaks to the Heart, as well as the Word speaks
to the Ear; so that this work of the Spirit that goes along in Conversion, is
much more then any external persuasion of the preached Word can produce. 3. We
say it is a peculiar work, to difference it from what is common to the Hearers
of the Gospel, for it is a work that is peculiar to them whom the Lord converts,
and is applied to none other, but to those in whom He works Faith, and whom He
effectually calls by His Grace; It Is a peculiar work then and not common, for
if it were common to all the Hearers of the Gospel, and not peculiar to some,
these two could not go together and be commensurable (as we said) Who has
believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? 4. We say
it is a real work as well as powerful; A real work of the Spirit, that is not
only able and powerful to produce the effect, and to convert the Sinner, but
real and powerful in producing and bringing of it about, and to pass by a real
influence of the Spirit, actually renewing the Will, infusing and creating the
habits of Grace, and particularly the very habit of Faith amongst others in the
Soul; which is quite an other thing then the supposing and saying that a Man
has power to Believe and be Converted, that there is no more requisite to his
Conversion, but to persuade him to put forth that Power or Strength which he
has into Exercise or Practice; It Is a real work of the Spirit, and a powerful
bringing about of the conversion of the Sinner in a physical way, as they say
in the School. 5. We say it is an immediate work of the Spirit on the Heart, to
difference it from a mediate persuasion, or moral swasion (as it is called) as
if there were no more requisite in Conversion but God's enlightening of the
Mind, and by that persuading the Will to close with Jesus Christ, without any
immediate work of the Spirit on the Will it self; In this Doctrine, we take in
all these according to the Scripture, in opposition to the several Errors
vented by Men of corrupt Minds, anent the work of Conversion and of Saving
Faith; God's Arm and Hand must be revealed, the work and power of His
efficacious Grace must be put forth, for moving and enclining the Heart and
Affections, and for determining the Will it self.

We might farther clear and confirm all these from that famous instance of
Lydia, Act. 16.14. where Paul preaching to some Women, it is said of her, Whose
heart the Lord opened, that she attended to the things which were spoken of
Paul, where we find these things differenced. 1. The Lord's powerful work on
her heart from Paul's preaching to her Ear, the Lord opened her Heart. 2. It Is
an inward work, for it is on the Heart. 3. It Is a peculiar work, it is not all
who hear Paul preach whose Hearts are opened, but it is the Heart of one Lydia.
4. It Is in the nature of it a real work, that makes a real inward change on
her. 5. It Is an immediate work, for the Lord not only enlightens her Judgment,
but goes down to the Heart and opens it, and works a change in it immediately;
Paul indeed by his preaching opens the way of Salvation to all that heard him,
from which, though many go away with their Hearts unopened, yet the Lord has a
secret, mysterious, real, inward work on her Heart, which is evidenced by the
effect, for He not only enlightens her Mind, but makes her willingly yield to
the call of the Gospel, by opening of her Heart.

In the second place, To speak a little for confirmation of the Doctrine, we
would consider these four or five Grounds or Reasons, to show that there is
such a work of the Spirit wherever Faith is begotten, and that most
intelligibly in them that are at Age. 1. It Is clear from these places of
Scripture, where there is an express distinction and difference put betwixt the
outward Ministry of the Word, and this inward, powerful, efficacious work of
Grace on the Heart, and wherein the great weight of Conversion is laid on this
inward work and not on the outward Ministry of the Word; as Deuteronomy 29.4. where
the Lord by Moses tells the People how many things they had seen and heard, and
yet says he, The Lord has not given you a heart to perceive, and eyes to see,
and ears to hear, unto this day; They had the outward Means in plenty, when
they wanted in the mean time the inward Power; The gift of a spiritual Life,
and the making them spiritually active to exerce it, was withheld, and
therefore they did not savingly perceive, see, nor ^ear; Joh. 6.44. Murmr not
among your selves, no man can come to me except the Father which has sent me
draw him; It Is written in the Prophets, and they shall be all taught of God,
every man therefore that has heard and learned of the Father comes unto me;
where there is very clearly a distinction put betwixt the outward teaching and
the Father's drawing, betwixt the Ministers teaching and God's teaching; It was
one thing to be taught outwardly by Christ as the Prophet of His Church, and
another thing to be drawn and taught inwardly of the Father; This inward
teaching is called drawing, to show that it is not external Oratory or
Eloquence consisting in words, to persuade, that can effect the business, but a
powerful draught of the Arm of the Lord reaching the Heart: There are several
other Scriptures full and clear to this purpose, as Psalm. 110.3. and Acts
11.21. A second Ground, of kin to the former, Is from the many and various
expressions that are used in the Scriptures for holding forth this work of the
Spirit of God in Conversion, that point out, not only an Hand working, and an
work wrought; but an inward powerful way of working and bringing about the
wo^k, as Je^. 31.34. I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in
their hearts: Ezekiel. 11.19. I will give them one heart, I will put a new spirit
within them, and will take away the stony heart out of their flesh: Ezekiel. 36.26
27. A new heart will I give unto you, and a new spirit will I put within you,
etc. Jer. 32.40. I will put my fear in their heart, that they shall not depart
from me; It Is called the Father's drawing, John 6.44. as I show. In the Saints
Prayers (as Psalm. 51.) it is called even as to further degrees of this work, or
restoring of lost degrees, creating of a clean heart, and renewing a right
spirit within; And many more the like expressions there are, which show not only
Man's impotency and inability to convert or savingly to change himself; but also
that to his Conversion there is necessary, an inward, real, peculiar,
efficacious, powerful work of the Spirit of Grace. 3. It Is clear, and may be
confirmed from the Power of God which He puts forth and applys in the begetting
of Faith and in working Conversion; It Is not a mediate work whereby He only
persuades congruously, as some love to speak, but an immediate and efficacious
work, whereby with mighty Power He works Conversion, It is God (says the
Apostle, Phil. 2 13.) that works in you both to will and to do of his good
pleasure; and as he not only persuades but effectually works, so he not only
works on the Judgment to the enlightening of it, but on the Will, to incline and
determine it, by curing it of its crookedness and perverseness, backwardness,
obstinacy, and rebellion; and the Power whereby He works this great work is
said, Ephesians. 1.19. To be that same mighty power which he wrought in Christ when
he raised him from the dead, that ye may know says the Apostle, what is the
exceeding greatness of his power to usward who believe, according to the
working of his mighty power which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from
the dead and set him at his own right hand, etc. It is such a Power that works
Faith, and so exercised in the working of Faith, as it was in the raising of
Christ from the Dead; Now, could there be use for such a Power, if there were
no more requisite to Conversion but an objective swasion, or a bare proposal of
the object with external persuasion to embrace it, wherein the Soul is left to
it self to choice or refuse as it pleases? certainly if there were no more,
considering our natural enmity at God and His Grace, the Devil and Corruption
would have much more influence, and a far greater stroke upon the Heart to
closing up of the same in Unbelief, then any outward persuasion would have as
to the opening of the Heart, and the begetting of Faith; therefore His Power is
necessarily called for, and the Lord adds it in converting Sinners, else the
work would for ever ly behind; and if Men be sp^ritually dead in Sins and
Trespasses, (as all Men by Nature are) as real a Power must be exerced in
raising and quickening of them, as there is exerced in raising and quickening
of the Dead. 4. It may also be cleared from some in whom this Power is exerced,
as some Children, some deaf Persons, and others, whom we cannot deny to be
reached by the Grace of God, and yet there can be no other way how they are
reached but by this effectual, efficacious, and immediate powerful work of the
Spirit, they not being capable of reasoning or persuasion by force of Argument.

We shall only add two Reasons further, to confirm and some-way to clear why it
is that the Lord works, and must work thus distinctly, inwardly, really,
powerfully, and immediately in working Faith and converting of Sinners: The
first is drawn from the exceeding great deadness, indisposition, averness,
perverseness, impotency, inability, and impossibility that is in us naturally
for the exercising of Faith in Christ; If Men naturally be dead in Sins and
Trespasses, if the Mind be blind, if the Affections be quite disordered, and if
the Will be utterly corrupted and perverted; then that which converts, and
changes and renues them, must be a real inward, peculiar, immediate, powerful
work of the Spirit of God; there being no inward seed of the Grace of God in
them to be quickened, that seed must be communicate to them, and sown in them
ere they can believe, which can be done by no less nor lower Power then this
Power of God's Grace; It Is not Oratory as I said, nor excellency of Speech that
will do it; it is such a work as begers the Man again, and actually renews him.
The second is drawn from God's end in the way of giving Grace, comunicating it
to some and not to others; If God's end in being gracious to some one and not
to others, be to commend His Grace solly, and to make them alone in Grace
common or debt, then the work of Grace in Conversion must be peculiar and
immediate, and wrought by the Power of the Spirit of God, leaving nothing to
Man's Free Will to diff^rence himself from another, or on which such an effect
should depend; But if we look to Scripture, we will find, that it is God's end
in the whole way and conduct of His Grace, in Election, Redemp^ion, Calling,
Justification, etc. to commend His Grace solly, and to stop all Mouths, and to
cut off all ground of boasting in the Creature, as it is 2 Cor. 4.7. Who makes
thee to differ from another? and what have thou that thou have not received?
now if thou did receive it, why do thou glory as if thou did not
receive? This being certain, that if the work of Grace in Conversion, were not
a distinct, inward, peculiar, real, immediate work, and did not produce the
effect of it self by its own strength, and not by virtue of any thing in Man;
the Man would still be supposed to have had some Power for the work in himself,
and some way to have differenced himself from another; but the Lord has
designed the contrary, and therefore the work of Grace in Conversion must be
suitable to his design.

Use 1. The first Use is for the refutation of several Errors, and for the
confirmation of a great Truth of the Gospel which we profess.

It serves I say, First, For the refutation of Errors, which in such an
Auditory we love not to insist on; yet we cannot here, the Ground being so
clear, and the Call so cogent, forbear to say somewhat bri^fly this way, and
the rather that the Devil has taken many wa^s, and driven many d^signs, to
weaken the estima^ion of God's Grace among Men, and to exalt proud Nature, and
that there is here a collection and concatenation of these designs and ways
against the Truth which this Doctrine holds forth, vented by corrupt Men. As 1.
They will have nothing to be necessarily applied for the working of Conversion,
bu^ the preaching of the Word; taking it for gran^ed, that all Men have
universal or common Grace, which God by His Sovereignty, say they was obliged
to give, else he could not not reasonably require Faith of them; and upon this
comes in the pleaded for Power of Free Will, and Man's ability to turn himself
to God; others by pleading for this notion of a Light within Men, become to be
Patrons of proud and petulant corrupt Nature, as if there were need of nothing
to beget Saving Faith but that common Grace within, and Oratory or Swasion of
Mouth from without; And hence they came to maintain the foulest Errors, which
have not only been condemned by the Church of God in all Ages, b^t have even by
some Papists been abominated; and many of these same Errors are creeping in
even in these times wherein we live, the design whereof is to tempt Folk to
turn loose, vain, and proud, and to turn the Grace of God into wantonness, as
if they needed not at all to depend on God and His Grace, having a sufficient
stock within themselves on which they can live well enough: And it is not only
the Errors of Papists, Pelagians, Socinians, Arminians, or Errors in the
Judgment that we have to do with; but of such as overturn the very foundation
of the work of Man's Salvation, and who though pretending to higher notions, do
yet go beyond all these. But if it be true, that in the work of Conversion,
beside the preaching of the Word, there is a distinct, real, inward, peculiar,
immediate, efficacious work of the Spirit, necessary for bringing about such an
effect; Then there is no common and universal Grace that all the Hearers of the
Gospel have, nor is there any Power or Ability in Man to believe of himself;
otherwise there were no necessity of such a work as this for the converting of
a Sinner, the Prophet needed not to cry, Who has believed our report? and to
whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? And Christ needed not say, No man can
come to me except the Father draw him; for Men might come without drawing, and
believe without the revelation of God's Arm: But in opposition to that, we say
and have made it clear, that the work of Conversion is brought about by a
distinct, peculiar, powerful, real, and immediate work of the Spirit on the
Heart, whereby he not only enlightens the Mind, but renews the Will and
rectifies the Affections. 2. There is another Error that this refutes, which
seems to be more subtle, for some will grant a necessary connection betwixt the
effect, and the Grace of God, who yet say that it is swasion or persuasion (for
here we take these for the same,) so and so trysted to prevail with some, that
brings about the effect or work of Conversion in them, and not in others where
that persuasion is not so trysted; but this opinion lays not the weight of
Conversion on the Arm of the Lord, but on some circumstances accompanying the
work, and leaves still some ground of boasting in the Creature. 3. A third
Error which this Doctrine refutes, is that of some others, who will have Grace
necessarily to go alongs with the Word in the working of Faith, but so as it
reaches not the Will, but that the Will necessarily determines it self; as if
the Will were not corrupt, or as if that Corruption that is in the Will were
indeed no Corruption, as if that Corruption that is in the Will could be any
more removed from the Will without the immediate work of the Spirit upon it,
then Darkness can be removed from the Judgment without the Spirits immediate
work on it: But seeing the Will is the prime seat of Man's perverseness while in
Nature, and the principal part to be renewed; It Is a strange thing to say, that
in the work of Conversion, other faculties and powers of the Soul must be
renewed, and yet that this which comes nearest to the life of the Soul should
be neglected, or not stand in need of renovation: But from this Text it is
clear, that in Conversion the Arm of the Lord must be revealed, and that there
is a powerful work of Grace that not only presents reasons from the Word to
move the Will, but really regenerates and renews the Will: Now what is for the
refutation of it these Errors serves also to confirm us in the Truth of the
Doctrine opposite to these Errors.

2. It serves to refute something in Folks Practice, and that is, their little
sense of the need of Grace; Most part come and hear Preaching as if they had
the habit of Faith, and as if it were natural to them, and pretend to the
exercise of Faith, never once suspecting their want of Faith, nor thinking that
they stand in need of such a work of Grace to work it in them, as if it were
impossible for them not to Believe; Hence many think that they have Grace
enough, and if they Pray, it is that they may do well, never minding the
corruption of Nature that is in them, and indeed it is no wonder that such
Persons fall readily into Error, when their Practice says plainly they think
they have Grace enough already.

The second Doctrine is, That this distinct, real, inward, efficacious,
powerful work of the Grace of God in Conversion, is not common to all the
Hearers of the Gospel, but is a rare thing applied but to few, it is even as
rare as Faith is; And what we touched on to evidence the rarity of Faith, will
serve also to evidence the rarity of this work of Grace in Conversion; It Is on
as many as are Believers, and are saved, that the work of Grace is revealed,
and no more, Jer. 3.14. I will take one of a city, and two of a family, and
bring you to Zion, says the Lord; It Is two or three in the corner of a Paroch,
or in the end of a Town, to speak so, who are converted, and the rest are
suffered to ly in black Nature. If the reason hereof be erquired after, this
might be sufficient to stop all Mouths, which the Lord gives, Mat. 11.28. Even
so Father, for so it seems good in thy sight; It is of the Lord, who is
Debtor to none, and who as it is Romans 9.15. shows mercy on whom he will, and
whom he will he hardens; and here we must be silent and lay our hand on our
Mouth and answer no more, all being found guilty, He is just in what He does,
in calling or not calling, effectually, as He ple^seth; And yet secondly, The
Lord has thought good to call few of many, for holy and wise ends, As 1. To
hold forth His own Sovereignty, and that He is free, and will walk freely in
the dispencing of His own Grace; Hence, He not only takes few, but ordinarily
these that are the most mean, contemptible, silly, and in a manner foolish, of
the multitude of Hearers; It is not many noble, not many wise, according to the
flesh, not many rich, not many learned, that He chooses and converteth, very
ordinarily He hides His Grace from these; It Is but seldom that He calls and
takes the stout and valiant Man, and the learned Scholar, but it is this and
that poor mean Man, the Weaver, the Shoemaker, the simple Plough-man, etc. whom
most ordinarily He calls, when He suffers others to continue in their Sin. 2.
That He may make all the Hearers of the Gospel walk in holy fear and awe of
Him, He reveals His Grace in few; It Is not the multitude that believes, but
here one and there one, that all that have the Offer of Grace may fear lest
they miss it and receive it in vain, and may be careful to entertain and make
right use of the Means of Grace, and may withal cherish the Spirit in His
motions, and not grieve Him. O! if ye knew and believed what a rare thing the
work of the Spirit of Grace is, ye would be feared to quench, extinguish, or
put out any of His motions. 3. As to the Godly, He does thus, To make them
admire, adore, and praise His Grace, and the Power of it so much the more.

The Uses are three. 1. It serves to move all to reverence, adore, and admire
the Grace of God, and His sovereign way in it; Presume not to debate or dispute
with Him, because there are few that believe, and few that He has determined
His Grace for, it is an evidence of His dread, a proof of His sovereignty, in
which he should be silently stooped unto, and reverently adored, and not
disputed with; we ought to bound all our reasoning within His good pleasure,
who might have taken many and left few, or taken none as pleased Him; And we
should not think strange, nor fret that the Gospel is powerful but on few, here
is the reason of it that may qui^t us, the Lord has determined effectually to
c^ll but few, and yet he will not want one of His own; All that the Father has
given to Christ, shall come to Him, though none come but as they are drawn in.
A thing that we should be sensible of, but yet calm and quiet our Spirits,
rather wondering that He has chosen and calls one, then fret because he has
past by many.

Use 2. The second Use is to exhort you that are Hearers of the Gospel, and
have not had this distinct and powerful work of Grace begetting Faith in you,
to be persuaded of this Truth, that Faith and the work of Grace is no common
thing; The most part alace! think that they have Grace, and that it is not one
of many that want it, they will readily say, it is true I cannot believe of my
self, but God has given me the Grace; But I would ask you this question, Do
you think that Grace is so common a thing that it comes to you and ye never
know how, or so common that never a Body wants it? If not, how comes it then
to pass that ye think and speak of Grace as ye do? we would think it a great
length, if many of you could be persuaded of your Gracelesness; It Is not our
part to point particularly at the Man and Woman, though the deeds of many of
you say within our Heart that there is no fear of God before your eyes, and
that many of you think ye have Grace who never had it; And therefore we wou^d
say these three or four words to you. 1. Begin and suspect your selves that
matters are not right betwixt God and you, we bid none of you despair, but we
bid the most part of you be suspicious of your condition; suspect, nay be
assured, that Hypocrisy is not Grace, and that your Presumption is not Faith,
for if but few get Grace, then many should suspect themselves, and seeing Grace
is so rare a thing, do not ye think it common. 2. Neglect no means that may
bring you through Grace to believe, but be diligent in the use of them all, of
the Word, Prayer, Sacraments, Meditation, etc. It Is by these that the Lord
begets Grace, and by neglecting of them ye may make your selves guilty of
destroying your own Souls. 3. Beaware of quenching the Spirit in any of His
Operations or Motions, of smothering or putting out any Challenges or
Convictions; If the Conscience be at any time touched, or the Affections
tickled, go not away as the temporary Believer does, sitting down there
without going any further; Fear to strangle the beginnings of the life of
Grace, for Grace may begin at little; and if ye quench any Motion, Conviction,
or Challenge, ye know not if ever ye shall meet with the like again, because
when He knocked hard at your Heart ye held Him out and kept Him at the door;
and ye may be in hazard of that terrible charge, Acts 7.31. Ye uncircumcised in
heart and ears, ye have always resisted the Holy Ghost, as your Fathers did so
do ye. 4. Seeing this work is not common to all the Hearers of the Gospel, but
peculiar to some, labor to have it made sure to your selves, by putting it to
proof and trial in good earnest.

Use 3. The third Use is for you that are Believers, (and would God there were
many such,) to whom I would also speak three or four words. 1. Learn from this
to be humble, What have thou man but what thou have received? and if thou have
received it, why do thou boast as if thou had not received it? O! but it is
unsuitable to Believers who are Free-Graces-Debtors and Beggars (whereof yet
none need to think shame,) to be proud and forget themselves; Thou have nothing
Believer to boast of, but that He has shamed thee with His Grace, and
should thou be proud of that as if thou had made thy self thus? therefore
guard watchfully against all puffing up, self-conceit, and high-mindedness, and
study to be humble, and to carry a low S^il, else thou may break out into
some scand^lous offense, and may become a shame and reproach to the Gospel; We
commend Humility to you above many things, for we think that in these days.
Folks pride is like to break their Necks; for when once Conceit creeps in, they
begin to think they are so far advanced in Holiness, that they must not keep
Company with others, nor join in Worship with them, and from that they go to
another thing, and from that to a third, that it is hard to tell where they
will halt or end; they grow so giddy that they are scarcely like to leave so
much Ground as themselves may stand upon: O! think shame of Pride, it is a most
intolerable thing to be proud of that which God has given, wherein ye have no
more hand, and whereof ye can no more boast, then they who never had it. 2. Be
thankful and give God the praise of that ye have gotten; It becomes the upright
to be thankful; It Is no little matter to have God's Power manifested in the
working of Faith and conferring Grace; The temporal Throne and Kingdom, and
great things in the World, are nothing to this, it is peculiar to the Lord's
own, and not common; Many get their fill of the World, who never get nor will
get this; The World is of so little value with the Lord, that to speak so, He
does not much regard who get it, though it be ex^ctly distributed by His
Providence, but converting and upbuilding Grace is peculiarized to His
Favorites; Being therefore clear that He has bestowed Grace on you, O how
should ye exult in blessing God (as David did,) for giving you counsel to make
choice of such a portion, and for His powerful determining of your Heart by His
Grace to embrace it, for which ye have not your selves to thank but God. 3. Be
compassionate and tender toward others, considering that it is only Grace that
has made the difference betwixt you and them, and not any good nature in you
which was not in them as some foolishly fancy; Be not puffed up at the faults and
falls of any, but rather mourn for them as well as for your own, and be the
more humble when ye think of the difference that Grace has made, lest ye fall;
and since your standing is by Grace, be not high-minded, but fear; of all
Persons it worse becomes you to look lightly on. let be to mock at the falls of
others, considering who, and what has made the diff^rence. 4. If it be so
peculiar a priviledg^ to be p^rtakers of this powerful and sp^ci^l Grace of God
that is put sorth in the great work of Conversion; Then sure there is ^omething
peculiar called for in your Conversation, even that it may in all things be as
it becomes the Gospel, and answerable to this Grace bestowed on you, O! what
manner of Persons ought ye to be in all holy Conversation and Godliness?

SERMON XIV.
ISAIAH LIII.I. -- And to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?


THE way of the Grace of God is a very difficult Subject to be thought on or
spoken of suitably and as it becomes, Grace having a sovereign and unsearchable
Channel of its own wherein it runs; yet no doubt it is very useful now and then
to consider it, if we knew how to make use of it aright; yea even these steps
of Grace that are most cross and contrary to carnal Reason, may not a little
profit when duly pondered; Thus when the Prophet has been looking on the
scarcity of Faith, and on the paucity of true Believers, he looks a little
further then on the external preaching of the Gospel, even in upon the way of
God's Grace, not out of any curi^sity, nor from a fretting humor, because of
the unsuccessfulnesse of his Ministry, but that he may thereby get himself
stayed and composed, and that he may bring both himself and others, to
reverence and adore the holy and sovereign way of God therein; To whom (says
he) is the arm of the Lord revealed? It Is a word like that which Christ had on
the like occasion, John 6.44. Murmr not among your selves, no man can come to
me, except the Father who has sent me, draw him.

We opened up the meaning of the words the last day; In short they come to
this, as if he had said, how few are they that believe the Gospel, and who take
the Word off the hand of His sent Ministers? and how few are they on whom the
Grace of God that only can make men believe, does effectually work; the Prophet
pointing at a higher hand then that of the Ministers in the success and
fruitlessness of the Gospel, and coupling these two together, the Preaching of
the Word and the Power of God's Grace in the working of Faith and Conversion in
Sinners.

We proposed these three Doctrines to be spoken to from the words. 1. That in
the work of Conversion and begetting of Faith, beside the preaching of the
Word, there is a powerful, internal, immediate work of the Grace of God,
exercised within Men's Hearts, as well as the Word is preached outwardly to the
Ear, wherever Faith is begotten, these two go together, the Word without, and
the power of Grace within the one of which is distinct from the other.

2. That this powerful, internal, and immediate work of Grace within, is not
common to all the Hearers of the Gospel, but a rare, and peculiar thing to
some, to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? it is but one or few of many to
whom it is revealed; To these we have spoken already.

3. The third is (which indeed holds out the scope of all,) that there is an
inseparable connection betwixt these two, the begetting of Faith in the Hearers
of the Gospel, and the application of this powerful work of the Grace of God
for working of it, so that where this powerful work of Grace is not, there is
never Faith nor Conversion wrought, and where this powerful work of Grace is,
there is Faith and Conversion; The Prophet makes them reciprocal and
commensurable; who is the Believer? he to whom the Arm of the Lord is revealed;
and who is the Unbeliever? he to whom the Arm of the Lord is not revealed;
These two are so conjoined and knit together, as they are never separated, and
so they must stand or fall together.

That we may be the more clear, we shall take up the Doctrine in two distinct
Branches, The first whereof is, That except the powerful work of God's Grace
concur, the most powerful preaching of the Gospel will never beget Faith in the
Hearts of the Hearers of it. The second is, That wherever this powerful work
of Grace goes along with the preaching of the Gospel, or wherever the Lord
applies His Grace with the Word preached, there Faith is begotten in the Heart,
and that Soul is effectually united to Christ, and savingly changed; The one of
these Branches serves to show the necessity of God's Grace from the
consideration of our sinfulness and impotency or inability, and of the
emptiness and ineffectualness of all outward Means in themselves, and so to
stop all Men's Mouths as being utterly unable to contribute any thing to their
own spiritual Good or Conversion, that being the product of the Grace of God;
The other Branch serves mightily to commend the Grace of God, as being the
powerful Arm of the Lord, that brings to Believe, that calls and converts such
and such Persons, according to a prior engagement and transaction betwixt the
Father and the Son.

As for the first of these, It will easily be believed among Men and Women that
have any true sense and feeling of the Corruption of their Nature, and find
daily somewhat of the Law of the Members warring against the Law of the Mind;
and we are persuaded, if all that ever received Faith were brought to depone in
this matter, they would bear witness, that there is no Mean that without the
effectual Power of the Grace of God, can bring a stranger Sinner to close with
Christ and believe on Him; and if all that are now before the Throne of God in
Heaven, were called to speak to this great Truth, they would put their seal to
it, and say, Not unto us, but to thy Name be the glory of our believing, we had
never believed if it had been left to the power of our own Free Will, and if
the power of thy Grace had not wrought in us the very Will as well as the Deed
or Act of believing. Yet because this Doctrine (as we said) serves to discover
the sinfulness and impotency of Nature, and how little we are obliged to our
selves in this great work; and to hold forth the absolute necessity of the
Grace of God, and how much we are obliged to it in the work of Faith and
Conversion; and to hold forth withal the emptiness and ineffectualness of all
outward Means without this Grace, and because it wants not its own considerable
opposition from the enemies of the Truth, we shall give you some Grounds for
confirmation of it, The first whereof is drawn from these express instances of
Scripture wherein it is clear, That there has been much powerful Preaching,
and by the most eminent Preachers, and yet the generality of People have been
fruitless under it, and their fruitlesness has been brought to this very
Ground, to wit, that the work of God's Grace and His outstretched Arm went not
along with it. The first instance is Deuteronomy. 29.4. That Moses was a skilled
Preacher, who will deny? he being faithful in all the House of God, yet says
he, after much and long Preaching, and after many Signs and Wonders wrought,
the Lord has not given you an heart to perceive, nor eyes to see, nor ears to
hear unto this day; where he not only puts a difference betwixt the preaching
of the Word without, and the work of Grace within, but shows the necessity of
the conc^rrence of the work of Grace, and lays the great weight of the Peoples
profiting or not profiting, on the wanting or having of that: A second
instance, is in this Prophet Isaiah; were there any among all the Preachers
before or since, that preached in a more Evangelick strain then he did? and yet
when he has complained of the paucity of Believers, saying, who has believed
our report? he fixes and stays on this as the cause, to whom is the arm of the
Lord revealed? And Chap. 6.9, 10. he gives an account of the sad Commission he
had from the Lord, who said to him, Go and tell the people, Hear ye indeed but
understand not, and see ye indeed but perceive not, make the heart of this
people sat, etc. where there is also a clear distinction made betwixt the
inward working of Grace, and the outward Ministry. A third instance, and one
that is beyond all exception, is in our blessed Lord Jesus, who spoke as never
man spoke, and preached with such power and life, that even carnal Hearers
wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth, for he
preached with Authority and not as the Scribes, and yet Joh. 6.44. when they
begin to murmr at Him, what says He? Murmr not at these things, none can
come to me, except the Father draw him; none can Believe, except the powerful
Grace of God work Faith in him, there must be a higher hand then ought ye see
or hear, a more powerful work then any external Preaching of mine as Prophet of
my Church, ere a Soul can believe on me; and though his Hearers were not free
of the guilt of this their Unbelief, but had their own sinful accession unto
their continuing in it, yet our Lord looks in on the sovereign way and work of
Grace, and holds there, telling them that his external Ministry will not do the
turn, but there must be an inward, powerful, immediate work of Grace for the
working of Faith. We add a fourth instance, and it is of that chosen Vessel
Paul, who labored more abundantly then all the rest of the Apostles, and yet
when he is Preaching, Acts 28.25. and some believed, and others believed not,
before he dismisses the multitude, he adds this one word, Well spoke the Holy
Ghost by Isaiah the Prophet unto our fathers, saying, Go unto this People, and
say, Hearing ye shall hear and shall not understand, and seeing ye shall see
and not perceive, etc. where he expressly differenceth his external Preaching
from God's inward working, and tells, that so long as there was a judicial
stroke on the Hearts of the People untaken away, no external Preaching could do
the turn as to their Conversion and bringing of them to Believe; which he also
does to guard against any offense that might be taken at the unsuccesfulness of
his Ministry by any who would be ready to say, what aileth these Folk that they
will not receive the Gospel? to whom he answers, Isaiah long before told the
reason of it, to wit, that there is a Plague on their Hearts and Minds which
God must remove ere they can receive it.

2. To these plain and clear instances we may add two or three Grounds or
Reasons, As 1. The exceeding greatness of the work of Conversion, O how great
and difficult is it! Therefore it is set out by the similitudes and expressions
of raising the dead, creating a new heart, of removing the stony heart, and the
like, all tending to set out the necessity of an omnipotent Power or a powerful
work of Grace, in the begetting of Souls to Christ; and if it be so great a
work, what can the outward Ministry do, if the Power of God be not added? or
what can the Man himself do here? can a M^n quicken, raise, creat, or beget
himself? it is true, these comparisons are not to be extended and and applied in
every respect, yet they hold out that Man being naturally dead, can no more
contribute to his own quickening and raising, and to the b^getting of spiritual
life in himself, then a dead M^n can contribute to his own quickening and
raising to his natural life; for which cause, the Holy Ghost has made choice
of these expressions, even to hold out the exceeding greatness of the work. 2.
Consider the condition that M^n are in when this work is wrought, and we will
see they can contribute nothing to it, that they have no aptitude for it,
except that they are subjects capable to be wrought upon, being as it is Ephesians
2.1. dead in sins and trespasses; being as to their Souls estate, and as to
their Spiritual condition, like Adam's Body before the Lord breathed in it the
Breath of Life, and made him a living Soul; as his Body could not move, stir,
nor act till then, no more can the Natural Man stir or act in the ways of God
till a new principle of Spiritual Life be put in him. To clear it further, we
would consider, that the Scripture speaks of these three in the Natural Man. 1.
Of an utter inability and deadness as to that which is Good, Dead in Sins, Ephesians.
2.1. We are not sufficient (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 3.5.) of our selves as of
our selves to think any thing, not so much as a good thought. 2. The Scripture
holds him out not only as unable for good, but perverse and bent to every thing
that is Evil, Col. 1.21. Alienated and enemies in our minds by wicked works;
the carnal mind being enmity against God, Romans 8.7. it is plainly opposite to
any thing that is Good, and so to the way of Faith. 3. Man's Mind is not only
naturally perverse and stuffed with Enmity, but in an incapacity to be healed
while it remains such, Romans 8.7. It is not subject to the law of God, neither
indeed can be; and therefore in the work of Conversion, there is not only an
amending, but also a renewing of our Nature called for; there is more requisite
then the rectifying of something in the Man, even the creating of new Habits,
and the infusing of the Principles of Spiritual Life and Motion into the Soul:
It is true, in some Sense the whole Image of God is not absolutely removed, the
faculties of the rational Soul still remain, for Man has an Understanding and
a Will, and some sort of Reason, but without any tendency to Spiritual Life, or
to any action for God; he has an Understanding, but it is wholly darkened; he
has a Will, but wholly perverse, and not in the least inclined to Good; he
has Affections, but wholly disordered and corrupted, and set wholly upon wrong
Objects; so that it is with Man's Soul as to Good, as it is with spoiled Wine;
Wine when wholesome, serves to cheer and refresh, but when it is spoiled, it is
quite another thing, not only not conducing to Health, but it is noisome and
hurtful: It Is just so we say with Man's Soul, it is by the Fall quite spoiled
and corrupted; it is not indeed annihilated or made to be nothing, for it
retains the same faculties still; it has (to speak so) the same quantity
still, but as to it is qualities, it is utterly corrupted and carried closs
contrary to God; it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be; and
renovation by Grace, is the taking away of the corrupt qualities in part in
this Life, and wholly in the other Life, and the bringing in of new qualities
for recovering the beauty of that Image of God which Man has lost. 4. Consider
the end that God has in the administration of His Grace, and the Glory that He
will needs have it getting in every gracious work, and more especially in the
work of Conversion, and the silence, as to any boasting, that He will have all
put unto that shall partake of it; His end in the administration of His Grace,
is to bring down Pride, to stop all Mouths, and to remove all grounds of
boasting from the Creature, that He only may have the glory of Conversion; that
when ever that question is proposed, What have thou O man, but what thou have
received? and if thou have received it, why do thou boast? who made thee to
differ from another? the Soul may answer, it was not external Preaching, nor my
own Free Will, nor any thing in me, but the power of God's Grace, I have
nothing but what I have received: It is on this ground that the Apostle Phil.
2.12, 13. presses and encourages Christians to their great work, Work out
(says he) your own salvation in fear and trembling, for it is God that works
in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure; the Lord leaves not to Man
the working of the Will in himself, and of him, says the same Apostle 1 Cor.
30.31. are ye in Christ Jesus, who is made of God unto us, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption, that he that glories should
glory in the Lord, as he said before, verse. 29. that no flesh should glory in
his presence; there is one ground of boasting that the Lord will have removed
in a Sinner's Justification and obtaining the Pardon of Sin by the imputation
of the Righteousness of Christ; but there is another ground or matter of
boasting that Man might have if he could reach out the Hand to believe and
receive that Righteousness, and so put difference betwixt himself and another,
which in Effectual Calling the Lord puts to silence and quite removes; that Man
may h^ve it to say, I have not only Pardon of S^n, but Grace to Believe, freely
bestowed upon me; God made me to differ, and He only; He opened my Heart as He
did the Heart of Lydia: Thus the Lord will have all the weight of the whole
work of our Salvation lying on His Grace, that the Mouths of all may be
stopped, and that His Grace may shine gloriously, that we may have it to say
with the Psalmist, Psalm. 57.2. It Is the Lord that performs all things for me,
and with Paul, 1 Timothy 1.13, 14. I obtained mercy, and the Grace of God was
exceeding abundant toward me.

The Uses are these. 1. It writes to us in great and legible Letters, the great
emptiness and sinfulness of all Flesh, who not only do not good, but have
sinned themselves out of a capacity to do good; all Men and Women have brought
themselves thus lamentably low by Sin, that now if Heaven were to be had by a
wish, sincerely and singly brought forth, yet it is not in their power to
perform that condition; and though it now stands upon the streatching forth of
the hand of Faith to receive Jesus Christ, yet of themselves they cannot even
do this; how ought then Sinners to be deeply humbled, who have brought
themselves to this woeful pass? I am afraid that many of you do not believe that
ye are such as cannot Believe, nor do any Good till His Grace work effectually
in you.

2. It teaches you not to idolize any instrument or mean of Grace, how
precious and promising soever; No Preaching, if it were of a Prophet, or an
Apostle, yea of an Angel, will do the turn, without Grace come with it; there
is a necessity of the revelation of God's Arm, and of the assistance of His
Grace, not only to your Conversion, but to every duty ye go about; Ye should
therefore fear and tremble when ye go about any Ordinance, lest the Arm of the
Lord be not put forth in it.

3. It should make you more serious in dealing with God for His effectual
blessing to every Mean and Ordinance, seeing without that no Ordinance can
profit you.

4. It serves to reprove and repress Pride, (...) to promove Humility in all
such who (...) ^^tten good by the Gospel; Have ye Faith or any measure of
Holiness? what have ye but what ye have received? from whence came your Faith
and your Holiness? ye have them not of your selves, these are not Fruits that
grow upon the Tree of Nature, or in its Garden, but on the Tree, and in the
Garden of Free Grace, and ye have not your selves to thank for them.

5. The main Use of it is for confirming and establishing you in the Faith of
the Truth proponed in the Doctrine, and for confuting and overturning the
contrary Error, that, as it were, in contempt of the Grace of God, exalts proud
Nature, and gives Man's Free Will so great a hand in the work of Conversion;
That the main thing that makes the difference shall not be attributed to the
Grace of God, but to the Free Will of the Creature, which of it self choised
the Grace of God offered when another rejected it: It may indeed seem strange
that the Devil should so far have prevailed with Christians that profess the
Faith of Original Sin, and of the necessity of a Savior, as to make them look
at Grace as useless in this prime step of Conversion and renewing of a Sinner,
that when the Grace of God and Man's Free Will come to be compared, Man's Will
should have the preference and pre-eminence, the highest place and commendation
in the work, and that the great weight of it should ly there, and that proud
Nature should be thus bolstered up that it shall stand in need of nothing for
the Man's Conversion, but the right use-making of what it has in it self: And
yet it is no wonder that the Devil drive this design vigorously, for what
shorter cut can there be taken by him to ruin Souls, then to make them drink
in this Error, that Nature and Free Will will do their turn? and so take them
off from all dependence on Free Grace, and on Jesus Christ, and give them
ground of boasting in themselves; for when it is thus, of necessity they must
ruin and perish; this should sure, make you loath this Error the more: And we
are persuaded, that the day is coming, wherein the Truth opposite to this
Error, shall be confirmed on the Souls and Consciences of all the Opposers of
it, and wherein, the maintaining of this Error shall be found a confirmation of
Man's Enmity at Gods Grace, which is not subject to His Law, nor indeed can be.

But there are three Questions that may be moved here, to which we would speak
a word. 1. If the Preaching of the Gospel cannot beget Faith, without the
powerful work of Gods Gra^e, what is the use of the Gospel, or wherefore serves
it? 2. If Men cannot Believe without the work of Grace, which the Lord
soveraignly dispenses, why does He yet find fault and expostulate with Men for
their not Believing? 3. If Grace perform all, and Men can make no mean
effectual, nor do any good without it, what then should Men do to come by
Believing, and this work of His Grace?

For the first, We shall not say much unto it; only, seeing the Lord has made
choice of the Gospel to be the ordinary external Mean of Grace, and of the
begetting of Faith, there is no reason to say that it is useless; for though it
be not the main and only thing that turns the Sinner, but the Lord has
reserved it to Himself as His own Prerogative, to convert and change the Heart
of a Rebel-sinner, yet he has appointed it to be made use of, as He has
appointed Baptism and the Lords Supper, for many good and notable ends, uses,
and advantages that are reached and come by the preaching of it. As, 1. By it
the Righteousness of God is manifested that before lay hid; Ye may by the
preaching of the Gospel come to the knowledge of the Covenant of Redemption,
and of the great design that the Lord has laid down for bringing about the
Salvation of lost Sinners, Romans 1.17. Therein is the righteousness of God
revealed from Faith to Faith. 2. By it the Lord reveals the Duty He calls
for from Men, as well as His Will concerning their Justification and Salvation;
He lets them know what is wrong, what is right, what displeases Him, and what
pleases Him. Yea, 3. By the preaching of the Gospel, He holds out what Men's
ability is, or rather what is their inability, and by His external Calling
gives them in it occasion to know this their inability in not giving obedience
to His call; and this is no small advantage, when by it they have occasion to
know the necessity of a Mediator, and to seek after another way of Justication
then by their own works; for so it proves a notable mean to humble Men, to stop
their Mouths, and to make them plead guilty before God. 4. It Is profitable as
the Lord is pleased to make use of it, to call and gather in so many as He has
ordained to Eternal Life; for though in it self it be not able to convert, yet
having the Power of God going along with it, it is the instrument of
Conversion, and the Lord ordinarily makes use of it to the begetting of Faith
in them that Believe, as it is Romans 10.17. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing
by the word of God, preached; and 1 Cor. 1.24. it is called the power of God to
salvation; and, it has pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save
them that believe; for though God can work without it, yet He has thought good
to make use of it, to inform the Judgment, and to stir up the Affections of
Hearers, and so it proves instrumental to the begetting of Faith in them. 5. If
it do not promove the Salvation of all the Hearers of it, yet it promoves it in
all the Elect, and serves to make others the more inexcusable, and in this
respect it triumphs always, 2 Cor. 2.15, 16. In some it is the savor of life
unto life, in others the savor of death unto death, leaving them the more
inexcusable, and the more obnoxious to Wrath by their rejecting of the Counsel
of God against themselves.

I know this will be excepted against; We come therefore to consider the second
Question, which is this, How can the Call of the Gospel make Men inexcusable,
seeing they cannot without the effectual Power of the Grace of God Believe? as
Christ says, John 6.44. No man can come to me, that is, no Man can believe in
me, except the Father who has sent me draw him; yea, why does God find fault
with Men for their Unbelief? for answer, it has been no new thing for Men to
start Questions and Objections against the Grace of God, and to be always
striving to rub affronts and disgrace upon it, see Romans 9.13, 14, etc. where
this same Objection is started, and answered again and again; for when the
Apostle has said verse. 13. Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated, the
Objection is moved, Is there unrighteousness with God then? Folks readily think
that there is a sort of unrighteousness in God when He takes one and leaves
another, especially considering, that the leaving of the other infers (though
it be not any culpable cause of) the ruin of the Man's Soul; he answers first
with a God forbid, as if it were an absurd thing so to assert; and then
endeavors to answer it from Gods Sovereignty, as being Debtor to none, I will
have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and, it is not in him that wills, nor in
him that runs, but in God that shows mercy: In Gods administration of Grace,
He is Debtor to no Man, nor has He any rule by which He proceeds, but His
own Sovereign Will; and if it shall yet be said, if God does walk by His own
Sovereign Will in giving Grace, Why does he yet find fault or condemn, for who
has resisted his will? Why is God angry that Men will not Believe, since none
can come to Christ against the Will of God? His Indignation rises at this
proud and petulant Objection, and He answers, But who art thou O man that
reply against God? shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, why
have thou made me thus? has not the potter power over the clay, to make of the
same lump, one vessel to honor, and another to dishonor? By the Apostle's
doubling of this answer, and his not setting of himself to satisfy carnal
Reason and Curiosity, there is ground given to silence us here; It Is the Lord,
He is our Potter, and we the Clay; it is He in whose Hand we are, who can do us
no wrong, and this may sufficiently serve to put a stop to all reasoning and
disputing against Him; Ye^ we may add a word further, seeing the Apostle
proceeds to another Reason; Therefore, 2. Consider whence it is that this
inability to believe or turn to God does come; not from God sure; for if He had
not made Man perfect, there might be some ground for the Objection; but seeing
He did make man upright, and he has sought out many inventions, who is to be
blamed? has the Lord lost His right to exact His Debt, because Man has played
the Bankrupt and debauched, and turned Dyvour, and unable to pay? does not this
very objecting prove us guilty, and evidence that we have lost that which God
gave to us, and made us with at the Beginning? When God made Adam, he had power
to believe and give God credit as to every word revealed or to be revealed, and
that now after the Fall, he and his Posterity want that power, they have not
this privation from Gods creating of them, but from their Fall, they by their
Fall utterly incapacitating themselves for these Duties that they owe to God,
and for this among the rest. 3. If there were no more but simple inability
among them that hear this Gospel, they might have some pretext or ground of
excuse, though it were not any real nor just excuse, as has been showed, but
it never comes to this as the only or main cause of their not Believing; There
is always some maliciousness, perverseness, and pravity in the Will; it is not, I
cannot, but I will not, it is a wiful and some way deliberate rejecting of the
Gospel, that is the ground of Folks not Beli^ving; and what excuse, I pray, can
ye have, who do not believe the Gospel, when it shall be found that ye
maliciously and deliberatly choosed to reject it? To make this out, consider
but these few things, 1. Men's neglecting of the very outward Mea^s, that
through Gods blessing prove instrumental in the begetting of Faith, as of
Hearing, Reading, Prayer, Meditation, Self-searching, stirring up themselves to
Repentance, etc. whereby the Lord ordinarily brings about and furthers the work
of Faith. 2. Consider the carnal, careless, and lazy manner of Men's going about
these Means and Duties, which to their own conviction are within the reach of
that power which they have; ye might hear oftener and more attentively, ye
might pray more frequently and more seriously then often ye do, ye want even
much of that moral seririousness in Hearing, Prayer, Reading, etc. that ye have
in other things of less concernment; ye will hear a Proclamation at the Cross
with more attention, then a Preaching of the Gospel, ye will hear a Threatening
from Man with more fear then ye will hear a Threatening from God's Word, ye will
be more serious in seeking somewhat from Man, then in asking Grace from God;
the reason is, because your Heart is more to the one nor to the other; can ye
then rationally think that ye are excusable, when Believing is not a thing that
is in your Heart, and that takes you up, but ye go about the Means that lead to
it unconcernedly, carelessly, and negligently? 3. Consider how often ye do
willingly choose some other thing then Christ, to spend your Time, and set your
Affections upon, laying obstructions and bars in the way of Gods Grace, setting
up idols in the Heart, and filling Christ's room before hand with such things as
are inconsistent with His Company, and all this is done willingly and
deliberately; ye have said in your Hearts as these did, Jer. 2.25. We have
loved strangers, and after them we will go; and will ye, or dare ye make that
an excuse why ye could not come to Christ, because your Hearts were taken up
with your Lusts and Idols? So then the matter will not hold here. that ye were
unable and had not power to believe, but it will come to this, that your
Conscience will have it to say, that ye willingly and deliberately choosed to
ly still in your Unbelief, and that ye preserred your Idols to Christ Jesus. 4.
Consider, That sometimes ye have met with some more then an ordinary touch,
motion, and work of the Spirit that has been born in upon you, which ye have
slighted and neglected, if not quenched and put out, which is your great guilt
before the Lord: Is there any of you, but now and then at Preaching, or when in
some great hazard, or under sickness or some other sad cross, ye have been
under Convictions of Sin, and have had some little glances of the hazard ye
were in of the Wrath of God, more then ordinarily ye had at other times? and I
would ask you, have these been entertained and cherished, or rather have they
not been slighted and worn out by you? and may ye not in this respect be
charged with the guilt of resisting the Spirit of God, and marring the work of
your own Conversion and Salvation? These things, and many more, which will cry
loud in the Consciences of Men and Women one day, will quite remove and take
away this objection, that ye could not do better; Ye might have done better
then ye did, ye might have abstained from many Evils that ye committed, and
done many Duties that ye ommitted, and done them with more moral seriousness
then ye did; but ye were perverse, and did willingly and deliberately choose to
continue in your Natural condition, rejecting Christ, and the Offer of
Salvation through Him: This also serves to refute and remove that profane
Principle or Tenet that many have in their Minds and Mouths, That they have no
more Grace then God has given them; will ye dare to come before God in the
great Day with any such Objection? no certainly, or if ye dare, God will
aggrege your guilt by it, and beat it back again into your Throat; then, O!
then all such Subterfuges will be no shelter to you before Him, nor in the
least able to insconce your Souls against the strong Batteries of the Wrath of
God, that will be as a Storm against the Wall.

SERMON XV.
ISAIAH LIII.I. -- And to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?


MInisters have not done with their work when they have preached, and People
have not done with their work when they have heard: That which is of greatest
concernment follows, which either has, in the want of it influence on the
sadning of both Ministers and People, or in the obtaining of it, on their
Consolation: This is the thing that we find Isaiah upon here, who having
preached the Gospel, looks what Fruit it has, and when he beholds the general
unfruitfulness it had in his own time, and should have in our time, it weights
him exceedingly, and indeed it is very sad that Isaiah should be so much
weighted in foreseeing the unfruitfulness of the Gospel in our days, and that
we our selves should be so little weighted with it, and so senseless under it.

He casts in this word, To whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? partly to
confirm the former word, Who has believed our report? and partly to help to
make the right use of it, by drawing Men to the discovery of the Sovereign Hand
of God in the matter, and of the necessity of His Grace for making the Gospel
effectual in the Hearers of it wherever it comes, Who (says he) has believed
our report? To whom is this preached Gospel made effectual for Faith and
Salvation? It Is but to very few, even to as many as have the Arm of the Lord,
the effectual Power of His special Grace revealed to them, and no more.

The last Doctrine we proposed, and began to speak of as the Scope, was, That
believing and receiving of the Gospel, and the Lord's exercing a powerful work
of His Grace with it, are ever still knit together; they are of equal extent;
as many Believe as He stretches out His Hand of Power with the Word to work
Faith in them, and as many ly still in Unbelief as His Hand of Power is not
revealed unto, This is his Scope.

We took up this Doctrine in two Branches, First, That the most powerful Means
cannot work nor beget Faith in the Hearers of the Gospel, except there be an
inward powerful work of Grace on their Hearts accompanying them; and this we
cleared, and spoke a little to ^^o Q^estions in the Use, and left at a third,
to wit, What the Hearers of the Gospel should do that have the Call and Offer
of the Gospel, seeing without the effectual work of the Grace of God they cannot
Believe? which we shall forbear to speak to, till we open the second Branch of
the Doctrine, because this Question relates to both.

The second Branch then of the Doctrine is, That wherever the Lord applies the
powerful work of His Grace, there necessarily Faith and Conversion follow; or
the stretching forth of God's Arm in the work of His Grace, has always the
work of Faith and Conversion, and the engaging of the Soul unto Jesus Christ
following on it; and indeed if it be true that we cleared before, to wit, That
there are as many Unbelievers as there are Persons on whom Grace does not thus
powerfully work, or that they are all such that this work of Grace is not
manifested on, then the work of Conversion and Believing is as broad as this
work of Grace is, for the Prophet makes them of equal extent, who is he that
believes? even he to whom the Arm of the Lord is revealed* and on the
contrary, who is he that believes not? even he to whom the Arm of the Lord is
not revealed, and on whom this work of Grace is not manifested. By which we may
see it to be very clear, that the Prophet hangs the Believing of the Gospel on
the Lord's manifesting His Arm; so that where it is not manifested, this work
of Faith is not brought forth, and where it is manifested, necessarily it is
brought forth.

This being a Doctrine concerning the Efficacy of God's Grace, which ought not
to ly hid from the Lords People, we shall a little, first, clear it, and then
secondly, confirm it to you.

First, For clearing of it is Meaning. 1. Ye would not take up our meaning in it
so, as if we made every common work that lively means may have on the Hearers
of the Gospel, to be Conversion; The preaching of the Word will sometimes make
Folks tremble, as we see in Felix, and will waken Convictions and Terrors in
them, and put them into an amazement, and yet leave them there; for all these
Convictions may be, and often are resisted, as to any Saving Fruit at least,
which we conceive to be that which Stephen points at, Acts 7.51. while he
says, Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist
the Holy Ghost, as your fathers did, so do ye; and what he means by this is
explained in the words following, Which of the Prophets have not your fathers
persecuted, etc. even their contending with the Word of the Lord in the mouths
of His Servants: Yea, in that same place, where it is said, that they gnashed
upon him with their teeth, it is insinuated that they came over the belly of the
cutting Conviction which his Preaching had upon them: Nor do we 2. mean, That
every common operation of the Spirit, whether illumination of the Mind, or a
touch on the Affections (such as may be in Temporaries and Apostates, as is
clear Mat. 13.20, 21. Heb. 6.4. and downward) is Conversion; There is a great
difference betwixt a common work or gift of the Spirit (which in a large Sense
man be c^^^ed Grace because freely given) an^ the ^^v^ng work of Grace, which
before (...) ^^^^e^ a peculiar work: And oft-times t^^t c^mmon operation of the
Spirit is quenched and p^t out, therefore the Apostle 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. exhorts
thus, Quench not the Spirit. 3. When we speak of an effectual bringing forth of
Faith by this Grace of God, we would not have you thinking, that we suppose no
reluctance to be in the Man in so far as he is unrenewed, for though where
Grace effectually works, Faith follows necessarily, yet Corruption being in
the Man, it is disposed and apt to thwart with, and to oppose Grace; and the
Will has its aversness to yield: But the meaning of the Doctrine is this, That
though there be such a strong power of Corruption in the Man to whom Grace
comes, and on whom it is put forth, yet the power of Grace is such, that it
powerfully masters and overcomes Corruption, and wins the Heart to believe in,
and to engage with Christ; though (to speak so) there be something within that
strives to keep the door shut on Christ; yet when it comes to that, Cant. 5.3.
He puts in his fingers by the holl of the lock, and makes the myrrh to drop;
the Heart is prevailed with so, as it is effectually opened, as the Heart of
Lydia was to receive the Word that Paul preached: Thus, notwithstanding of
Corruptions opposition, Grace gains its point, and the Lord never applys His
Grace of purpose to gain a Soul, but he prevails. 4. When we speak of the power
and effectualness of Grace in conquering and gaining the Heart and Will of the
Sinner to believe in Jesus Christ, we do not mean that there is any force or
violence done to the Will, or any exerting of a coactive power, violenting the
Will contrary to its essential property of freedom, to close with Christ; But
this we mean, that though Corruption be in the Heart, yet Grace being infused
and acted by the Spirit, the pravity in the Will is sweetly cured, and the Will
is moved and made to Will willingly and upon choice, by the power of the Spirit
of Grace taking in that strong hold; This great work is wrought by an
omnipotent swavity, and by a sweet omnipotency; and it needs not at all seem
strange, for if Man in Nature, be, by the power of habitual Corruption, made
necessarily to will Evil, so that notwithstanding he does freely and willingly
choose Evil; why should it be thought strange o^ absurd to say, that when a
principle of the Grace of God is infused into the Soul, and acted by the Spirit
of God, If has, that much influence, power, and efficacy as to prevail with
the Will, it keeping still its own freedom, to make it willing to embrace Jesus
Christ, and yet not at all thereby wrong that essential property of the Will?
sure, Grace is as powerful as Corruption, and the Lord is as dextrous a worker,
and can work as aggreeably to the nature of the Creature in this gracious work,
as the Creature can in its own sinful actings. So then we say, when the Lord is
pleased to apply the work of His Grace to convert a Sinner, that work is never
frustrated, but it always has necessarily the work of Faith, Renovation, and
Conversion following on the back of it.

Secondly, We shall a little confirm the Doctrine, and the grounds of
Confirmation are these, The 1. whereof is, The express Scriptures wherein this
Truth is asserted, as John 6.44, 45. It is said in the 44. Verse, No man can
come to me except the Father draw him, and on the contrary, it is as expressly
set down verse. 45. It is written in the Prophets, they shall be all taught of
God, every man therefore that has heard and learned of the Father comes unto
me, and this being contradistinguished to external Preaching, and being that
which is called drawing, v. 44. he knits Believing to it, and makes Believing,
called coming, a necessary effect of it, that to whomsoever God gives that
inward Lesson, they shall come; which confirms the Doctrine, that whomsoever
the Lord teaches and schools by His Grace, and calls effectually, they do
necessarily Believe. Another passage we have Phil. 2.12, 13. Work out the work
of your salvation in fear and trembling; for it is God that works in you both
to will and to do of his good pleasure; where the Apostle makes the work of
Grace not only to work ability to will and to do, but to work also to will and
to do actually; and Grace never works to will, and leaves the Man unwilling,
but necessarily supposes the Man's closing willingly with Christ, with whom He
works thus. A 2. Ground of confirmation is drawn from these Expressions
whereby this work is set forth, and the Promises comprehending it in God's
Covenant, wherein it is called the giving of a new heart, a heart of flesh, the
writing of the law in the heart, the putting of his Spirit within his people,
and causing them to walk in his statutes, etc. Jer. 31.33. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. and
it is impossible to conceive aright of the fulfilling of these Promises without
the including of the effect; the giving of the new Heart, is not only a
persuading to Believe, but the actual giving of the new Heart, whereof Faith is
a special part, which Promise is peculiar to the Elect, though the offer of it
be more large, and be further extended; and what can that Promise of Gods
writing the Law in the Heart be, but an effectual inclining of the Heart to the
Will of God? or inward renovation contradistinguished to the external Ministry,
that can only hold out His Will in a Book, and speak it to the Ear. 3. This may
be cleared and confirmed from the nature of the work of Grace, which is such a
mighty work and so powerful, as it is impossible it can be frustrated or
disappointed; unless we could say that Grace in God, or the Grace of God is not
so powerful as Corruption in us, which were Blasphemy; to this purpose the
Apostle prays in behalf of the Christian Ephesians, chap. 1.19, 20. that they
may know what is the exceeding greatness of his power to usward who believe,
according to the working of his mighty power which he wrought in Christ when he
raised him from the dead; he speaks so in this high strain, to set out both
the exceeding stubbornness of our Nature that needs such a work, and the
exceeding great power of the Grace of God that works irresistably, not only
in the Conversion of the Elect at first, but in all the after-acts of
Believing, so Ephesians. 3.7. the same Apostle has it, -- according to the gift of
the Grace of God given unto me by the effectual working of his power; and Col.
1.29. according to his working which works in me mightily; The Power that
works in Believers is Gods omnipotent Power, which works effectually and
mightily; and if this Power be exercised in the continuing and promoving of
Faith, as is said before, it must be much more exercised in the begetting of
Faith; yea, and what need is there that He should exercise it, if not for this
end, that where He exercises it, it may also prevail? A 4th. ground of
Confirmation may be drawn from the Lords great end which He has before Him in
this work, and that is the gaining of glory to His Grace, and to have the whole
work of Conversion attributed to it; and if this be His end, He must and will
prevail by His Grace in throughing the work in order to this end; if it were
left indifferent to Man to yield o^ not to yield to God as he pleases, the
whole weight of the work of Conversion should not ly upon Grace, Man's Mouth
should not be stopped, but when that question should be asked, who has made
thee to differ, and what have thou O man, but what thou have received? he
should still have something to boast of, and the work of his Conversion, should
at best be halfed betwixt Grace and his own Free Will; this would necessarily
follow if Grace did not through the work, and so God should miss of His end. A
5th. ground of Confirmation is taken from the consideration of Gods Decree, of
the Covenant of Redemption betwixt Jehovah and the Mediator, and of the Power
and Wisdom of God in carrying on this work, which we put together for brevities
cause; From all which it will be clear, that there is, and must be a necessary
connection betwixt the work of Grace on Believers and the Effect, and that it is
not in the power of Man's Free Will to resist it, which indeed is not freedom
but bondage. 1. Then, We say, That if we consider the Decree of Election, we
will find that where Grace is applied, Faith and Conversion must follow;
otherwise, if the work of Grace were not effectual to convert, Gods Decree
should be suspended on the Creatures Free Will, and be effectual or not
effectual according as it pleased, and is that any little matter to make His
Decree depend upon, and be effectual or not according to Man's pleasure? that
which sickereth His Decree and makes it infrustrably to take effect, is, that
He has effectual Means to bring about His Decree. 2: If we consider the
Covenant of Redemption, betwixt Jehovah and the Mediator, we will find that
upon the one side the Mediator particularly undertaketh for them that are given
to Him, that He shall loss none of them; and upon the other side, we have (to
speak with reverence of the Majesty of God after the manner of Men) the
Father's Obligation to make such Persons in due time Believers, that Christ the
Mediator may see of the travel of His Soul and be satisfied, according to that
Promise made to Him, Psalm. 110.3. In the day of thy power thy people shall be
willing; and that other, Isa. 53.11. He shall see of the travel of his soul and
be satisfied, by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, etc.
and accordingly Himself says, John. 6.37. All that the Father has given to me
shall come unto me, where it is clear, that these who are given must
necessarily come: and He also says, John 10.16. Other sheep have I, which are
not of this sold, them also I must bring; and it cannot be supposed without
horror and blasphemy, that this determinate, solid, and sure transaction,
having all its midses included in it, and being as to its end so peremptory,
shall as to these midses and that end, and as to their throughing, not be in
Gods hand, but in the hand of Man's Free Will? if it were there, O! how unsicker
and loose would the bargain and God's design in begetting Faith, and in
bringing Souls through Grace to Glory be! 3. If we consider the Lords Power in
beginning and promoving, and His Wisdom in carrying on of this work, His Power
whereby he raises the Dead, and His Wisdom whereby He leads from Death to
Life; is it possible to conceive or imagine these to be applied by the Lord in
the Conversion of a Sinner, but this Doctrine must needs hold, that the work of
His Grace powerfully applied, has always Faith and Conversion following on it,
and that the Lord leaves it not to the option of Elect Souls, to believe, or
not to believe as they please? He must not, He cannot be frustrate of His end
and design, but He must bring them to a cordial closure with Christ by Faith in
order to their Salvation.

Use 1. The first Use serves to fix you in the Faith of this great Truth, and
though we use not, neither is it needful to trouble you with long Questions and
Debates; yet when the like of this Doctrine comes in our way, especially in
such a time, wherein the pure Truths of God, and this among the rest, are
troubled and called in question, it is requisite that a word be spoken for your
confirmation and establishment; and we would hence have you fixed in the Faith
of these two. 1. Of the impotency of Nature in the beginning or promoving ought
of the work of Grace, which belongs to the first branch of the Doctrine. 2. Of
the effectualness and irresistableness of Grace, that wherever God begets and
brings in a Soul, He does it by His own powerful Grace, and wherever He applies
that work, Faith and Conversion necessarily follow, which belongs to the second
branch of the Doctrine; and we would the rather speak a little to this, because
it is questioned by the Enemies of the Grace of God, then which, there is
nothing they set themselves more to dethrone and debase, and to exalt and cry
up Nature and Free Will, as if it did sit on the Throne, and Grace behoved to
come and supplicate it, and as if it might accept or reject its Bill at
pleasure as to the Conversion of a Sinner; In opposition to which, this
Doctrine holds good, that wherever the Lord applies His Grace, He effectually
throughs the work of Faith and Conversion, and there is no Soul that can
utterly resist it; and wherever the Lord applies this Grace, the Grace that
converts one cannot be frustrated by another; These things we hold in
opposition to the direct assertion of the Enemies of Grace, whereby they make
the work of Conversion, not ultimatly to terminate on Grace, but on Man's
Free Will, and how dangerous and damnable this Error is, may easily appear, For
1. It overturns and runs cross to the whole strain of the Gospel, for if we
loose but this one Pin, in making Faith and Conversion not to depend on Grace,
but on Free Will, then the whole Fabric of Grace falls down flat; then God
should elect us, because we were to elect Him, contrary to the Scripture, which
tells us, that He elects us, not we Him; and that our closing with Him by
Faith, depends on His electing of us: It overturns our free Justification by
Grace, for supposing Faith comes in in Justification, as it does, none being
justified but by Faith, and that Believing is of our selves, and that it is in
the power of Man's Free Will to close the Bargain, all is not here of Grace,
our Justification is not free, but some-way depends on Free Will: It overturns
the Perseverance of the Saints; for if Believing depend on Free Will, then our
Perseverance depends on it also, for if the Man's Free Will change, he may fall
back and break his neck in a manner, at the very threshold of Heaven; whereas
if it be the work of Grace (as indeed it is) that brings forth Faith, and
carries it on, and if this work of Grace cannot be frustrated or restrained by
the malice and hardness of any Heart to which it is applied, because it cures
the hardness and removes that malice; then certainly this Error cannot stand;
and we are persuaded when we plead thus for Grace, we have the best end of the
Debate, and the surest Ground to go upon, most for God's Honor, and most for
the comfort of Believers. 2. This Error thwarts with the Glory of the Grace of
God; for it is an Error that strikes at the richest and most radiant Diamond of
the Crown of the Glory of Christ, it hangs Election and the effectualness of
God's Decree as to effectual Calling, Faith, Justification, and Perseverance on
the Person himself, and makes God and Christ to be in the Man's common debt,
and reverence, to make His Decree effectual, whereas it is the glory of Grace
to have all Flesh allanarly in its debt and common, as having loved freely,
elected, called, justified, sanctified, and carried on the work of Grace til it
end and be perfected in Glory, freely; which is the Song of the redeemed, Rev.
1.5, 6. Unto him who has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own
blood, and has made us kings and priests unto God and his Father, to him be
glory and dominion; If eternal love be free, then the expression or
manifestation of it in making us Kings and Priests unto God, is also free, 3.
This Error is exceeding destructive to the consolation of God's People; Is it
not a comfortless Doctrine that founds their Believing and Perseverance on
their own Free Will? if ye were to make the bargain of Grace, whether would ye
think it more comfortable and sure, that the effectualness of Believing and
Perseverance should hang on the Grace of God, or on your own Free Will?
especially considering the pravity of your Will; doleful would your condition
be, if Free Will were the Base or Foundation, and God used no more but external
persuasion: how specious soever this opinion seem to be, because it puts it in
Man's option to believe and convert himself, or not, as he pleases; yet it
overturns the whole strain of the Gospel, and quite eclipseth the glory of
Grace, and cuts the very throat of your Consolation, and is the great ground of
Popery, Pelagianism, and Arminianism; to which ye would therefore so much the
more advert, and we do the rather speak to it, that ye may be guarded against
it, and that ye may be settled in the Truth, especially since the same Errors
are a-reviving in another shape in these days, as is manifest in that foolry of
Quakers, who talk of a Light within them, and talk so of that Light as if it
were of power sufficient to convert and guide them, if it be not resisted. As
also that other conceit of being above Ordinances, implys something of this
same Error; which ye would set your selves to abhor, as that which the Devil is
again laboring to sow the Seed of amongst us, and labor to be confirmed in
the Truth: For if there be any truth at all in Christianity, these are two main
Truths, the utter inability that is in Men's Hearts by Nature to exercise Faith
in Christ, and the efficacious and irresistible power of the Grace of God, in
the begetting of Faith where it is begotten; which when we shall all appear
before the Tribunal of God, will be found to be so, and none will have a Mouth
opened to oppose them. And what absurdity, I pray, is there here,
notwithstanding all the clamor of corrupt Men? that God has reserved this
work of converting Sinners by His Grace to Himself, and has not put it in the
hand of their own Free Will; which supposes Men to have a stock within
themselves, and has many fearful effects following it, tending to the
depreciating of the Grace of God, and to the drawing Men off from dependence on
Christ, and to the giving of them ground of boasting in themselves, and of
vanity and security, all which this Doctrine of Gods Grace overthrows, and
stops the Mouth of the Creature from all vain boasting, to the high exaltation
of Gods free, sovereign, and efficacious Grace, and to the great comfort of His
People.

Use 3. The second Use serves to commend the Grace of God to the Hearers of the
Gospel, and especially to Believers; There cannot be a greater commendation
given to it, than this, that it works effectually, and indeed it could not be
called Grace, I mean, Saving Grace, if it should want this effect, even to save
such as it is applied to; but this highly commends Grace, that if, there be
mighty Corruption in us, there is a strong arm of Grace put forth by Him for
perfiting of that which concerns us, notwithstanding of this great strength of
Corruption. And if ye think your selves not to be Believers, and think this
Doctrine to be hard, that ye cannot Believe without this Grace, and yet would
fain Believe, consider that as none can believe, neither can Believers stand
without Grace; so Grace can help you to do that which ye cannot do, which is
the commendation of Grace, and should make it more lovely to you; this gives
encouragement to any poor Soul that is as it were in the place of the breaking
forth of Children, and lays greater ground of confidence that they shall come
speed, than if they had it in their own hand; and serves to obviat that grand
objection of Souls that would fain be at closing with Christ, and cannot come
to Him, here is a powerful Arm reached forth to draw them.

Use 3. The third Use serves to humble Believers who have any thing of the work
of Grace, and so, to work them up to thankfulness to Him that has communicate
ought of it to them: Is there any of you that have Grace, who has made you to
differ from others? it was not your selves but free Grace, and therefore ye
have reason to acknowledge it with thankfulness, and to say, if this same
Doctrine had not been true, I would have been a stranger to God all my days,
and remained under the dominion of Satan and Sin with these that are in Nature;
and with David, Psalm. 16.7. to say, I bless the Lord who has given me counsel,
my reins also instruct me in the night seasons; This counsel was not the common
advice that all got from the Word preached, but the inward counsel of the
Spirit that made his reins Instruct him, and made him inwardly to follow the
advice that the Word gave him outwardly; and it is this inward work of the
Spirit that keeps in the life of Grace, as well as begets it, as it is Psalm.
73.23, 24. Nevertheless I am continually with thee, thou have holden me by my
right hand, thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to
glory; whom have I in heaven but thee, etc. my flesh and my heart fails, but
God is the strength of my heart and my portion for ever: the Psalmist glories
in this, that the work of his throw-bearing, did not depend on his own flesh
and heart, but on God, who was the strength of his heart and his portion for
ever: If Believers would consider what they were in their natural condition,
and how much they are obliged to the Grace of God, that with power was applied
in their Conversion, it would stop their Mouth as to boasting, make them admire
Grace, and sound forth its praise: And they would think Graces sweet way of
prevailing, to be no co-active forcing of their Will, but the greatest part of
their freedom; and so far would it be from being looked on as a violenting or
wronging of their Will, that it would be esteemed their truest and greatest
liberty: We are persuaded that the Saints in Heaven count it no bondage that
God has so fully fred them from all Corruption, that they serve Him with
delight, and do so necessarily; and shall any sojourning-Saints here below,
count it a wronging of their Will, that God takes such pains on them, to subdue
Corruption, and to bring them to some measure of conformity to them who are
above? God forbid.

Use 4. The fourth Use of it is, To let us see, what great ground of
encouragement there is here for the Hearers of the Gospel, to set about the
work of Believing, and what ground there is to make them all utterly
inexcusable who shall continue in their Unbelief; which may be thought somewhat
strange, when we say that no means can be effectual for working of Faith,
without the effectual Grace of God be applied; But let these two be put
together, 1. That though we be insufficient of our selves, and though all
outward means be of themselves ineffectual, that yet there is a sufficiency in
the Grace of God: And 2. That this Grace shall be powerful to work Faith in the
Hearers of the Gospel, if they make not themselves guilty of frustrating this
Grace in the offer of it (as they may do); These then who will not believe,
will be found most inexcusable. But to return to the main intent of this Use,
We say, that the encouragement lies here, that though we be unable, we have an
able Mediator, and Grace is powerful; and therefore we should with the greater
encouragement set about the work of Believing, as the Apostle reasons, Phil.
2.12, 13. Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God
that works in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure: Ye might
possibly think it had been more encouraging to have said, ye are able of your
selves to will and to do; but certainly, Grace is a more encouraging motive
then any thing in the Creature; say not then, ye cannot will nor do, for that
excuse is taken away by God's offering to work both in you by His Grace; But
let me exhort all, both these that are begun to be Believers, and these that
are to begin to believe, to be so far from disputing themselves from it, as
that they rather encourage themselves to work out the work of their own
Salvation with fear and trembling, because God's Grace which ye have in your
offer, is so powerful to work the work, and will admit of no utter opposition
from Corruption in you, if ye receive not the Grace of God in vain that is
offered to you in the Gospel: If Grace were so weak as we might cast it back at
our pleasure, and if it were but a helper in the work of Faith and Conversion,
as Arminians make it, what encouragement could we have from it? and as to
Practice, is not this Doctrine as encouraging? what advantage or comfort is it
to undertake any thing in our own strength, which is none at all? is not this
much more encouraging, to undertake in the strength of Gods Grace? knowing that
the same work of Grace that begets Faith, is as effectual to carry it on, and
to make us to persevere in it, and to enable us to every good word and work;
let Grace work then, and take a proof of it, and ye shall find it powerful: The
Lord Himself give you wisdom so to do for your Salvation and Consolation.

SERMON XVI.
ISAIAH LIII.I. -- And to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?
It Is much to walk evenly and steadfastly under the pure Doctrine of Grace, and
neither therefrom to take occasion to give way to looseness and carnal liberty,
nor to become faint and discouraged, and fearful at the way of God; corrupt
Nature is ready to abuse the best things: That word which we have 2 Pet. 3.16.
that there are many that wrest and pervert the Scriptures to their own
destruction, holds true, not only of doctrinal Heresies, but it holds also true
in respect of Men's Practice, or practical Errors; for some hearing of the
impotency of Nature, and of the power and perfection of Grace in bringing about
its designed effect, are ready to think that they need to do nothing,
alleging, that if Grace undertake the work it will be wrought, and if not, it
will not be wrought; and thus Atheism and Prophanity steal in secretly upon the
Heart, and the sweet Doctrine of Grace is abused and perverted by such, to
their own destruction: There are others again, who it may be will not dare so
to top with God, who yet have their own fainting and discouragement when they
hear of this Doctrine, and think it hard that they themselves can do nothing,
and fear that they will never win to believe, because they cannot do it of
themselves, these also fail, and make not the right use of Grace.

Ye remember, the Question which we proposed to speak a little to on the last
Doctrine, to wit, That seeing both these branches of it are true, That except
Grace concur, the most powerful preaching of the Gospel will not beget Faith;
and that wherever the work of Grace goes along with the Gospel, there Faith is
begotten; what is called for from the Hearers of the Gospel as the Use of this
Doctrine?

Before we come to answer this Question more particularly, we would 1. Premit
this word in general, That none would account the Preaching or Hearing of the
Word of God to be useless or fruitless, albeit that without the work of Grace,
Men cannot yield the Fruit which it call^th for from them; for our blessed Lord
Jesus, Isaiah and Paul, preached this Doctrine of Grace, and the necessity of
the Lords Arm to be revealed in the Conversion of Souls, and yet they taught
the Word in season and out of season, and were gathering in some, and to some
this Doctrine was made the savor of life unto ^ife, though to others (through
their enmity and corruption) it became the savor of death unto death: To
conclude therefore, the inconsistency, or to deny the consistency of these two,
to wit, Of the necessity of Preaching the Doctrine of Grace, and of the
pressing in Preaching the practice of holy Duties, and the use of ordinary
appointed M^ans, would reach this dreadful length, even to condemn the Prophets
of old, yea, and our blessed Lord Jesus Himself who says, John 6.44. after He h
d preached long, No man can come to me ex^ept the Father who has sent me draw
him and verse. 65 -- Therefore I said unto you, that no man can come to me,
unless it be given him of my Father. And will any think that His Hearers, who
accounted this with some others, Hard sayings, and from that time went back,
and walked no more with him, were excusable in their doing so? or that His
Preaching was useless, needless, or impertinent, as having a tendency to tempt
Men to abandone all use of Means, because He preached this Doctrine of the
impossibility of believing in Him, without this pull and draught of His Fathers
Arm?

But secondly, We shall a little more particularly in answer to the Question,
speak First, To what Uses Folk would not make of this Doctrine, or what things
they would abstain from, as tending to a wrong use of it. Secondly, To some
Considerations for pressing this Doctrine, and removing from it the
construction of hardness that we are ready to put upon it. Thirdly, To what is
the native Use it calls for; And Lastly, to some Considerations to press this.

For the first, When we say to all that hears this Gospel that there is a
necessity of a powerful work of Grace ere this Word can be profitable, ye would
1. Abstain from, and lay aside curiosity in seeking satisfying Answers to all
these Objections that are moved against it, and absurdities that it is loaded
with by the Devil and Man's proud Nature, and learn to stoop to, and reverence
the sovereign Dominion of God, and His deep and unsearchable Wisdom and
Knowledge, in this sovereign way of His Grace, as the Apostle does, Romans 11.33.
O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how
unsearchable are his judgments and his ways past finding out? ye would also
consider that other word, Romans 9.20. Who art thou that reply against God? or
expostulateth with Him, Shall the thing formed, say to him that formed it, why
have thou made me thus? It Is good to enquire and to seek to know the use the
Lord calls for of this Doctrine with sobriety; but there is an enquiring to
satisfy curiosity which the Lord abhors, as we may gather from Exodus 19 21.
where the Lord being to deliver His ^^^l says to Moses, Go down, charge the
people ((...) word of peremptory command) left they break through unto the Lord
to gaze, and many of them perish: The Lord is not displeased that His People
should endeavor to behold, and take Him up aright, but when their end is not
good, but to satisfy an itch of Curiosity, it displeases Him: This may be
useful in many cases, and particularly in this we have in hand, to teach us
sobriety in seeking to know the way of God's Grace, as the Lord would have His
People, Exodus 19. waiting for as much of His Mind as He thought fit to acquaint
them with, and to write on the two Tables of Stone, but He would not have them
breaking in over the Boundary or March which He did set to them, lest He should
break through on them, and they should be made to perish; So would He have Men
in their studying the knowledge of His Ways, and particularly of the way of His
Grace, to keep His Measures, and to contain themselves within the limits that
He pleases to set to them. 2. Abstain from carnal freting at, and
expostulating with the way of God, whether in the highest degree of upbraiding
Grace and snarling at it, that ye should not have the Stock in your own hand;
or in an inferior degree, having a Heart inwardly discontent, that ye are not
more able of your selves then ye are, to believe, which is the thing that the
Apostle opposes, Romans 9.20, 21. Should the thing formed say to him that formed
it, why have thou made me thus? Has not the potter power over the clay. etc.
especially since none can answer that question with any just reflection upon
God; who is to be blamed for that defect or inability? or whence did that
inability or defect in Man's Nature proceed? God was gracious, free and liberal
in making Man perfect, and whose Fault is it that it is otherways? 3. Abstain
from, and beware of drawing desperate conclusions as to the giving over the use
of the Means, or of becoming more lazy and secure in the duties of Holiness,
and in the practice of Piety, because of the necessity of this Grace; but on
the contrary, be the more diligent and serious, that ye have so much need of
Grace, and that of your selves ye can do so little, or rather nothing that is
truly good without it.

I know that profane Hearts are very fertile and broody of Arguments to plead
this point of neglect of Means, and will readily say, what is the fruit of
diligence, and the prejudice of laziness? the one will do us no good, and the
other can do us no ill, seeing it is Grace that does all the work: But 1. By your
laziness ye mar your own fruitfulness, and that through your own fault, and
make this addition to your guilt, that ye not only continue graceless, but do
so through your sin wilfully. 2. Ye may draw on to your natural impotency,
habitual and judicial hardness of Heart, and blindness of Mind; it is on this
very ground that many Ears are made heavy, many Eyes made blind, and many
Hearts made fat, and is that a little or light matter? 3. Though ye may think
this little, yet that which will bear the weight of your sentence at the Day of
Judgment, will not be your natural impotency, or that Grace was not made
efficacious to your Conversion, but this will be it, that when God sent out His
Word to win you, and offered His Grace for inabling you to yield, ye did
maliciously and deliberatly reject it. So that it will never be suffered to
come to this, I was unable; because the Word was wilfully rejected before it
came to this.

But secondly, Because there are some others possibly that have more
seriousness in the use of Means, who, though they dare not quarrel with Grace,
yet it weights and discour^ges them because they can do so little, and they are
made heartless to essay, and hopeless to come speed, and it may be, that this
is in some whom the Lord allows not to draw any such conclusion, but would
rather have encouraged; we would say to such, that they would beware of
fainting or being discouraged, as if that were impossible to God and His Grace
which is impossible to them; they would by all means beware of sitting up, and
^ackning their hand in Duty, because they can do so little: We know there are
some that need not much to be spoken to for satisfying of them in this point,
but there are others who are weighted with this Doctrine, to whom the Lord
allows more tender usage, and would not have them to faint nor be discouraged;
you that are such (if any be) may know that there is ground for us to press
this, and that we may remove the construction of hardness from this sovereign
way of Gods Grace, wherein He has thought fit to draw Men unto an absolute
dependence on Himself: In the dispensing of it, we shall propose these few
Considerations, 1. That (which was hinted at before) never a Man that has
heard this Gospel when he comes to count with God, shall have it to say, that
the reason why he did not receive and embrace it, was his impotency and
inability, but the real reason shall be found to be his wilful rejecting of it;
and upon the contrary it shall be found, that there was never one that would in
earnest have had strength to run the way of Gods Commandments, and Faith to
grip to, and embrace Jesus Christ offered in this Gospel, that for want of
ability came short; and if so, what reason is there to complain? if none want
Faith but such as would not have Him, and if none that would have Him can
complain of their want of Him, upon these two we have great ground of
encouragement to them that have a sincere affection to be at Him, and there is
no ground for Folk to sit up or fall lazy in pursuing after union and communion
with Him in the use of Means: None shall have cause to complain of their want
of Him, but such as with their own consent gave Him over; and any that would
fain have had Him, shall not miss Him; for this real willingness to close with
Christ, being a work of the Grace of God, and it being no less power that works
this Will, than the power which does effectuate the work of Conversion, and
bring it to perfection; He that begins the work will perfect it according to
His Promise, seeing there is nothing that He does begin but He does perfect it;
and therefore in this case, Folk had more need to reflect upon their
willingness to have Christ, and to close with Him on His own terms, than to
dispute their impotency and inability. 2. Consider what they have been whom the
Lord has brought through, were they not such as had as much need of Grace as ye
have? had they not the same corrupt Nature that ye have? were they not as
impotent and unable to do for themselves? could any of themselves do more than
ye can? consider them all that are before the Throne, was it not this same
Grace of God and not their good Nature nor their Free Will that did the work?
and they were not expressly or by name included in the Promises more than ye
are; and ye are not expressly excluded more than they were; the Lord brought
forward the work of Grace in them that same way that He deals with you; by
the preaching of His Word He brought them first to know their sinfulness,
impotency, and weakness, to know that there was need of a Savior, that their
Salvation was not of themselves, neither was it in them to make right use of
the Savior and Salvation offered, but in the power of His Grace, and what if
He be doing so to thee? and if that condition be hard and hopeless now, it had
been a hopeless and hard condition to these many that are now before the
Throne. 3. Consider, That there is no question but Grace is effectual to carry
on the work, and to make it go through; all the difficulty and dissatisfaction
is, because God keeps the application in His own Hand, which the Man's Heart
would have in its Hand, and which of them do ye think is most sure and
encouraging? all your fainting and discouragement resolves in this, because ye
can do so little; If ye be in good earnest desirous to have Grace throughing
the work of Faith and Conversion, would ye possibly make choice of another or
better Hand than God's to put it in? is it not as suitable and sure, that His
Wisdom should contrive and lay down the way, as it is to His Power to set it
forward, and to the freedom of His Grace to make application of it, and all
more suitable and sure than if it were in your own Hand? may ye not think shame
to be discouraged on this ground, because any thing ye do ye must needs get it
from God, and that that should be an obstruction in the way of Godliness, which
is a main encouragement to it? is the Lord an upbraider? is there any that can
quarrel Him as nigardly in dispensing of His Grace? does he not give to all men
liberally and upbraideth no man? and does it not become Him well to have the
conduct and guiding of His own Grace? 4. Consider how many the Lord has given
Grace to already, and how He has given it freely, surprizingly, and
unexpectedly; if ye could bring forth any proof that never one got good of God,
ye might have a pretext for your discouragement and scarring, but when as many
as are before the Throne are pooofs of His being gracious to Sinners, when so
many have gotten good of God before you; and when there are several who to your
own certain knowledge, are daily get^ing good of Him sensibly, freely, and
unexp^ct^dly, who were as indisposed to bel^eve as ye are, and as much fainted
and discouraged as ye are; and when He says that He is found of them that
sought him not; is it not as likly that a poor Body that is longing for His
Grace shall be satisfied as well now as ever? according to that word Matthew.
5.6. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they shall
be filled; the Soul that would fain have Holiness shall get it: I know there
will be a business made here, and an new Objection started, whether this
longing or hunger be real or not? but if your longing and hunger be not real,
it will not trouble you much to want; and it is not to encourage or comfort
such that have no real longing, that all this is spoken; we know there is more
need to make some vomit up the conceit of their ability, than to encourage them
against any seen and felt inability; There are many alace! that think little of
the Grace of God, with whom the error anent Universal Grace would aggree well,
they having a presumptuous conceit of Faith, and that it is not so difficult a
thing to believe as is alleged; we must profess that we have not much to say
to such for their encouragement, only we would let them know, that there is a
time coming when God will refute and silence them: But as for such as see their
inability, and are put to any measure of suitable seriousness and longing in
earnest after Believing, the Lord allows that they be strengthened and
encouraged, and to such we would say this, If their missing of Jesus Christ
weight them, if it be their burden that they cannot Believe, and if their
longing, hunger, and thirst be some pain and piece of exercise to them, so as
other things relish not with them, they are so taken up with that; and if they
had their Souls choice, it would be this, even a satisfying fight of union and
communion with Him; their longing and hunger is real, and we may turn over that
just now cited word to them, Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
righteousness, for they shall be filled; this hunger and thirst was never
begotten without some spiritual Physic from Christ the great Physician, who
has provision for satisfying it, and as we use to say, of the natural Life, He
sent never the Mouth but He sent the Meat with it, so we may say of this
hunger, He that gives this spiritual Mouth, gives always the Meat with it;
would to God there were many enlarged Apetites to receive, our Lord would no
doubt be found ready to satisfy them all; if the Mouth were wide opened, the
Affections enlarged, and the Soul sick under hunger and chirst for Christ and
Holiness, that Sickness should not be found to be unto Death, but to the glory
of the Grace of Him who is the great Healer.

For the third thing that we proposed, to wit, That seeing there are many ways
how Folk may go wrong, and yet none should give over hope, what is the native
use and exercise that this Doctrine calls for? I shall speak to this, first in
general, and secondly, in some few steps or particular directions. 1. Then in
general, ye would consider that place, Phil. 2.12, 13. Work out the work of
your own salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God that works in you
both to will and to do of his good pleasure; where it is clear, that the
exhortation given to them to work out their Salvation is drawn from this same
Doctrine of the efficacious work of Gods Grace, working in them to will and to
do as the great Motive; God says. He works in you to will and to do,
therefore work ye out the work of your own Salvation: There are in this general
exhortation four things employed, the first is the very entry or beginning of
the work of Salvation, that is, the exercising of Faith in Jesus Christ, it is
of God, therefore work at that work, as if He said, Believe to the saving of
your Souls, as the word is Heb. 10. ult. For it is God that works the will in
you. The second is the work of Repentance, this is also taken in here, for his
bidding them work in fear and trembling, respects their sinfulness, and
necessarly implies Repentance. The third is their aiming at perfection in
Holiness, the putting forth themselves in improving of all Means, and in the
exercising of all Duties for that end, work out says He. And fourthly, It looks
to the manner, that it be not carnally or in carnal confidence, but with fear
and trembling; and if it should be asked, how does that conclusion flow from
this Doctrine, it is Gods work, or He works in you to will and to do, therefore
work ye out your Salvation? Folk would rather think that the conclusion should
be, since God does all this, do ye nothing: No, but the just contrary
conclusion is drawn and it hangs on these two. 1. On the efficacy of Grace.
it is God that works to will and to do, it is His Grace that strengthens you,
and where. He works the will, He works the deed, where He begins a work, He
will also through and effectuate it, therefore take ye encouragement to work;
as if He had said, fight well, for ye have a brave second, though it be not
proper to call Grace a second; set your selves to the exercise of Holiness in
earnest, and God will make it go with you. 2. On the consideration of sinfulness
and weakness in them, which should make them work in fear and trembling, as if
He had s id, seeing it is God, and the efficacy of His Grace that does the work
be not ye vain and presumptuous; the first part says, it is God that works and
not ye, therefore be ye the more holily confident; the second part says, it is
not ye but God, and therefore do the work with fear and trembling; and both
tend to this, that Folk would be serious in minding and prosecuting the work of
their Salvation from the first step to the last, in fear and trembling, on this
ground, that though they have nothing in themselves, yet there is enough in God
and in His Grace to do their turn: How is it then, or what can be the reason,
that we in our Hearts do draw the just contrary conclusion to that which the
Spirit of God draws here from this ground? when we have the offer of Grace, and
hear of the power and efficacy of it, it should as to our part provoke us to be
more busy, reasoning thus with our selves, that though our Corruption will
soon overcome us, yet it wi l not, it cannot overcome Grace; and though the
exercise of Faith be above our reach, yet it is not above the reach of Grace,
though we be weak, yet Grace is strong, and therefore we will work it out: And
upon the other side, we ought to con^inue humble, and in fear and trembling
work it out, because it is not we but Grace that does the work: If Grace were
well considered, there is nothing that would more str^ngthen Folks hands to
work; and upon the other hand, there is nothing that would make Folks more
watchful, and to walk in holy fear, considering that we are poor Beggars, and
through our unwatchfulness, or conceit and presumption, may mar the outlettings
of His Grace, especially if we grow secure, and ungrately forget what we
receive from Him.

2. I come now to some steps or particular directions implied in this Use,
because it will be asked, What then should Folk do? And before I touch on
particulars, take these two Cave^ts in the entry to them. 1. That we can
propose nothing to be done by you, neither can ye do any thing of your selves
that is a gracious act or deed. 2. That we understand not that any thing can be
done by Men in their Natural state, that does infer or procure, and far less
deserve the giving of Grace to any; but seeing God has given direction to us
how to walk in order to the working out of our Salvation, we say 1. That it is
safe to us to walk in the way He has directed us to walk in, and in the use of
the Means He has prescribed, and much more safe then to lay them aside. 2.
That there is greater suitableness betwixt the use of the Means, and the
finding of Grace, then there is betwixt the neglect of Means and the finding of
it. 3. That it aggrees well with Gods way in bringing about the Conversion of
Sinners, to bring them piece and piece forward; sometimes bringing them to the
use of external Means, and to the performance of outward Duties, sometimes
convincing them of Sin, and letting them see their need of Christ; sometimes
discovering the worth that is in Christ, and bringing them to fall in love with
Him, ere they actually close with Him; and making them in their practice to
follow any peep or glimmering of light that is let out to them, and to go the
length that light discovers the way and makes it plain as to their duty.

Now for particular Directions, we would 1. Bid you study to be fixed and
established in the Faith of these general Truths that relate to Man's Sinfulness
and Misery, and Insufficiency in Himself, that in us, that is, in ou^ flesh
dwells no good thing; that naturally we are dead in Sins and Trespasses, and
cannot quicken our selves; and in the Faith of the necessity and powerfulness
of Grace, and that it is Christ that must give and work Faith, and that Grace
can do the turn, and prevail where it is put on work; ye would also consider,
and believe the great hazard of missing Grace, and the advantage that comes by
it; ye would meditate on these things, and on the Scriptures that hold them
out; and on the experiences of the Saints that confirm them, that ye may not
only have a glance and transient view of them, but may be confirmed in the
Faith of the truth of them. 2. Content not your selves with a general Faith of
the truth of this Doctrine, but labor to be suitably affected with these
things that ye believe; and though every affectedness be not special Grace, yet
I speak to them that are ready to lay the blame and fault on the Grace of God,
and yet were never affected with their own gracelesness: Ye would study to be
affected with the gracelesness of your Nature, and let it put you to some
sanctified disquiet and trouble, till with Ephraim, ye be made to smite upon
your thigh, and till ye be put to a holy deliberation and consultation about
your own condition; a Man that is under the hazard of a civil penalty, will
think on it again and again, it will affect him, and he will not be at rest
till he be without the reach of it; much more should ye be with the hazard that
your Souls are in through Sin; ye are not excusable, so long as ye come not
this length. 3. Add to this, Diligence in the use of all outward Means and
Duties, whereby, and wherein the Lord uses to communicate His Grace, abounding
always in the work of the Lord, as the Apostle exhorts, 1 Cor. 15.58. Be
diligent in secret Prayer, Reading, Meditation, Conference, Self-examination,
Hearing, keeping good Company, and the like, which indeed Hypocrites may do,
yet they cease not for that to be Duties. 4. Be sincere and serious in the use
and performance of these Means and Duties, that which I mean, is a moral
sincerity and seriousness, such as a Man will readily have in a civil Cause
that he has depending before a civil Judge, or in hearing of News, or the
like, which is a thing that may be, and is often found in Men that are void of
a principle of Grace, and yet Folk are very often defective in this, and make
themselves exceeding guilty before God, because they come not this length. 5.
Take heed and beware of entertaining any thing that holds and bars out Grace,
or of doing any thing that may mar or quench the working or moving of Grace; If
ye cannot get Christ entertained in your Heart as ye should, be sure to give it
to no other; if ye cannot get Corruption thrust out, nor mortified, watch
against the rising or harboring of that which ye know to be Corruption; and
against the incoming or rising of such evils, as ye know will keep or put away
the Beloved; guard also against the neglecting of such Means, as by the neglect
whereof ye may grieve His Spirit. 6. Study and seek after a composed frame of
Spirit in your ordinary walk, and especially in Duties of Worship: Carnal Mirth
and Jollity, loose Company, and suffering the Heart to go a whoring after the
things of the World, do not only provoke Christ as they are sins, but indispose
us for Duty, and mar the exercise of Grace where it is, and keep it back where
it is not, therefore the wise man says Eccles. 7.3. that sorrow is better then
laughter, for by the sadness of the countenance the heart is made better;
carnal Sorrow is not to be commended, but sober sadness, or a grave and
composed frame of Spirit, is better then a light and unsettled frame, it being
very hard, if not impossible to keep the Heart right even where there is Grace,
but where there is some counterpoise or wither-weight; and it must be far more
impossible to keep it right where the work of Grace is not, or but in the very
first beginnings of it; and though I do not call this composedness of frame,
Grace, yet it keeps Folk in some capacity, as it were, to receive Grace: It Is
said Lam. 3.27, 28. That it is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his
youth, he sits alone and keeps silence, because he has born it upon him,
he puts his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope; for though Crosses
are not always blessed to Conversion, yet we may see now and then that sad
times are the beginnings of better times, and even in Hypocrites their sad
times ordin^rily are their best times; I neither desire nor allow any to bring
Cros^es upon themselves, yet I would desire all to make the best use of any
Cross they are under, and to be acquainting themselves with their Sin and
Infirmities, and with their Hazard, and with such other things as may weight
and compose them without fostering discouragement and a^xiety; and to love as
well to speak and hear such things spoken of, as may provoke to sighing and
sadness, as these that may provoke to laughter; I said of laughter (says
Solomon. Eccles. 2.2.) it is mad, and of mirth what does it? and Prove. 14.13.
Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is
heaviness: though often times our Laughter may not be so sinful, yet it readily
more indisposeth us for any spiritual Duty, then Sorrow does; the Heart is like
a Clock, whereof, when the inner wheels are set a reeling, it is not soon
righted and settled. 7. I would propose Ephraim's example to you, Jer. 31.18,
19. and desire that ye would in the fight and sense ye have of your sinfulness,
weakness, and fecklesness, be bemoaning your selves and your sad condition to
God, putting up that Prayer to Him, Turn thou me and I shall be turned; These
words flowing from suitable sense are good; and then follows, after that I was
turned, I repented; It Is observable, that in the very entry he is graciously
taken notice of by the Lord, Surely I have beard Ephraim bemoaning himself
thus; so it is with God's People when they consider how great Strangers they
have been to God, how sinful and stubborn, and how impossible it is for them to
mend themselves of themselves, they retire themselves into some corner, and
there bemoane their case, and cry out, O! what a sinful nature is this, and
when will it be got amended? I am as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke, says
Ephraim, and the Lord tells, He heard and observed it; when possibly he thought
he was scarcely, if at all Praying, but rather sighing out as it were a short
ej^culation to God, O! that I were amended; the last word of his Prayer is,
Turn thou me and I shall be turned, or convert me, and I shall be converted; he
sees that when all is done, he must cleanse his hands and leave the matter to
God, I cannot, but thou can work the work, and it ends sweetly in words of
Faith, for thou art the Lord my God, and where words of Faith are after serious
exercise, that exercise has often times Faith going alongs with it, hence are
these words Lam. 3.20. If so be there may be hope: Psalm. 119 Incline mine
heart, open mine eyes, etc. and Luke 9.13. How much more will your heavenly
Father give his Holy Spirit to them that ask him? it is good to pray for the
efficacy of Grace, and to offer our selves Subjects to be wrought upon, and
Objects to receive what Grace offers to us.

As we began these Directions with a word of Caution, so we would close them;
Do not think that these things in a Natural Man, following this sinful course,
will bring forth Grace; neither conclude, that where these things only are
discerned and no more in some Persons, that there Grace is wanting, it being to
help such forward that we mainly speak to them: Only in sum, 1. Keep clean and
clear the Light ye have. 2. Improve the strength bestowed. And 3. What ye have
not, put it over on God, and seek from Him, who has Grace to give for working
that in you; and it would seem that in reason ye should refuse none of these
three. 1. We say, Keep clean and clear your Light, for if ye detain the Truth
of God in unrighteousness, and make as it were a Prisoner of it, by setting a
guard of corrupt Affections about it, ye may bring on blindess. 2. Improve what
strength ye have, for if ye improve not your strength, were it but in Natural
parts and endowments, that makes you inexcusable when Spiritual and gracious
qualifications are denied to you, for ye have procured this to your selves; are
there not many things that ye thought your selves able for, that ye never
seriously once essayed, much more might have been done as to Repentance, Love
to God, Charity to others, and the like; and when ye have not stretched your
selves to the yondmost in these, there are sure many things left undone that ye
might have done. 3. What ye dow not do, or find your selves unable to do, put
it on God to do for you, seriously, humbly, singly, and self-deniedly; for if
ye come not to God with that which ye are unequal and unable for, ye are still
on this side your duty and without excuse. Take these then together, Improve
any strength ye have according to any measure of Light God has given you, and
coming to God through Jesus Christ, seek that ye want from him, and leave the
acceptance of your Persons and of your Performances on Him: This is the result
of all that we have spoken of this Doctrine of Grace, that ye may not take
occasion from the way of Gods dispencing Grace, to continue graceless, which if
ye do, it will be ground of a most grievous challenge against you; but that ye
may see an excellent consistency betwixt the sovereignty of Grace, and your
going about the means appointed of God in order to Faith and Conversion, and
the study of Holiness; and that ye may go on in the use of these Means, with an
Eye to Grace, in the sense of your own insufficiency to think as of your
selves, so much as a good thought, leaving all your Duties at Christ's feet,
walking before him with a stopped Mouth; when any thing is wanting, standing at
his Door and begging it from him, and when any thing is received, cleansing, to
say so, your own Hands of it, and giving him all the Thanks, Praise, and Glory
of it. To him be Praise for ever.

SERMON XVII.
ISAIAH LIII.II, III. Verse 2. For he shall grow up before him as a tender
plant, and as a root out of a dry ground: he has no form nor comeliness: and
when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him.

Verse 3. He is despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows, and acquainted
with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was despised, and we
esteemed him not.


IN the former Verse the Prophet has asserted the rarity and scarcity of
Believing the Gospel, and receiving of Jesus Christ offered therein, Who has
believed our report? says he, who has made Christ welcome? And to whom is the
arm of the Lord revealed? to whom has this Gospel been made effectual by the
Power of God for the engaging of their Hearts to him?

In these two Verses he gives a reason as it were of this, which runs upon
these two. 1. The low appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ in respect of his
outward condition, it has no outward beauty, splendour nor greatness to commend
it, but is attended with much meanness, and with many afflictions. 2. The
itching humor of Men who are taken up with worldly grandour, or greatness and
glory, and make little account of any thing that wants that; as if he said, it
is no wonder that Christ get few to believe on him, and that few receive this
Gospel, for he will not come with much worldly pomp and grandour, which the Men
of the World greatly affect and are much taken up with.

To open the words a little, we shall first consider the matter of this reason,
and then the consequence of it; or what influence it has on Men's offending at
Christ, and continuing in their Unbelief; only we shall premit two or three
words to both.

That which we premit first is this, That the He that is here spoken of, is our
Lord Jesus Christ, who in the New Testament has this Text applied to him, for
albeit there be no He so expressly mentioned in this Chapter before, yet in the
13. Verse of the former Chapter, to which this relates, the He that is spoken
of here, is called the Lords Servant; and it is said of him that He shall be
exalted and extolled, and made very high; and it is not unusual to speak of
Christ singularly by a relative without an antecedent, as Cant. 1.2. Let him
kiss me with the kisses of his mouth; because Christ to Believers is so
singular an one, that when ever he is spoken of by way of eminency and
excellency, as here, they cannot mistake him, or take an other for him.
Secondly, This want of form and comeliness, is not to be understood of any
personal defect in our Lords Humane Nature, but in respect of, and with
reference to the tract of his Life, and what accompanied his Humiliation, to
wit, That it was low and mean, without that external grandour, pomp and
splendor of outward things, which the world esteem to be comeliness and beauty.
3. Where it is said, He shall grow up before him, etc. It relates to the
hearers of the report of the Gospel concerning him, or to the man that believes
not the report spoken of before; And so relates to the words of the first verse.
Who has believed our report? Which is certainly meant of the man that hears of
him, and to whom he seems nothing worth, because of his mean and low outward
condition; for if we should apply it to God, we cannot see how it will so well
infer the scope, and be the reason of the unbelief asserted formerly, for which
end it is brought in here.

We come now to open the words a little, and here we would know that Christ's
low condition is two ways set down in these two verses. 1. In the 2. verse. In
respect of his want of the abundance of the things of this world. 2. In the 3.
verse. In respect of the accession of outward crosses and afflictions; for not
only does he want credit, respect, and esteem, but he has contempt, despite,
and reproach; Not only wants he great riches, but he has poverty, and is in a
poor and low condition: The first verse. expresses him negatively, to be no
worldly great man; The second verse. expresses him positively, to be a mean and
despised man. 1. Then these words, He shall grow up as a plant out of a dry
ground, are expounded by the words following, He has no form nor comeliness;
For as Shrubs or Scrogs growing up out of dry ground cryn and wither, when
trees planted in a fat soil, are fresh, fair, and beautiful. So shall it be
with Christ when he comes forth (says the Prophet) to the eyes of the world,
he shall, as it were, be like a Scrab in a Moor edge: Our Lord had personal and
much divine comeliness in him, as we may see, John 1.14. Where he says that the
Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory, the glory as
of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth: But the comeliness
here spoken of, is that outward state, pomp, and splendor which great men in
the world use to have, which Christ wanted: This is confirmed by the following
words, And when we shall see him there is no beauty that we should desire him;
There is in men naturally a delight and complacency in that which is beautiful
to the natural eye; But (says he) there shall be no such thing seen in Jesus
Christ when he comes, and therefore no great wonder that few believe on him:
And that he says We, it is either according to the phrase used in Scripture,
to make some hard thing digest and go down the better with the hearers, whereof
the speaker is not guilty; or it is his expressing what is the humor generally
in all men naturally; as if he had said, had even we who are elect and godly no
more but carnal eyes, we would think no more of Christ then other folk do, for
we should get no satisfaction to carnal reason.

The second thing whereby his low condition is set out, is in these words, He
is despised and rejected of men, etc. Not only shall he want that which carnal
hearts and eyes seek and look after, but he shall be so very low, that men
shall set him at naught, mock, and reject him: And what wonder then that he be
not believed on? A man of sorrows; As for the tract of his life, it shall be
spent in sorrows; And acquainted with grief; He shall not be a man that shall
be a stranger to crosses, griefs, and heaviness, but he shall be familiarly
acquainted with them, and they with him; And we hid as it were our faces from
him; A consequent of the former; As men will not give their countenance to them
whom they despise; So, says he, we shall think shame to see or look at him; He
shall be the object of men's contempt and scorn, and we shall not so much as
countenance him; He shall be despised and set at naught by Herod and the Roman
Soldiers; And we esteemed him not; That is, we the people of the Jews, who owe
him more respect, esteemed him not; And hence he concludes, that it is no
wonder that but few believe on him: And so in the words following he goes on to
describe his Humiliation, and to remove the offense that might be taken at it,
Surely he has born our griefs, etc. As if he had said, there is no such cause
to skar and stumble at Christ for his lowness and base outward condition; for
it was not for himself, but for us that he became so low, and therefore it did
not become us to think so little of him; His griefs and sorrows are humane
infirmities that he subjected himself to for our sake; For the wrath of God
which he suffered for us is spoken of afterward. And because there is great
difference betwixt Christ's bearing of infirmities, and our bearing of
infirmities, He being like to us in all things, except sin: I shall for
clearing of this, name three distinctions given by Divines when they discourse
of this purpose.

1. They distinguish and put difference betwixt the taking on of infirmities,
and the contracting of infirmities; The taking on of infirmities, is the
assuming of the effect without the cause; of the infirmity without the sinful
defect: Contracting of infirmity is the drawing on of the defect, with, and by
the cause; Now, we draw on the cause with the effect, Christ took on the
effect, but he had no sinful defect in him to draw on such infirmities: He
might have taken on the nature of man without the infirmities, if he had so
pleased, but he took on the nature and infirmities without the cause. 2. They
distinguish betwixt these infirmities which are simply natural, such as man
might have had though he had never sinned, and these infirmities which flow
from man's nature, as fallen and corrupted; The first sort may be called
Passive, and look to suffering, as to be hungry, thirsty, weary, sensible of
that which hurts the body; The second sort may be called Active, and are
sinful, as flowing from sin, and tending to sin, as inclination to ill, and
indisposition to good, dullness as to the uptaking of Gods mind, etc. Our Lord
took on the first sort of infirmities that are simply natural, and may be
without sin; But he was free of the other that implies corruption in the
nature; He was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin says the
Apostle, Heb. 4.15. 3. They distinguish infirmities, in these that are called
natural and common to all men, as men, and these that are personal and
acquired, as flowing from some defect in generation, or are drawn on by some
intemperance, grossness in the life and conversation; As some Families are
subject to Diseases that come by Generation; Others draw on Diseases by
Whoredom, Drunkenness, and the like; Now our Lord was free of these last,
because being conceived by the Holy Ghost in the womb of the Virgin, there was
no defect in His Generation; And being blameless in his life and conversation,
he could acquire none of these infirmities; and therefore the infirmities which
he bare are of the first sort; that is, such as are common to all men, and to
men as men: And hence we think it probable which some say, That as our Lord was
not sick, so he was not capable of sickness, being so perfect in his
constitution or complexion; which makes for the glory of Grace, and says, That
our Lord behoved to die a violent death, there being no principle in him
tending to a natural death, though notwithstanding he did most willingly to
satisfy Justice for sinners. And this may serve to explain these words, That
he was a man of sorrows, and acquainted with griefs.

We come now to observe some things from the words, And 1. From the condition
our Lord is described to come to the world in; Observe, That the Messiah the
Lords Servant that was to redeem his people, was to become man, This is here
supposed and Prophesied of, as the first step of his Humiliation, He is called
a Man; And it is an aggravation of it that he was to be a man of sorrows; Or
taking our Lord Messiah to be already come, we may take the Observation thus;
That the Lord Jesus Christ, the eternal Son of the eternal Father is also a
true and real Man, A common truth, yet a truth fundamental to the Gospel,
whereof we are not to think the less or the worse, because it is a common
truth; When the fullness of time came (says the Apostle, Gal. 4 4.) God sent
forth his Son made of a Woman, made under the Law; Who, as it is, Philip. 2.
Thought it no robbery to be equal with God, yet took upon him the shape of a
Servant, and was made in likeness of men, and being found in fashion as a man,
he humbled himself, and became obedient, etc. So Heb. 2.14. It Is said of him,
That forasmuch as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also
himself likewise took part of the same, etc. And verse. 11. Both he that
sanctifies, and they that are sanctified are all of one, for which cause he is
not ashamed to call them brethren; And verse. 16. He took not on him the nature
of Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham, wherefore in all thing it
behoved him to be made like unto his brethren; He was made even like unto us in
all things except sin: And if we look to the way of grace, there was good
reason for this, that the Redeemer of sinners behoved to be Man. 1. If we
consider the interposed or adjoined threatening to the Covenant of Works, The
day thou eats thou shall surely die; There must be a satisfaction to Justice,
and the curse threatened must be born. 2. The curse must be born by man, the
Nature that sinned must die, the Party offending must satisfy in his own
Person, or in a Cautioner. And 3. By our Lord's becoming Man, 1. He came to
have a right as being near of Kin to sinners, to redeem them. And 2. By this
the Law has right to pursue and exact the Debt of him: And 3. By this, Grace
has access to commend the Redeemer of sinners to sinners, Heb. 2.17, 18. And
4.15, 16. Wherefore in all things it behoved him to he made like unto his
brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest, etc. And that
we have such a Redeemer, it makes God, to say so, trystable, and Grace to have
access, 1 Timothy 2.5. There is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the
Man Christ Jesus, and this gives man access to step in to God. 4. This makes
the mystery of Godliness to shine the more radiantly, and the wisdom and love
of God to shine the more conspicuously through it, 1 Timothy 3.16. Without
controversy great is the mystery of Godliness, God manifested in the flesh:
And John 1.14. The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his
glory, etc.

Use 1. It serves to be a prop and foundation to our Faith; We may say of this
truth, as the Apostle, speaking of the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 1.15. says, If
Christ he not risen, then our Preaching is vain, and your faith is vain; If
Christ were not Man, our Preaching and your Hearing were in vain: 1. By this we
have an evidence that our Lord is the true Messiah who was to become Man. 2. By
this we see a clear way how he was liable to our debt, and how his satisfaction
is communicable to us. And 3. In this also we see a main and most attractive
Argument to draw sinners into Christ for the actual application of his
purchase: Our Lord Jesus is Man, our Brother, and made of a Woman, made under
the Law; O! this puts a sweetness and loveliness on the Mediator, to commend
him to sinners, for the engaging of their hearts to him.

And therefore as a second Use of it, seeing there is a Man-Mediator, 1. We pray
you, Men and Women, neglect not such a Salvation as is to be had by his
becoming Man, but let this Argument prevail with you to make use of him, that
he is a true Man: And we may say, when this Son of Man comes in the Clouds to
Judge the World, it will be one of the greatest aggravations of the sin of
unbelievers, that he came thus low as to be a Man for the good of men, and yet
was not made use of by them. 2. Sinners that would be at him, may on this
ground be confident and cheerful; The Steward of Grace is a Friend, he is a
Man, their Brother, and claims Kindred to them that honestly aim to do the will
of his Father; whosoever shall do the will of my Father, says he, Mat. 12. The
same is my brother, sister, and mother: Sinners wrong Christ and themselves
oft-times when they scar at this Cordial Consolation that by Christ's becoming
Man is allowed on them; Indeed if we were immediately to go to God, who is a
consuming fire, it were no wonder that we stood at a distance; but when God is
in the Mediator Christ, God Man to reconcile the World to himself, as the word
is, 2 Cor. 6. Let us, as the Apostle says, Heb. 4. ult. come boldly unto the
throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of
need. O! make this use of it, because he is a friend that sits on the Throne.
--

2dly. Observe, That our Lord Jesus did not only become Man, but a Man in an
exceeding low and afflicted condition; It had been much to the Son of God to
have come in the shape of man, though he had been Emperor of the whole World,
but he thought not that meet; for since it was his errand in his first coming,
not to judge, but to save the World, He came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister; And therefore Joh. 13.12. He washes the fee^ of his Disciples: We
may take both the branches of the Doctrine together, our Lord Jesus not only
became Man, but He was a Man without all worldly grandour and pomp, in a low
and mean condition; And not only did he want that grandour, but he had much
affliction shame and sorrow in the place of it. Need we to prove this? Any who
are acquainted with the History of the Gospel know it; He was for the whole
tract of his life, not only in a low condition, but a man of sorrows, griefs,
and afflictions; under much persecution, contempt and reproach; We might
instance this, 1. In His Birth. 2. In His Life. And 3. In His Death, The
meanness and lowness of his condition, and the afflictions he met with appear
clearly in all these, wherein ye may behold the glory of grace and of truth;
For the more low he became, the more does the glory of grace shine, and the
more also does the glory of truth, in that he fulfilled all righteousness.

1. Then for his low condition, And that 1. In his birth, he was not born of
any of the greatest Queens; However the birth of Mary was Noble, yet she was in
a mean condition, for the time espoused to a Carpenter; He was not born in a
great Palace, but in a common Innes, which too being taken up with Guests, His
Mother was thrust out, or constrained to betake her self to a Stable, where our
blessed Lord is brought forth, and laid in a Manger, Crib, or Stall, out of
which the Beasts eat their meat for his Cradle; There the Lord and Heir of all
things is laid, and has no other Cradle, neither was the Room hung with rich
Hangings and Tapestry, as the Rooms of great ones use to be. 2. In his life he
was low, for no sooner is he born but his Mother is forced to flee away with
him to Egypt; He dare not be seen; And when he returns, he co-habits with, and
serves his supposed Father and his Mother, was obedient to them, ran their
errands, and wrought their work; Therefore he is called, Mark 6. the Carpenter:
There is no outward nor worldly pomp and grandour here; And thus he was for the
space of 30. years; And then when he came to his public Ministry, he has no
great folks for his followers and Disciples, but a few poor Fishermen; over
and above whom he exalts not himself loftily, but humbles himself to wash their
feet, and to serve them: And to hold forth this a little further, ye may take
notice of some Scripture-expressions to that purpose, as namely that of Luke
Chap. 9.58 Foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son
of man has not where to lay his head; That of John Chap. 1.10, 11. He was in
the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not; He came
unto his own, and his own received him not; Though he could have made a
thousand Worlds at a word, yet so low was he, that he had not a foot of ground
to lay claim to, or to lean his blessed head on; And if we look to Luke 8. we
will find that he was provided for in his necessity by some few Women, such as
Mary Magdalen; Joanna, Susanna and others, who ministered to him of their
substance; He lived upon the charity of others; And yet 2 Cor. 8. By his
poverty he made many rich: And when he went from place to place, his diet was
often a-seeking, neither do we read of any great cheer he had, but of some
Barley Cakes and Fishes; And often the Disciples were sent to seek for meat to
him. And 3. when it comes to his death, O! How very low is he brought there?
When he is crucified, they hang him up betwixt two thieves, as the most
notorious Malefactor of the three; And he could hardly come under greater
reproach then was cast upon him at his death; And as a dead man being really
dead, he is laid in the grave and buried, as if death had gotten the victory
over him; And so he dies a most shameful death, after he had lived a most mean
and abject life.

2. For his afflicted condition, it is clear if we consider, what troubles did
accompany him in his life, and at his death; No sooner was he born, but (as I
said) he is persecuted by Herod, so that himself and his parents must needs
flee down to Egypt, and they being but poor folks, behoved in so long a journey
to meet with many difficulties; That they were but poor, may be seen by Mary's
offering after her Purification: And when he came forth in his Public
Ministry, at his very entry to it he was most terribly tempted of the Devil,
taking occasion of his hunger after long fasting; And all along the exercise of
it, what contradiction did he meet with from the Scribes and Pharisees? How did
he travel on his feet from place to place? Often su^ject to weariness and
fainting; sometimes men will not so much as give him lodging, which he suffers
patiently, and rebukes his Disciples for their impatience and preposterous
zeal, Luke 9. Many calumnies and reproaches were cast upon him, He was called
Beelzebub, a Deceiver, a friend of Publicans and Sinners; How did some of his
fr^ends according to the flesh snarl at him, and offer to bind him as a mad
man? What plots and conspiracies were laid and made to take away his life? And
when it came to the upshot of all, Peter shamefully denied him, and all the
other Disciples forsook him, and fled; Many other things befell him, as may be
seen in the History of his Sufferings, written by the Evangelists: We read that
he wept thrice, to let us know that it was his frequent and familiar exercise,
And a little before his death, we read that he was in a great agony, and did
therein sweat blood, and offered prayers with strong cries and tears; but we
read not that he did laugh, or that ever any worldly mirth was found in him,
which clearly makes out this truth, That he was a man of sorrows, and
acquainted with grief.

For Use, It would take the tongues of Men and Angels to speak of it, it being
the most remarkable and soul-refreshing Subject that ever the world heard of,
even that of which the Angels sing, Luke 2.10, 11. Good tidings of great joy
which shall be to all people, that unto you is born in the City of David a
Savior, which is Christ the Lord: And this shall be a sign to you, ye shall
find the babe wraped in swadling-cloaths, lying in a manger; Sure we should not
sing less, but more then Angels, Men being more concerned then Angels in these
things; And therefore, 1. Behold, believe and wonder, that he that was rich
became poor, that we through his poverty might be made rich; that he that was
Lord of all, became servant to all; that he that was the infinite God, the
express image of his Fathers person, and thought it no robbery to be equal with
God, yet humbled himself and became of no reputation, and took on him the form
of a servant, etc. Behold (we say) believe, and wonder at this, 1. In respect
of the cause it came from, to wit, everlasting love, He did and suffered all
this most willingly, there was no constraint on him; But as it is, Psalm. 40. He
delighted to do his Fathers will; He had power to lay down his life, and to
take it up again. 2. In respect of the end, it was not to add to his own glory;
for as God, his Glory being infinite, it was not, neither was capable of
diminution or addition, but he became poor that we might be made rich, He was a
man of sorrows, that we might be made to rejoice, he wept that we might laugh,
he wanted that we might have: Is not this love stooping thus lo^ to be wondered
at? Was there ever the like heard of? That God the great Party offended should
come so low to recover the despicable Parties offending; and that even while
they were rank enemies to him? God commends his love to us, says the
Apostle, Romans 5.8. that while we were yet sinners Christ died for us; And says
himself, John 15. Greater love has no man then this, that a man lay down his
life for his friends; But when we were enemies Christ died for us; Were it then
an unsuitable use of this Doctrine, to be beholding, believing, and wondering
at his love, and to be often thinking and saying, What is man that God should
be so mindful of him, as to send the Heir of all things his own Son into the
world, as his great Ambassador and Commissioner, to negotiat a peace betwixt
himself and rebel-sinners, which he was to purchase by becoming so very low,
and by suffering so very much?

2. See in this the great evil and hurt of sin, and the difficulty of making
peace betwixt God and a sinner who has provoked God; Is it a little matter
that made our Lord condescend and stoop so low? O! if folk knew the evil of
sin; And that ere Justice could be satisfied, the Son of God behoved to become
Man, and a deeply humbled Man; The Sword of his avenging Justice behoved to
awake against him, and smite the man that was his fellow, rather then that sin
should go unpunished, and Justice should want satisfaction: Beware lightly to
boast and brag of mercy, or to think it easy to make your peace with God; And
remember that it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

3. See in this, much condescending in our blessed Lord Jesus, and a motive as
well as a copy of patience in him, who is content to be made of a woman, made
under the Law, who submits himself unto the Law, and takes on a mean and
afflicted state of life in the world; It Is a wonder that Christ's members should
take so ill with a mean, suffering, and hard lot, seeing their lot is far, very
far from the contempt, reproaches, sorrows, weights and griefs that accompanied
their Head and Lord; And it is a shame that believers minds and hearts should be
set so much on these things, that he who was and is their Lord and Master, and
the Heir of all things, possessed so little of; or that they should place their
happiness in whole or in part in the enjoyment of these things, or their misery
in the want of them; More patience under the Cross, under watchings, weariness,
reproaches, etc. would become us much better, our blessed Lord Jesus had a
great many more.

4. See this to be not only a motiv^ to patience in respect of outward things,
but a st^pping sto^e and ground of encouragement to go forward to Christ with
every want spiritual and temporal; It Is much that our Lord became Man, but it is
more that he became a man under griefs, afflictions, sorrows, and temptations,
and was subject to death it self; And that he has bowels of sympathy from
experience of these temptations, vexations, and sorrows, as they are sinless,
as is clear from Heb. 2. and 4. at the close; He knows what hunger, thirst,
poverty, contempt, reproach, and persecution are; He knows what it is to be set
upon with the violence of a temptation, though there was no sin in him to
comply with it.

5. See here a most real Savior, since he is a suffering Savior; Why did our
Lord become thus low? But that he might come under the curse, in the several
degrees of it, for the satisfying of Justice for our sins; And see in every
piece of Christ's suffering a reality of the grace and love of God; A reality in
the Covenant and bargain of Redemption; A reality in Christ's satisfying of
Justice, and performing his engagement according to the tenor of that
transaction: And seeing there is a reality in this Savior, and in his suffering
and satisfying of Divine Justice, and in the price that he paid to the full;
Put not this Savior again to open shame, as the word is, Heb. 6.6. Trod not
the Son of God under foot, neither account the blood of the Covenant an unholy
thing; Do not despite to the Spirit of Grace, as it is, Heb. 10.29. He has
suffered enough already, let him not be a sufferer again; O! grieve him not by
your unbelief, but give him credit by adventuring your souls on him upon his
own terms; your selves will have the advantage and he the glory; This is the
pure simple truth of the Gospel; Do not only receive it as a truth, but receive
him that it holds forth, and let your hearts close with him, and your Faith
feed upon him, w^o bec^me poor, that ye through his poverty mig^t be made rich;
Happy they for evermore who are made rich through his poverty, and miserable
are they, and much more miserable eternally will they be whose practice says
that they think they have another way to be happy then by his sufferings and
satisfaction, and so disdain and rej^ct both him and it.

SERMON XVIII.
ISAIAH LIII.II, III. Verse. 2. For he shall grow up before him as a tender
plant, and as a root out of a dry ground: he has no form nor comeliness: and
when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him.

Verse. 3. He is despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows, and acquainted
with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was despised, and we
esteemed him not.


IF our hearts were suitably tender, the reading of these words, knowing of
whom they are spoken, would some way prick and wound them; It Is hard to
determine, (though it may be we should not make the comparison) whether there
is more grace in our Lords condescendence, or more wickedness and perverseness
in the unkind and evil meeting that he gets from sinners; But surely there is
much grace on the one side in his coming so low, and much wickedness and
perverseness on the other side; For what meets he with, even blessed Jesus, who
is the glory and praise of all his Saints, yea, the brightness of his Fathers
glory? He is despised and rejected, and we esteemed him not; Even when he thus
humbled himself and took on our nature, and was and is prosecuting the work of
our salvation, and evidencing his grace in an inconceivable manner.

These are the two things that are spoken of here, 1. His condescending to be a
man, and a mean man, and which is yet more, a man of sorrows, and acquainted
with grief; Which if we believed, and knew really what he were, that it was
even he by whom all things were created, who is the beginning of the Creation
of God, the firstborn of every creature, yea, he for whom all things were
created, for whose glory the world and all things in it were made and continue,
He for whom all things are as their last end, and through whom they are
preserved in their being, and governed in their operations, and shall be seen
to tend to his glory in the close; we would certainly wonder more at this his
condescendence: And yet alace, it is he that is despised and rejected, and that
we hid as it were our faces from, and would not give him our countenance; It is
he by whom the world was made that is despised, and we esteemed him not: And
this is the second thing in the words which we are now to speak to, even the
abominably unsuitable meeting that men give to our Lord Jesus, who has so far
condescended, as to leave some way his Fathers Glory, not to receive a Kingdom
of this World, but to be trod upon in it as a Worm: He is despised and
rejected, and we will not intertain him, nor make him welcome when he comes;
We esteem him not.

Only take this advertisement for clearing of the words, and for grounding of
the Doctrine, that this that is spoken of Christ's Humiliation, and man's
stumbling at it, is not precisely to be restricted to his Humiliation in his
own person only, and men's stumbling at that, for it is given as the reason of
men their stumbling and offending at Christ in all times; But it is to be
extended to Christ in his Gospel and Ordinances throughout all ages, and so it
comes in as the reason why so few believe on him; If ye ask the reason why men
do not now believe and receive Christ in the offer of the Gospel? Here it is,
for we esteemed him not, for he shall grow up before him as a tender plant; He
shall be mean and contemptible-like to the men of the world, and in an
afflicted condition, therefore he is not esteemed, therefore he is not believed
on.

These two are the main Doctrines to be spoken to here, 1. That Jesus Christ
who thus condescends and humbles himself for the salvation of lost sinners is
not esteemed of, but despised and undervalued, which is implied in the words,
When we shall see him there is no beauty that we should desire him, and is more
clearly holden out in the following words, He was despised, and we esteemed him
not. 2. That this undervaluing and little esteeming of Jesus Christ, is the
great ground of folks unbelief, or the reason why men do not believe on him,
even because they think him not worthy the receiving; two very clear truths in
the words and in experience, though as sad in their consequents.

As to the 1. which is this, that our Lord Jesus Christ is usually and
ordinarily exceedingly undervalued, and little esteemed of by the men of the
world to whom he is offered in the Gospel; There are two things implied and
supposed here in and about the Doctrine, that will clear it, and be as two
reasons of it, 1. That he has no form nor comeliness, and no beauty wherefore
he should be desired; which holds out this that men are ordinarily taken up
with, and seek after worldly grandour or greatness, splendor and beauty,
that is it that fills men's eyes, and is that which Christ wanted, This we say
is one reason why Christ is so little thought of, even because he comes not
with external pomp, observation and grandour, nor with great temporal gifts to
his followers; That which mainly is desirable to natural men is that which has
earthly beauty in it, a very deceitful consideration and ground, though such an
one as men are often carried away with, and therefore they despise and reject
the Savior. 2. Which is another reason of the Doctrine, and also clearly
employed, that our Lord Jesus Christ's Humiliation and coming so low for man's
sake, his very condescending and stooping for their good, is the great ground
of their stumbling at him, and because of that he is the less thought of; Even
the very hight of his grace, and that great streach thereof, that the Son of
God became thus low as to become Man, a mean Man, and a Man of sorrows, is a
greater ground of stumbling to men then if he had never become thus low; Now
these two being supposed, and thus explained, the Doctrine is clear, to wit,
that Jesus Christ that became Man, and performed the satisfaction due to the
Justice of God for our sins, is usually and ordinarily disesteemed and
undervalued by them to whom he is offered in the Gospel; 1. It was so under the
Old Testament, and is so likewise under the New; What is almost all the Gospel
spent on? But to hold out Christ upon the one side to be a man of sorrows, and
upon the other side to show that men esteemed him not: How was he undervalued
at his birth when his Mother was thrust out to a Stable, and he laid in a
Manger? And no sooner does he appear in the exercise of his public Ministry,
but his friends offend at him, and look on him as a distracted man, Mark 3. His
Contrymen contemn him, and were offended at him, Mark 6. Is not this (say
they) the Carpenter, the Son of Mary, the brother of James and Joses? And how
was he esteemed, or rather disesteemed and undervalued at his death; So that it
is said, Acts 3.14. They denied the holy and just one, and desired that a
murderer should be granted unto them; They rejected the Prince of Life, and
choosed Barabbas; And judging him not worthy to live, they cry away with him;
Hence our Lord says, Matthew. 11. Blessed is he that is not offended in me,
which insinuats that there were but very few to whom his Humiliation proved not
a Stumbling Block. 2. If we consult experience we will find this to be true,
how little is he thought of among Turks? amongst whom his precious Name is
blasphemed, though they pretend more respect to him then mere Heathens do: How
little is he thought of among the Jews? who call him a Deceiver: And if we come
nearer, even to the Christian Church, and to such as profess their Faith of his
being the Eternal Son of God, equal with the Father, that he is Judge of quick
and dead, and that they look for Salvation through him, yet if it be put to a
trial, how few are they that will be found to esteem of him aright? since there
are but few that believe the report that is made of him, but few that receive
him as he is offered in the Gospel, few that have but such respect to him as to
prefer him to their Idols, and that give him the first and chief seat in their
hearts: And if we consider how little eager pursuing there is after him that he
may be enjoyed, and how indifferent folks are whether they have or want him;
How many things men dote upon and prefer to Jesus Christ, as the Lord
complains, Jer. 2.13. My people have committed two evils, they have forsaken me
the fountain of living waters, and have dug to themselves cisterns, even
broken cisterns that can hold no water, the thing will be clear beyond all
debate. We may take in another Branch of the Doctrine here, when he says, We
esteemed him not; and it is this, that even Believers are in so far as
unrenewed, inclined and not without culpable accession to this same sin of
undervaluing of Jesus Christ; It Is indeed true that the Apostle Peter says in
his 1 Epist. Chap. 2. Verse. 7. To you that believe he is precious; Which place,
though it confirm the first part of the Doctrine, that to them that believe not
he is not precious, but a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense; albeit
that Believers being compared with Unbelievers, have some precious esteem of
Jesus Christ, yet if we consider the corrupt nature that in part cleaves to
them, and the degree of their estimation of him, that it is but very little and
low in respect of what it should be, and the many peevish fits, too's and
fro's, up's and down's that they are subject to, with the many suspicions and
jealousies they have of him; so that though they were just now fresh and lively
in the exercise of their Faith, and of their estimation of Christ, yet within a
little, even by and by, they give way again to their jealousies, the Doctrine
will also hold true of them, we esteemed him not.

We shall give the second Doctrine (and then speak to the use of both jointly)
which is this, That there is nothing more culpably accessory to the abounding
of Unbelief, then the poor thoughts and little estimation that Men have of
Jesus Christ; the undervaluing of him is the great ground and reason why they
believe not on him; and on the contrary, if the Hearers of the Gospel had
higher thoughts, and a more precious esteem of Christ, and valued him according
to his unvaluable worth, there would be more believing in him then there is:
When the Gospel comes to invite Men to the Wedding, Matthew. 22. when Christ is
roosed and commended as to what he is, what he has purchased, and what he
freely offers to Sinners, it is said, that those who were bidden made light of
it, and went away, one to his farm, another to his merchandice, etc. when
Christ was spoken of, and the offer of Life through him, they undervalued and
despised it, and made light of the offer, and therefore turned their backs, for
they thought more of the House, of the Oxen, of the Farm, and of the married
Wife, then they thought of him: And Acts 17. when Paul is preaching Christ at
Athens, the Philosophers and Orators, these learned Heads, despise and disdain
him as a setter forth of some strange and uncouth god: If we compare this with
its contrary, it will be further clear, to wit, wherever there is estimation of
Christ, it proves a help to Faith and a ground of it; so wherever Christ is
lightlied, disesteemed and undervalued, it breeds in Folk, and is a ground to
them of these three. 1. It cools, or rather keeps cool their love and affection
to him; where he is disesteemed and undervalued, he cannot be loved, and People
in that case become like these that are brought in Jer. 44.17. saying, It was
better with as when we did bake cakes to the queen of heaven; the Lord is
counted by them to be as a wilderness and land of darkness, and they say, as it
is Jer. 2.31. We are lords, and will come no more unto thee; and when Men
esteem not Christ, they seek not after him, they care not for an interest in
him, they trust not to him; when a Man valueth a Pearl, he will readily sell
all that he has that he may buy it, but that which is not esteemed, there will
be no care to come by it. 2. It has influence to obstruct Folks giving him
credit, which is of the very essence of Faith; so then, where he is not
esteemed of, he is not, he cannot be believed on; the former says, that we will
not marry him, this says, we will not trow him, nor trust the reality of his
offer: Where he is not esteemed of, he is not taken up to be real, in good
earnest, and faithful in what he says; His offers are looked upon as having
neither solidity nor reality in them, therefore Rev. 19. these two are put
together, first its said, Blessed are they that are called to the marriage
supper of the Lamb; and then it is subjoined, these are the true and faithful
sayings of God; so that when Christ is not esteemed of, he is not thought
worthy the crediting and lippening to; And it is on this ground that the Lord
founds his contraversie with his professing People, Jer. 2.5. What iniquity
have your fathers found in me, that they have gone far from me, and have walked
after vanity and are become vain? they undervalued his word, they thought him
not worthy credit, and therefore they turned the back on him; the same is
insinuated by the Lord, Micah 6.3. O my people, what have I done unto thee, and
wherein have I wearied thee? testify against me. 3. This little esteem of
Christ weakens hope or expectation of any good that Men may have from him; when
we esteem him not, there is no expectation of getting our need supplied, and
our wants made up by him, nor of attaining in him the Happiness that we would
be at, and therefore there are no serious addresses made to him for the same:
These three, Love to him, Trust in him, hope from and through him, being the
prime Graces in a Christian, when they are weakened, Unbelief most certainly in
so far prevails; and it being Christ's worthiness, and the estimation thereof
that gives ground to all these; then sure, when he is not esteemed but
undervalued, these must also fall in their exercise, and be in utter non-entry
where he is altogether undervalued: Now, laying all these together, there can
hardly be any thing more culpably accessory to the abounding of Unbelief then
the undervaluing of precious Jesus Christ; it is impossible that he can be
cordially welcomed where he is not at all esteemed of.

As for Uses of these Doctrines, they are of large extent, serving to make
manifest a root of bitterness, and a great neck-break of multitudes of Souls,
and which Men and Women will not easily be persuaded to believe. Let this
therefore be the 1. Use of it, To discover a great Sin that is incident to the
Hearers of this Gospel; among many other things that may be charged on them,
this is one and not the least, even little estimation of Jesus Christ, so
little, that when he is speaking, they count him scarce worthy the hearing;
hence is the slumbering and sleeping of so many when he is preached of, which
holds out something of the nature of all Men and Women; this despising,
undervaluing, and thinking little of Christ, is a Sin that may for a long time
cleave fast and close to the Hearers of the Gospel, and does so to many to
their very dying day. It may be ye will think this a strange and uncoath
ch^rge, and that whoever disesteem him, ye do certainly esteem him much, but it
were better ye were seriously and humbly saving with the Prophet here, He was
despised and we esteemed him not: There are many who never once suspect
themselves as guilty of, or chargeable with this evil; for whose conviction,
let me speak but a few words, Is there not such a bitter root in you? If it be
natural to all Men and Women, how comes it to pass that ye are free of it? Is
there nothing of the seed of the Serpent in you? and if there be, will there
not be hatred at the seed of the Woman in you? are ye any other sort of Hearers
then they were to whom this is spoken? were they not Hearers of the Gospel as
well as ye? nay he speaks here of Hearers of the Gospel in all Ages, and yet ye
will disdain to take with this Sin, and will account it to be an uncouth, if
not an unjust charge and imputation, to say of you that ye are undervaluers and
despisers of Christ; but the reason of it is twofold, the first whereof is,
Because ye know not what Christ's worth is, and therefore ye do neither esteem
him, nor know that ye disesteem and undervalue him; whereas they who have win
to some knowledge of his worth, are always, or very often complaining that they
cannot get him suitably thought of and esteemed. The second Reason is, Because
ye know not your selves, and therefore ye take self-love and estimation of your
selves to be love to him and estimation of him; ye think your selves so well,
that ye cannot endure to think that ye want any Grace or good thing; and
estimation of Christ being a good thing, and ye thinking that ye could not hold
up your face and own the reproaching and despising of him, ye will not let it
light that ye want this Grace and good thing, a precious esteem of him: But
there is no greater evidence that ye are lying under the power of the deceit
and delusion of your own Hearts, that your natural distemper and Fever is not
yet cooled and calmed, but that ye are still roving in Nature; and therefore,
though ye be living in enmity at God and Christ, yet ye cannot be made sensible
of it; we really think it somewhat strange, that Men and Women should live
twenty, thirty, forty, or fifty years under the Gospel, and yet never be
brought to groan under this enmity, nor to lay to heart this Sin of
undervaluing of Christ: But if it be a truth that none naturally do love and
esteem him, then certainly many of you are grossly mistaken, that think ye
esteem highly of him; Ah! your fancied esteem of him will be counted an
undervaluing of him.

And if ye ask, What is that to undervalue Christ, or when is he undervalued? I
answer, He is undervalued 1. When he is not matched with or married, when ye
match with himself, whereof he makes offer, is not closed with upon his own
terms; for what I pray can hinder the ending of a Bargain, or finishing a
Marriage contract, especially when it is so full, free, and rich on the Proposer
and Suitors part, but either that Folk think it is not fit for them, or that
they think nothing of it at all? and this is it that hinders closing with
Christ, Matthew. 22. They made light of it and went away, etc. and Psalm. 81. My
people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me. 2. When any
thing is made equal to Christ, much more when any thing is preferred to him, he
is undervalued and not esteemed of; when he gets little or none of Folks care
and labor, little of their time, little of their love and delight, few or none
of their thoughts, etc. but they are quite carried away after other things, for
where the treasure is, there the heart will be also; and were Christ our
Treasure, and precious in our esteem, our Hearts would be more set on him; but
it is strange, sad, and even astonishing to think, how little our Spirits are
exercised with the thoughts of Christ; how little they are taken up with
longing for him and delighting in him, and yet we will think that we esteem
him. 3. Our Lord is undervalued when he is not made use of, and employed, and
lippened to as an able and sufficient Savior; If there be a learned and
skilful Physician in a City in all or most Diseases, or an able Lawyer to plead
all Causes; if Folk have Diseases to be cured, and Causes to be pleaded, and
yet do not employ such a Physician or such a Lawyer, but go to some other,
though far less skilful and able, they undervalue him; It is even so here, when
Folks have many Sins, and they seek not to him for Pardon, many, not only
Temporal wants, but also and mainly, many Spiritual wants, and do not
acknowledge him in them, neither seek to him for supply of them, many
predominant Evils, and they seek not to him to mortify them, many Snares and
Temptations, and they do not make use of him to prevent and lead them by them,
and many Spiritual Causes to be pleaded before God, or at his Bar, and they do
not employ him as Advocate to plead for them. 4. He is undervalued when Folk
think not themselves happy enough in him, nor sicker enough in bargaining with
him, and when he does not satisfy and fully content them, as if he were yea
and nay, and as if all the promises were not yea and amen in him; when he is
not credited entirely, and rested upon, he is not esteemed of, hence he
complains John 5. Ye will not come to me that ye might have life: and Matthew.
23. How often would I have gathered you and ye would not? he would, to say so
with reverence, fain do them a good turn, but they will not lippen to him. O!
how much undervaluing of Christ is there even among believers, when they hold
and draw with him, intertain jealousies and suspicions of him, scarcely credit
him, and when they do at any time credit him, are in a manner ready to take
back their word again; How often are Creature Comforts overvalued by them? And
how often are the consolations of God small with them? These and many other
ways are they, even they, in some considerable measure and degree guilty of
undervaluing of Christ.

Use 2. Take with this sin, acknowledge and seek pardon for it,; It were a good
token of some tenderness, to be mourning for enmity against Christ, and for
undervaluing of him, as well as for Drunkenness, Fornication, Theft, or any
other gross sin; And where that gracious and right mourning that is spoken of,
Zech. 12.10. comes, it will be in special for this undervaluing of Christ to
the hight of piercing of him: We would ask any of you that think ye repent, if
this sin of slighting him has pierced you as it did these, Acts 2? It may be,
some think themselves so cleanly and perfect that they have not many sins to
mourn for, O! dreadful mistake; But though ye had no more, is not this enough
that ever there should have been enmity in your bosom at Christ? And should
not this prick you at the very heart that ever ye should have so undervalued
him? But readily they that see fewest sins in themselves, will see and take
with least of this sin.

Use 3. It serves to be a warning to all men in nature, to consider what their
condition is; Do ye that have this enmity, and are undervaluers of Christ, know
what is in your hearts? And do ye consider what posture ye will be found in, if
Grace make not a change, in the day of Christ? ye will be found amongst these
despisers and haters that would not have him to reign over them; How will you
dar to appear, or in what posture will ye appear before him, when he whom ye
despised, shall come in the glory of his Father with all the holy Angels with
him, and shall sit upon the Throne of his glory? And yet appear ye must; How
will the conscience then gnaw, and the heart be affrighted? How will challenges
waken, yea, sting and prick you on this ground, that the Son of God, the Heir
of all things, the Lord of lords, and King of kings, who proposed Marriage to
you, was undervalued, and Marriage with him made light of, and that a thing of
naught was put in his room and place? Will not this be a horrible challenge in
that day? And if ye would consider what will be their posture that mocked and
buffetted him, and plucked off his hair, that nodded with the head, and cried
Aha, and bade him come down from the Cross, that did scourge him, and hang him
up upon the Cross betwixt two Thieves; Such a posture will all of you be in who
have despised and disesteemed him; ye will meet with that same sad sentence,
Bring out these mine enemies that would not that I should reign ever them, and
slay them before me; O! what a strange punishment suppose ye will that be, when
the Savior of sinners shall stand by and look on till he see vengeance execute
on sinners that despised him? Think on it, for there is such a day coming, when
ye will all appear before him, and when your reckonings will be cast up; suffer
not your selves to be cheated into an opinion that it will be accounted a
little sin to be found under this guilt of despising Christ, and let not one of
you put it off himself, and over upon another; they will be found despisers of
him that would never let it light, nay even many that have Preached him, and
that would have been angry at prophanity in others, as may be gathered from
Mat. 7.22.

The 4. Use serves to commend this to you as a piece of your duty, to study to
know Christ, and to have the suitable impression of Christ and of his worth as
the great mean contributive to the bringing you to credit him, and believe on
him, and to the removing a main obstruction that hinders your Faith, and that
is the undervaluing of him; For if undervaluing of him be the great cause of
unbelief, and that which mainly obstructs Faith; then the esteeming of him from
a due impression of his worth, must be a great mean of, and help to Faith, and
the more he be esteemed of, the more will he be believed on: It has an
attractive virtue to draw sinners to love him, a screwing virtue to screw up
the affections toward him; and withal a fixing and establishing virtue to
settle and stay the Soul upon him by believing; the soul that from the right
impression of his worth esteems of him, knows that it may lippen to him, for he
is holy and true; And hence it is, that the great thing that believers take to
ground their prayers upon, is some excellency in God, some one or other of his
Titles and Attributes upon which they fix, to bear them up under and against
any difficulty that presses hard upon them; This fixes also their hope and
expectation of attaining of any good thing that they want through him: And
therefore upon the one side we would commend to you the study of Christ's
worth, and upon the other, an high estimation of him, as that which will fix
your Faith, and Love, and Hope on him; This we see to be in a high degree in
Paul, Philip. 3. I account all things (says he) to be but loss and dung for
the excellency of the knowledge of him, and his transcendent worth, ye would
not think it lost labor, to read and study these places of Scripture, that
show what our Lord Jesus is in his Person, Nature, and Offices, that ye may
have the Faith of his Godhead fixed, and may be clear as to the excelling
fullness that is in him; as namely that of Isai. 9.6. To us a Child is born, to
us a Son is given, the government shall be upon his shoulders, and his Name
shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father,
the Prince of Peace, of whose Kingdom and Government there shall be no end; And
to study his excellent Properties, his Eternity, Omnipotency, Faithfulness,
Mercy, etc. common to him with the Father and Holy Ghost; and the excellent
qualifications that as Mediator he is replenished with; being full of grace and
truth, and in all things having the preheminency; See Col. 1. John 1.14. and
Heb. 1.2, 3. etc. The reason why we press you to this, is not only that ye may
have more clear Theory and Contemplation; But also and mainly that your
affections may be delighted in him, and that your Faith may without hink or
hesitation come to give him credit; Ignorance of Christ breeds disestimation,
and disestimation makes you not to give him credit, and thus ye are kept at a
distance from him; There is no study more pleasant, more precious, and more
profitable. There is here then a task for you that ask what ye shall do; even
to read and study the excellency of Jesus Christ, and to labor to have it well
fixed in the imagination of the thoughts of your hearts; It will give you
notable direction what to do, even that which is well-pleasing to God, and may
be very profitable to you through his blessing.

Use 5. See here the great necessity and convenience of studying the
disestimation of Christ that is in us, as well as of studying the worth that is
in him, and what he has out of love suffered for us; These two are put
together in the Text; it being needful for us to be as well acquainted with the
one as with the other: We shall give you this use in two short Doctrines, The
1. whereof is, That it is a necessary duty for the hearers of the Gospel to
study thoroughly, and to be convinced of, and clear in their disestimation of
Christ, as well as of his worth and excellency, because it makes up
repentance, and makes it flow, and thoroughly humbles the sinner when he
finds this desperate wickedness and perverseness to be in himself, and makes
him kindly to loath and abhor himself; and unless this desperate wickedness be
seen and felt, that great and bitter mourning spoken of, Zech. 12.10. will
never flow forth.

The 2. is, That where folk have any just estimation of Christ and of his
worth, and are sensible of the evil of unbelief, there will also be some sense
of the sin of undervaluing of him, and the more sense they have of the evil of
unbelief, they will be the more sensible of their undervaluing of him; And will
with the Prophet here cry out, He was despised, and we esteemed him not: And
from both these ye may see the necessity of studying to find out this
corruption; the search and discovery whereof, will in-sight you in the evil and
perverseness of your nature, and so deeply humble you; and also serve highly to
commend Christ and his Grace to you; and without the discovery of this
corruption, it is impossible ever to be humble thoroughly, or to have right
thoughts of Christ and of his Grace.

Use 6. It serves to let us see the necessity of believing in Christ, and of
the employing of him; because there is no other way to be free of the
challenges of misprising and not esteeming of him, but by receiving of him, and
believing on him.

A 7th Use may be added, and it is this, That the more there be that despise
Christ, and the greater difficulty there be in believing on him, the more
reason have they to be thankful that he graciously works any suitable
estimation of himself in, and brings them to believe on him; These who have
gotten any glimpse of his Glory which has lifted him high in their estimation
to the drawing forth of their faith and love after him, would praise him for
it; It Is he, and only he that opened your eyes to see him, and gave you that
estimation of him, and circumcised your hearts to love him; let him therefore
have all the praise and glory of it; This is the Word of God, and himself bless
it to you through Jesus Christ.

SERMON XIX.
ISAIAH LIII.IV, V. Verse. 4. Surely he has born our griefs, and carried our
sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted.

Verse. 5. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our
iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we
are healed.


THis is a most wonderful Subject that the Prophet is here discoursing of, even
that which concerns the sufferings of our blessed Lord Jesus, by way of
prediction several hundreds of years before his Incarnation; It was much that
he was to be a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief; But this was more,
that he was despised, and we esteemed him not; There is wonderful grace upon
the one side, that our Lord became so very low, and wonderful contempt and
enmity on the other side, that we despised him, and esteemed him not, even
because of his lowness.

In the words now read, and forward, the Prophet sets himself to remove the
offense that men took at our Lords Humiliation, by showing them, that although
he became so low, yet he was not to be the less esteemed of for that; And the
ground which he lays down to remove the offense, is in the first words of the
Text, which in sum is this, that there was nothing in himself wherefore he
should have been brought so low, there was no sin in him, neither was there any
guile found in his mouth, but he was graciously pleased to take on him that
which we should have born; and therefore men ought not to stumble and offend at
his stooping to bear that which would with its weight have crushed them
eternally, and thereby to make their peace with God: in the 6. verse. he shows
how it came to pass that he stooped so low, All we (says he) like sheep have
gone astray, and turned every one of us to our own way, and the Lord laid on
him the iniquity of us all; We had lost our selves, and God in the depth of his
eternal wisdom, love, and good will, found out the way to save us; wherein (to
speak so) a Covenant was transacted betwixt God and the Mediator, who becomes
Cautioner for our sins, which are transferred on him: From the 7. verse. to the
10. verse. he goes on in showing the execution of this transaction, and how the
Cautioner performed all according to his engagement; And from the 10. verse. to
the close, we have the promises made to him for his satisfaction: The scope is,
as to remove the scandal of the Cross, so to hold out our Lords pursuing the
work of satisfaction to the Justice of God for elect sinners, and the good
success he had in it.

In the 4, and 5. verses we have three things, 1. This ground asserted, Surely
he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows. 2. Men's enmity aggreged from
this, yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted; In the
very mean time that he condescended to stoop so low for us, and to bear that
which we should have born, we esteemed but little of him, we looked on him as a
plagued man. 3. This is more fully explained, verse. 5. But he was wounded for
our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, He was so handled for
our sins, and the chastisement of our peace was on him, that which made our
peace with God was on him, By his stripes we are healed, the stripes that
wounded and killed him cured us.

We have here then, rather as it were a sad narration, then a Prophecy of the
Gospel holding out a part of our Lords sufferings, yet a clear foundation of
the consolation of the people of God; it being the ground of all our Faith of
the pardon of sin, of our peace with God, and of our confident appearing before
him, that our Lord was content to be thus dealt with, and to give his back to
the smiters, and his cheeks to them that plucked off the hair.

We shall clear the words in the assertion, which will serve to clear the words
of the whole Chapter, and also of the Doctrines to be drawn from it. 1. The
thing that Christ bare is called griefs and sorrows, by which we understand the
effects that sin brings on men in the world, for its the same that in the 5.
verse. is called his being wounded for our transgression, and bruised for our
iniquity; It Is a wounding that iniquity causes, and meritoriously procures;
It Is not sin it self, but the effect of sin, to wit, the punishment the sorrow
and grief that sin brings with it, called griefs and sorrows; Partly because
grief and sorrow is necessarily joined with sin, partly to show the extremity
and exceeding greatness of this grief and sorrow, and the bitter fruits that
sin has with it. 2. How is it said that Christ has born and carried their
griefs and sorrows? By this we understand, not only Christ's removing of them,
as he removed sickness and diseases, as it is said, Matthew. 8.16, 17. But also
and mainly his actual and real enduring of them, as the phrase is frequently
used in Scripture; That man shall bear his iniquity, or he shall bear his sin,
Levit. 5. and many other places; It sees out a real inflicting of the
punishment that sin deserves, on him. 3. That it is said our griefs, and our
sorrows, it is not needlessly or superfluously set down, but to meet with the
offense that men take at Christ's humbling himself so low; As if he had said,
What aileth you to stumble at Christ's coming so low, and being so afflicted? It
was not for his own sins, but for ours, that he was so handled; And they are
called our griefs and sorrows, 1. Because we by our sins procured them, they
were our deserving, and due to us, the debt was ours, though he as our
Cautioner took it on himself. 2. Because though the Elect have distinct
reckonings, and peculiar sins, some more, some fewer, some greater, some lesser,
yet they are all put on Christ's account; there is a combination of them, a
gathering of them all on him, as the word is, verse. 6. He has laid on him, or
made to meet on him the iniquities of us all.

The meaning then of the assertion is this; Surely this is the cause of Christ's
Humiliation, and this makes him not only to become Man, but to be a mean poor
Man, and to have a comfortless and afflicted life in the World, that he has
taken on him that Punishment, Curse and Wrath that was due to us for our Sins;
and therefore he ought not to be offended and stumbled at.

Now because Socinians, the great Enemies of Christ's satisfaction, and of the
comfort of his People, labor to elude this place, and to make Christ only an
exemplary Savior, and deny that he really and actually did undergo these
Griefs and Sorrows for the Sins of his Elect; We shall a little clear and
confirm the exposition we have given; the question is not about the taking away
of Sin, but about the manner of removing it; They say that it is by Gods
pardoning of it without a Satisfaction; We say it is by Christ's Satisfaction;
So the difficulty in expounding the words, is whether to expound them of
Christ's removing our Sorrows and Griefs from us, or of his bearing of them for
our Sin, and so really taking it away: And that this Scripture means not of a
simple removing of them, as he did remove Sickness, Matthew 8.17. but by a real
taking them on himself, and bearing of of them in order to the satisfaction of
the Justice of God for our Sins: We shall give these Reasons to confirm it. 1.
Because these words are to be understood of such a bearing of Sorrows and
Griefs as made Christ to be contemptible and despised before others, This is
clear from the scope, for they are given as a reason why Christ was rejected
and despised as a Man of Sorrows and acquainted with Grief, and why Men should
not stumble at him for all that, because it was for them; now, if he had only
removed Sorrows from them as he did Sicknesses, it had not been a cause of his
Sorrow and Grief, nor of any Man's stumbling at him, but had been rather a cause
of his exaltation in Men's esteem; But its given here as a cause of that which
went before in the first part of the 3. Verse, and also as a reason why Men
should not stumble at him, and withal as an aggravation of their guil^ who did
stumble at him: Now it is clear that the ground of the Jews despising and
mocking of him, was nor his removing of Sicknesses and Diseases, but his
seeming to be given over unto Deaths power. 2. Because that which is called
here, bearing of sorrows and griefs, is in the words following, called, a being
wounded for our transgressions, which imports not only that h^ was wounded, but
that our Iniquities were the cause of his being wounded, and that the desert of
them was laid on him. 3. This wounding is holden forth, to be the stripes
whereby we are healed; and all we like sheep have gone astray, and the Lord
has laid on him the iniquity of us all; we did the wrong but he made the
amends; and it was such a wounding as proves a cure to us, and makes way for
our peace and reconciliation with God; and such, as without it, there is no
healing for us, for by his stripes we are healed; it is by his swallowing up of
the river and torrent of Wrath that was in our way and would have drowned us
eternally, had not he interposed for us, that we escape. 4. Consider the
parallel places to this in the New Testament, and we will find that this place
holds our Christ's re^l and actual bearing of our Sorrows and and Griefs; I
shall only name three, The 1. Is that of the 2 Cor. 5.21. He has made him to
be sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God
in him, which can be no other way exponed but of Christ's being made an Offering
and Sacrifice for our Sins; he not being a Sinner himself, but becoming our
Cautioner and engaging to pay our Debt, and to tell down the price for the
satisfaction of Divine Justice; he is reckoned to be the Sinner, and our Sins
are imputed to him, and he is dealt with as a Sinner. A 2d place is that of
Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, by being made a
curse for us, as it is written, cursed is every one that hangs on a tree; The
Sorrows and Griefs that Isaiah says here he should bear, are there exponed by
the Apostle, to be, his being made a Curse, or his bearing of the Curse that we
should have born; it is not meant simply of his removing the Curse from us, but
it also sets out the manner how he removed, to wit, by his own bearing of it
himself, being nailed to the Cross, according to the threatening given out
before. The 3d. place is that of 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own self bare our sins in
his own body on the tree; where there is a direct reference to this place of
Isaiah, which is cited for confirmation of what the Apostle says, and every
word is full and has a special signification and emphasis in it, He his own
self bare, the same word that is here, and our sins, and in his own body, and
on the tree; intimating the lowest step of his Humiliation, by whose stripes ye
were healed, for ye were as sheep going astray, etc. by his bearing of our Sins
the burden of Sin was taken off us, and we are set free.

I know that place of Matthew. 8.17. has its own difficulty, and therefore I
shall speak a word for clearing of it; he has spoken verse. 16. of Christ's
healing all that were sick, and then subjoyns in the 17. verse. That it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by Isaias the prophet, saying, himself took our
infirmities and bare our sicknesses; whereupon these enemies of Christ would
infer, that this place of Scripture has no other, nor further meaning, but of
Christ's curing of some sick Folks, and of the deputed or committed power which
he has to pardon sins; but we suppose that the reasons which we have already
given, make it clear, that this cannot be the meaning of the place, to which we
shall add first. A Reason or two, and secondly, Give you the true meaning of it.

The Reasons why one cannot be the meaning of the place, are 1. Because Acts
8.32. this Scripture is spoken of as being daily a fulfilling by Christ, and
therefore it could not be fulfilled in these few days wherein he was in the
Flesh upon Earth. 2. Because this bearing of our Griefs and Sorrows is such a
piece of Christ's Humiliation, as thereby he took on all the Griefs and Sorrows
of all the Elect at once, both of these who lived in Isaiah his time, and of
these who lived before, and since his time, and therefore cannot be restricted
to the curing of Temporal Diseases in the days wherein he was on Earth, nay,
not to the pardoning of the Sins of the Elect then living, there being many
El^ct before and since comprehended in this his Satisfaction, which was most
certainly a Satisfaction for the Sins of the Elect that were dead and to be
born, as well as for the Sins of them that were then living.

2. For the meaning of the place, 1. We are not to look on Christ's curing of
Sicknesses and Diseases, Matthew. 8 16. as a proper fulfilling of this place, Isa
52.4. but as many Scriptures are spoken by way of allusion to other Scriprures,
so is this; there is indeed some fulfilling of the one in the other, and some
resemblance betwixt the one and the other, and the resemblance is this, even to
show Christ's tenderness to the outward condition of Folks bodies, whereby he
evidenced his tenderness and respect to the inward sad condition of their
immortal Souls whereinto they were brought through their Sin; the great thing
aimed at by the Prophet. 2. If we consider the Griefs and Sorrows that Christ
bare and suffered complexly in their cause and eff^cts, he in healing of these
Diseases and Sicknesses bare our Griefs and carried our Sorrows, because when
he took on our Debt, he took it on with all the consequences of it; and so
though Christ took on no Disease in his own Person, for we read not that he was
ever sick, yet in taking on the Debt in common of the Elect, he virtually took
on all Sicknesses and Diseases, or what they suffered in all Diseases or should
have suffered, he took it on together; and hereby he had a right, to speak so,
to the carrying of all Diseases, and in carrying of them he had respect to the
cause of them, to wit, Sin; therefore to such as he cured, he says very often,
Thy sins be forgiven thee; he studied to remove that in most of them he did
deal with; and so looking on our Lord as taking on our Sins complexly with the
cause, and as having a right to remove all the effects of Sin, evidencing it
self in the removing of these Diseases whereof Sin was the cause, these words
may be thus fulfilled; and so they are clear, and the Doctrine also; We have
here no mere exemp^ary Savior that has done no more but confirmed his
Doctrine, and given us a copy how to do and behave, but he has really and
actually born our Sorrows and Griefs, and removed our Debt, by undergoing the
punishment due to us for Sin.

Observe here 1. That Sin, in no Flesh, no, not in the Elect themselves, is
without Sorrow and Grief; Tribulation and Anguish are knit to it, or it has
these following on it; or take the Doctrine thus, Wherever there is Sin, there
is the cause of much Sorrow and Grief; no more can the native cause be without
the effect, then Sin can be without Sorrow and Grief, it is the plain assertion
of Scripture. Romans 2.8, 9. Indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon
every soul of man that does evil; which one place, putting the four words
together says, 1. That there is Sorrow most certainly and inseparably on every
Soul that has sinned, And 2. That this Sorrow is exceeding great (which may
also be the reason why this Sorrow is set out in two words in the Text)
therefore four words are used by the Apostle to express it: It Is not our
purpose here to dispute, whether God in his Justice does by necessity of Nature
punish the Sinner: These three things considered, will make out the Doctrine,
which is, That there is a necessary connection betwixt S^n and Sorrow, and that
this Sorrow must needs be very great; 1. If we consider the exceeding
unsuitableness of Sin to the holy Law of God, and how it is a direct
contrariety to that most pure and perfect Law. 2. If we consider the perfectly
holy Nature of God himself, The righteous Lord says the P^almist, Psalm. 11.7.
loves righteousness; and the Prophet Hab. 1.13. says, He is of purer eyes then
that be can behold evil, and he cannot look upon iniquity; and though we need
no^ to dispute Gods Sovereignty, yet it is clear that he is angry with the
wicked every day, Psalm. 7.11. and he will by no means clear the guilty, Exodus
34.7. and tha^ there is a greater suitableness in his inflicting Sorrow and
Grief on a Sinner that walks contrary to him, then there is in showing him
Mercy; and there is a greater suitableness in his showing Mercy to a humbled
Sinner that is aiming to walk holily before him. 3. If we consider the revealed
will of God in the Threatening, who has said, the day thou eatest thou shall
surely die, we may say there is, as they speak in the Schools, a hypothetick
necessity of grief and sorrow to follow on Sin, and that there is a necessary
connection betwixt them; and this may very well stand with the Mediator his
coming in and interposing to take that Grief and Sorrow from off us, and to lay
it on himself; but it was once ours because of our Sin.

If it be ask^d what Grief and Sorrow this is? We said it is very great, and
there is reason for it, for though our act of Sin. 1. As to the Subject that
Sins, Man. And 2. As to the act of ^in it self, a sinful thought word or deed
that is soon gone, be finit; yet if we consider Sin, 1. In respect of the
object against whom, the infinite God. 2. In respect of the absolute purity of
Gods Law, a rule that bears ou^ G^ds Image set down by infinite Wisdom, and
that may be some way called infinitely pure; and Sin as being against this pure
rule that infinite Wisdom has set down; And 3. If we consider it in no respect
of its nature, every sin being of this nature that though it cannot properly
wrong the Majesty of God, yet as to the intention of the thing, and even of the
Sinner, it wrongs him; Sin in these respects may be called infinite, and the
wrong done to the Majesty of God thereby, may be called infinite; as these who
built Babel, their intention in that work breathed forth infinite wrong to God,
as having a direct tendency to bring them off from dependence on him; and so
every Sin if it had its will and intent, would put God in subordination to it,
and set it self in his room, and therefore Sin in some respect as to the wrong
against God is infinite.

2. Observe, That the real and very great Sorrow that the Sins of the Elect
deserved, our Lord Jesus did realty and actually bear and suffer; as we have
exponed the words and confirmed the exposition given of them, ye have a clear
confirmation of the Doctrine from them; 1. Griefs and Sorrows in the plural
Number, show intensness of Sorrow and Grief. 2. That they are called ours, it
shows our propriety in them, And 3. That it is said Christ bare them; These
concur to prove the Doctrine; that the same Sorrow which the Sins of the Elect
deserved Christ bare; It not only says that our Lord bare Sorrows, but the same
Sorrows that by the Sins of the Elect were due to them, and so there was a
proportionableness betwixt the Sorrows that he bare, and the Sorrows they
should have endured; he took up the cup of Wrath that was filled for us, and
that we would have been put to drink, and drank it out himself; suppose that
our Lord had never died (as blessed be his Name, there is no ground to make the
supposi^ion) the cup of S^rrow that the Elect would have drunken eternally, was
the same cup that he drank our for them: It is true, we would distinguish
betwixt these things that are essentially due to Sin as the punishment of it;
and these things that are only accidentally due to it, the former Christ bare
but not the latter; To clear both in a word or two, 1. These things essentially
due to Sin as necessarly included in the Threatening. The day thou eatest thou
shall surely die; and in the curse of the Law according to that, Cursed is
every one that abides not in all things that are written in the book of the law
to do them, are Death and the Curse, these are essentially the desert of Sin;
in which respect it was not only necessary that Christ should become Man and
^^ffer, but that he should suffer to death or should die, and not only so, but
that he should die the cursed death of the Cross, as the Threatening and Curse
put together hold out; and as to all these things that he underwent and met
with before, and at his death, they were the accomplishment of the Threatening
due to us, and fulfilled in and by him in our room; so that as he himself
says, Luke 24.26. O fools and slow of heart to believe all that the Prophets
have spoken, ought not Christ to have suffered these things and to have entered
into his glory? therefore he behoved to be in an Agony, and to sweat great
drops of Blood, to be crucified and die, and to be laid in the Grave. 2. These
things which we call accidentally due to Sin, are mainly two, 1. That horrible
desperation of the damned in He^l, where they gnaw their tongues for pain and
blaspheme God; This we say is not properly and essentially the desert of Sin,
but only accidental; 1. In respect of the Creatures inability to bear the wrath
that Sin deserves, and hence arises not only a sinless horror which is
natural, but a sinful desperation. 2. Add to this inability of the Creature,
the enmity thereof, whereby it comes to thwart with and contradict the will of
God; hence the desperation not only arises but is increased: Now, our Lord
Jesus not being simply a Creature or a Man, but God and Man in one Person, he
was able to bear the sorrow and wrath due to the Elect for their Sin; and and
there being no quarrel, nor ground of any quarrel betwixt God and him on his
own account, though he had a natural and sinless horror at the cup of his
Fathers displeasure when put to his head; yet he had no sinful desperation. The
2d. thing accidentally due to Sin, is the eternal duration of Wrath or of the
Curse, because the Sinner being a mere Creature, cannot at one shoke meet with
the infinite Wrath of God, and satisfy Justice at once, therefore the Lord
has in his Wisdom and Justice found out a way of supporting the Creature in
its being, and continuing it for ever under wrath, because it cannot, being
finit, satisfy infinite Justice: But our Lord being God and Man, being of
infinite worth or value, and of infinite strength, was also to satisfy
Justice, and bear at once, that which the El^ct could never have born; yet he
had the essentials of that which sin deserved, to wit, death and the curse to
meet with, and did actually meet with them, as the hiding of his Fathers face,
and the suspending and keeping back of that consolation, that by virtue of the
personal union flowed from the Godhead to the Man-head; And he also had the
actual sense and feeling of the wrath of God, the awaked Sword of the Justice
of God actually smiting him; so that men wondered how he could be dead so soon.
We shall only add a word or two of reasons for clearing and confirming the
Doctrine; and for proof of it, these three things concur, 1. That sins
deserving by God's appointment, is to have sorrow following on it. 2 That by
God's appointment according to the Covenant of Redemption, the Son of God
undertook that same very debt that was due by the Elect. And 3. That it was
God's design not to pass one of their sins without satisfaction made to
Justice, but to put at the Cautioner for them all; for the declaration of the
riches and glory of the free grace of God when the sinner is liberat, and not
put to pay; An^ for the declaration of the holy severity and justice of God,
when not one farthing is owing, but the Cautioner must needs pay it, and that
both these meeting together, there may be to all generations a standing and
shining evidence of the unsearchable riches both of Gods Grace and of his
Justice.

This is a sweet Doctrine, and has many massy, substantial, and soul
refreshing uses: Out of this eater comes meat, and out of the strong comes
sweet; This being the very marrow of the Gospel, holding out not only Christ's
sufferings, but that he suffered not at random or by guess, but that he
suffered the sorrows and griefs that we should have suffered; and though the
equivalent might have been received, yet he would needs undergo the same
sufferings in their essentials: Which may exceedingly confirm the Faith and
Hope of believers in him, of their exemption and freedom from the wrath and
curse of God, seeing he suffered the same that they should have suffered, had
not he interposed betwixt them and it as their Cautioner and Surety.

Use 1. Hereby we may know what an evil and bitter thing sin is that has such
effects; Would God we could once prevail this far with you, as to make you take
up and believe, that sin has sorrow and grief inseparably knit to it, and that
the sinner is miserable and liable to death, and to the curse of God, and there
is no difference but this, that sinners are insensible how miserable they are,
and so in greater capacity to be made obnoxious to that misery; Do ye mind
this, O sinners, that God is angry with you every day? That indignation and
wrath, tribulation and anguish is to every soul of man that does evil? That God
will by no means clear the guilty? Tremble to think upon it; Many of you pass
as gay honest folks who will be found in this Roll: And would ye know your
condition, and the hazard that ye run? It Is of wrath and of the curse of God
eternally with desperation and blasphemy; And if that be misery, sin is misery,
or brings it; And the day comes when there shall be a storm from Heaven of Fire
and Thunder; that will melt the Elements above you, and not leave a stone upon
a stone of these stately buildings on earrh about you; in which day sinners
will be confirmed in the belief of this truth, That it is an evil and bitter
thing to depart from the living God.

To press this Use a little; There are two sorts of sinners, who, if they would
soberly let the truth of this Doctrine sink in their minds, they would see
their folly: The 1. sort are these who^ly quietly under bygone guilt unrepented
of, as if the sorrow were past, because the Act is so; but think not so, will
the just God av^nge sin on his Son, and will he let it pass in you? Ye that
will grant ye are sinners, and are under convictions of sin, ye had need to
take heed what is following it; As ye treasure up sin, ye are treasuring up
wrath against the day of wrath; O! wrath is a heaping up in store for you. A 2.
sort are these that go on in sin whatever be said to the effects of it; and
will confidently put their hand to it, as if there were no sting in it at all,
and drink it over as so much sweet liquor, but of these stolen drinks that seem
sweet in secreet, will be vomited up again with pain, torment and sorrow; and
either it shall be grief and sorrow to you in the way of repentance, or eternal
grief and sorrow when the cup of Gods wrath shall be put in your hand, and held
to your head for evermore.

Use 2. By this ye may see a necessity of making use of the Mediator Christ
Jesus; It Is Gods great mercy that he has given a Mediator, and that the
Mediator is come, and that he has taken on our debt: What had been our eternal
perishing and wallowing in Hells torments with Devils, to his sufferings?
Always this Doctrine says that there is a necessity of making use of him, and
receiving of him; And therefore either resolve to meet with this sorrow in your
own persons, or betake you to him, that by his interposing it may be kept off
you; Weigh these two, that sorrow, death, and the curse, necessarily follow
sin; And that Jesus Christ h^th died and undergone that curse for elect
sinners, and then ye will see a necessity of being found in him, that ye may be
free of the curse; Which made Paul make that choice, Philip. 3 8, 9, I count
all things dung that I may win Christ, and be found in him. Oft-times the
allurements of the Gospel prevail not to bring sinners to Christ, but if it is
allurements do not prevail, will not the consideration of the vengeance of God
persuade you? However in these two Doctrines ye have in sum this, the curse of
God following sin, and a free and full Savior holden out to you, by whom ye
may evi^e the curse; ye are invited ^o make him welcome; Choose you, death and
life are set before you, whereby you are put to it whether ye will adventure to
meet with the curse, or to make him welcome; Now God himself make you wise to
make the right choice.

SERMON XX.
ISAIAH LIII.IV, V. Verse. 4. Surely he has born our griefs, and carried our
sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted.

Verse. 5. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our
iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we
are healed.


IF we had the Faith of that which the Prophet speaks here, and the through
conviction who it is of whom he speaks, we would be in a holy transport of
admiration and astonishment at the hearing of it; That it is he who is the
Prince of life, that was bruised and wounded, and that these bruises, wounds
and stripes are ours, were for us, and the price and satisfaction for our
iniquities to Divine Justice; And yet that even he in the performing of all
this, is vilipended and despised by these whose good he is thus pursuing and
seeking after, O! how should it be wondered at?

These words (as we show) hold forth these three, 1. The cause or end of
Christ's suffering Surely he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows;
which is to remove and take away the scandal that might arise from Christ's
Humiliation, described in the foregoing words; He was low indeed but there was
no guilt found in his mouth; It was for no quarrel that God had at himself, but
he undertook our debt, and therefore carried our sorrows. 2. The aggravation of
men's enmity, and desperate wickedness, that yet notwithstanding of all this, We
esteemed him smitten of God, and a flicted. 3. We have the Exposition of the
first part more clearly set down, But he was wounded for our transgressions, he
was bruised for our iniquities, etc. Where more fully he expounds what in the
beginning of the 4. verse. he asserted.

We expounded the first part of the words, and show that these griefs and
sorrows held forth the due desert of sin, called ours, because they are the due
and particular desert of our sins, and that which they procured, and that
Christ's bearing of them, was not only meant of his taking away, or removing
from us of sorrows and griefs, as he did diseases, but of his real undergoing
of that which we should have undergone, even such a bearing as made others
think him smitten and plagued of God, and such as wounded and bruised him, even
such as made him become a curse for us, and such as procured healing to us; All
which proves that it was a re^l undergoing of sorrow and grief.

We spoke to two Doctrines from this part, 1. That sin has sorrow necessarily
knit to it, and never wants sorrow following on it. 2. That Christ Jesus
undertook these same sorrows, and really bare these same griefs that sin
procured to the Elect, or that by sin were due to them.

That we may proceed to observe somewhat more, and for clearer access to the
Doctrine, we shall speak a word to a Question that may be moved here.

What is meant by these words, our, we, and us? He has born our griefs, the
Lord has laid on him the iniquities of us all, by his stripes we are healed?
And the rather I would speak to this, because throughout the Chapter we will
find these Pronouns very frequent. We know in Scripture our and us are
sometimes extended to all mankind, so we are all lost in Adam, and sin has a
dominion over us all; And that part of the wor^s, verse. 6. All we like sheep
have gone astray, may well be extended to all mankind: Sometimes it is to be
restrict^d to God's Elect, and so all comprehends only such and all such; And
in this respect our, us, and we, and all, are contradistinguished from many
others in the World; and take not in all men, as Gal. 4.26. Jerusalem which is
above is free, which is the mother of us all; Which is spoken in opposition to
the bond woman and her children spoken of before; So that this our, us, and we,
are not to be extended to all individual men in the W^rld, as if Christ had
satisfied the Justice of God for all, but it is to be applied to Gods Elect,
separat in his purpose from others, and in Gods design appointed to be redeemed
and satisfied for by Christ; And the words being thus expounded they lead us to
this Doctrine, that Jesus Christ in bearing the punishment of sin, had a
particular and distinct respect to some definite sinners; for confirmation of
it, we shall not go out of the Chap^er, the scope whereof we would clear a
little; And if we look through the Chapter, we will find five grounds to clear
these words are to be thus restricted.

For 1. We are to expound this universal with respect to Gods purpose and
Covenant, the contrivance of the Elects Redemption, and to the death of Christ,
the execution of it, and so these words our, us, we, all are, and must be
restricted to these, and in them we are to find out who they are: Now, who
these are, we find clear, John 6.37, 39. In the 37. v. where he says, All that
the Father has given me shall come unto me, And v. 39. This is the Fathers
will which has sent me, that of all which he has given me I should lose
nothing; It Is in a word these whom the Father has given to Christ, and as many
as are given will believe: And certainly these that are given to Christ to be
redeemed by him, are the same whose iniquities the Father makes to meet on him;
And these are distinguished from these not given, John 17.6, 11. And are called
his sheep. Joh. 10.15, and 17. Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay
down my life, to wit, for my sheep: And all the strain of this Chapter being to
show Gods way of contriving and prosecuting the work of Redemption, and Christ's
executing thereof according to the Covenant of Redemption; All this spoken of
Christ's suffering must be expounded according to that engagement. 2. Whereas it
is said, v. 8. For the transgressions of my people was he stricken; It is
certain, this our and us and we for whom Christ was stricken, must be
restricted to Gods people; That is his peculiar people who are his by electing
love, as Christ says, Joh. 17.6. Thine they were, and thou gave them to me;
They are not his as all the World are his, but are contradistinguished from the
world as his own peculiar, purposed, designed people; Sure all the World are
not God's People in this sense, therefore they are called his sheep, and
contradistinguished from these who are not his sheep, Joh. 10.17. And therefore
we are to look on these words, our, us, and we, as of equivalent extent with
the peculiar people of God; He carried the punishment of the sins of all Gods
people that are his peculiar election. 3. So v. 10. When thou shall make his
soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed; Hence we gather this, that
these whose iniquities Christ bare, are Christ's Seed, and for these he
purposely laid down his life, as these whom he expected should be saved for
satisfying of him for the travel of his soul, and for no more, and these cannot
certainly be all the World, there being such contradistinction betwixt Christ
Mystical, or his Seed comprehending the Elect, And the Seed of the Serpent
comprehending the Reprobat and Wicked, who are said to be of their father the
Devil; These are Christ's Seed who are spiritually begotten of him, and these
doubtless are not all the World, and for these only he suffered; So that our
sins here, are the sins of all the Seed. 4. Look to v. 11. where it is said, By
his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, for he shall bear their
iniquities: Where it is clear whose sins they are that Christ bears; it is
theirs who are justified by his knowledge, or by faith in his blood, and
justification by faith in his blood, and redemption by his blood, are
commensutable, and of equal extent: Now, it being certain as to the event, that
not all the World, nor all in the visible Church, are justified by the Faith of
Christ, it must also be certain that the sins of others who are not, nor shall
not be justified, were never purposly born by Christ: And this ground as all
the rest, will be the more clear, if we consider that it is given as an
Argument why they must be justified, because he has born their iniquities. A
5. ground may be gathered from the last words of the Chapter, He made
intercession for the transgressors; Whence we may reason, that Christ's
intercession and his satisfaction, are of equal extent, he satisfies for no more
then he interceeds for; Now, it was not for all the World, nor indefinitely and
by guess for all in the visible Church that Christ did interceed, but for them
that the Father had given him out of the world, John 17. v. 9. and v. 6. Thine
they were, and thou gave them me: And v. 10. All mine are thine, and thine
are mine; Christ's death being the ground of his intercession, and it being by
virtue of his death that he interceeded, his death and intercession must be of
the same extent; He interceeds for such and such sinners, because he has paid
a price for them, that there may be a good account made of them at the last day.

The 1. Use of it serves to clear a great and precious truth concerning Gods
Covenant and discriminating love whereby he has put difference betwixt some
and others. 2. It serves to stir them up who are thus differenced, to admire
at, and to commend his love, who has been graciously mindful of them when
others are past by. 3. It serves also to clear other Scriptures, and this same
Chapter, and to teach us, not to make common to all, the privileges bestowed
on some peculiar ones; and to guard us against the vilifying and profaning of
our Lords sufferings, as if he had no special and peculiar design in them, or
as if they might be frustrated in the design of them contrary to the promises
made to him of the Father.

And therefore here to obviat an Objection which is made from the 6 verse. All
we like sheep have gone astray; Whence some would infer, that it is all who like
sheep have strayed, whose iniquities Christ has born; We say, that, that all
is not meant to comprehend them whose iniquities Christ has born only, but to
hold out the extent of straying; or, the meaning is not to show that his
suffering and satisfying of Justice, extended to all that strayed; but to show
that the Elect for whom he suffered had all of them strayed, as well as others;
And this is like the reasoning which the Apostle has, 2 Cor. 5.14. If one died
for all, then were all dead; The meaning whereof is not, that Christ died for
all that were dead, but this is the meaning, that all for whom Christ died were
once dead: so here while it is said, All we like sheep have gone astray; It is
to show that the Elect strayed and esteemed him not as well as others, and had
Go^s curse lying on them as their due, all Christ interposed and took it off
them as well as others. The Point might have also Use for Confirmation, but we
do not follow these.

2. Surely he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows, that is our griefs
and sorrows who are his Elect, his People, his Seed, who flee to him for
refuge, and are justified by his knowledge, or by Faith in him, and for whom he
makes intercession; H^nce Observe, that Believers would endeavor the
strengthening of themselves in the Faith of this, that Jesus Christ has born
their griefs and sorrows, and has satisfied Justice for t^en in particular;
they would study to be in case on good ground with the Prophet, to say. Surely
he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows; To make it sure that they are
in the Roll of Elect Believers, and Justified Persons; To say with the Apostle
Paul, Gal. 3.13. He was made a curse for us; And with the same Apostle, 2 Cor.
5. ult. to say, He was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness
of God in him; And to say with the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own self
bare our sins in his own body on the tree; they speak always by way of
application; So in these places whereby we confirmed the Doctrine, that Christ
really bare that punishment of the sins of the Elect, are expressed in an
applicatory way; And that no^able place, Gal. 2.20. Where, as if it were not
enough to say, he loved us, and gave himself for us, he draws it nearer and
more home, and says, Who loved me, and gave himself for me. But that ye may
not mistake the point, my meaning is not, that every body off hand should make
application of Christ's death; O! the presumption and desperate security that
destroys thousands of souls here; as if there were no such distinction as we
held forth in the first Doctrine, nor any Bar to be put in the way of that
fancied universal application of Christ's dying for all sinners; whereas we show
that it was for his sheep, and these given to him of the Father only, that he
died, and for no more; But this is my meaning, that (as it is, 2 Pet. 1.10.) ye
would give diligence to make your calling and election sure, and ^^^t in an
orderly way ye would s^cure and sicker your interest in Christ's death; Not to
make this the first thing that ye apprehend for the foundation of your Faith,
that he died for you in particular, for that were to come to the top of the
Stairs, before ye begin to set foot on the first step; But the orderly way is
to make sure your fleeing to Christ in the sense of sin, and your closing with
him on his own terms, and your having the characters of his people engraven on
you; And then from such premises ye may draw this conclusion as the result
thereof, Surely he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows: Then ye may
be satisfiedly confirmed in this, that when Christ transacted and bargained
with the Father about the Elect, when he prayed, and took the Cup of his
Fathers wrath and drank it out for them, he minded your names, and was made a
curse in your room: The reason is drawn from the advantage of such a Doctrine,
as having hanging on it the consolation of all the promises of God; for we can
never comforta^ly apply, nor be delighted in the promises, till we come to make
particular application of Christ's purpose and purchase in the work of
Redemption: This is it that rids Marches, and draws a Line betwixt us and
re^robat ungodly men, and that keeps from the fear of eternal death that
pursues them; And it gives some ground of hope to lay hold on, and grip to, as
to our enjoying of Christ's purchase: I kn^w there is noth^ng that f^^k had more
need to be sober and warry in the search of, and in the securing themselves in,
then this; yet by the same command that injoyneth us, to make our
Covenant-state, our Calling and El^ction sure, we are bound to make our
Redemption sure; And having at some length spoken of the way of making sure our
believing, on the 1. verse. We may insist the less on this, of making sure our
Redemption ^y Christ.

The 1. Use serves for Information; To let you know, 1. That there are many
prosessing Christians, that account this a curious, nice, and conceity thing,
to study to be sure, and to make it sure, that Christ in his death and
sufferings minded them in particular; Others may be think it impossible; And
all may think it a right hard and difficult thing, and indeed so it is; But yet
we would have you to consider, 1. That simply it is not impossible, ^lse we
should say, that the comfort of the people o^ God were impossible. 2. That it
is no curious thing, for the Lord does not lay the obligation to curiosity on
any, though we would wish that many had a holy curiosity to know God's mind
toward them, that they might not live in the dark about such a concerning
business. 3. That the secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, Psalm.
25.14. And even this same secret concerning Redemption is with them, and he
will show them his Covenant: And indeed it were no small matter to have this
manifested.

And therefore as a 2. Use of the point, we would commend to you the study of
making this sure; for it has many notable advantages attending it; it would
provoke to humility, and to thankfulness to him that loved us, and washed us
from ou^ sins in his own blood; It would make a c^mfortable and cheerful
Christian li^e; It would warm the heart with love to God, and to Jesus Christ
who has thus loved us as to give himself for us: When we commend this to you,
it is no uncouth, nice, needlesl^ curious, or unattainable thing, nor would we
have you when ye cannot attain it, to fit down discouraged; neither would we
have you take any extraordinary way to come by it; nor waiting for any new
light but that which is in the Bible; nor would we have you resolving to do no
other thing till ye attain to this: But this we would have you to do, even to
make Faith in Christ sure, by fleeing to him, and casting your burden on him,
by cordial receiving of him, and acquiescing in him; and then ye make all sure;
The committing of your selves to him to be saved by his price paid to Divine
Justice, and resting on him as he is holden ou^ in the Gospel, is the way to
read your interest in his R^demption: And this is it that we have Gal. 3. and
2.19. Where it is disputed at length, that we are Heirs of Abraham by
believing, and by the Law (says the Apostle) I am dead to the Law, that I
might live unto God: I am crucifi^d with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not
I, but Christ lives in me, and the life which I live in the fl sh is by the
Faith of the Son of God: Hence he concludes, Who loved me, and gave himself for
me; And this he proves in the last words, I do not frustrate the grace of God,
I do not disappoint it. I mar it not in its end and design; It is (as if he
had said) seeking a lost sinner to save, and I give it a lost sinner to be
saved; For though God's Decree be the first step to Salvation, and the work of
Redemption follows on it, and then believing on both; yet to come to the
knowledge of Gods Decree of Election, and of our concern in the Covenant of
Redemption, we look downward, and seek first to know if we have right to make
application of that which was thought upon long since concerning us, and this
we do by reflecting on the way we have come to believing: If we have been
convinced and made sensible of sin, and of our lost condition by nature, if we
have not smothered that conviction but cherished it; If we have not run to this
or that duty for satisfying of Divine Justice, and for making of our peace
ther^by, but were necessitate to betake our selves to Jesus Christ made offer
of in the Gospel for the salvation of sinners, and if we have closed with him
as he was offered: And if we have done so, we may th^nce conclude that he has
loved us, and given himself to save us; Because he has humbled me for sin (may
the serious soul say) and giv^n me this faith to believe in him, and this is
his promise which I rest upon, that I shall be saved. Or thou may try thy
interest in his Redemption thus; Whether am I one of Gods people or not?
Whether do I walk like them? and so go through the marks and signs of holiness,
asking ^hy self, What sinceri^y is there in me? What Mortification? What
Humility, Meekness, Love to God and his Children? And wha^ fruits of Faith in
new-obedience? These two F ith and Holiness are the Pillars that bear up the
House of Assurance; Working and not resting on it, believ^ng and yet not
growing vain and light because of it, but so much the rather studying Holiness;
And to go on betwixt and with these two, till we come to read God's mind about
our Election and Red^mption: For neither Believing nor Holiness can make any
alteration in the bargain of Redemption, yet it will warrant our application of
the bargain, and clear our interest in i^; as the Apost e Peter plainly
insinuats when he thus exhorts, Give diligence to make your calling and
election sure; How is that? Will diligence mak^ God alter his decree of
Election, or make it any surer in it self? No, by no means, bu^ it will assure
us of it; For by so doing an entrance shall be ministered unto us abundantly
into his everlasting Kingdom; by giving all diligence to add one grace to
another, and one degree of grace to another, there shall be a wide door opened
to us to go in to Heaven by; And there is no haz^rd in commending this Doctrine
to you all, even the study of Faith and Holiness, thereby to come to the
knowledge of Gods Secret Council concerning you.

And therefore as a third Use of th s point, know that all of you that prejudge
y^urselves of this comfort of your interest in Christ's purchase, do bring the
blame of it on your selves: If any shall profanely object, if God has
purposed so many shall get goo^ of Christ's sufferings, and no more, what will my
Faith and Holiness do if I be ^ot elected? And what can my unbelief and
negligence prejudge me if I be elected? We show in the former Use, what Faith
and Holiness will do; and we t^ll you here, what your unbelief and negligence
will do, and it is this, it will seclude you from all the blessings of the
Covenant, and bring you under the sentence of condemnation; for as the
conditional promise looks to the believer and unbeliever; and so it is not
Christ's purchase, nor the difference God has made in his purpose of election,
that is the cause why ye are damned and not justified; But ye are damned
because ye transgressed Gods Law and when salvation was offered to you through
Christ, ye would not close with the offer; And ye are not justified, because ye
b^took not your selves to him for righteou n^ss but continued in your sin, and
in seeki^g righteousness by the Law: For although this universal be not true,
That Christ died for all men, yet this universal is true that they are all
justified that by faith flee unto Jesus Christ for refuge; Hence these two are
put together, Joh. 6.37. All that the Father has given me sha l come unto me,
and him that comes I will in no wise cast out; For I came down from Heaven not
to do my own will, but the Fathers will that sent me; If it should be asked,
what is the Fa^hers will? He answers, This is the Fathers will that sent me,
that of all that he has given me I should lose nothing; There are (as if he
had said) some committed to me to be redeemed by me, and I will lose none of
them: And lest it should yet be objected, but I wot not if I be given to Christ
to be redeemed by him; He adds, And this is the will of him that sent me, that
every one that sees the Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting life:
In which words, we have two wills, to say so, both having the same promise and
effect, the first he relates to the secret paction of Redemption, verse. 39. And
the second is his revealed will p^inting at out duty, verse. 40. And so if any
should say, I know not it I be given to Christ, I know not if I be elected;
This answer is here given, What is that to thee? It Is not to be searched into
at the first hand, and broken in upon per sal^um, and at the broad side: That
is God's secret will, and that which is his revealed will belongs to thee, and
that is, to see that thou believe, and if thou believe, the same promise that
is annexed to believing is annexed to election, and they sweetly tryst
together, and are of equal extent, to wit, believing and to be given to Christ:
And therefore let me commend it to you, to hold you content with Gods revealed
will; For it is not the ground of your Faith, I mean as to its first closing
with Christ, That of all given to Christ he shall lose none; But this is the
ground of it, That every one that sees the Son, and believes on him, shall
have everlasting life: And we may add this word as one motive amongst others to
Faith and Holiness, that by your studying of these ye may turn over the words
of the Prophet here to your selves, and say, Surely he has born our griefs,
and carried our sorrows; And that of the Apostle, Gal. 2. Who loved me, and
gave himself for me; Also, that word of Peter cited before, His own self bare
our sins in his own body on the tree; And O! what consolation is there?

The 4. Use of it is, to commend the practice of this to the Believer that has
indeed fled to Jesus Christ; And to show the great privilege that they have
who are such: The practice of it is, that Believers should seek to be
established and confirmed in the particular application of Christ's death to
themselves; not only to know that he suffered for the Elect and for Believers,
but for them in particular, that as it is ^eb 4.16 They may come with boldness
to the Throne of God, and confidently assert their int^rest; And as it is, Heb.
6. They may grow up to the full assurance of hope unto the end: We suppose
there are many believers that dar not disclaim the Covenant and their interest
in Christ, who yet are fearful to make this particular application, Jesus
Christ has loved me, and given himself for me; But if they could knit the
effects with the cause from whence they came, they might attain to it; for the
man that can say I am fled to Christ for refuge, he may also say, that he
purposely laid down his life to pay my debt; And he is warranded of Christ to
make this application of his particular intention toward him: Upon the other
side, the more consolation be in this to Believers, it speaks the greater
ground of terror to unbelievers, because of the prejudice they sustain by the
want of this; And as many of you as make not Faith and Holiness your study, ye
ly out of the reach of this consolation that flows from Christ's bearing the
griefs and sorrows of his own; And therefore let the profane sen^^ess
multitude that know not what it is to die to the Law, or to live to Holiness,
as ye would not commit Sacrilege, stand a-back, and not dar to meddle with
this redemption, till ye stoop and come in at this door of Faith and Holiness;
And let as many as are in this way admit of the consolation, for it is the Lords
allowance upon you; But for others if ye presume to take hold of it, the Lord
will wring it from you, and let you know to your cost that ye had nothing to do
with it.

SERMON XXI.
ISAIAH LIII.IV, V. Verse. 4. Surely he has born our griefs, and carried our
sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted.

Verse. 5. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our
iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we
are healed.


THese words, and all this Chapter, look liker a piece of the History of the
Gospel then a Prophecy of the Old Testament; The sufferings of the Messiah
being so directly pointed at in them; We show that this first part of the 4.
Verse holds forth the cause of his sufferings, and it is applied to our Lord,
Matthew. 8.17. and 1 Pet. 2.24. As for the second part of the Verse in these
words, yet we esteemed him smitten of God, stricken and afflicted; any who are
acquainted with the Gospel, cannot but know that it was fulfilled in him; and
it is an aggravation of their sin who did so undervalue and despise him, that
though he condescended to come so low for us, yet we slighted him, and even
then when there was greatest love let out, we abused it and made it the rise of
greatest malice: and for the 5. Verse, it is applied by Peter, 1 Pet. 21.24.
This whole Chapter then being so Gospel like, and having a direct fulfilling in
Christ, we may draw this general Doctrine from it.

That our Lord Jesus Christ who was born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under
Pontius Pilate, was crucified, died, and was buried, and rose again the third
day; is the very same Messiah that was prophesied of in the Old Test^ment, and
was promised to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, whom the Fathers before his coming in
the Flesh were waiting for: And though this may be looked on as but a very
common and useless Doctrine, yet it is the main ground and found^tion of our
Faith; we take many things for granted, wherein if we were well tried and put
to it, we would be found unsicker, and in this among the rest: Now for
confirmation of it, this same one argument will make it out, we shall not
follow it at length, but in the prosecu^ing of it shall astrict our selv s to
this Chapter; the argument runs thus, if in Christ Jesus, that which was
prophesied of the Messiah, and promised to the Fathers, have its fulfilling and
accomplishment; then he must be the same Messiah that was prophesied of, and
promised to them; for these things spoken of the one and alone Messiah, can
agree to no other. But whatever was prophesied and spoken or promised of the
Messiah to the Fathers, to the least circumstance of it, was all fully
accomplished and fulfiled in Christ; therefore the conclusion laid down in the
Doctrine follows, to wit, that our blessed Lord Jesus is the same Messiah that
was prophesied of, promised to the Fathers, and whom they before his coming
were looking for: So that that question needs not now to be proposed art thou
he that should come, or do we look ^or another? Go, says Christ, Mat. 11.4 5.6.
and tell John, the blind receive their sight, the lame walk, and the lepers are
cleansed, the deaf hear, and the dead are raised, and the poor have the Gospel
preached to them, and blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in me;
blessed is he, who because of my Humiliation is not stumbled: Now, not to make
a rehearsal of the general Prophesies in Scripture, all of which have their
exact fulfilling in Christ, we shall only speak to two things here for mak^ng
out of the Argument proposed. 1. That this Chapter speaks of the Messiah. 2.
That what is spoken in it, is literally fulfilled in Christ.

1. That this Chapter speaks of the Messiah; Though of old the blinded J^ws
granted it, yet now they say that it speaks of some other; but that it speaks
of him, these things will make it evident, 1. If we look to the 13. Verse of
the former Chapter, where it is said, My servant shall deal prudent^y, he shall
be exalted and extolled, and be very high; there our Lord Jesus is spoken of as
the Fathers Servant or great Lord-Deputy; and the Jews themselves grant that
this is mean'd of the Messiah, and there is nothing more clear then that what
is spoken in this Chapter relates to him who is called the Lords Servant in the
former Chapter as we show at our entering to speak of it. 2 If we look to the
description of his Person, it can aggree to no other, for it is said, There was
no guile found in his mouth, he was brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as
a sheep before the shearer is dumb, so he open^d not his mouth* etc. he had no
sin of his o^n, which can be said of no other, therefore this Chapt r speaks of
him. 3. If we consider the end and effects of his Sufferings, they do also
clear it; the end of his Sufferings for it is for the transgressions of his
People, and as it is Dan. 9.26. He was to be cut off but not for himself; the
effects, He shall see his feed, and by his knowledge justify many: And the New
Testament is full to this purpose, there being no Scripture in all the Old
Testament more made use of, nor oftener applied to Christ then this is.

2. What is spoken in this Chapter is really and literally fulfilled in Christ,
and we may shortly draw what is in it to these five Heads; all which we will
find clearly fulfi^led in him. 1. To his Suff^rings. 2. To the ground of his
Sufferings. 3. To Men's account and estimation of him. 4. To the Promises made
to him. 5. To the effects that followed on his Sufferings. 1. For his
Sufferings it is said, that he should be a man of sorrows and acquainted with
grief, that he should be despised and rej^cted of men, and not be esteemed;
that he should be looked on, as stricken, smitten of God and afflicted; that he
should bear ou^ sorrows and griefs; and be wounded for our transgressions, that
he should be opp ess^^ and afflicted; and brought as a lamb to the slaughter;
that he should be numbered, among^t the transgressors; and that he should die
and be buried make his grave with the wicked and with the rich in his death;
all which are clearly fulfille: in him; and the clearing of his Sufferings,
whereof we spoke before, clears this, that not only he suffered, but that he
was brought so low in suffering. 2 For the ground of his Sufferings, its said
to be the sins of his own Elect, He bare our griefs and carried our sorrows; he
was wounded for our transgr^ssions, and bruised for our iniquities; there was
no guile found in his mouth; the greatest enemies of our Lord could impute
nothing to him; Pilat was forced to say, that he found no fault in him; all
which show that it was for the Transgressions of his People that he suffered.
3. As for Men's little esteem of him, it is also very clear, for He was despised
and rejected of men; we hid as it were our faces from him; He was despised and
we esteemed him not; the World thought little of him, and we that are elect
thought but little of him, and what is more clear in the Gospel then this?
where it is told, that he was reproached, buffeted, spitted on, despised; they
cri^d away with him, crucify him; He trusted in God, let him deliver him; but
God has forsaken him. 4. As for the Promises made to him, He shall see his
seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in
his hands; He shall see of the travel of his soul and be satisfied; and by his
knowledge shall many be justified, etc. what mean all these but that he shall
die and rise again, and have many Converts; that God's work shall thrive well
in his hand, and that he shall have a glorious Kingdom and many Subjects? which
is called afterward, his having a portion with the great, and his dividing of
the sooil with the strong: All this was accompl shed in Christ, when after his
Resurrect^on many were win and brought in by the Gospel to believe on him; and
though Jews and eathens concurred and conspired to cu^ off all Christians, yet
his Kingdom spread and has continued these sixteen hundred years and above. 5.
As for the effects that followed on his Sufferings, or the influence they have
on the elect People of God; as many Converts as have been and are in the World,
as many Witnesses are there, that he is the Messiah; every converted, pardoned,
and reconciled Soul seals this truth: Hence 1 John 5.7, 8 it is said, There are
three that bear witness in heaven, the Father, the Word and the Holy Ghost, and
these three are one; and there are three that bear witness on earth the Spirit
in his efficacy, the Water in the sanctifying virtue of it, in changing and
cleansing his People, and the Blood in the satifying and justifying virtue of
it, and these three agree and concur in one, even this one, to wit, that Jesus
Christ is the Son of God; and then it follows, He that believes has the
witness in himself, because he has gotten Pardon through him, and therefore
can set to his Seal to this truth, and say, truly Christ is the Messiah.

The Use is, To exhort you to acquaint your selves with these things that serve
to confirm this truth; the book of the Acts of the Apostles, and the Epistle to
the Hebrews, are much sp^nt upon it, even to hold out, and to prove Christ
Jesus to be the true Messiah, and Savior of his People: If this be not made
sure and sicker, we have an unstable ground for our Faith; and though it be
sure in it self, yet so long as it is not so to us, we want the consolation of
it; and there is a twofold prejudice that comes through Folks want of through
clearness in, and assurance of this truth. 1. To the generality of Hearers,
there is this prejudice, that they are so careless and little solicitous to
rest on him: And as it made the Jews to r^ject him, who to this day stumb^e at
him on this same very ground, that they know him not to be the Messiah, the
Christ of God, in whom is accomplished all that was spoken of the Messiah; to
Christians not being through in it, they do not rest on him nor close with him
as the true Messiah. 2. There is a prejudice also from it to Believers, who
having only a glimring light of Christ's being the Messiah, come short of thar
consolation that they might h^ve if they were through in the Faith o^ it; there
is this great evil among Christians, that they study not to be solidly clear
and through in this point to that if they were pu^ to reason and debate with a
Jew if there were not a witness within themselves of it, the truth of the Faith
of many would be exceedingly shaken.

2. From this, That he never speaks of Christ's Sufferings, but he makes
applic^tion of them he carried our Griefs, he was wounded for our
Transgressions, etc. Observe, That Believers would look on Christ's Sufferings
as undergone for them, and in their rooms and place; We cleared before, 1. That
Christ suff^red for some peculiarly, and not for all; And 2. That Believers
would endeavor the clearing of their own interest in his Sufferings, and that
they have a right to them; Now we shortly add this 3d. of kin to the former,
That B lievers, and such as are fled to Christ for refuge, would look on his
Suff^rings as come under for them; and these same Scriptures which we cited to
confirm these, will confirm this: The reason why we would have you confirmed in
this, is, Because, 1 It is only this that will make you suitably thankful, it
is this which is a notable ground of that Song of Praise, Rev. 1.4. To him that
has loved us and washed us from our sins in his own blood, etc. 2. This is a
ground of true, solid, and strong consolation, even to be comforted in the
applicative Faith of Christ's purchase. 3. It is the Lords allowance on his
People, which they should reverently and thankfully make use of, even to look
on Jesus Christ, as wounded, pierced, and lifted up on the Cross for them; and
by doing this according to his allowance, there is a paved way made for
application of all the benefits of his purchase.

3. From the scope (looking on the words as spoken to remove the scandal of the
Cross) Observe (which may be a reason of the former) that folk will never take
up Christ rightly in his sufferings, except they take him up as suffering for
them, and in their room; This look of Christ, leads 1. To take up much of the
glory of grace, and condescending love to sinners. 2. It leads to take up
Christ's faithfulness, that came to the world on sinners errand according to the
ancient transaction in the Covenant of Redemption, as he is brougbt in saying
Psalm. 40. Lo I come in the volume of thy book it is written of me, I delight to
do thy will O God. 3. It leads to a stayed look of Gods Holiness, Justice, and
Goodness, in exacting satisfaction of his own Son, and in accepting of that
satisfaction. 4. It gives a right view of the way of grace, and leads in to see
it to be a most real thing; God the offended Party accepting of the price, and
Christ paying it: Thus the Believers Faith gets a sight of Christ satisfying as
if he saw his own debt satisfied by himself; It sees him undergoing the curse
and justice inflicting it on him, that the Believer may go free.

The Use is, to show the necessity of studying the well-grounded application of
Christ's sufferings as for us; much of the reason why Christ is not more pr^zed
lies here, that he is not looked on as paying our debt; otherwise when
challenges of the Law and of Justice take hold on the Soul, if Christ were seen
interposing, and saying, A body have thou prepared unto me; And if Justice were
seen exacting, Christ performing, and God accepting his satisfaction, and that
in sign and token that Justice is satisfied, he is raised from the dead,
justified in the Spirit, and is entered in possession of Glory as Believers
forerunner in their name; it would afford precious and lovely thoughts of
Jesus Christ, and humbling thoughts of our selves; Therefore there is a
necessity, if we would consider his sufferings aright, and prize and esteem
him, that we endeavor to make particular application of them to our selves on
good grounds. 2. Upon the other hand, know, ye who have no ground to make this
application, that ye cannot esteem aright of him or his sufferings, nor of the
grace that shined in them, because ye have no title to, nor can while such,
have any clearness of interest in them. 3. For you that would fain have a high
esteem of Christ, and yet are all your days casting at this foundation, never
think nor expect to win rightly to esteem of him, so long as ye scarr to make
application of his purchase; And therefore that ye may love and praise him, and
esteem rightly of him, labor to come up to the making of this application on
solid and approved grounds.

4. More particularly from this part of the aggravation, Yet we esteemed him
stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted; We have a fourfold confirmation of
truth, or four precious truths confirmed. 1. That our Lord Jesus in his
sufferings did really suffer, and was really brought low in his sufferings, so
as on-lookers thought him a most despicable man, and one that was stricken and
smitten of God, and ^fflicted: Of this we spoke on the beginning of the 4.
verse. 2. We have here an evidence of the exceeding great freeness of grace,
and of the love of Christ in his sufferings, in so far as he bare their
sorrows, and paid their debt that counted him smitten; There was no good thing
in us to deserve or procure his sufferings, But most freely he under-went these
sufferings, and undertook our debt, Romans 5.8. God commends his love toward us,
in that while we were yet sinners Christ died for us; And v. 10. While we were
yet enemies we were reconciled by the death of his Son: Can there be a greater
proof of infinite and free love then appears in our Lords sufferings? There was
not only no merit on our side; but on the contrary, despising, rej^cting, being
ashamed of him, reproaching him kicking against him, and rubbing of aff^onts on
him; Paul and others having their hands hot in his blood.

Use 1. Consider here, behold and wonder at the free love of God, and rich
condescending love of Christ, he stands not at the Bar and prays for them that
were praying him to pray for them; But as it is in the end of the Chapter, it
was for transgressors; It was even for some of them that were seeking to take
away the life of the Prince of Life, and for other transgressors.

2. Know that in them to whom the benefit of Christ's death is applied, there
is no more worth then there is in others who do not share of the benefit of
it: It Is the opinion not only of Heretics, but some way of many ignorant
Professors; That these for whom Christ died were better then others; But here
we see a proof of the contrary; He dies for them that accounted him smitten of
God: And this he does for two reasons, 1. To show the riches and freedom of his
grace, that could overcome man's evil and malice, and outreach the hight of the
desperate wickedness that is in man, and that that stands not (to speak so) on
stepping-stones, but comes over the greatest gulfs of sin and enmity in the
creature. 2. To comfort and encourage his followers when engaged to him,
against and out over their grossest failings and greatest miscarriages; He that
loved them when they were despising and rejecting him, and spitting in a manner
in his very face, Will he now give up with them when they have some love to
him, for this or that corrup^ion that stirs or breaks forth in them? Thus
the Apostle reasons, Romans 5.10. If when we were enemies we were reconciled to
God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by
his life: We were enemies when Christ gave himself for us, but through grace we
are somewhat better now; Enmity and despite in us was then at an hight, now it
is weakened, restrained, and in some measure mortified: And if while we were at
the h^ght of enmity against him he died for us to reconcile us to God, How much
more now being reconciled, may we expect peace and safety, and all the
benefits of his purchase through him? Thus there is a notable consolation, from
this bent of malice that was sometime in us, compared with the victory that
grace has now gotten over it; and the gradation is always comfortable, to
wit, that these lusts that once did reign, and were without any gracious
opposition made to them, or any protestation entered against them, prevailing
it may be publicly, are now opposed and protested against; And if Christ stood
not on the greater, will he stand on the lesser? And our Lord allows this sort
of reasoning so much the more, that he may thereby strongly engage the heart of
the believer against sin, and to the admiring of grace, and withal to the
serious study of holiness.

3, It serves to let you know how much ye Believers are engaged and obliged to
Grace, and what thanks you owe to it. 1. Look to what satisfies for your debt,
ye pay not one farthing of it, our Lord Jesus paid all. 2. Look to the moving
cause, it is to be attributed to nothing in you, but altogether to free grace:
Some poor Dyvour may by his pleading prevail with an able and pitiful-hearted
man to pay his debt; But there was no such externally moving cause in you to
procure this of him, but he freely and willingly, and with delight paid your
debt when ye were in the hight of malicious opposition to him, doing all that
might scarr him from it; And had it been possible that man's malice, despising,
and despite could have scarred him, he had never died for one sinner, but he
triumphed openly in his grace over that and all that stood in his way. 3. We
have here a confirmation of that truth that holds out man's malice and desperate
wickedness, And can there be any thing that evidenceth man's wickedness and
malice more? Then 1. To have enmity against Christ. 2. To have it at such an
hight as to despise him, and count him smitten and plagued of God. And 3. To be
at the hight of malice even then when he out of love was condescending so low
as to suffer and satisfy Justice for him; ye may possibly think that it was
not ye that had such malice at Christ; But says not the Prophet, We esteemed
him smitten of God? Taking in himself and all the elect, which might give us
this Observation, That there is nothing more desperately wicked, and filled with
more enmity against Christ in his condescending love, and against God in the
manifestation of his grace, then when even elect souls for whom he has
suffered, despise him, and count him smitten of God and afflicted: It Is indeed
very sad, yet very profitable, to walk under the deep apprehension, and
soul-pressour of heart-enmity against God and Christ: Are there any of you that
think ye have such sinful and wicked natures that dispose you to think little
of Christ, to despise and reject him and his grace? Gods Elect have this enmity
in their natures; And if such natures be in the Elect, what must be in the
Reprobat who live and die in this enmity? If this were seriously considered and
laid to heart, O but folk would be humble, nothing would affect the soul more,
and stound to the very heart, then to think that Christ suffered for me,
through grace an Elect and a Believer, and that yet notwithstanding I should
have so despised and rejected him, and accounted him smitten of God and
afflicted; Let me exhort all of you to look back on your former walk, and to
lay this enmity to heart, for the day is coming when it will be found to be a
biting, and conscience gnawing sin to many.

4. In that he aggravates their enmity from this, Observe this truth which is
also here confirmed, that there is nothing that gives sin a deeper Dye, then
that it is against grace and condescending love, that is, against Christ when
suffering for us, and offered to us; O! that makes sin to be exceeding sinful,
and wonderfully abominable, and thus it is aggreged, Heb. 2. As greater then
the contempt of Moses his Law; And Heb 6. It Is accounted to be a crucifying the
Son of God a-fresh, and a putting him to an open shame; And Heb. 10. it is
called a trod^ng him under foot, an accounting the blood of the Covenant to be
an unholy thing, and a d^ing despite to the Spirit of Grace; These two last
Scriptures look mainly to the sin against the Holy Ghost, yet so as there is
somewhat of that which is said in them to be found in all unbelievers their
despising of Christ; It Is a sin some way hateful, even to the Publicans and
Sinners to hate them that love us, to do ill to them that do good to us; How
much more sinful and hateful is it to despise and hate him who loved us so as
to give himself for us, and when he was giving himself for us? There are many
sins against the Law that will draw deep, but this will draw deeper then they
all, even sinning against Grace, and the Mediator interposing for sinners, and
manifesting love to them; And the reckoning will run thus, Christ was
manifested to you in this Gospel as the only remedy of sin, and set forth as
crucified before your eyes, and made offer of to you in the Gospel, and yet ye
despised him, and esteemed him not: And let me say it to Believers, that it is
the greatest aggravation of their sin; It is true, in some respect that the
sins of Believers are not so great as the sins of others, they not being
committed with such deliberation and full bensil of will, nor from the dominion
of sin, yet in this respect they are greater then the sins of others, because
committed against special Grace and Love actually communicated; and therefore
when the Believer considers that he has requit Christ thus, it will affect him
most of any thing, if there be any suitable tenderness of frame.

5. From considering that it is the Prophet that expresses this aggravation,
we may Observe, that the Believer that is most tender, and has best right to
Jesus Christ and his satisfaction, and may upon best ground apply it, will be
most sensible of his enmity, and of the abominable guilt that is in despising
and wronging of Jesus Christ; Therefore the Prophet brings in himself as one of
those that by Christ's stripes were healed, taking with his guilt, we despised
and rejected him, we esteemed him not, we judged him smitten of God; The reason
is, because interest in Jesus Christ makes the heart tender, and any wrong
that is done to him to affect the sooner and the more deeply, the scurf that
sometime was on the heart being in a measure taken away; and interest in Christ
awakeneth and raises an esteem of him, and produces a holy sympathy with him
in all the concerns of his glory, even as the members of the body have a
fellow-feeling with the head; Make a supposition, that a man in his madness
should smite and wound his head, or wrong his Wife, his Father, or his Brother;
when that fit of madness is over, he is more affected with that wrong then if
it had been done to any other member of his body, or to other persons not at
all, or not so nearly related to him: There is something of this pointed at,
Zech. 12.10. They shall look unto him whom they have pierced, and mourn for him
as a man does for his only Son; As if he had said, the strokes they have given
the head, shall then be very heavy and grievous to be born, and will be made to
their feeling to bleed a-fresh; They thought not much of these woundings and
piercings of him before, but so soon as their interest in him is clear, or they
come cordially to believe in him, they are kindly affected with the wrongs done
to him.

The Use is, That it is a mark, to try if there be indeed an interest in Christ,
and if it be clear; The man whose interest is clearest, 1. His wrongs done to
Christ will prick him most, if the wrongs be done by others they affect him; if
by himself they some way faint him; Wholeness of heart under wronging of
Christ, is too great an evidence that there is little or no ground for
application of his satisfaction, but it is kindly like, when wrongs done to
Christ affect most. 2. When not only challenges for sin against the Law, but
for sins against Christ and Grace offered in the Gospel, do become a burden,
and the greatest burden. 3. When the man is made to mind secret enmity at
Christ, and is disposed to muster up aggravations of his sinfulness on that
account, and cannot get himself made vile enough; When he has an holy
indignation at himself, and with Paul counts himself the chief of sinners; Even
thou h the evil was done in ignorance, much more if it has been against
knowledge; It Is no evil token when souls are made to heap up aggravations of
their guilt for wrongs done to Christ, and when they cannot get suitable
expressions sufficiently to hold it out, as it is an evil token to be soon
satisfied in this; There are many that will take with no challenge for their
wronging Christ, but behold here how the Prophet insists, both in the words
before, in these, and in the following words, and he can no more win off the
thoughts of it, then he can win off the thoughts of Christ's sufferings.

6. While the Prophet says, when Christ was suffering for his own, and for the
rest of his peoples sins, We esteemed him not, but judged him smitten of God;
Observe briefly, because we hasten to a close, that Jesus Christ is often
exceedingly mistaken by men in his most glorious and gracious works, can there
be a greater mistake then this? Christ suffering for our sins, and yet judged
smitten and plagued of God by us; Or more home, even Christ Jesus is often
shamefully mistaken in the work of his Grace, and in the venting of his love
toward them whose good he is procuring, and whose iniquities he is bearing.

The Use of it serves 1. To teach us when we are ready to pass censure on
Christ's work, to stand still, to animadvert on, and to correct our selves, lest
we unsuitably construct of him: He gets much wrong as to his public work, as
if he were cruel, when indeed he is merciful, as if he had forgotten us, when
when indeed he remembers us still: And as to his private work in particular
persons, as if he did fail in his promise when he is most faithful, and
bringing it about in his own way. And 2. (which is of affinity to the former)
it is a warning to us not to take up hard constructions of Christ, nor to
misconstruct his work, which when misconstructed, himself is mistaken and
misconstructed: How many think that he is breaking when he is binding up, that
he is wounding when he is healing, that he is destroying when he is humbling?
Therefore we would su^pend passing censure till he come to the end and close of
his work, and not judge of it by halves, and then we shall see there was no
such ground for miscons^ructing of him, who is every day holding on in his own
way, and steddily pursuing the same end that he did from the beginning; And let
him be doing so: To him be praise for ever.

SERMON XXII.
ISAIAH LIII.V. Verse. 5. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was
bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and
with his stripes we are healed.


It Is hard to tell whether the Subject of this Verse, and almost of this whole
Chapter, be more sad or more sweet; It Is indeed a sad Subject to read and hear
of the great Sufferings of our blessed Lord Jesus, and of the despiteful usage
that he met with, and to see such a speat of Malice spued and spitted out on
that glorious face; so that when he is bearing our Griefs and carrying our
Sorrows, we do even then account him plagued, smitten of God, and afflicted,
and in a manner look upon it as well bestowed: Yet it is a most sweet Subject if
we either consider the love it comes from, or the comfortable effects that
follow it; that has been the rise, the cause, and the occasion of much singing
to many here below, and is the cause and occasion of so much singing among the
redeemed that are this day before the Throne of God; and as the Grace of God
has overcome the malice of Men, so we are persuaded this cause of rejoicing
has a sweetness in it beyond the sadness, though often we mar our own
Spiritual Mirth, and know not how to dance when he pipes unto us.

These words are an explication of the 4th. Verse, where it is asserted that
Christ's Sufferings were not for himself but for us; from, and by which the
Prophet having aggreged Men's malice, who, notwithstanding thereof esteemed him
not, yea judged smitten of God, he comes again for furthering and carrying on
of this Scope, to show more particularly the ground, end, and effects of
Christ's Sufferings; where ye would remember what we hinted before in general,
that Folks will never think nor conceive of Christ's Sufferings rightly, till
they conceive and take him up as suffering for them; and when we consider this,
we think it no wonder that the most part esteem but little of the Sufferings of
Christ, because there are so few that can take him up under this notion, as
standing in their room, and paying their debt, and as being put in Prison for
them when they are let go free.

In this 5th. Verse, We have these three, 1. A further expression of Christ's
Sufferings. 2. The cause of them, or the end that he had before him in them. 3.
The benefits and fruits or effects of them.

There are in the words four expressions which I shall clear, 1. He was
wounded, to show the reality that was in his Sufferings, he was actually
pierced, or as the word is rendered in the Margin, tormented, and the cause is,
our transgressions; and while it is said, He was wounded for our
transgressions, he means, 1. That our Transgressions procured his wounding, And
2. That his wounding was to remove them, and to procure pardon to us. 2. He was
bruised, that is, pressed as Grapes in a Wine Press, he under-went such a
wounding as bruised him; to show the great desert of Sin, and the heaviness of
wrath that would have come on us for it, had not he interposed; and the cause
is our iniquities; And these two words transgressions and iniquities, show the
exceeding abominableness of Sin; Transgressions or Errings pointing at our
common Sins, Iniquities or Rebellions pointing at greater guilt. 3. The
chastisement, or as the words bear, the discipline of our peace was upon him;
It supposes first, That we by nature were at feud with, and enemies to God.
Secondly, That before our peace could be procured, there behoved to be a
satisfaction given to Justice, the Mediator behoved to come under discipline
and chastisement. 4. And by his stripes we are healed; he was so whipped, that
to say so, the marks of the rod remained behind; the first benefit looks to
pardon of Sin and Peace with God in the first three expressions; the second in
this last expression, looks to our Sanctification and purging from the dominion
and pollution of Sin; By Christ's becoming Sin for us, there is a way made to
wash us from all the guilt of Sin, and from all the foul spots and stains that
were on us by Sin, and he has thus procured Holiness to us; we come easily by
it, but it cost Christ dear, yea very dear.

These very sad, but most sweet, and Soul-solacing words, hold out a short sum
of the substance and marrow of the Gospel; and because they do so, we shall
speak of them summarily together; and ye would the more seriously attend,
especially such as are more ignorant, that by the reading and opening up of
this Verse ye may be brought and kept in mind of the sum of the heads of the
Gospel; and to make the matter the more clear, I shall endeavor to make the
Doctrines drawn from it, as so many answers to six or seven questions, As 1.
What is Man's condition naturally, and what is the condition of all them that
get not benefit by Christ's death? 2. How is Man redeemed and fred from that
condition? 3. By whom is he fred, or who makes the Satisfaction? 4. How does he
perform that Satisfaction? 5. What are the benefits that flow from, and come
to us by the Satisfaction performed? 6. Who are the Persons for whom Christ
has performed the Satisfaction, and to whom he has procured these Benefits?
7. What is the way how these Benefits are transferred or derived to these
Persons? And putting these seven together, we may have a short Catechism in one
Verse.

1. Then, What is Man's condition by Nature. 1. He is under Transgressions. 2.
Under Iniquities. 3. At feud with God. And 4ly. Under wounds and most loathsome
Diseases of a sinful Nature: In a word, Man by Nature is a Sinner, guilty,
greatly guilty, under Gods Wrath and Curse, and at Feud with God, of a most
sinful and abominable nature, even sick of, and loathsome, because of Sin; The
first is employed in this word, He was wounded for our transgressions, that is,
our common Sins; The second is holden out in the next word, He was bruised for
our iniquities, or Rebellions, which holds out great guilt; The third in that
word, The chastisement of our peace was on him, which suppons that we were once
without Peace with God; The last word, By his stripes we are healed, supposes,
that we continue in that condition filthy and polluted, and polluting our
selves more and more, greedy to drink in Sin, and wounding and sickning our
selves by Sin; Now, lay these four words together, they clear this truth to our
Judgment, and serve to point out to us the necessity of a Mediator. Again,
Consider them in a second notion, and they tell us, that even the Elect
themselves, are by Nature in the same sinful and rebellious condition wi^h
others, at feud with, and under the Curse of God, and abominably polluted
before they be washed and healed, as the Apostle asserts Ephesians. 2. We are by
nature children of wrath even as others; and here it is plainly declared, He
was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, etc.
Some are ready to think (as was hinted before) that the Elect by nature were
better than others, or that God foresaw they would be better, and therefore he
elected them; This piece of Arminianism is in all n^turally; but this Text in
downright contradiction to such a groundless conceit, answers and asserts,
that by nature they are even like others, as the Apostle says, Romans 11.32. God
has concluded them all under unbelief, that he might have mercy on all; All
the Elect, as well as others, are concluded under Sin and Wrath, that the way
of obtaining any Spiritual Good, might be by Mercy and Free Grace alone.

2. How are Folks fred from this sinful and miserable condition? Answer 1. In
general, Before the quarrel can be taken away, and their peace can be made,
there must be a Satisfaction, which is employed in these words, the chastisement
of our peace was on him; which suppons the necessity of a Satisfaction made or
to be made, in respect of Gods decree and commination, who said, the day thou
sins, thou shall die, and cursed is every one that continues not in all things
written in the law to do them. 2. And more particularly, There must be a
Satisfaction, because there is 1. The Justice of God that has a claim by a
standing law. 2. The Holiness of God that must be vindicate. And 3 The
Faithfulness of God that must cause be performed and come to pass what it has
impledged it self for, as well in reference to the Threatening as to the
Promise; for these words, Has he said and will he not do it? relate to the one
as well as to the other; there is a great mistake in many while they leap
immediately to Mercy, without minding the necessity of a Satisfaction to
provoked Justice, and on this ground that God is merciful, which if it were an
argument good enough, it would say, that all, even the Reprobate may get Mercy;
but we would consider the way that God has laid down for Sinners coming to
Mercy, and how that before peace can be made, he will needs have satisfaction
to his Justice.

3. Who makes the Satisfaction? The Text says, it is He and Him; He was wounded
for our trangressions, the chastisement of our peace was on Him; and who is
this He and Him? it is in general the Messiah, who was then to come, he who was
conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, who suffered and was
crucified, who died and was buried and rose the third day; even he, who having
the nature of God and our nature united in one Person. He his own self bare our
sins in his body on the tree, as is said 1 Pet. 2.24. and He who knew no sin,
was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, as
it is 2 Cor. 5 ult. even he of whom the Apostle has been speaking here, while
he says, We as ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we
pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconcealed unto God: And when we say it is
Christ that is mean'd of, we are to understand it as well negatively and
exclusively, excluding all others, as positively including him; when we make
him to be the only Savior, we exclude all that Men can do with their Penance,
Prayers, Good-Works, and all that Angels can do, neither Man nor Angel could
satisfy divine Justice, and make our Peace with God, and therefore it is said,
Acts 4.12. Neither is there salvation in any other, for there is no other name
under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved, but the name of Jesus,
where it is clear that all others are excluded, as it is Psalm. 40.6. Sacrifice
and offering thou would not, etc. neither Penance, Performances, nor any
other thing will do it, but it is Lo I come in the volum of thy book, its
written of me I delight to do thy will O my God. Take this then as another
ground of Saving Knowledge, that it is our blessed Lord Jesus that satisfies
Justice, even he who being God, was content to become Man, and is God and Man
in one Person, He, and he only undertaking the Debt, satisfies Justice.

4. How does he satisfy Justice? Ans. He was wounded for our transgressions,
he was bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was on him,
and by his stripes we are healed: In which words, observe these three things,
1. In Christ's satisfaction for us there is an actual undertaking, he becomes
Cautioner and enters himself in our room; when all other things are casten,
Angels, Men with their Sacrifices, thousands of Rams, ten thousand rivers of
Oil, and the fruit of the Body, then our Lord Jesus comes in and undertakes,
Psalm. 40.7. Lo, I come, he satisfies for our Transgressions; which supposes
that Justice could not have sought our Debt of him if he had not undertaken it;
therefore Heb. 7.24. He is called the surety of a better testament, for he
comes in our room and place, and undertakes to pay our Debt; even as if a man
under Debt were a carrying to Prison, and another able rich man should
undertake to pay the Debt; although the Debt should ly over for a while
unpayed, yet the Creditor will get a Decree on the Cautioner for payment of
the Debt when he pleases to put at him; so Jesus Christ enters Cautioner for
our Debt, and becomes liable to the payment of it. 2. Christ's performance and
payment of the Debt according to his undertaking, implys a Covenant and
Transaction on which the application is founded, which we show was also employed
in the foregoing words, ver. 4. He has born our griefs and carried our
sorrows: God the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, are the Party wronged by Sin;
Jesus Christ considered personally and as Mediator, is the Party undertaking:
The terms are, that he shall suffer and satisfy Justice for us, and that we
shall go free; that his paying shall be our freedom, that the Debt which he
pays for us shall not be exacted off us our selves, 2 Cor. 5. ult. He who knew
no sin, was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in
Him; and here, the chastisement of our peace was on him; it was transferred
from us to him, that by his stripes we might be healed; by his stripes and
blanes health was procured and brought to us. 3. Our Lord Jesus in fulfilling
the Bargain and satisfying Justice, paid a dear price; it was at a very dear
rate that he bought our freedom; He was wounded, bruised, suffered stripes and
punishment: So that ye may take the answer to the question in sum to be this,
our Lord Jesus performed and satisfied for all that was due by us, by
undertaking our Debt and paying a dear price for Sinners according to the
Covenant of Redemption; He came under the Law, and the Law struck at him as
Cautioner, and he answered the Laws demands, and fully and condiguly satisfied
the Justice of God for us.

As for that Question, Whether Christ might not by one drop of his blood have
satisfied? and such like, we think them very needless, too curious, and little
or not at all edifying: But if it be asked, why Christ paid so much? we
answer, 1. It behoved Christ to pay a condign price, to give a condign
satisfaction to Justice. 2. It was meet that he should pay all that he paid.
First, We say, it behoved to be a condign satisfaction, For, 1. It behoved to
be a price equivalent to all that the Elect should have suffered, had not he
interposed. 2. It behoved to be proportionable to the Justice of God, for God
having laid down such a way of showing Mercy, that his Justice should be
salved, there behoved to be condign satisfaction for the vindication of
Justice; which was done by Christ's suffering to the full undoubtedly; if we
consider, 1. The excellency of the Person that suffered, God and Man in one
Person. 2. If we consider the nature of his Sufferings, that they were
exceeding great, heavy, and pressing. And 3. If withal we consider the manner
of his Sufferings, that it was with much readiness and cheerfulness of
obedience to the Fathers will: That such and so excellent a Person should
suffer, and suffer so much, and suffer in such a way, this sure makes a condign
Satisfaction, and so Justice is fully thereby satisfied, and made as glorious
as if all the Elect had suffered eternally; therefore we say, that his
sufferings were a condign and proportionable satisfaction to Justice for them
whose Debt he paid, by this Justice is completely and gloriously satisfied.
Secondly, We said that it was meet that he should pay all that he paid, and so
it is, if we consider, 1. The excellency of immortal Souls, a little price (as
all that Men or Angels could have paid would have been, the finest Gold,
Silver, and precious Stones) could not have done it, the redemption of the soul
is precious, and cease for ever, to wit, amongst all the Creatures, Psalm.
49.8. 2. The severity of Justice on the just account of Sin, called for such a
price. 3. Gods end, which was to make both his Grace and Justice glorious,
required, and made it meet that our Lord should suffer condignly, and in his
Sufferings suffer much, even all that he did suffer: And in this ye have an
answer to this question, why Christ suffered so much, as the loss (to speak so)
of his declarative glory for a time, outward sufferings and inward sufferings
even the b^^isi^g and squeezing that hi^ Soul was under, which made him to say,
that it was heavy unto death, and exceeding sorrowful: Let not sinners then
think it a little or a light thing to get a Soul saved, the redemption whereof
cease for ever as to us or any Creature: Behold, herein the glory of Grace
eminently shines forth, when there is such a price paid for that which in
some respect is of so little worth; and also the glory of Justice, when so
great a price is demanded and paid down for its satisfaction, by so worthy and
excellent a Person; and let none think little of Sin, the guilt whereof could
not be otherwise expia^^d, the chastisement of our peace behoved to be on him.

5. What are the benefits that come by these Sufferings? Answer 1. The benefits
are such, that if he had not suffered for us, we should have suffered all that
he suffered our selves. 2. More particularly, we have 1. Peace and Pardon of
Sin. 2. Healing by his Sufferings, so that if it be asked, what procured pardon
of Sin and peace with God? We answer, it is Christ's Sufferings; Or if it be
asked, what is the cause of Gods justifying Sinners? We answer, it is Christ's
satisfaction or suffering; and it is (by the way) much to be regrated, that
such is the ignorance of some, that if a question be proponed in diverse words
or expressions, as if it should be asked, wherefore are we pardoned? wherefore
are we justified? which is one and the same they know not how to answer; but
here ye are called to remember, that Christ's being wounded, and his bearing the
chastisement due to you, is the cause of your Pardon and Justification. 2.
Healing looks to Sanctification, as we hinted in the exposition, so that if it
be asked, How comes it to pass that a Sinner is made holy? we have it here
answered, that though efficiently it comes by the Spirit; and be his work, yet
meritoriously it comes by Christ's suff^rings, he bought it, by his stripes we
are healed? And under these two Words peace and healing, we take in all things
needful or pertai^ing to Life and Godlin^^s; for by pea^e* the feud and enmi^y
is taken ^way, (...) ^e reconciled to God, a Ephesians. 2.14. (...) ^^d to be our
peace, and he who ca^ (...) speak peace to all that are afar off and ne^ ^and;
and also by peace we under stand all (...) effects of peace, 1. Pardon of Sin,
Justification, Adoption, Communion with God here and hereafter; Peace with our
own Conscience, and with the Creatures, eter^^^ Peace and Glory, and all these
good things purchased by Christ's death: For the Hebrews under peace
comprehended all good things: And under healing we take in Sanctification (as
distinguished, though not divided from those other things mentioned) dying to
sin, and living to righteousness, with the several degrees of their advance and
progress, and the making of us to be without spot and wrinkle, or any such
thing; So that folk have much advantage by Christ's purchase, and much prejudice
through the want of it, By his death we are kept out of Hell, and admitted to
peace with God and every thing that is good; We have liberty to pray for all
that is good, and are brought in his own way and time to the possession of it;
It Is by the blood of sprinkling that we have a new and living way made patent
to us unto the most holy, and holiness in the way whereof we enter in thither.

6. To whom has Christ procured all these good things? The Text says, it is
our and we, the chastisement of our peace was on him, and by his stripes we are
healed, to wit, we Elect. Whence Observe, 1. That the benefits of Christ's
purchase redounds only to the Elect, there is a certain select number to whom
they are applied, and not to all indifferently; It Is only of as many as are
healed, whose chastisements he has born; It Is only they whom the Father has
given him, to them he gives eternal life, and they shall never perish, John
6.45. They are Effectually Called, Justifi^d, and Sanctified. 2. Observe That
what Christ Jesus has purchased, and the benefits of his purchase, redound,
and are extended to them that are guilty of heinous sins; to them that are
under transgressions and iniquities, that are at feud with God, and under many
po^^^tion^, and most loathsome spiritual Diseases; to them who contemned and
despised Christ, and judged him smitten, and plagued of God, as is clear from
the foregoing words, and to them which have gone straying like lost sheep, as
is clear from the words following.

This points at these two or three things very useful, 1. That the Elect are by
nature, and before Christ do them good, no better than others. 2. It shows the
freedom of the Grace of God that comes over that, and freely gives pardon,
peace, and healing to them: And 3ly. It serves to strengthen a Sinners Faith,
who is sensible of his enmity and sinfulness, and to be a ground of
encouragement to him, to step to, and lay hold on Christ's purchase, because it
was for such that he died; he may humbly, yet confidently say, Christ died even
for such as me, for them that wounded and pierced him by their transgressions
and iniquities, for them that were at enmity with God, etc. and alace I am
such, and will therefore on the call of the Gospel come to him, and on his own
terms endeavor to cast my self on him.

7. How are these benefits, this Justification, Pardon of Sin, Peace and
Healing, and all that is comprehended under them, derived from Christ to the
Sinner that by Faith flees unto him for refuge? Answer, These two generals
will clear it. 1. They are derived to us justly and in a legal way; Christ
steps in in our room, that we may come in his room. 2. They are derived to us
freely, he was wounded and bruised that we might go free; he endured stripes
that we might be healed; he got the buffets and bare the burden, and we get the
benefits, there is not a grain weight of it laid on us as it is satisfactory
to divine Justice.

To clear this a little more anent the deriving the benefits of Christ's
purchase to us, there must be a respect had, 1. To the Covenant of Redemption,
the ground of his suffering for us. 2. To the Covenant of Grace and
Reconciliation wherein the offer of these Sufferings, and the benefits
purchased by them to us, and the terms of both is made.

1. I say, That respect most be had to the Covenant of Redemption, wherein it
(...) acted in the Council of the Godhead, that the Son of God should become
Man, and suffer, and condignly satisfy divine Justice by paying the price due
by the Elect; and that that price being laid down, it should be made
forthcoming for them for whom he paid it, and be reckoned theirs, and they set
actually at liberty when having recourse thereto by Faith; and here there is a
legal ground for transferring Christ's purchase to and upon us; the Cautioner
satisfying, we the Debtors are on that account absolved in his own order and
method, and have a right to seek the application of the price, and the benefits
purchased by that price; Christ's stands in our room at the bar, and sentence
passed on him to pay our Debt; he satisfied according to his undertaking for
us: And upon the other hand, we are brought in, and the sentence of
Justification passed on us on that account; He, says the Apostle, who knew no
sin, is made sin for us, that in him we may be accounted righteous, and may be
declared free (as we are) by virtue of his satisfaction.

But it may be objected here, What, are we then absolved from the very time of
Christ's death and forward? For answer, We would distinguish betwixt a right to
the thing, and a right in the thing (as we use to speak;) betwixt jus ad rem
and jus in re; the Elect from Christ's death forward, and before too, have a
right to the thing, but not in the thing as to the application of it to
themselves; an elect Person by virtue of Christ's Satisfaction has a legal
right to his purchase before Believing, but when he comes to believe, the
obstruction is taken away that hindered his application, and then he has a new
right not only to, but in Christ's purchase; even as a Person that is Minor or
mad, may have a right to a great possession, but by the law he is secluded from
the use of it till he come to majority, and have the use of reason; and this
distinction we have as one of the clauses of the Covenant, John 6.39, 40. where
1. in the 39. Verse, Christ says, This is the Fathers will that sent me, that
of all that he has given me I should lose nothing, but should raise it up
again at the last day; It Is the Fathers will that Eternal Life be given to as
many as are given to Christ on his Satisfaction, and Christ has purchased it
to them by his Satisfaction absolute as to the event, and therefore they have
an accessibleness to it, a right to it, and cannot but partake of it, yet not
simply, but in the way that he has laid down: And therefore 2ly. In the 40.
Verse, he says, This is the will of him that sent me, that every one that
sees the Son and believes on him, may have eternal life; by believing they
come to the application of that to themselves which they had a legal right to
before by Christ's death.

2. Respect must be had to the Covenant of Grace, which is not quite an other
thing then the Covenant of Redemption, but the making offer of it and the
benefits contained in it in the preached Gospel, when Christ sends out his
Ambassadors to woo and invite Sinners to Christ, and to bring them to the
application of his Purchase; and it is by closing with, and receiving of
Christ's offer that the actual Cure comes, and that by Christ's stripes our sores
are healed: Even as when a Child that was Minor becomes Major, he comes to have
a right to possess the same Lands or Sums of Money by the same Law that gave
him a legal or simple right to them before; or he comes to have a right in
that, which before he had a right to: So elect Souls that have a right to
Christ's purchase before believing, while they are mad in nature, are under the
curse and wrath threatened in the word of God for not believing; but when they
come to believe, they come to get an extract from the same word of their right
in Christ's purchase, because the Word says, He that believes, is past from
death to life, and shall not come into condemnation; and so the same word that
did condemn before believing, does now absolve upon a Sinners believing; and we
come at this absolution by receiving of Christ's offer in the Covenant of Grace:
And if it be asked, how comes it that the receiving of Christ's free offer in
the Covevant of Grace, gives a right to Christ's purchase? we answer, It is by
virtue of the Covenant of Redemption, wherein it is so transacted betwixt God
and the Mediator; so that there is the offer of the Covenant received, and the
Covenant it self that concur for making over and deriving a complete Right to
wretched Sinners in Christ's purchase.

Let the 1. Use of this be for your instruction and information, which is the
end wherefore we have chosen in this way by this short view to give you in a
very short sum, the marrow of the Gospel; And if ye remember these few
Questions, ye may be in a capacity not only to answer us, but through grace to
exercise Faith on Christ; And we think ye will all readily grant, that these
who cannot at all answer them, should not go to the Communion: And therefore
that ye may take them with you, we shall shortly resume them. 1. What condition
is man in by nature? Answer, Under sin and misery, and even under the curse of
God; Or thus, every man is a sinner, and has a sinful nature, or, he is under
transgressions and iniquities, is naturally loathsome, wants peace with God,
and has need of healing; Let this in the first place sink in your hearts. 2.
How is man freed from this sinfulness and misery! Answer, He cannot be free
from it, till there be a condign satisfaction made to Divine Justice; wounding
and bruising must be to procure pardon, and stripes must be to procure healing,
and chastisement must be to bring about our peace; That word, Exodus 34. Who
will by no means acquit the guilty, would always be remembered, and Faith would
look to a Savior for satisfaction. 3. Who can satisfy? Answer, Neither Man
nor Angel can do it, no penances, no prayers nor performances of any mere
creature will do it, but He only that was wounded and bruised, He who by Nature
is the Son of God, the express Image of the Fathers Person, and who in respect
of His Humane Nature was born of the Virgin Mary, like to us in all things
except sin; It Is he that satisfies Justice and it is by no other way that we get
pardon, and peace with God, and Holiness. 4. What way does Christ satisfy
Justice, and make peace betwixt God and sinners? Answer, He entered himself in
our room, and as Cautioner undertook our debt, suffered the condign punishmens
that was due for our sins, and paid the price that we should have paid; He in
a manner left Heaven and became Man, had a mean life in the World, drank the
Cup of his Fathers Wrath, was wounded, bruised, chastised, and died a cursed
death, whereof his hanging on the Cross was but a sign. 5. What benefits come
to us by his sufferings? Answer, Pardon of sin, Peace with God, and healing;
The Conscience by his blood is sprinkled from dead works, the person absolved,
reconciled to God, made whole, and made at last to be without spot or wrinkle,
or any such thing; And this is not as Papists blasphemously speak, a putative
effect, but a most real one. 6. Who are made partakers of this pardon, peace,
and healing? Answer, The Elect have right to it, and by believing they make the
application, therefore it is said here, our and we; And we may look upon the
Prophet speaking in the name of all the Elect, or in name of the believing
Elect, who on believing are actually healed; The Elect then are healed, and the
way how, is by faith making application of Jesus Christ. 7. How in Justice can
he be condemned that was free of sin, and how can we be absolved that were
guilty? Answer, He in Justice was condemned, because as our Cautioner he came
in our room, and undertook to pay our debt; And on the same ground we wretched
sinners, may in his way make application of his purchase; because it was on
these terms that he undertook the debt, that we might be set free; And it is on
these terms that it is offered in the Gospel, that seeing he has paid for
elect sinners, they may upon the hearing of the offer, close with it: But how
may the sinner apply it? Answer, Not only because it is free, and freely
offered, but by gripping to it by Faith, as the Prophet does here; It Is not
only to apply it simply, but to step in and rest upon it in the terms it is
made offer of, so that as on the one part Jesus Christ became really liable to
suffering, and satisfied for our sins, when he said, Lo I come, in the volume
of thy book it is written of me, I delight to do thy will; So upon the other
part, the believing sinner comes to apply the price paid, by embracing the
price, and acquiescing in the satisfaction, and gripping to it as his own, and
by his being brought to say in Faith, Let his wounding be my pardon, let his
chastisement be my peace, and let his stripes be my healing: By this means, as
the Law had a right to Christ for his paying the Elects debt, so they by
believing get a right to the promise of pardon and healing; For if the bargain
was ficker on the one side to procure wounding to Christ, as if he had been the
sinner himself, so on the other side, the bargain is as sure; The Believer is
set free, and may be as really comforted as if he had a righteousness of his
own, or had never had sinned.

Use 2. Therefore there is here wonderful matter of consolation to Believers,
that what was Justice to Christ, is Grace and Mercy to us, that which was pain
to him, is pleasure to us; His sorrow our comfort, his wounding our pardon, his
stripes our healing, etc.

Use 3. As ye would not prejudge your selves of these benefits which Christ
has purchased, make your peace with God through Christ; If your pardon and
peace be not obtained this way ye will never get it, but ye shall be made to
pay your own debt, and be liable to wrath eternally, because of inability to
pay your debt to the full: Therefore step to, and make the offer welcome, how
sinful and undone soever ye be; The more sensible ye be, ye are the more
welcome; This is the particular use of the Doctrine; O! Let these things sink
in your hearts, that ye are sinners, great sinners, under wrath, and at feud
with God; that Jesus Christ is the Savior of lost sinners, and that there is
no way to pardon and peace but by closing with him, and saying hold on his
satisfaction; That ye may be drawn to cast your selves over on this everlasting
Covenant for obtaining the benefits that Christ has purchased (...) ^d himself
bless what has been sp^ken for this end and use.

SERMON XXIII.
ISAIAH LIII.V. Verse. 5. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was
bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and
with his stripes we are healed.


IT were no small progress in Christianity to know and believe the truths that
are employed and contained in this same verse; The Lord by the Prophet is giving
a little compend of the work of Redemption by his saving of sinners from death,
through, and by the wounding of the Mediator. We did a little open the meaning
of the words, and gave a sum of the Doctrines contained in them, at least of
some of them which do contribute to this scope:

The Prophet is here speaking of Christ's sufferings, with a respect to the
cause of them, and the effect that followed them, and shows how this was indeed
the mistake and blasphemous imputation that we had of, and were ready to put on
him, even to judge him smitten and plagued of God for his own sins, whereas God
has another design; He was altogether without sin, but he was wounded for our
transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities; We were at feud with God,
and he took on him the chastisement of our peace; And this is the effect, to
procure healing to us.

We shall now speak a word to three Doctrines further beside what we spoke to
the last day, which are these, 1. That there was an eternal design, plot, and
transaction betwixt God and the Mediator, as to Christ's suffering for the
redeeming of elect sinners, before he actually suffered; This the Prophet
speaks of as a thing concluded; For the cause of his sufferings was
condescended on, and the end and fruit of them was determined, which implies an
antecedamus transaction betwixt the Father and him for putting him in the room
of sinners; And by this transaction Justice has access to exact the payment of
this price; He interposed, and the Father exacts of him the payment of their
debt, and seeks satisfaction from him for all that he bargained for. 2. That
this transaction or design concerning the Redemption of elect sinners, is in
respect of Christ's suffering and satisfying of Justice, fully and actually
performed, he undertook to be wounded and bruised, and he was accordingly
actually wounded and bruised: The transaction as to the engagement in it, and
efficacy of it, took place in Isaiah's time, and before his time; but as to the
actual performance of what the Mediator engaged himself to suffer, it is spoken
of prophetically by him as a thing done, because to be done; and now it is
done, and indeed long ago. 3. That the satisfying of Justice by the Mediators
Sufferings according to his engagement, proves as effectual to absolve,
justify and heal these, even the grossest Sinners, that come under this
Bargain and Transaction, as if they had actually suffered, and paid and
satisfied their own Debt themselves; these Sins are pardoned through his
Sufferings, their deadly Wounds are healed by his Stripes, as if they had never
had a wound; their Count is dashed and scored as clean out as if they had never
had any Debt; they are acquitted and set free as if they had never been guilty.

These three Doctrines ly very near the life of the Gospel, and the Prophet in
this Chapter, and particularly in this Verse, is often on them. Our purpose is
only shortly to explicate them to you, as a short sum and compend of the tract
of the Covenant of Redemption: The first of them shows the rise of the work of
Redemption. The second shows the mids by which it is executed. The third holds
out the effect and consequence, and the end of all.

For the first then, There is (we say) an eternal transaction betwixt God and
Jesus Christ the Mediator concerning the Redemption of Sinners, his actual
redeeming by being wounded and bruised, supposes this; for the Son is no more
liable to suffering (not to speak of his suitableness) then any other of the
Persons of the blessed Godhead, had there not been an antecedent transaction;
there was no obligation nor ty on him to be wounded, and to enter into the room
of Sinners as their Cautioner for payment of their Debt, if there had not been
a prior engagement; neither could his wounding and bruising have proven useful,
or have brought healing to us, if this prior engagement had not been: And this
is it which we call the Covenant of Redemption; which we would not extend so,
as in all things to stretch it to the properties of these Covenants and
Bargains that are amongst Men, it being in some respect an expression used to
make Grace more discernable to us that can conceive so little of Graces way:
This Transaction or Covenant of Redemption is sometimes called the Fathers
will, and his law, as Psalm. 40.8. I delight to do thy will, O my God, yea thy
law is within my heart; and John 6.38. It is called so, I came from heaven not
to do my own will, but the will of him that sent me; so also John 17.14. it is
called the Fathers work in one respect, and the Sons work in another respect, I
have finished the work thou gave me to do; which is the prosecution of the
same contrivance usually called a Covenant; because as to the essentials, it
has the nature of a Covenant, to wit, two Parties agreeing, and terms
whereupon they agree; and it, well ordered in all things for prosecuting and
carrying on the design of saving lost Sinners; called Act. 2.23. the
determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God; there was a plot and design in
Gods counsel concerning Christ's sufferings, whereof his sufferings were the
excution.

To clear it a little, we would consider these five things in it. 1. The
Parties. 2. The matter about which it is. 3. The rise and occasion of it. 4.
The terms wherein the form of it stands or the mid^^^ whereupon it is
undertaken. 5. Some p^^perties of this Covenant.

1. For the Parties, Upon the one side as God essentially considered, or all
the three Persons of the glorious Godhead, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, who
are all concurring in this Covenant, it being the act of the determinate
counsel of God; and in this respect God is the Party to whom the satisfaction
for lost Sinners is made, and he is also the Party condescending to accept of
the satisfaction: And upon the other side, the Party engaging to make
satisfaction, is Jesus Christ, the second Person of the blessed, dreadful, and
adorable Trinity personally considered, now becoming the head of the Elect,
that he may have them all with himself to be one m^^^ical body; in the first
respect, all the three Persons, that same one blessed God, give the command or
require a satisfaction as God, and concur as the infinitely wise orderers of
the Decree; and in the second respect, Jesus Christ as Mediator, undertakes to
make the satisfaction, Psalm. 40.6, 7. Sacrifice and offering thou did not
desire; God as it were making the offer, what can, or shall be given to me for
the redemption of Sinners? Sacrifice and Offerings will not please, nor are
accepted by me; then follows the Mediators part, Lo I come, in the volum of thy
book it is written of me, I delight to do thy will, O my God; for though in the
first respect, all the Persons of the Trinity be on the one side being of one
will, yet in the other respect, Christ Jesus as Mediator comes in on the other
side to do that will.

2. As to the matter about which this Covenant is; It Is about the satisfying of
Justice, and making of peace between God and lost Sinners; it is that we might
be pardoned, justified, have peace with God, and be healed; it is true there is
an end above and beyond this, even the glory of Gods rich Grace, and
condescending love that stoups so low to save Sinners; but Sinners pardon, and
peace with God, and their healing, is the immediate end: Or if we come nearer;
the matter about which it is, is the redeeming of the Elect, for these words in
the Text, We and Us, are of equal extent with them that are justified and
reconciled, and whom he actually heals by his wounds and stripes; so that
whoever they be who are never justified and healed, they are not comprehended
in this Bargain.

3. The rise and occasion of this Covenant may be gathered from these three. 1.
There is the supposing of Man's sin and fall; for whatever Election does,
Redemption does most certainly suppose Man to to be lost and under sin. 2.
There is Gods decree not to pardon sin without a Satisfaction. 3. There is Gods
election preceding, or his purpose to save some for the glory of his Grace,
which are the Elect, who are said to be given to Christ: These three are the
rise an^ occasion of the Covenant of Redemption; Man has sinned, the
threatening must be executed, and Justice satisfied; and yet God has for the
glory of his Grace, elected a certain number to Life, and that must needs stand
firm; and these three seeming to thwart one of them with another, gives the
occasion and rise to the excellent and admirable contrivance of this way; how
the lost Sinner shall be saved, yet so as Justice shall be satisfied and not
wronged in the least, and Justice so satisfied, that yet the decree of election
by Grace shall stand.

4. As for the terms (wherein the form of the Covenant stands,) and the midses
by which these ends may be brought about; to wit, how the Redemption of lost
Sinners may be attained, Justice may be satisfied, and the glory of Grace made
to shine; and how any thing that makes these seem to justle and thwart might be
guarded against; and that was it which (to speak so with reverence) put God to
the consultation about it; which shows the excellency of the Covenant of
Redemption, and the deep draughts that are about it, for otherways and properly
God needs not consult or advice: They are shortly these, 1. Gods offer to
redeem Man if his Justice may be satisfied, and if any responsal Person will
become Cautioner and undertake to pay the Elects Debt. 2. The Sons accepting of
the Offer, and undertaking or engaging to pay their Debt, upon condition that
his payment and satisfaction shall be accounted the Elects, and accepted for
them. 3. The Fathers acceptance of this engagement, and undertaking according
to his offer; and the Mediators accepting of it, and acquiescing in it, he
holds the Bargain (to speak so,) and so it is a closed Covenant: The first is
comprehended in these words, Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire,
Psalm. 40. insinuating that God did desire something; The second in these words,
Mine ears thou have opened, then said I, Lo I come in the volum of thy book,
it is written of me, I delight to do thy will; which implys the Fathers
acceptance as well as Christ's undertaking; and it also points at the way how
the satisfaction is made effectual; especially if we compare these words of the
Psalm with Heb. 10.5, 6. we will find that they relate to Christ's Humiliation
in general, for it is in the Psalm, Mine ears have thou opened; but in Heb.
10.5. it is, A body have thou prepared me; and where it is said in the Psalm, I
delight to do thy will, the Apostle says, By the which will, we are sanctified:
The Father makes the offer on the terms of a satisfaction to Justice, the Son
as Mediator accepts the offer, and undertakes for the Elect, here am I to do
thy will on the same terms that the offer is made; and the Father accepts of
the Sons engagement, according to that word, Matthew. 3. This is my beloved Son
in whom I am well-pleased; he offers himself Surety for Sinners, and the Father
is content to accept of him as their Surety: In the one respect it is called the
Fathers pleasure, Verse. 10. of this Chapter, yet it pleased the Lord to bruise
him, etc. because the terms were so proposed; and in the other respect it is
called the Mediators pleasure, or satisfaction, Verse. 11. because the condition
proposed is satisfying to him, The pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his
hand; He undertakes to pay, and God accepts of his undertaking, and obliges
himself to absolve the Believer; and the words following, He shall see his
seed, and of the travel of his soul and be satisfied, and by his knowledge
shall my righteous servant justify many, are Promises made to him on
supposition of his making satisfaction: And in 2 Cor. 5. ult. the first part of
the Transaction is, He has made him to be sin for us that knew no sin; and the
other part of it is, That we might be made the righteousness of God through
him; he accepting of the Bargain, obtains a right to a justifying and absolving
Sentence by virtue of his suffering, for which cause these words are added in
him, or through him; This shows the clearness of Gods Justice in proceeding
with the Mediator; the ground of Sinners Justification through him, and gives
Sinners a warrant to make use of Christ's satisfaction as theirs, because it was
so agreed upon in the counsel of the Godhead.

5. We come now to speak a little to some properties of this Covenant, and
shall content our selves with three or four of them that make for the scope, As
1. The justice and equity of it. 2. The faithfulness of it. 3. The freeness of
it. And 4. The wisdom that shines in this Bargain; passing by the rest.

1. The justice and equity of this Transaction may appear in these respects, 1.
That the Father should be satisfied, that he that was wronged should have his
honor restored, that the threatening given out in his Law should light and take
effect; that the Soul that sins, should in his own, or in the Sureties person,
die; and that a suitable recompense should be made to Justice before the Sinner
be absolved. 2. Justice appears in this respect, That when the Son of God, the
Mediator, offers to become Man, and to endure and suffer all that the Elect
should have suffered, his sufferings should be accepted as a satisfaction;
because the justice of God, yea, the holiness, power, and greatness of God, are
as gloriously manifested in Christ's satisfaction, as if Man had suffered; nay,
there would not have been such an amends and satisfaction made to Justice, if
all Creatures had suffered; Justice by this means has more satisfaction than
it could have had otherways; and hereby the holiness of God, and the severity
of his justice, as well as the condescending love of God, is the more
manifested, that he himself should condescend to satisfy; therefore Romans 3.26.
it is said, That he might be just, and the justifier of him that believes on
Jesus: God is just, in that he will not only have satisfaction, but an
equivalent satisfaction for the restoring of his Justice to its declarative
glory wherein it suffered by Man's fall. 3. Justice appears in this respect,
That the Mediator satisfying Justice, these for whom he suffered should be
acquitted, and have the sentence of absolution past in their favors: which the
rather we would take noti^e of, that we may know the redemption purchased and
bestowed by the Mediator, is by an exact satisfying of Justice, and not by
removing of our sins as he did remove diseases, nor by pardoning of them by an
authority committed to him; but, as I said, by a real and actual satisfying of
the Justice of God for them; therefore Luke 24. it is said, He behoved to suffer
these things, and then to enter into his glory; there was a necessity of it,
because of the justice of this Covenant, for the Son, not only to become Man,
and be in a low condition, but to become a Curse and to die the cursed death of
the Cross.

A second property is faithfulness on all sides; Faithfulness on the Fathers
side in his Word and Promise to the Son, All that are given of the father are
made to come to him, and there is nothing lost, John 6.37, 44, 45. Faithfulness
on the Sons side, performing all according to his undertaking, fulfilling all
righteousness: Therefore when in the (...) word he says, Deliver me from this
hour, in the next word he says, But for this cause came I unto this hour; It
was my errand into the World, and now I am to go about it by and by, And I lay
down my life for my sheep of my self, no man takes my life from me but I have
power to lay it down, and power to take it up again; His faithfulness also
appears in keeping all that are committed to his trust, None of them shall
perish, but he shall raise them up at the last day; Therefore he is called the
good or faithful shepherd.

3. It Is a free Covenant, it is just, as betwixt God and the Mediator, but as to
the Elect, it is most free; By his wounds we have pardon, and by his stripes we
have healing; The chastisement of our peace was on him; There is not one grain
weight or worth to be satisfied by us; He was made sin for us, he was made the
curse, even the wrath-pacifying-sacrifice and offering; That we might be made
the righteousness of God, not through ought in our selves, but through him, 2
Cor. 5. ult.

4. It Is a most wise contrivance, for if the Son had not become Man and
Mediator, how could Justice have been satisfied, or the Elect pardoned and
healed? They could not satisfy for themselves, and no creature could satisfy
for them, therefore the only wise God finds out a wise mids for such an end, as
is the saving of the Elect, in a way wherein Justice and Mercy, or free Grace,
sweetly kiss each other, and wherein they both shine forth conspicuously and
radiantly.

That which we would say in short concerning this Covenant, is this; that Jesus
Christ has undertaken to pay the Elect's debt, and has stepped in into their
room, And God has imputed unto him their sin, and accepted of a satisfaction
from him for them; And all this in a legal and just way; so as there is access
before the Throne of God for them to plead for the application of his
Righteousness by virtue of this Covenant; That as really and faithfully as
Christ performed his u^dertaking to God, and his satisfaction w^^ accep^^d for
t^^^, they may as really and (...) good g^^^^d expect the application of it
(...) them; For though all be of Gr^^e ^o (...), yet it is a b^^gain on just and
legal (...) God and the Mediator; Therefore th^^^ i^ a Title and Right in
Justice for the Elect when they come to Christ, that his satisfaction shall
stand for them, as being Members of his Body, and in whose room and place he
satisfied; Hence it is said, 1 John ^.1. If any man s^n we have an Advocat with
the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous; And whereon is this righteousness
founded? The next words tell us, He is the propitiation for our sins; He has
paid the price that was due by us, and we may seek the application of it to us
according to the transaction past betwixt the Father and Him, now performed;
which is the next point.

The 2. Doctrine is, That this transaction and design concerning the Redemption
of sinners, is now not only undertaken, but fully performed, as is clear, Acts
2.23. Him being delivered by the determinat counsel of God, ye have taken, and
by wicked hands have crucified and slain; The eternal purpose concerning this
is now execute: As to the efficacy of his sufferings, He is indeed the Lamb
slain from the beginning of the world; Because neither the Son's undertaking
was questioned by the Father, nor the Fathers promise questioned by the Son; To
speak so with reverence of such a mystery, the Father before his coming trusts
him upon his engagement with the Salvation of so many Elect Souls as he had
given him; And the Son considered as Mediator, trusts the Father with the
justifying of them, according to the promise made to him in the 11. Verse of
this Chapter; But the actual performance of the undertaking was not till Christ
suffered. This actual performance of the Covenant comprehends these things
shortly: 1. That as this plot and design of Redemption was laid down, so it
has the performance by all the Parties Covenanting; It is actually performed
according to the terms of it. 2. That it has the real effects Covenanted for,
actually and really brought about* I^ has with it a most real and effectual
following, to speak i^ whereof Christ's actual suffering was a part and (...)
main ^art*

I say it ^s performed by all parties according to the ^erm^ ^^^nd has its
^eal effect in these ^espects (...). Christ Jesus has according to this
Covenant, sisted himself before the Bar of Justice, and undertaken our debt. 2.
(...) (...) pursued Christ for our debt and has exact (...) payment of it from
him. The (...) that belonged to ^is was put in his hand and (...) w^^ made to
drink it, in which ^^spec^^ (...), He was made a curse for (...) 3. The word of
Divine, Justice awa^ed against him, and did smite him. (...) Jesus Christ
according to his ^^derta^^^g does accept of the Claim, undergoes the Deb^^ and
satisfies Justice, therefore ^h^n he stands in our room, as if he had been the
guilty person, he opens not his mouth to justify himself, he says not, these
are not my sins, but is as dumb as the sheep is before the shearer, because he
was our Cautioner; The everlasting Covenant, to say so stood Registrat over his
head, and he is made to count for all that was due by, and to us. 4. It Is
performed in this respect that the Father pursues not the Elect on this account
to be satisfied of them, who as soon as they accept of the Covenant, are
actually justified and absolved; Indeed while they are in nature the sentence
still stands; Cursed is he that sins and believes not; Yet by virtue of his
performance of the transaction they have a legal right to Justification, and
the promise to him stands good that the Elect by his knowledge shall be
justified, and it has an actual performance in all them that believe, they are
really made free as he was made the sinner. 5. In respect of the manner, 1.
It Is performed ex^ctly according to the Covenant even as it was agreed upon
that for so many he should suffer and procure eternal life, and so it is;
Eternal life is given to so many according to the condition of this Covenant
and Ba^^ain. 2. As it was a Bargain wherein Justice was to be satisfied; so it
was exactly satisfied. Christ Jesus gets nothing down, not one farthing is
remitted, but satisfies all pays down the full price he drinks ^ut all the
wrath contained in the Cup ^ill i^ come to that sweet word uttered by him
amongst his last words on the Cross, It is finished.

The 3. Doctrine is, That t ough Elect sinners be as well sinners by nature and
as gross sinners as others, yet by virtue of this Covenant, and upon condition
of their accepting of it, they may obtain (...) do actually obtain peace with
God pardon and healing, as if they had never sinned or as if they had satisfied
the Justice ^f God themselves: This is the very end of this transaction. He was
wounded, for our transgressions, bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement
of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we are healed; His wounds,
bruises and stripes effectually procured Justification and healing to us; And
this is the ground of that which we call imputed righteousness, and shows how
it comes to pass that we are made righteous by the righteousness of another,
scornfully called putative righteousness by Papists: But considering what is in
the former Doctrines, and in this; we will find it to be a clear truth, on
which our Justification and the whole weight of our Salvation hangs; That the
believing sinner closing with Christ's satisfaction is as effectually absolved
from sin as if he had never sinned; Christ's satisfaction becomes as really his
as if he had paid the debt himself; And if we consider these three, 1. The
great design of the Covenant of Redemption betwixt God and the M^diator. 2. The
faithfulness of God in this Covenant, in performing his part on the terms on
which the Mediator laid down a price for the Elect. 3. The excellency and
efficacy of the price paid with respect to the Covenant; We will find that
there is clear access in Law, or according to the Decree of God manifested (the
Decree is called a Law, Thy Law is within my heart) for the grossest sinners
that come under this bargain, and close with this Covenant, their obtaining
Peace, Pardon, Justification, and Healing, as if they had never sinned, or had
satisfied themselves, and that they may confidently expect it on this ground.

1. I say, if we consider the great end and design of the Covenant betwixt God
and the Mediator, we will find it to be the Justification of the Elect: Christ
suffered not for any sin that was inherently in himself; He had no sin, there
was no guile found in his mouth; no quarrel betwixt God and him on his own
account, but he was wounded for our transgressions, The chastisement of our
peace was on him; to make peace betwixt God and us by his wounding, was the
great design of the Covenant of Redemption; And can that design hold if his
satisfaction come not in the room of ours, and stand not for our satisfaction
and payment? In man's Law the Cautioner paying the debt proves valid for the
Principal Debtor, and when this is the design of God in the Covenant of
Redemption how to get the debt of Dyvour Sinners paid, and themselves set at
liberty, and when this is found out as the mids, A body have thou prepared unto
me; the Covenant must be as real on the one side as it is on the other; That
is, as real and effectual to make the Believer in Christ just, as it was real
and effectual to make Christ to be accounted the sinner, and to be dealt with
as such. We may clear it further in these two, 1. By looking to Christ typified
in the offerings under the Law; When the sinner came with his offering he laid
his hand on the head of the Beast, especially of the Scapegoat, to show that
Jesus Christ who was to come to be both Priest and Sacrifice, was so to bear
the sins of the Elect, as that they were to be set free; That he was to lay his
neck down to the Knife of Justice that the stroke might be kept off our Throat.
2. We are so justified by Christ as Christ was made sin for us, now our sins
became really Christ's, not that he was made the sinner inherently, that were
blasphemous to be thought or spoken of; But he was reckoned the sinner, and was
substitute in the room of sinners, as if he had been the sinner, and was made
to satisfy for Original sin, and for Actual sin; as if he had been guilty of
them by committing them: Therefore 2 Cor. 5. ult. He is said to be made sin for
us, and Gal. 3. To be made a curse for us, and 1 Pet. 2.24. To bear our sins in
his own body on the tree; And if he suffered for us, and if we partake of his
righteousness as he did of our sins; then our Justification really follows, and
we are absolved and made righteous through his satisfaction closed with by
Faith as if we had never sinned: The parallel is clear, 2 Cor. 5. ult. He was
made sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God
in him; So that as Christ was made sin, in the same manner we are made
righteous; That as legally as he who had no debt, was made liable to our debt,
so as legally we partake of his righteousness, and are declared free; even as
the Dyvour is legally fred from the debt which his Cautioner has paid, and
cannot be liable to it; So the Believer by Christ's satisfaction is freed from
the debt of sin, and absolved and declared righteous: And though this may seem
strange and a wonder, to be a sinner, and yet in some respect free of sin,
under guilt and yet absolved; yet Christ's satisfaction is as real and effectual
as to the Believer, as if he had satisfied himself, because his Cautioner has
satisfied for him.

2. If we consider Gods faithfulness in this Covenant in performing his part,
according to the terms of it, the matter is clear; For as the Mediator has
performed his part according to his engagement; so it is impossible but God
must perform his, and must accept of the satisfaction in name of the Elect, and
upon their believing justify them; For as it was the Fathers will that he
should lay down his life for his sheep, so it was the will of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, that Believers in him should through his satisfaction have
eternal life, John 6.39, 40. When he has said before, I came not to do my own
will but the will of him that sent me, he subjoyns, This is the Fathers will
which sent me, that of all that he has given me I should lose nothing, but
should raise it up again at the last day; Where the satisfaction that Christ
should make is employed, and it is a great one, And what satisfaction shall he
have for that? Even the salvation of the Elect, This is the will of him that
sent me, that every one that sees the Son, and believes on him may have
everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day; And verse. 10. of
this Chapter, it is clear that he shall not want satisfaction, for he shall see
the travel of his soul and be satisfied; And what is the satisfaction? By his
knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; he shall be the cause of
the justifying of many, and they shall be actually absolved in due time; And
what is the ground of it? For he shall bear their iniquities: And therefore as
God is faithful he shall get that which he merited and purchased for them,
applied unto them.

3. If we consider the excellent and equivalent price that Jesus Crist has
paid, and that with respect to the Covenant, we have a clear ground why the
Believer may expect and be confident to be absolved and declared free; It is no
mean price, Gold, Silver, or precious Stones, but the Blood of him that was and
is God; which we say would be considered not simply, but with respect to the
Covenant, and to the end wherefore he suffered and shed his Blood; For though
it be no comfort to a sinner simply that Christ suffered, yet when he considers
that it was for this end, to wit, that Justice might be satisfied, and that
these for whom he satisfied might be justified and set free, The believing
sinner may hence reason, If there was a reality in Justice pursuing of him as
my Cautioner, and a reality and efficacy in his satisfaction, and if it was
full and complete, so as Justice was fully satisfied by it; then there is a
reality of Mercy, Pardon, Justification, and Peace with ^od, and of heallng to
and for me, their being made forth coming to me upon the condition of
believing; And in this respect, though it be grace to pardon sin as to us, yet
it is Justice in God to give Christ the satisfaction for the travel of his
Soul, as well as he gave God satisfaction to his Justice; And the equivalent of
that which the Elect should have paid, being paid to Justice by Christ their
Cautioner, the Lord cannot, nor will not shun nor shift the pardoning of a
believing sinner according to the Covenant.

The Uses are five, 1. Of Instruction, whereby we may have a little Map of Gods
way of saving sinners, and of the way of sinners coming to get Salvation
through Jesus Christ.

2. To stir us up to admire the love of God contriving such a design for the
salvation of lost sinners; at the love of God that gave his Son; and at the
love of the Son that engaged to come, and has come and paid our debt.

3. It gives a notable warrant to the faith of a sinner to take hold of, and
close with Christ; and to rest upon his satisfaction for his Justification and
healing; because he has God and the Mediator Covenanting for this very end;
the Mediator engaging to satisfy, and God engaging to receive the
satisfaction, and to justify all these who shall accept of it, and rest upon
it.

4. Its therefore a notable ground of encouragement and of exhortation to take
hold of Jesus Christ, and of his satisfaction; Folk would not skar at him, but
lippen their Salvation to him; and be sure the bargain will not fail; As it is
sure that the Mediator has satisfied, it is as sure that his satisfaction
shall be made forthcoming to Believers in him.

5. To reprove the neglecters and slighters of Jesus Christ, and of this
offered Salvation through him; when he has taken the threatening and curse of
the Law on himself to make out the Promise to them, it must be a great
aggravation of folks guilt to slight him. It serves also to comfort a poor
sinner that has may sins and challenges, and knows not how to be quit of them;
The Covenant says our sins are translated on the Mediator, that we might be
set free; Christ Jesus Covenanted on the terms of Justice to make way for us to
Covenant on the terms of Mercy; God Covenanted with him to pursue our sin in
him, and he Covenanted to impu^e that satisfaction freely to us: Hence is that
never enough noted saying, 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ reconciling the world
to himself; It Is Justice on his part, he satisfies for pardon of sin, and peace
to them; But on the Elects part it is grace, God is reconciled to them, not
imputing their sin to them, but its for Christ's satisfaction that he freely
forgives them their sin; so that what cost him dear comes most freely to us;
and this is no small ground of comfort to a Conscience pressed with sin. God
fix these things in your Hearts.

SERMON XXIV.
ISAIAH LIII.V. Verse. 5. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was
bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him and with
his stripes we are healed.


IF there were more deep conviction amongst us of our natural deadness in sin,
and of that fearful condition that naturally we ly under by our lyableness to
the wrath and curse of God, all Men and Women having by nature Gods curse, as
the sentence of the Law registrate against them; the reading of such a Text
wherein a way of remedy is holden forth, would be more welcome to us; and we
are persuaded that such a through conviction would not only make the Word more
lovely and delightsome to us, but more plain and easy to be understood by us,
and would be sooner taken up by us; and one Preaching would thus be more
profitable and effectual than many are to you while in a secure condition; when
People are not under the deep and due conviction of their sin and misery, they
have no serious thoughts that the word of the Gospel concerns them in
particular, and that their souls stand in need of that which is spoken to them
therein.

Ye may remember we spoke somewhat from these words for clearing the way of
making Peace betwixt God and Sinners; and for holding forth the way that God in
his infinite wisdom has laid down for setting of poor sinners that are lying
under his Curse, free; for this end there was an eternal Transaction and
Covenant entered into by the Father and the Son, the Father demanding, and the
Son accepting, and satisfying as Mediator and Sinners-Cautioner what was due to
Justice for the sins of the Elect, as was determined in the counsel of God;
from which blessed Bargain all our Salvation flows as from the Fountain, and
runs down as a river to us.

That which now we are to speak a little to, is some profitable Uses which are
the scope of all, and tend to lead you in to know the use of such Doctrine, and
not only to know it, but to engage you to make suitable practical improvement
of it.

There are several sorts of Uses that flow from this Verse whence the
preceding Doctrines have been drawn.

The first sort is for Information; which ye who are more ignorant, and have
not so much light in ^ou as to discover the way to Heaven, would especially
take heed to, though they be useful to all. And 1. Ye would know and be
informed in this, that all Men and Women without exception are lying under
Transgressions and Iniquities, and liable to be smitten and cursed of God till
these be taken away; But this having been spoke of in the Forenoon, we need nor
insist on it now; but the truth is, neither Law nor Gospel has gained this
much ground on the great part of you as to bring you really to know that
naturally ye are dead in sins and trespasses, and till this be drunk in and
digested, other Truths cannot to any purpose profit you.

2. Ye would know and consider the necessity of a satisfaction to the justice
of God before Sinners can be fred from sin, and from the curse and wrath of God
that they are under and liable to, by reason of their original corruption and
actual transgressions. Do ye think that Jesus Christ did needlessly enter into
the Covenant of Redemption, and engage to satisfy, and actually and really did
suffer and satisfy Justice? If men might come so easily to He^ven as many
suppose, it had been needless: Wou^d God (think ye) have wounded the
Cautioner, his own dear Son, if those who ly under Sin and Wrath might have by
another way satisfied his Justice and restored him to his Honor? Nay, E^etheir
Peace could be made this b^hoved to be; and yet I must doubt if many do think
that there is any such distance betwixt God and them, which a word of Prayer,
or Conf^ssion, or some Penance cannot remove: This is, alas! the woeful
Ignorance of many that live under this Gospel; but ye would know that a
Satisfaction behoved to be, and such a Satisfaction as was equivalent to the
wrong done, and suitable and satisfying to him that was wronged by sin, and
that among all the Creatures it could not be found: Yea, ye may read from this
the dreadful effects of sin, and what a horribl^ thing it is to have your
Transgressions to count for with God your selves: If sin brought such heavy
things on the Cau^ioner, what will it bring on thee a Sinner? who has
continued all his days in tops with God to speak so, and would not make p^^ce
with him when he was earnestly i^vited to it? Yea we may from this know, what
is that most horrible, dreadful, and confounding Sentence which is abiding all
of you that stand it out, and do not make your Peace with God through this
Satisfaction of our blessed Lord Jesus, When ye shall be made eternally to bear
the wrath that Sin deserves, which yet is intolerable.

3. Ye would hence know, and study to be clear and distinct in your knowledge
of this precious Truth, how a Sinner that by nature is under Sin and Wrath, and
has ground every day to look for it, may be freed from that Curse and Wrath?
To prevent which, the Lord has made a Covenant with the Son who is appointed
Mediator for making Peace betwixt God and Sinners by satisfying his Justice for
them, and by paying the same Debt that was due by them, so that this Wrath is
prevented, and their Peace is made by virtue of this Covenant of Redemption;
wherein these two clauses are agreed and concluded upon betwixt these two
infinitely responsal Parties 1. That Christ shall become the Sinner, and be
handled as a Sinner, though there was no sin in him. 2. That the Elect Sinner
that by nature was a child of wrath even as well as others, shall be fred from
the Wrath to come by virtue of his Satisf^ction: These are two Pillars that our
Salvation is built upon, and that our Peace and Reconciliation with God flow
from; By his wounding and bruising we are pardoned, The chastisement of our
peace was on him, and by his stripes we are healed.

To clear this a little; This Covenant would be considered, 1. As it looks to
the parties and their several actions. 2. As it looks to the Execution thereof
in all the steps of it.

For the first, There are three parties that concur in their own place, 1. God
is the Party offended, and he is here bruising and wounding the Mediator: He is
the Judge, and stands ready to execute the Sentence that stands in his Law
against Sinners if he get not an equival^nt Satisfaction. 2. Jesus Christ the
Mediator is the Party wounded and bruised: the Mediator's part is to satisfy
justice, to pay the Price and perform the Satisfaction resolved upon in the
Counsel of God, of suitable and sufficient value for the Redemption of the
Elect, according to his Engagement; and he is actually wounded and bruised: God
determined what shall satisfy, Christ Jesus accepts of the Determination,
engages to satisfy, and does actually satisfy for elect Sinners. A 3d. Party
is, We poor Sinners, He was wounded for our Transgressions etc. It Is the elect
Sinner, or the Sinner, who being made in due time sensible of Sin, and afraid
of Wrath, and who being kindly touched with the Apprehension of it, and cleared
anent the firmness and freeness of the Covenant, and anent the fullness of
Christ's Satisfaction, does by Faith flee unto Jesus Christ and submit to his
Satisfaction, and betakes himself allenatly to that for Righteousness; Christ
lays down the Price, and the believing Sinner pleads for Interest in it, and
for the Benefit of it, and by Faith gets Title and Right to an Absolvitor from
his Debt and Guilt: If it then be asked what is the thing whereby a Sinner is
pardoned and justified, reconcealed to God, and delivered from Wrath and
healed? I answer, It is by Believing in Jesus Christ: If it be again asked,
What is the ground or reason why the believing Sinner obtains that Favor? I
answer, Because our Lord Jesus has sufficiently satisfied for, and fully paid
the debt of, so many as are brought to believe on him: If it be 3dly asked, How
comes it that Christ's Satisfaction becomes a Ransom, and is accepted for such
and such a Believer? I answer, It is by virtue of the Eternal Covenant of
Redemption, or Transaction made betwixt the Father and the Son; wherein it was
agreed that his suffering and satisfieing of Justice, should be accepted for
believing Sinners, as if themselves had satisfied; according to that of Job.
6.39, 40. This is the fathers will that sent me, that of all that he have given
me I should lose nothing; and this is the will of him that sent me, that
whosoever sees the Son and believes on him, may have everlasting life: So our
believing is the first immediate step whereby we came to obtain pardon of Sin
and Peace with God; Christ's Righteousness or Satisfaction, is that whereon our
believing sounds it self; yet so as it has a resp^ct to the eternal Covenant
of Redemption, whence both Christ's Satisfaction and our Believing do flow, and
without which we could have no Warrant to expect Righteousness through a
Mediator; for unless we know that Christ has satisfied Justice for Elect
sinners that shall believe on him, we cannot rest on him for righteousness; And
unless we have an eye to the Covenant of Redemption, we cannot expect that this
satisfaction will be accepted for us: And therefore if we will trace these
steps back again, the first rise of our Salvation is in the counsel of God; the
prosecution of it is in Christ's satisfaction; And the application of his
satisfaction, is by our fleeing to it, and accepting of it by Faith: And
therefore we would learn in our looking and stepping up to Heaven, to look to
these three in this order, we would first begin at Faith, and in believing we
would consider Christ's satisfaction, and from that we would ascend to the rise
of it, to wit, the Covenant of Redemption, and the terms of it; All which put
together, give a very clear ground of expecting righteousness through Jesus
Christ: I shall illustrat it by a Scripture-similitude, wherein I shall show
you how all the three concur, yet so as there is a difference in their
concurrence; Ye know that under the Law there were Cities of refuge appointed,
which were Types of Jesus Christ, in whom we find a shelter; In these Cities of
refuge, consider these three that concurred for saving the person that had
committed manslaughter: 1. God's determination appointing such a thing, and
that the Manslayer being within such a City, should be safe from the avenger
of blood, and this gave the rise to the other two that follow. 2. The City it
self as a shelter or refuge to the Manslayer. 3. The persons fleeing or
running to hide themselves in it: Now the safety of the person of the
Manslayer did flow from all the three. 1. The Law, appointing such a City, was
the ground. 2. The City was the shelter. 3. The persons actual running to the
City, gave him a claim and title to the privilege of the City; For though the
former two had been, if he had not fled to the City he had not obtained the
benefit of safety: Even so, the Believer that would be saved, is to consider
these three, 1. Gods determining such a way of Salvation to Elect Sinners by a
Mediator. 2. The Mediator privileged as the City of Refuge for this end. And
3. The sinners fleeing to him, which is his believing on him, and his seeking
and pleading for the benefit of Christ's satisfaction according to the terms of
the Covenant: Now suppose a person to flee to the City of Re^uge, he is
preserved in it, Justice cannot follow him further then the Gates, yet so, as
he has the benefit by Gods determination and appointment of the City for such
an end, and yet so as he must flee into it ere he can plead for the benefit of
the City: So, suppose a sinner to be fled to Jesust Christ by Faith, he may
plead for exemption from wrath, by God's determining and appointing a Mediator
for such an end; And the Mediator Jesus Christ has this privilege conferred
on him, that he that thus flees unto him shall be safe; Yet it is also supposed
that such a sinner has fled to him, else he could not expect safety through
him, notwithstanding of Gods determining the Mediator for safety: Thus we would
have these three put together; And yet (as we said) they differ; for Gods
determination is the efficient cause and fountain of all; Christ's satisfaction
is the meri^orious cause, and our believing is the ground on which we have
right to plead for the benefit of his satisfaction; Even as the man that fled
to the City of Refuge, his safety was not by any virtue in his running, but by
God's determination, yet his running to the City was requisite as the mids, and
except he run or fled to it, he could not plead for the benefit of the City; So
our believing gives us ground to plead a right and title to Christ and his
satisfaction, without which we could not have that right.

But 2dly, Because one will take up this under one notion, and another under
another; To clear it therefore a little further, we shall again consider in
this Covenant these three steps, 1. The determination of it, as it is enacted
in the Council of the Godhead, which in sum is this, that such and such
persons shall be satisfied for by the Mediator, and his satisfaction accepted
for them. 2. The execution of this Covenant, where we take in all our Lords
sufferings; all the strokes and wounds that Justice pursued him with, as
Cautioner for the Elect; and God's accepting and justifying of him, and
declaring his accepting of him, and being well satisfied with what he did and
suffered by his raising him from dead. 3. The application of his purchase by
his accepted satisfaction; which consists in these, 1. That these that were
given to Christ on this condition that his satisfaction should stand good for
them, should be justified and saved, that is, that in due time application of
his satisfaction should be made to the persons given him to to be saved by him;
Which takes in Christ's making intercession, that Renewing-grace, Faith, etc.
may be given to such persons. 2. That the work of the Spirit, who, as the
Sanctifier, begets Faith, and perswads to embrace Jesus Christ, shall be given
them- Then 3. follows the Believers actual coming to Christ, being sweetly and
powerfully drawn to rest on him and his satisfaction; Whereupon follows the
application of the sentence of Justification and Absolution that results from
the former; So that whereas it was before, Cursed is he that continues not in
all things written in the Law; Now it is, He that believes on Jesus Christ
has eternal life, and shall never come into condemnation; All these go and
agree well together, the Covenant as the ground, Christ's satisfaction as the
meritorious cause, and the application of his satisfaction by Faith, which
entitles and gives the Believer a right to it.

The reason why we have so much insisted on this, is, that we may teach you to
join respect to the Covenant of Redemption, Christ's suffering, and your
believing together; It will not be Faith that will justify, that is without
respect to the Covenant; Neither will the Covenant and Christ's satisfaction
justify without Faith; yet ye would so put them together, as the glory of
Salvation through Grace may not lie on Faith, but on God's everlasting Love,
and on Christ's satisfaction: And indeed it is no little practick for a Soul
sensible of sin, in the exercise of Faith, so to lay the weight of its
Salvation on Christ and the Covenant, as it neglects not running to Christ by
Fait^; and so to lay hold on Christ by Faith, as it lay not the weight on
Faith, but on Christ and the Covenant: As in the comparison before used,
suppose a man that had killed another unawares, had been taken before he wan to
the City of Refuge, God's determination was not the cause of that, but his not
running, or his not coming at the City; So it may be that some are apprehended
by the Justice of God, that are less sinful than others; yet the reason or
c^u^e is not in God's Covenant, nor in C^rists want of worth, but in the
persons not running, or not fleeing to Christ, as to the City of Refuge; and
therefore they are not heard to plead for immunity by virtue of that
satisfaction before the Bar of God.

A 2d. sort of Uses are for exhorting and encouraging Sinners to come to
Christ; There is here then 1. A clear ground to our our Faith, and a plain way
opened to Heaven, and a mighty encouragement to persuade Sinners to lay hold on
Christ, and to take this way for obtaining of life; This Text opens as it were
the gates of the City of Refuge, and points out the way how to eshew the wrath
which is to come: There is a way here laid down in the Wisdom, Justice, Go
dness and Grace of God, which is made offer of in the Gospel; and since it is
so, we beseech you that ye would not receive this Grace in vain, but seeing
there is a Covenant well ordered and sure, a Mediator and a Ransom provided,
and a way laid down how to come to Christ by Faith, let all of you who come
under the conviction of Sin and apprehension of Wrath, step to and close with
him, and plead for Pardon by virtue of his Wounds, and for healing through his
Stripes with respect to the Covenant.

There are these four things here that will serve to give ground for this
Application, if we consider 1. The great ground of Faith that is here. 2. The
great reason we have to make use of this ground. 3. The great encouragement we
have so to do. And 4ly. The great necessity we have to make this Application; A
little to each of these; But we shall premit one word to all, and it is this,
That considering you are all in tryfting terms with God, whether ye live at a
distance from him, the U^e will by way of Exhortation reach you; or whether ye
be brought to greater nearness under the sense of Sin, and have some
seriousness in seeking after God, it will reach you for Consolation; In a word,
we would exhort all and it may convince some, and comfort others: But to the
first thing we proposed, We declare and proclaim this as a true and faithful
saying, that there is here an Everlasting Covenant, wherein the salvation of
the Elect is concluded through Christ's satisfaction to Justice for them, and a
way laid down for making Peace betwixt God and all them that will thoroughly
renounce their own righteousn^ss and lay hold on this Satisfaction, even such a
way as procures Justificat^on and Healing to them: And for your confirmation
consider in general, if it be possible that this Covenant of Redemption, the
Sufferings of the Mediator, and the Promises made to Believing, can be for
naught; did the Father pursue the Cautioner so hotly for nothing? or did the
Cautioner pay such a Ransom for nothing? no certainly, if it had not been to
communicate Pardon and Peace, with Healing by his Wounds an^ Stripes to them
who were ly^^le to Condemnation, and under the dominion of Sin, neither of
these would have been: And therefore for grounds of your Faith more
particularly, see here 1. A full Satisfaction, God has made way to Sinners
Peace with himself, by satisfying himself fully in Christ the Mediator for the
sins of elect Believers, so that a sinner that in the sense of sin betakes
himself to him, needs not to fear any back-accompts, because what ever might
make for our Peace, was fully said on him, so that we may with holy and humble
boldness say, that we are not come to the mount that might not be touched nor
to blackness and darkness and tempest, and the sound of a trumpet; but we are
come unto mount Sion, the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and
to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling: Our
invitation therefore to you, is not to bid you come and count for your own Debt
your selves, but to come and accept of Christ's payment of it, and of his
Satisfaction, whereby Justice is completely satisfied. 2. See here as another
ground of Faith, the Justice of God, not with respect to us, but to the Bargain
betwixt the Father and the Son who are the principal Parties, and we (to speak
so) but Parties accidentally in this Covenant; the Covenant being primarly and
mainly betwixt God and the Mediator; the Justice of it appears in this, that it
has respect to a Covenant which is fulfilled on all sides, and therefore the
Elects believing and taking hold of the Mediators Satisfaction, cannot but be
accepted as if he had paid the the Debt himself; the Father (to speak so) had
the carving of the Bargain and what satisfaction his Justice was to receive, to
his own mind; and as it was Justice on the Sons side to satisfy according to
his undertaking, so it is Justice on the Fathers side to pardon and be at peace
with the Sinner that by Faith flies unto Jesus Christ. 3. See in this Bargain
not only Justice, but Mercy; as its just, so its a graciously free Bargain;
which is wonderful and may seem somewhat strange if not paradoxal, yet its
nothing inconsistent with the way of Grace; it is just that the Cautioner should
pay the Debt; and yet that Debt is most freely and frankly pardoned as to us;
it is Justice in the height as to the Mediator, but free Grace as to us in the
height; we come to it freely and without price though it cost him dear: And
that is one of the Mediators Undertakings that it should be free to his Seed,
Joh. 6.40. This is the will of him that sent me, that he who sees the Son and
believes on him should have eternal life. 4. Consider the reality and sureness
of the Bargain, it is such as it cannot fail, having such Pillars to lean on,
the Faithfulness of God engaged on just and equal terms and the glory of God as
the end; and having a most necessary and c^rtain effect, to wit, Healing to all
to whom this sovereign Medicine is applied: This stability and sureness of the
Covenant flows from Gods engaging to the Mediator, and the Mediators engaging
to God; from the Mediators satisfying and the Fathers accepting of his
Satisfaction, which being confirmed by the Blood of the Testator, it becomes a
Testament which cannot be annulled nor altered or changed. And if all this be
so, let me put the question, is there not good ground here to exhort the
Hearers of the Gospel to believe in Christ, and on Believing, to look for Life
through him? and a most solid ground laid down whereupon to build the hopes of
Eternal Life? and therefore seeing this is the up-shot of all, that Life is to
be gotten freely by Faith in Jesus Christ, improve this way of Salvation for
making your Peace under no less certification than this, even as ye would eshew
reckoning with Divine Justice in your own Persons for the least Farthing of
your Debt.

If it be objected here by any, 1. We are at enmity with God and cannot
satisfy, I answer, This Text tells you that satisfaction is not sought from
you, but from the Mediator who has already given it, and the Father has
accepted it for all such as shall by Faith plead the benefit of it. 2. If ye
shall say, we know not how to win at God, we are such as cannot step on foot
forward, and so very sinful and miserable that we know no such Transgressors
and Wretches. I answer, Was it not for such that the Mediator transacted, even
for such as we Transgressors, Rebels, Despisers of him, and such as judged him
to be smitten and plagued of God? If he had been Caution only for righteous
Folks, there had been some reason for such an objection, but it is for Sinners,
for most heinous Sinners: Nay, this way of reasoning and pleading says on the
matter, that Christ needed not have laid down his life. 3. If it be said, We
are so sinful and backsliding, so filthy and pollu^ed that we think we are not
within the reach of healing: I answer, This reasoning would if it held, turn in
effect to this, that ye are not within the reach of Gods Grace and for Christ's
Satisfaction; which is not only injurious but even blasphemous to the Grace of
God and to the Satisfaction of the Mediator; if your sin be ugly and horrible,
he suffered horrible Wra^h; he was wounded, bruised, chastised, etc. 4. If it
be said further, We can do nothing for our selves, we cannot come to Christ, we
know not what it is to B^lieve, or if we win to do any thing, alace all our
Goodness is as the morning Cloud and early Dew that soon passes away; I
answer, The Covenant is not transacted betwixt God and you, but betwixt God and
the Mediator, and the ground of your Peace, as to the procuring cause, depends
on the Mediators performing his part of the Covenant in your name: And further,
as for your Believing, it is a piece of the Fathers engagement to the Mediator,
and must certainly be made as effectual as the Father must keep his word to the
Son, according to these Promises of the Covenant, I will put my law in their
hearts, and write it in their minds, they shall all know me; and they shall be
all taught of God; And thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, and
the like; All these Promises were in the Covenant betwixt the Father and the
Son; and the application of them is but their execution as to us; and therefore
seeing such a City of Refuge is cast open to Man-slayers and Transgressors* step
humbly and boldly forward and run into it. There is yet a 5th. Objection which
will possibly be sticking with some, and it is this, we know not whether we
shall believe or not, for we know not if we be in the Covenant or not: I
answer, Would ye have thought that he who had committed Manslaughter would
have reasoned well if he had reasoned thus, I know not if that City of Refuge
was appointed or built for me, and when the Gates of it were cast open should
skar to enter in it on this account? when it was told him that it was appointed
for such: Just so is it here: And suppose one should say, I cannot believe, it
is as if such a man should say, I cannot, I dow not run to the City; nay rather
though he had been feeble, yet he would have creeped, clinshed and cripled to
it as he might: Even so here, in a word, a man should not dispute whose name is
in the Covenant, but should step forward to the Shelter and Refuge; as it is
Heb. 6.18.19. where the Apostle borrows the same similitude, and says, God
has confirmed his promise by an oath, that by two immutable things in which it
was impossible for God to lie, that we might have strong consolation who have
fled for refuge to lay hold on the hope set before us: Men in their Natural
condition are compared to the Manslayer, lying under the stroke of the Law, or
under the hazard of being pursued by the Avenger of Blood; Christ is compared
to the City of Refuge; and the heir of Promise being pursued, what shall he do?
will his election simply save him? no, but he must flee unto Jesus Christ as to
his City of Refuge: And therefore, by all means run and flee to him, as having
this fear, least the Avenger of Blood pursue and overtake you; and if ye cannot
run so fast as ye would, yet run as ye may; and ye have this advantage that the
City of Refuge is not far off, it is near you even at your Door, as the Apostle
speaks Rom: 10. The word is near thee, in thy mouth and in thine heart; the
criplest Body among you all has Christ at your door that ye may enter into him
as into a City of Refuge, and that he may come in and sup with you; so that
though ye cannot lift your feet so quickly in running to him, if ye can but in
good earnest roll your selves over upon him, ye shall be safe: Seeing then that
this way of Salvation is so full, so free, so equal and effectual, take heed
least ye prejudge your selves of it.

2ly. To press this yet a little further, Consider what good reason ye have to
run; Take but this one word, Ye are Sinners lying under the Curse and Wrath of
God, and have ye any other way of obtaining Pardon or of making your Peace? and
if ye believe that ye are Sinners and under the Curse, is there not need that
ye should run to a Shelter from it? If we were preaching to Angels that had
never sinned, there might be some reason for their slighting or laying little
weight upon such a word of exhortation, but seeing ye are Sinners, and liable to
Gods Curse, why do ye slight a Savior, having so much need of him?

3dly, Consider yet further, that ye have encouragement to run, and nothing to
discourage you; What prejudice is in believing? There is no prejudice at all in
this way, but many advantages; Doubtless Salvation will not fail them that
believe: Yea, we may add from the words of the Text, for encouraging to this
that the man or woman that is sensible of sin, and afraid of wrath, has the
Covenant to look to, for begetting and throughing the work of Faith in them
with power; for if it be true that all the midses are in the Covenant, as well
as the end; and if we may lay weight on the Covenant for the effect, to wit,
the pardon of sin, and healing, then we may also lay hold on the Covenant for
furthering us to that effect: I speak not this as if folk could of themselves
act Faith on the Covenant, before Faith be given them; But I speak it to
encourage young beginners that think they have no Faith at all, that they may
act what they have, and may look more and more to the Covenant, to be
enlightened, quickened, and strengthened, and that they may say with the poor
man in the Gospel, Lord, I believe, help my unbelief; And with the Spouse,
Cant. 1 Draw me; and We will run after thee.

4. And finally, for pressing of this, consider the absolute necessity that ye
are under of making use of this way of Salvation, of getting your peace made by
Christ's satisfaction, and your wounds healed by his stripes; There is no mids,
but either ye must hazard on a reckoning with God on your own score, or accept
of his satisfaction: There was never a Covenant made by God with Man but two, a
Covenant of Works for perfectly righteous folks, by which Covenant no sinner
was ever able to come to life; And a Covenant of Grace wherein Christ is made
sin for us, and as many as flee by Faith unto him, are made the righteousness
of God through him; and therefore either betake your selves to his way, or
resolve on compting with God your selves without a Mediator and Surety; or if
ye think it a fearful thing to count thus with God, and if it be certain that
many have been condemned for taking the way of Works; Let me earnestly entreat
you to welcome and make more use of Christ's righteousness for obtaining pardon
of sin, and peace with God: This way will do your turn when the other will
quite fail you; But as for them who take this way, I will adventure to say in
his Name, that as certainly as Christ was smitten, as certainly shall pardon
and healing come to them; Even to as many as creep in to him, and by believing
lay hold on him: And on the other side, I say in the same name to all of you
who take not this way of Salvation, that ye shall most certainly be brought to
reckon with God yuur selves without a Mediator, and to undergo his curse
according to the tenor of the Covenant of Works: Thus this Text sets before you
life and death; God's blessing and God's curse; Life, and God's blessing, if ye
betake your selves to Christ, as to your alone City of Refuge; And death, and
God's fearful curse if ye do it not; God himself make you wise to make the
right choice.

SERMON XXV.
ISAIAH LIII.VI. Verse. 6. All we like sheep have gone astray, we have turned
every one to his own way, and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all.


YE have in the Former Verses somewhat of our Lord's suffering, and of his
suffering for sinners, that he was wounded and bruised, etc. In this Verse the
Prophet proceeds to clear how this came to pass, that Christ Jesus was made to
suffer for the Elect, the Seed that God had given him; which he does by laying
down the Occasion and Fountain-cause whence it proceeded, 1. The Occasion of it
in these words, All we like sheep have gone astray; All the Elect, as well as
others, had wandered, and every one of us had turned to our own way; We had
denuded our selves of all right and title to eternal life, and had made our
selves liable to Gods curse and wrath through our sinning. 2. The
Fountain-cause is, The Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all; When we
had all strayed Jehovah took our Lord Jesus, as the Sacrifices under the Law
were taken, and put him in our room, and laid on him the punishment due to us
for our sins, and actually pursued him for our debt.

So the words are an answer to that question, How comes it to pass that our
Lord Jesus suffered thus for sinners? It Is answered, The Elect had made
themselves liable to the wrath and curse of God, through their straying; and to
keep them from that wrath, God designed and provided his Son Jesus Christ to be
the Redeemer, and according to the Covenant of Redemption laid on him the
punishment due to them for their iniquities; In a word, their sin, and God's
appointing him to be Cautioner, made him liable to satisfy for all their debt.

The first part of the words holds out our natural disease; The 2. part holds
out Gods gracious cure and remedy.

In the first part we have these three, 1. The natural state and condition of
all Men and Women, even of the Elect themselves (who are mainly to be looked on
here) All we have gone astray. 2. This is illustrat by a similitude, We have
gone astray like sheep. 3. It is amplified, Every one of us has turned to his
own way; Several words being put together to set out the desperate sinful
condition whereinto the Elect as well as others had brought themselves.

1. Our natural state and condition is set down in this word straying; To
stray, is to wander out of the way, to go wrong, to be be wildered; For God
has set a rule to men to walk by in the way to life, the rule and way of
holiness, and whoever walk not in that way, do go astray, and wander out of the
right way.

2. This is, as I said, illustrat by a similitude of sheep; The comparing of
the Elect to sheep here, is not at all to extenuat the sinfulness of their
straying; though sometimes the innocence of that Creature in some other
comparisons is insinuated; But it is to hold out the witlessness, spiritual
silliness ad bruitishness of their straying, the Scripture usually pointing out
that Beast to be disposed and given to wandering; And both Nature and
Experience tells us, that in a Wilderness where there is greatest hazard, they
are readiest to run on the hazard; such is their silly, and to speak so,
foolish inclination; Just so are the Elect by Nature.

3. It Is amplified by this, That every one has turned to his own way; Before,
it was collectively set down, A^l we have gone astray; But now lest any should
exeem himself, it is distributively set down, Every one, even Isaiah, Jeremiah,
and others such, not one excepted: This turning to our own way, holds out two
things, 1. It Is called our own way, to distinguish it from Gods way, as it is,
Psalm. 81.11. He gave them up to their own hearts lusts, and they walked in
their own counsels, That is, in their own inventions, or according to their own
will, humor and inclination. 2. While it is said, that every one turns to his
own way, it is to show this, that beside the common way that all sinners have to
turn away from God, distinguished from God's way, every sinner has his own
particular and peculiar way whereby in his way he is distinguished from another
sinner; There is but one way to Heaven, but many ways to Hell, and every one
has his different way, some have one predominant lust, some another; But they
all meet here, that every one turns from God's way, and every one takes a wrong
way of his own.

Considering the scope, we shall shortly and passingly point at two general
Observations, whereof the 1. is this, that it contributes much for folks
conceiving and considering of Christ's sufferings aright, to be well acquainted
with their own sinful nature and disposition; Men will never look rightly on
Christ's sufferings, nor suitably esteem of him, nor make him, and the Doctrine
that holds him and his sufferings forth cordially welcome, except they have
some sense of their sinful nature and di^position; Hence it was that many of
the Pharisees and Hypocrites of that time wherein the Lord exercised his
Ministry amongst the Jews, never welcomed him, nor prized his sufferings,
whereas among the Publicans and Sinners many were brought to get good of him.

Not to insist in the Use of this, only in a word, see here a main reason why
Jesus Christ is so meanly thought of, and the respect of his sufferings is so
little welcomed and esteemed, even because so few walk under the due sense of
this, that like lost sheep they have gone astray.

The 2d. general Observation from the scope, putting both parts of the Verse
together, is this, that we should never look on Christ's sufferings but with
respect to the Covenant of Redemption, and God's transacting with him as our
Cautioner; Therefore the last part comes in, The Lord has laid upon him the
iniquity of us all: For albeit we know that Christ has suffered much, yet, if
there be not an eye to, and some acquaintance with, the Covenant, the rise of
his sufferings, and God's hand and end in his sufferings, it will be to no
purpose; Therefore when Peter is to speak of his sufferings, Acts 2.23. He
premits these words, Him being delivered by the determinat counsel and
foreknowledge of God, and then subjoyns his being crucified: Looking on
Christ's sufferings with respect to the Covenant. 1. It lets us know that
Christ's sufferings come not by guess, but by the eternal counsel o^ God, and
by virtue of that transaction betwixt the Father and the Son, and this takes
away the scandal off them, which the Prophet sets himself here to remove. 2. It
gives Faith access to make use of his sufferings when we look on him as
purposely designed for this end. 3. It holds out the love of God, Father, Son,
and Spirit toward Elect Sinners; That howsoever God looked angry like on the
Mediator, as personating them, and sustaining their room; yet that Jehovah had
the devising and designing of these sufferings, and that he sent his Son to
suffer thus, it holds out wonderful love.

3. And more particularly, from the first part of the words, which is the main
thing to be marked, Observe, That all men, even the Elect themselves not
excepted, are naturally in a most sinful and desperate state and condition, so
that if ye would know what they are by Nature, this is a description of their
state, All we like sheep have gone astray, and every one has turned to his own
way; And when it is called our own way, there needs no other E^^thete to set out
the desperatness of it; That which I mean is this, that all men are naturally
under these two, 1. They are under guilt before God, Ephesians. 2.1, 2. Dead in sins
and tresp sses, child^en of wrath, and heirs of condemnation, liable to the
curse of God by virtue of the Covenant which Adam broke. 2. Which is mostly
aimed at here, there is in every one a sinful nature, a sinfulness or sinning
sin, an inclination to sin, every one has a straying humor; So that although
the similitude of sheep a^ree not to them in that sen^e as sheep are innocent
creatures, yet it agrees to them in this sense that they are silly foolish
Creatures; And in this respect it is said Genesis 6.8. That all tha imaginations
of the thoughts of the heart in man are only evil continually; And Ephesians. 2.1.
They are said to be dead in sin, not only in respect of their being obnoxious
to God's curse, but in respect of their natural deadness, of their sinful
nature, and want of spiritual life; So Romans 3 9, 10. and forwards, the Apostle
describes the sinfulness of man's nature at large, not only in respect of its
guilt, but of its inclination to sin, and says that their throat is an open
Sepulcher; Insinuating thereby that men naturally are like to a Tomb, and that
the Corpse within the Tomb is death and sin, and that all that comes from them
savours of that; Their feet are swift to shed blood, with their tongues they
use deceit, etc. Every member and part of the body, and every faculty of the
soul is bent to that which is evil. These three may further confirm it, 1. If
we look in general to what the Scripture speaks of men by nature, Ephesians. 2.1, 2,
3. Romans 3, and 5. Chapters; They being as it is, Isaiah 57. penult, As the
raging Sea that casts out dirt and mire continually; It is always moving and
working one way or other, and more especially in a storm, so that though at one
tide ye should sweep the Shore never so clean, it will be as foul and dirty the
next Tide that comes; So are these hearts of ours (as Peter speaks, 2 Epist.
2. And Jude verse 13.) foaming out their own shame; And James says, Chap. 4.5.
The spirit that dwells in us lusts to envy; It has as great eagerness after,
and as great delight in sin, as a Drunkard has after, and in drink. 2.
Experience also confirms it, Go through all the Men and Women that ever were in
the World (our blessed Lord Je^us being excepte^, as not descending o^ Adam by
the ordinary way of Generation) and that will be found true which the Apostle
has, Romans 3. There is none that does good, no not one; And that which is
spoken, Genesis 6. All flesh has corrupted their way; And what is the spring of
all the a^ominations that are in the World, and the rise of these particular
evils that are in believers and Saints mentioned in Scripture, as in David,
Peter, and others: But this same corrupt nature, this body of death, as it is
called. Romans 7.14. All which strongly prove a fire to be within, when there is
such a smoke without. 3. We may confirm it from well-grounded reason, for it
cannot be otherwise; If the root be of such a nature, can the branches be
otherwise? Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean thing? No, not one,
Job 14.4. When Adam fell the root was corrupted, and the branches cannot be
fresh; the fountain was defiled, and the streams cannot be clean and clear:
Hence when Adam begot Seth, an Elect in whom the Church was continued, it is
said, that he begat a son after his own likeness, Genesis 5. He himself was
created after Gods Image, but begat children after his own Image.

Though this be a commonly received Doctrine, yet its not without good reason,
nor for no use insisted on so much here and in other Scriptures; We shall
therefore speak a little to these four Uses of it.

The 1. Use of it serves for Information; and we may make it a looking-glass
wherein we may see clearly our own most sinful state and condition; Would ye
know what ye are by nature? This Text tells you that not only all men have
strayed, but that each of us, or every one of uc has turned to his own way;
But knowing how ready we are to shift the challenge, we would be persuaded that
we are by nature liable to Gods curse for Adams sin, dead in sin, and inclined
to all evil; Sheep are no readier to go the wrong way, and will no more readily
stray if they want a Shepherd, then we are inclined to do: There is a common
word in many of your mouths, that we are all sinners by nature, but when it is
searched into, we find that there is much ignorance amongst you of what it
means; many count themselves to be sinners, only because of their being guilty
of the first sin, and so put no difference betwixt the first sin and Original
sin, which is an effect that flows from, and follows upon the first sin; The
first sin was Adam's deed, and is legally ours being imputed to us; As it is,
Romans 5. Death reigned over all, even over them that had not sinned after the
similitude of Adam 's transgression, because Adam in his standing and falling
stood in our room, representing all mankind that was to come of him; But
Original sin is inherent in us, and cleaves closs to us, and is that which we
are born and bred and grow up with; And therefore ye would distinguish these
sins, that ye may know that ye are not only guilty of Adams first sinful deed
but that ye have a present sinful and corrupt nature, though it be not ^lways
alike exercising and acting it self; Others again look only upon their nature
as inclined to evil, and look not on it as that which makes them liable to
wrath by reason of the first sin; But ye would put both together, and know that
though your sinfulness does not consist only in an inclination to evil, that
yet your sinfulness lies mainly in that, and that it will not be long a going
wrong; And it is not only your actual straying and going wrong that ye would
take notice of, but also and mainly of your sinful nature, that inclines,
disposes, and sets you on work to go wrong; It Is your filthy corrupt Nature,
the Body of Death, the smell and savor whereof, to say so, is the kything of
some actual sin; We may clear it in a similitude or two; We are by this
Original sin as young Serpents before they can sting actually, or like Ravenous
Birds before they come out of the Nest, yet we call these, Serpents and
Ravenous Birds, because they are come of such a kind; In our Swadling-clouts we
have the venomous and Ravenous Nature, to wit, Original sin in us; And in our
Actual sinning we are like Serpents when they come to sting actually, or like
Ravenous Birds when they come to catch the Prey; And our Actual sin is a fruit
of Original sin: Or take it in this same similitude in the Text, there are many
Shep that never actually strayed; yet they are called straying witless
Creatures, because they are inclined to stray, and ready to stray; Or take it
in this similitude, there are some diseases that follow such a House and
Family, some are inclined to a Consumption, some to the Stone, some to one
disease, some to another, which is from some defect of the Body, even so it is
here, that from a defect of our Nature, infected by Original sin, that all
Actual sins flow.

The 2d. Use is for Conviction and Reproof, and indeed we cannot well tell
where we shall begin here; However the first thing that it reproves is our
natural Pride, Though this be the sinfulness of our very Infancy, yet we are
ready to look upon our selves as something; it is a true saying, though much
misapplyed, that Job has chap. 11.12. Vain man would be wise, though man be
born as an wild ^ss^s colt; a Colt has a wild humor, and ^s the most witless
of Creatures, and this same is it that is employed in that saying of James 4.5
Do ye think the Scripture says in vain, the spirit that is in us lusts to
envy, which says this much, that the most part never trow that they have such
a spirit in them that is inclined to all evil, bent to have God and every thing
that is good. 2. I^ reproves the great security that is amongst the most part;
It this be a truth that M^n and Women are thus born under the Curse of God, and
inclined to every thing that is evil, born enemies to God and inclined to
aggrege and highten the quarrel, how comes it then to pass that the great part
sleep as soundly and securely as if they were in no hazard? If ye were all
posed and put to it, how many of you can give a solid proof that ye are
reconciled, that your Peace is made, that ye are changed and your nature
renewed, and the quarrel betwixt God and you taken away? and yet if we look up
and down, ye are generally as s^cure and quiet as if ye were born friends with
God; There are but few taking with a Conviction, and saying within themselves,
Is yonder Doctrine true of me? as if the Scripture had spoken in vain whatever
it speaks of Original Sin: Ah! shall this never be amended? will ye never lay
your sinfulness to heart? shall ye still think nothing of that which gives the
occasional rise to the Covenant of Redemption and to Christ's Satisfaction? all
the preaching that ye hear daily if it be not now laid to heart, it shall be
most terrible and dreadful to you one day; and the Peace that ye now have shall
end in red War and great bitterness. 3. It reproves Folks exceeding great
unwatchfulness and their trusting to their own Nature and following their own
Council; the wise man says, Prove. 28.26. He that trusts in his own heart is
a fool; Is it not reproof-worthy for a man to be as brutish as the very beast
that perishes; as it is Psalm. 49. and yet to be as little watchful and as much
trustful, or to trust as much to a man's own guiding, as if nothing of a
milguiding humor and disposition were in him? we may more then allude to these
words of our Savior here, If the blind lead the blind, shall not both fall
into the ditch? many of you think that ye are instructed as Scribes in the way
to Heaven, and will be read^ to say, God forbid we should be ignorant of that,
and what have we been doing all our days if we be yet to learn that lesson? but
we will tell you what ye have been doing, ye have even been like silly witless
Sheep straying all your days: And we would the rather speak to this, because it
is so necessary to be known and believed, and yet so little known and credited;
For, 1. Ye will never be rightly humbled nor make use of Jesus Christ, nor walk
watchfully and soberly; In a word ye will never believe and repent till ^e
know, be convinced of, and believe this to be your natural Inclination and the
sinfulness of your nature: And yet 2. Tho this be so necessary that the want of
it mars the fruit of the Word in you, and Preaching does but buff on you to say
so; How many are there that are as little sensible of it as the very stones of
the Wall that are before us, or the boards that they lean upon as to their own
particular state and condition? I would but ask you, Is it possible that ye
could live so securely and satisfied with your own case if ye believed indeed
that ye had such a sinful nature, and that ye were liable to Gods Wrath and
Curse? or would ye give such way to your natural sinful humors and
inclinations, and so contentedly slight Jesus Christ and the offers of the
Gospel as many of you do? and yet we see amongst them with whom we converse,
Men and Women not only as secure as if they had not such natures, but even
belshing and foaming out their own shame: We would have you therefore to be
convinced and know, that not only ye are Sinners in the general, but that every
one of you is such in particular.

To make it the more clear, I shall give you two or three Qualifications that
are requisite to a suitable conviction of your sinfulness. 1. It would be
particular. 2. It would be sensible, ye would not in bare words take with it
that ye are Sinners, but ye would see and be convinced that in this and this ye
have sinned, and ye would be kindly affected with it. 3. It would be distinct,
not a guessing, but a thing that from the seeing and feeling of it ye would be
clear in. 4. It would have such i^fluence on the moving of your Aff ctions, and
such an inward working on your hearts, as that ye may loath ^our nature, and
your self because of it: We may see all these in Paul, Romans 7. verse 10. and
forward, who, though he was greatly renewed, yet says he, I see a law in my
members rebelling against the law of my mind; he feels and is very sensible of
that which leads him in captivity, and he cries out, Who shall deliver me; etc.
his affections are mightily stirred with it, What I do I allow not, etc. O
miserable man that I am, etc. If ye believe this to be a truth, and that Paul
lived in the faith and feeling of it; then judge if there be not just ground to
expostulate with most part of you, as being yet without the faith and feeling
of this mo^ concerning thing.

The 3^. Use of it serves wonderfully to set forth the glory of the free and
rich Grace of God, that all this business is made and this transaction entered
into, that Christ comes to satisfy and does actually satisfy Justice for a
number of such wretches that had gone astray like lost sheep; This comes in as
he scope; we have strayed and done the wrong, but he has paid the debt, and
satisfied for the wrong done: and from comparing this v. with the foregoing, we
may take these five Considerations that serve to heighten the glory of Gods
Grace and Free-love, and to shame Believers that are so little in wondering at
it. 1. Who is smitten? his own Son; we sinned and he was smitten, even he who
was and is the Fathers fellow, the Sword awakes against him and we go free. 2.
What did our Lord suffer? He was wounded and bruised, the chastisement of our
peace was on him, he laid on him the iniquity of us all; It was not a
complemental or fashional suffering, but he was arraigned before the Tribunal
of Justice, and did really pay our Debt, and satisfy Justice for our Sins. 3.
Who ex^ct^d this Satisfaction? who did smite him? It Is the Lord Jehovah, it is
the Father; which makes the glory of Grace shine the more; It Is God the Father
whose Heart was tender to the Son of his love that ex^cts the full price of
him, so that as he said of Abraham, By this I know that thou love me, because
thou have not withheld thy Son, thine only son Isaac from me; we may say, by
this we know God's love to the Elect, when he has not withheld nor spared his
own Son from them, but has laid on him the iniquities of them all. 4. For whom
did he smite him? for Sinners, for straying Sheep, for Covenant-breakers, for
such as had gone a whoring from God, and were bent to sin against him, I mean
the Elect. 5. When was it that he suffered for them? even when they were
straying, rejecting, despising, nodding the head at him, spitting in his face,
and saying away with him, even then he is praying and dying for them: Now put
all these together, that such a price shall be exacted of such a Cautioner, and
for such Sinners, and at such a time, behold and see therein how God commends
his love to us, as the Apostle speaks Romans 5.8. In that while we were yet
sinners Christ died for us; when we were in our sin, not praying to him, nor in
capacity to pray or give him thanks for any thing that he did or suffered, he
then died for us; Is there any thing here but freedom of Grace? and does not
this exceeding highly commend the love of God, that he exacts the Debt due by
us of his Son, and the wonderful love of the Mediator and Cautioner, that at
such a time and for such transgressions he should pay such a price?

Use 4. Seeing this was our state that we were Sinners, and that yet herein was
the love of God commended, that he laid o^ his Son the iniquity of us all,
then, is there not good ground to take with Sin and to make use of the Remedy,
to take with Sin and to close with Christ? We might take occasion here to
exhort, 1. To Watchfulness, and to walking soberly and humbly, from this
ground, that we have such a Nature. 2. To exhort every one to Repentance,
because by Nature ye are all in such a sinful state and condition; ^t may be
ground of exercising Repentance even long after your justification and peace
made with God who are justified; with whom it should be as we see it was with
David. But 3ly. Seeing by Nature ye are under God's Wrath and Curse, and in a
state of enmity with him, it mainly serves to exhort you to flee unto Jesus
Christ and not to rest till ye g^t the quarrel taken away; It might be in
reason thought that Folks would be soon and easily induced to this even to run
unto Jesus Christ, and to welcome the Gospel with good will, for preventing the
Curse and Wrath due to them for sin, and for subduing of this sinful nature and
inclination to stray from God and his Way: Therefore seeing there is a fountain
opened to the house of David for sin and for uncleanness, since there is a
satisfaction given to Justice for removing the guilt of sin, and since the
Spirit is purchased for mortifying of sin and making holy; let as many as think
that they have gone astray and have turned to their own way, as they would not
be found still at this distance with God, make use of Christ for making their
friendship with God; it is the word that Peter uses, 1 Pet. 2. ult. All we like
sheep have gone astray, but we are now turned unto the shepherd and bishop of
our souls; hold, O hold you near this Shepherd, and make use of his
Righteousness for making your Peace; If we could rightly understand the words,
we would see in them, 1. A Motive to put us on to believing in Christ, and can
there be a greater motive then necessity? We have sinned and gone astray, he is
the only Savior, there is no other name given under Heaven whereby Sinners can
be saved. 2. There is also in them an Encouragement to Believing; It was for
Sinners, such as we are, that Jesus Christ suffered all that he suffered, which
may be ground of hope and encouragement to step forward; and if neither our
need, nor Christ's being a Savior willing to make Sinners welcome will
prevail, we know not what will do it: It will turn to this, and ye will be put
to it, Whether are ye Sinners? and if Sinners, whether is it not a desperate
thing to ly under Sin and Wrath? If ye be not Sinners we have no warrant to
propose this Doctrine to you, to invite or make you welcome to a Savior; but
if ye grant that ye are Sinners, will ye contentedly ly under Sin? will ye be
able to bear it out against God? or think ye that ye will be well enough for
all that? and if ye dare not resolve to ly under Sin, I would ask, what way
will ye win from it? think ye it easy to win from under it? must not the
Justice of God be satisfied? some of you think that ye can pray your selves out
of Sin, but what need was there of Christ's sufferings if a satisfaction might
have been made to Justice another way? and if none but Christ can satisfy, it
turns to this, that by all means ye would make use of him, else ye will most
certainly drown and die in your sins; And this is the thing that we would
commend to you, that under the sense of sin, and in the faith of Gods
condescending love, ye wouldflee to Jesus Christ, and give him employment for
making your peace with God, and taking away your sin and sanctifying of you; O
but this be suitable to Sinners; and if ye think your selves Sinners, prejudge
not your selves of the benefit of a Savior.

This should be a distinct Sermon.
EVery expression that the Ptophet uses to set forth the grace of God in Jesus
Christ to sinners by, is more wonderful then another, because indeed every
thing that he expresses is more wonderful then another; And there is so much
grace and infinite love in the way of the Gospel, that it is hard to know where
there is most of it, whether in its rise, or in its execution; whether in the
decree of God, or in Christ's satisfaction; whether in the benefits that we
enjoy, or in the way by which we are brought to enjoy them; Sure all together
make a wonder passing-great, a most wonderful wonder, even a world of wonders:
It is a wonder that (as it is, verse. 5.) he should be wounded for our
transgressions, bruised for our iniquities, that the chastisement of our peace
should be on him, and that by his stripes we should be healed; And when here he
comes to explain this, and to show how it came to pass that Jesus Christ
suffered so much, he holds out another new wonder, All we like sheep have gone
astray, etc. As if he had said, would ye know how it came to pass that the
Mediator behoved to suffer, and suffer so much? All we, the Elect People of God
had gone astray like so many wandering sheep, as well as others, not one
excepted; And there was not another way to recover and reclaim us but this, The
Lord Jehovah laid on him the iniquity of us all: To recover us when we were
lost, Jesus Christ was substituted in our room by the eternal Decree of God,
and the iniquities of all of us who are his Elect people as to their punishment
were laid upon him; This then is the scope, to show the rise of Christ's
sufferings, and how it came to pass that our Lord suffered, and suffered so
much, the occasion of it was the Elects sin, and the Fountain cause, the
Fathers laying of their sin on him by an eternal Decree, and making him to
answer for it according to that Decree, with his undertaking, which was the
Covenant of Redemption whereof Christ's suffering was the execution: Thus we
have the Fountain whence our Lord's sufferings flowed; He is in the Covenant of
Redemption substitute and judicially enacted the Elects Cautioner, and takes on
their debt, and being substitute in their room, Justice pursues the Claim, and
Sentence passes against him for making him answerable and liable to the debt of
their sins; Which sets out as it were a Judge on the Throne Jehovah, and two
Parties at the Bar, We and Him; We the Principal Debtors, and Him the Cautioner
Jesus Christ in our room and place; The Law by which the Judge proceeds is the
Covenant of Redemption; And we the Principal Debtors not being Law-biding, he
is made liable to the Debt, and on this ground the Sentence passes against him
for satisfying what we were owing, and hereupon followed his sufferings; So
then the rise of his sufferings is, that it was so transacted by the Wise,
Just, and Gracious God, and thus this verse. comes well in to explain and
further to clear what he asserted in the former verse. Though the words be few,
yet they are a great compend and sum of the Gospel; How therefore to speak of
them so as to unfold them aright, is not easy: And because the Devil who seeks
by all means to mar the beauty of the Gospel, does more fiercely assault where
most of its beauty shines, and has therefore stirred up several sorts of
enemies to wrest these words, and to obscure the beauty of grace that may be
clearly seen in them; We shall a little open the few words that are in this
last part of the verse, And the Lord has laid on hIm the iniquity of us all;
Having spoken to the former part of it the last day.

In these few words then, we have, 1. something spoken of iniquity which three
Parties have some acts about, to wit, 1. The Elect, us all. 2. Him, to wit the
Mediator. 3. The Lord, to wit Jehovah; Then we have the express act of the
Lord, to wit, his laying on Him the Mediator, the iniquity of us all. 1. As for
this word iniquity, by it is meant sometimes 1. Sin formally taken as it has a
disconformity to the Law of God, and supposes a spot and defect, and so it is
commonly taken when we pray for pardon of sin; And when David says, Psalm. 51.
My sin is ever before me; And Psalm. 38. My iniquity is gone over my head; And
so it is the transgression of the Law of God. 2. It is sometimes taken for the
effect that sin procures, and so it is in effect the punishment of sin, as
Levit. 7. the 18, and 20. verses being compared together; verse. 18. it is said,
He shall bear his iniquity, which verse. 20. is, He shall be cut off, and so it
is clearly meant of the punishment of iniquity; For to bear his iniquity, and
to be cut off, are the same thing there; And that word of Cain, Genesis 4.14. My
iniquity or punishment is greater then I can bear, has a manifest respect to
Gods curse inflicted on him for his sin, and is, as if he had sald, I will not
get lived under the punishment that is inflicted upon me, for every one that
finds me will cut my throat; and sometimes it is translated punishment, as in
that of Genesis 4.13. The Question then is, Which of these two is understood here
in this Text, whether iniquity or sin formally taken, or iniquity taken for the
punishment thereof? These who are called Antinomians plead, that it is to be
understood of sin formally taken: But though it be hard so much as to mention
this, it being so blasphemous-like to assert, that our blessed Lord Jesus
should be formally a sinner, and have the spots and defilementt of sin on him,
which we wonder that any Christian should dare to assert, or presume to
maintain; Yet because this Scripture is alleged for it, we shall clear, that
iniquity is not here to be taken for sin formally, but for sin in the
punishment of it; And the 1. reason that we give shall be drawn from the plain
scope of the words, the Prophet having in the 5. verse said, that he was wounded
for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities; The scope of this verse.
is to show how it came to p^ss that Christ suffered, and suffered so much;
which he does by declaring that it could not be otherwise, because the
punishment of all the sins of the Elect was laid upon him; And that which was
called wounding and bruising in the former verse. is here called on the matter a
bearing of their iniquities, (for if they were laid on him he did certainly
bear them) the sins of all the Elect trysted on him as to their punishment; And
this shows how that Christ behoved not only to suffer, but to suffer all that
he suffered; So in the 8. verse. it is said, He was cut off out of the land of
the living, and for the transgression of my people was he stricken; That which
is here called the bearing of iniquity, is there called being cut off and
stricken for the transgression of his people; And this may be the 2d. reason of
the Exposition, as we have given it; because when iniquities are spoken of they
are not called Christ's, as inherent in him, but they are called his peoples
iniquities, they being formally theirs, but his judicially and legally only;
Even as the debt is formally the Bankrupts, but legally the Cautioners. A 3d.
reason is drawn from comparing this Text with other parallel places of
Scripture, that which is called bearing of iniquity here, is called, Gal. 3.13.
His being made a curse for us, so that his bearing of our iniquity, is his
being made a curse for our iniquity, and his bearing the wrath of God due to us
for our sin: I shall illustrat it by a compa^ison, whence the 4. reason will
clearly result, our iniquities become Christ's as his righteousness becomes
ours, for these two are parallel, 2 Cor. 5. ult. He was made sin for us who
knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in, or through him;
Where 1. it is clear, that Jesus Christ is so the sinner in our room, as we are
righteous in his room; and contrarily we are righteous in his room as he was
the sinner in our room. 2. That righteousness is not ^o derived to us that it
is formally made ours, and to be inherently in us, but is ours only by
imputation it self, or the virtue of it being imputed to us; And it is upon
this ground that Romans 4. Imputed righteousness is often mentioned, that is,
when God accounts a man to be righteous though he be yet a sinner in himself;
even so our sin is imputed to Christ, and reckoned his because he became our
Surety: And though Antinomians have a vain notion to elude this, yet the
Scripture is very clear, as holding forth a legal procedour; the debt is
accounted his, because of his obligation to be answerable for it, and in
Ju^tice and Law he is liable to it: And there is no other way that we can
rationally imagine how our blessed Lord can bear our iniquities, For 1. It
cannot stand with his absolute purity to have any spot of sin, or to be
formally the sinner: Neither 2. is it necessary that he should be the sinner,
but only that he should pay the penalty due by us, it being the nature of
Contracts among men, that where the Principal Debtor succumbs, the Cautioner
comes in his room, so is it here. Yea, 3. If Jesus Christ were the sinner
formally, it would incapacitat him to be our Cautioner, to pay the penalty, or
to satisfy Justice the debt of our sins: We would not have spoken so much to
this, were it not that this same place is pressed in a most fastidious manner
by the abusers of the grace of God to maintain their error: So then we take
this in short to be the meaning of this part of the verse, that Jesus Christ
did bear the punishment due to us for our sins.

3. The three parties that have some acts about iniquity, are 1. Us all. 2.
Him. 3. The Lord Jehovah. 1. Us all, and here we meet with the Aminians,
another party that abuses and perverteth this place, as if it were to be
extended to all Men and Women that ever sinned or went astray; For, say they,
it is the iniquity of all them that went wrong that is laid on Christ, and that
is the iniquity of all Men and Women in the World: But (as we show before) the
scope of the words is not so much to show the universality of all Men and
Women's sinning, as to show that all the Elect as well as others went astray,
and turned every one of them to their own way, therefore it is restricted, All
we; And the word All is no bro^der then the word We, now the We that ^s here
meant, is the We who in the former words are healed by his stripes; And that
sure is not all Men and Women that sin, but the Elect only; And verse. 11. it is
they that by his knowledge, that is, by Faith in him are justified; It Is these
All who^e iniquities he bare, and no more: So that in short, Us all, is not all
men simply considered, but Us all that are Elect, and thus it is necessarily to
be restricted to the Prophets scope.

The meaning of both parts of the verse together then, is this, We all, even
the Elect as well as others went astray, and turned every one of us to our own
sinful way, and the Lord Jehovah made him to bear the punishment of all our
sins, and it could not be but a mighty great punishment, and a most huge and
horrible suff^ring, when the Lord made the iniquities of Us all, his Elect to
meet upon Christ.

There is not much debate about the other two parts, The 1. whereof is Him,
that is the Mediator Jesus Christ, the eternal Son of the eternal Father, the
brightness of the Fathers Glory and the express Image of his Person, who
remaining God, became Man, to perform and bring about the work of our
Redemption according to his under taking.

The other Party is the Lo^d Jehovah, the Judge and the Party offended; as we
are the Party offending, and Jesus Christ ^he satisfier; And the Lord is here
considered essentially as Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, having one common
Essence and Justice, and who being all three one God, are to be satisfied, He
is Jehovah.

But how is this pun^shment of our iniquities laid on Jesus Christ? And here
Socinians make as great abuse and business, the Devil intending (if he could
effect is) to blow up the very foundation of the Gospel, bends all his Forces
against such places as do most lively hold it forth: But the words are clear
and most significant as they are rendered according to the Hebrew on the
Margent, thus, The Lord has made the iniquity of us all to meet on him; The
in^quities of the Elect are as so many Brooks and R vol^ts, any one of which is
hard and diffi^ult for them to pas^ over; But O! when Christ comes to satisfy
for them, they are brought and gathered into a great Lake, or rather into a
vast Sea or Ocean together, they all collected and combined met on him, and he
did meet with them in a mighty shock, and sure they could not but be great
sufferings that he endured when he had such a Sea to pass through; Or the sins
of the Elect were like so many Companies or Regiments of Men, any one whereof
they could never have overcome, but when Christ came to satisfy Divine Justice
for them, all the Companies and R^giments of sins (so to speak) Rendezvouzed
and brought in one formidable Army together, met on Christ; The word is well
rendered here were laid on him, being the same word in the Root that Saul used
when he commanded Doeg to ^all upon the Lords Priests, 1 Samuel 22.18. The word
is, Lay upon them, or lay at them; As when one is angry with another, he will
cry, Lay upon him; and this shows the exceeding greatness of Christ's
sufferings, when all the sins of all the Elect met together as a huge and heavy
Host, did fall and do terrible execution upon our blessed Lord Jesus. This then
being the meaning of the words, the Question is Whether the Lord Jehovah did
lay this punishment really upon Christ, or whether, as Socinians fondly
imagine, he only int^rceeded for them? But for Answer, 1. What sort of meaning
of the words would that be I pray? The Lord made the in^quities of us all to
interceed on him, when the T^xt says plainly, that they were laid on him, and
on the matter that he bare them, and ^xpr^sly so, verse. 11. For he shall bear
their iniquities: Yea, 2. Consider the scope, and it c^mes in as a reason why
Christ suffered ^o much, and would that, (can any think) be a good reason for
so great and grievous sufferings undergone by Christ, that God made him to
interceed for all the sins of the Elect? But if you look upon the words in
their true meaning, they are a clear reason why he was wounded, exceedingly
bruised and chastened, and why he endured so many stripes, even because all the
sins of all his Elect met on him, because he was made to bear the punishment of
them all; Also the words following clear it, He was cut off out of the land of
the living, for the transgression of my people was he stricken; And Gal. 3. He
was made a curse for us, He suffered, the just for the unyust; He actually and
really suffered that which we should have suffered: If it be asked, Wh t is
this, to lay iniquity on Christ? Or how is it said, that the iniquity of the
Elect was laid on him? Or in what respect? I answer, 1. In respect of Gods
eternal Covenant; the punishment due for our sins is laid upon him by an
eternal deliberat Counsel or Consultation of the Persons of the Godhead;
Wherein (as we show before) Christ enters Surety for us, accepts of, and
engages to pay our debt. 2. In respect of Gods actual pursuing Christ having
thus engaged himself, putting in his hand the Cup, and making him drink, and
the Bill of our account, and making him countable. 3. In respect of Gods
acceptance of that satisfaction which Christ performed and paid down for them.

This being the meaning of the words, we come to point at some things from
them, and the very opening of them may give us some In-sight in the way of the
Gospel, and of a notable ground of footing to our Faith, If we could rightly
apprehend God making this transaction with the Mediator, we might not only have
a ground to our Faith, but a great encouragement to come to Christ, and to rest
on him who has thus fisted himself in our room before the Tribunal of Diving
Justice, and it would waken and warm Faith and Love toward him.

But Observe here more particularly, 1. That all the Elect People of God are
lyIng under iniquity even as others; This we spoke to the last day, and shall
not repeat what was then said; It Is with respect to iniquity in the Elect that
all the business of Redemption is transacted, and from hence as the occasion,
it has its rise, even from God's being offended, and from the necessity of a
Mediator; For this does presuppose our debt, and a standing sentence against
us, till Christ interposed for the removing of it.

2. From its being said before, that every one turned to his own way, and here,
that the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all, Observe, that every one
of the Elect beside the common state of sin wherein all are, has his own
particular guilt that is in his own way; This is clearly holden out here, while
it is said, that not only like sheep we have gone astray, but that every one
has turned to his own way; Which as it holds forth a way in them all different
from God's way, so also a way in every one of them somewhat different from
another way; And this is called a walking in the counsel of our own heart,
Psalm. 81. and a man's own sore, 2 Chronicles. 6.29. and a man's own iniquity, Psalm.
18.23. Because it is in a special manner his. To clear it a little, consider
that sin is peculiar to a Believer, or may be called his own way, in these
respects; 1. In respect of his being more addicted to one sin then another,
which is usually called a man's predominant; Two men may both be covetous and
passionat, but the one of them may be called a covetous man, because he is
especially given to that sin of covetousness, and the other may be called a
passionat man, because he is especially given to passion. 2. In respect of some
peculiar aggravating circumstances; Though we will not dar particularly to
determine as to persons, yet if we look through all men and women, it will be
readily found that there is some sin which in respect of some or several
aggravations, is in some a greater sin then it is in others; And hereby God
has given ground of humiliation to all; There is not a man (as we just now
hinted) but readily he has an evil which is at a greater hight in him then in
another; As for instance, one may be given more to the sin of Drunkenness,
another more to Hypocrisy, another more to Uncleanness, etc. I do not speak so
much here of the diverse kinds of sin, as of the several aggravations of this or
that sin that they are given to; such and such a man may have aggravations that
will aggrege such a predominant evil in him far beyond what it is in others:
And it is from this ground that a Believer not in a complementing way, but most
really and sincerely, does call and account himself the chief of sinners,
because there are some aggravations that elevat his sin above the sins of
others, or above that same sin in others; as a weak Believer may have some one
good thing in him more commendable than it is in a stronger Believer, so the
stronger Believer may have some one sin that in respect of its aggravations,
may give him ground to look on himself as beyond others in sin.

Use 1. It serves much for our Humiliation, in as far as this adds to our
sinfulness; There are none of us, but beside the common way of sinning incident
to all, we have something that is peculiar to our selves, we have our own way
wherewith we are chargeable above and beyond others; we will readily all grant
that we are sinners, but who of us will take with our particul^r and peculiar
guilt that does more easily beset us? who, amongst many are as Doves of the
Valleys on the Mountains, every one mourning for his own iniquity, for his own
Plague and Sore, that by several circumstances may be aggreged as to its
sinfulness beyond the sin of others?

Use 2. The second Use which is the scope, serves to show the exceeding
greatness of Christ's sufferings; O! what a shock he was in when he had not only
all the common sins of the Elect to satisfy for, but when all their peculiar
sins with their respective aggravations, rend^zvouzed and trifted on him? It
serves likewise to exalt the free Grace of God, and the condescendency of our
blessed Lord Jesus who took in altogether in his making satisfaction for them
when there were several sorts of them, as if every one of the Elect had been
set to invent a new sin; what great and sore suffering was here when he
condescended to drink the Cup that had the wonderful effects of all the sins of
the Elect wrung into it? when not only in gross he takes on the sins of the
Elect, but this and that man's particular sins, which were all reckoned and
summed on Christ's account, and for which he was made to satisfy; and wherein
Justice proceeded equally and equipollently; this notably confirmed the reality
of Christ's satisfaction, by suffering what all the Elect should have suffered
eternally, or the equivalent of it; for if there had not been a proportional
satisfaction in his sufferings, wherefore serves such an enumeration of his
sufferings.

Use 3. The third Use serves to lead us in to know how much we are in Christ's
Debt, and what a great encouragement we have to believe, and withal, what
notable ground of consolation Believers have: I say, 1. It shows how much we
are in Christ's Debt, when we take a view of all our sins, and consider that
there was a particular view taken of them in the Covenant of Redemption, not
only all our common sins, but even all the particular and peculiar sins of
Believers were reckoned unto Christ the Cautioner, and put on his account, and
he engaged to satisfy for all, and pay the whole Reckoning; does it not lay a
great obligation on us to him who counted for the least farthing of our Debt?
we like a pack of bank-rupt Dyvours did take on the Debt, and the Account was
put in his Hand, not only (as I just now said) of all our common sins, but of
this and that particular sin, with all their several aggravations, and the
sinful circumstances that did highten them; and he satisfied for them all: And
of this we would take special notice, for it may readily wrong us to look upon
the Covenant of Redemption as a Bargain in gross; there is a particularness in
it, to show not only the sovereignty but the exactness of Justice, and also the
riches of Gods Grace, and of the great condescendency of Christ's love to elect
sinners. 2. It Is a great encouragement to believe; for even these sins that
would fright and skar serious and exercised Souls from coming forward to
Christ, were all compted on Christ's scorce, and were all satisfied for by him.
3. It Is a notable ground of consolation to B^lievers when they are disposed and
ready to think that their particular sins are insuperable and unpardonable;
they think that course might be taken with all their common evils, but as for
this most sinful and shameful unthankfulness, this despising of his Grace, this
woeful Unbelief, etc. it stairs them in the face, and they know not well how
that will be got done away: But Believers in Christ who are sorrowful and sadly
perplexed on this account, is that your own way? it is transacted on Christ's
score with the rest; every one of us has turned to his own way, and the Lord
has laid on him the iniquity of us all; O! impregnable ground of strong
consolation, which is as good news from a far country, a non-such cordial to a
fainting soul.

3. Observe here, That a believing Elect, or an elect Believer, will not only
be sensible of sin in the general, but of his own particular and peculiar
sinful way; or thus, it is a good token when Folk look not only on sin in
common, but on their own peculiar sinful way; or thus, that Folk should
consider their sinfulness not only in common but in particular with its several
aggravations; The Scriptures which we cited before do confirm this, as Psalm.
18.23. I kept my self from mine iniquity; and 2 Chronicles. 6.29. where says
Solomon, when every one shall know his own sore and his own grief; or as it is
1 King. 8.38. The plague of his own heart: This implys these two things, 1. A
distinct aggravating of sin, when a man not only looks on himself as a sinner,
but looks on his sin by reason of several aggravating circumstances as being
above and beyond the sin of others, and abhors and loatheth himself as the
chief of sinners, as David does, when he says Psalm. 51. Against thee, thee
only have I sinned; he is not there extenuating his sin as if it were done only
against God, but aggreging his sin, as the words following show, and I have
done this evil in thy sight, as if he had said, thy concern in the matter does
most affect and afflict me, Thou love truth or sincerity in the inward parts;
but I have been (alace) all this time juggling and greatly playing the
Hypocrite, which makes it to be a wonderful great evil; and Psalm. 65.3.
Iniquities prevail against me; and as Paul does, who calls himself the chief of
sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. So that Believe^s before conversion, yea and in respect
of their natural inclination even after their conversion, are woefully inclined
each of them to a sinful way of their own, called Eccles. 11. the way of a man's
own heart: And of this Believers would be sensible, not only of their
sinfulness in general, and of their particular acts of sin, but of their
peculiar sinful acts, and that for these ends or uses.

1. It serves deeply to humble, and to press forth (to speak so) Repentance;
When we consider our own way to be sinful beyond others, and that such and such
a man has sinned, but his sin has not such aggravations as mine, this makes
the Soul to blush, and to say as it is Psalm. 40.12. Innumerable evils have
compass^d me about, mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not
able to look up, they are more then the hairs of mine head, therefore my heart
fails me; he wonders at himself how a man can be so given to sin, and every
day to add one new sinful step to another, and never to weary and give over;
this makes him to blush and to be ashamed, as it is Ezekiel. 16.63. the
remembering of common sins and of this and that particular act of sin, will not
so aff^ct this; but when a sinner remembers that such a sin has been his own
way, that humbles and stops his mouth exceedingly.

2. This adds a peculiarness to the Grace of God in the Believers esteem, and
makes it so much the more amiable and admirable to him, as it is with Paul
when he says 1 Timothy 1.13. I was a blasphemer, and a persecuter, and injurious,
nevertheless I obtained mercy, and the grace of God was exceeding abundant
toward me. This is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus
Christ came in the world to save sinners, of whom I am the chief, howbeit for
this cause I obtained mercy, that in me he might show forth all long suffering,
for a pattern to them that should hereafter believe on him: I was, as if he had
said, singular in sinning, but Grace was eminent and singular in showing Mercy,
and has cast a Copy thereof in me that is singularly eminent; The peculiarness
of Believers sin, as it makes them know the aggravations of it beyond others,
so it makes them exalt Grace the more.

3. It serves someway to discriminat a sound Believer from a Hypocrite, and a
right sight of Sin from that which is not so: It is not so much to know that we
are sinners, for the light of a Natural Conscience will tell men that,
especially when their Lives are so bad; but its more to know, and rightly to
take up the peculiarness that is in our own way of sinning, to take up the many
windings and turnings of the deceitful heart in following of such a sin that it
is addicted to; This makes a Believer think that there is no bodies heart like
his: We see ordinarily that but very few, if any natural men, will take kindl^
with the peculiarness of their way of sinning, and even when they will take
with this that they are sinners in general, yet they shun to take with it that
they are given to such a sinful way of their own; and with the particular
turnings, windings, and traversings of their own hearts to that way; But few
will grant that they are given to despising or slighting of Christ, to
Hypocrisy, Self seeking, Lying, etc. I will not be peremptory here, to say
that every body must know what is their own one peculiar sinful way; For some
see so many predominant sins in themselves, that hardly can they pitch upon one
by another: nor upon the other side will I positively say that they are all
gracious that see one sin by another to carry sway in them; But this I say,
that this contributes much for the humbling of the sinner, and for the exalting
of free Grace; And that the Believer will see many windings and turnings in and
to their own way, that others who are not Believers will not see, and will see
one predominant after another; Whereas a natural man, though he complementingly
call himself the chief of sinners, yet he does not really think himself to be
such; But rather if he be given to Drunkenness, to Filthiness, or the like, he
will readily cast up David and Lot, or some others of the Saints to excuse or
extenuat it, but the Believer can get none to compare himself with in the point
of sinfulness, Iniquities prevail over me, says David in the Singular Number,
but when he speaks of the pardoning and purging away of sin, he speaks in the
Plural, associating others with himself, As for our transgressions thou shall
purge them away, Psalm. 65. verse. 3.

4. Considering our sinful way as the occasion of this transaction, and of the
laying of our iniquities upon Christ, as the result of it, we have this sweet
Observation, that the Elect are considered in the Covenant of Redemption as
foully and vilely sinful, and with all the aggravations of their sins and
sinful ways; so that they cannot be fouller and more vile in time then they
were considered to be when they were given to Christ to be satisfied for by
him; How were ^hey then considered? The Text tells us even as straying sheep;
But that is not all, they are considered as such who have had their own
peculiar way of straying from God, and have turned aside to, and run on in
their own sinful way; Thus the Lord considered the Elect in the Covenant of
Redemption, thus Jesus Christ considered them in the undertaking for them, even
with all the several aggravations of their sinfulness, so that they are not,
nor cannot be worse in time then they were considered to be before time: This
is so ordered by the Lord for these ends, 1. That Justice might be distinctly,
exactly, and fully satisfied, and that it might be known that it is so, he
would needs be restored to his honor, to his declarative, or manifested honor
and glory, which suffered by man's fall, and by the many great and variously
aggravated sins of the Elect, and would have his Justice, as I said, fully
satisfied: And therefore as there is a Volumn of a Book, wherein all the Elect
are written for whom Christ should satisfy, so there is a Volumn of what, and
for what he should satisfy that there may be a proportional satisfaction and
price told down to Justice. 2. Believers may have a more full view of the way
of Grace, and of Christ's undertaking for them; When Jesus Christ undertook our
debt, he had a full view of the sum he was to pay, he knew what he had to pay
to the least farthing, and what his peoples sins would cost him, and yet he
sk^rred not to engage to satisfy, but did satisfy according to his engagement
to the full. 3. It Is also ordered so for this end, even to confirm the
Believers Faith when he comes to take hold of Christ, and of the Covenant, and
when this O^jection mutters within him, dare such a sinful wretch as I take
hold of Christ, who have been thus and thus polluted with sin? Yes, says the
Text, for these sins so and so aggravated, were not unknown to the Father, nor
to the Mediator when thou wast bargained about; Nay, these sins with their
aggravations were expressly considered in the Covenant of Redemption, and there
is no sin already committed; or to be committed by thee in time, that was not
considered before time: What was your posture, Believers, when God passed by,
and cast the lap or skirt of his love over you? Were you not cast out in the
open field, wallowing in your own blood, with your navels uncut, having no eye
to pity you, etc. As it is, Ezekiel. 16. And wherefore I pray is this set down?
But as to let you know that ye are no worse in time then ye were considered to
be before ye had a being; So, to aggrege the Love and Grace of God in Christ,
and to draw you in to him, that since God and Christ the Mediator in the
transaction about your Redemption, stood not on your sinfulness, ye may not
stand on it when seriously taken with, but may submit to his Righteousness, and
say, Be it so Lord, I am content to take what thou freely offerest; And the
more sinful and lost ye be in your selves when suitably affected therewith, the
more wonderful is the grace of God in the Plot of your Redemption, the more
strong is your consolation, and the greater ground of believing have ye; your
sins do not surprise God nor the Mediator, the Bargain was made before your
sins were committed, and therefore the price must reach them even when they are
all summed up together; He was content to accept of them so as to satisfy for
them, and blessed be he for evermore that accepted of the bargain, and paid
the price according to his undertaking.

SERMON XXVI.
ISAIAH LIII.VI. Verse. 6. All we like sheep have gone astray, we have turned
every one to his own way, and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all.


IN the former verse the Prophet has asserted three most wonderful truths, and
very concerning to the people of God, and yet such truths as will not be easy
got digested by natural reason. 1. That our Lord Jesus was put to sore and sad
sufferings, He was wounded and bruised, etc. 2. That these sad sufferings were
for us the Elect; it was for our sins, and what was due to the Elect, he was
made to bear them, He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for
our iniquities. 3. The end of these sufferings, or the effect that followed on
them to us, pardon of sin, peace with God, and healing, The chastisement of our
peace was on him, and by his stripes we are healed.

And each of these being more wonderful then another, therefore the Prophet
goes on to clear their rise, which is no less wonderful; How it came to pass
that he suffered, and suffered so much, and that we have such benefit by his
sufferings; It could not (would he say) be otherwise, but it behoved our Lord
Jesus to suffer, and to suffer so much, and for us; Neitheir was it
unreasonable that it should be for our benefit, For we had all like lost sheep
gone astray, and every one of us had turned to his own way: And there was no
way of relief for us but by Christ's stepping into our room, and interposing
for us, and engaging to pay our debt; and by virtue of that interposition and
bargain, The Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all: And therefore, 1.
Would ye have the reason of Christ's so great sufferings? Here it is, the Elect
had many sins, and he interposing for them, their count was scored-out, and
they were reckoned on his score. 2. If the cause and reason be asked, How it
came to pass tha^ Christ suffered so much for us? Here it is, he undertook to
satisfy for our iniquities, and God imputed them to him; Even as if a Dyvour
were pursued, and one should step in and be Cautioner for him, and being
enacted Surety, should take on, and become liable for the Debt; The exacting it
of him is the laying it on him. But 3. If it be asked how it comes to pass that
his sufferings become our healing, and bring peace to us? It is answered, it
was so transacted and agreed upon; He was content to pay all our debt, and the
Father accepted of his payment for ours; Our blessed Lord Jesus engaging and
satisfying, the Elect are set free, and Justice betaketh it self to him as the
more responsal Party; This is the scope of the words, which though but few, yet
exceeding full and sign^ficant, as holding out the fountain and fundamental
grounds of the Gospel: We shall look upon them in these three respects, 1. As
they imply a Covenant and Transaction, whereby the Elects sins are transacted
on Christ, and his righteousness is made application of to them; Christ
undertaking to pay their debt, and Jehovah accepting thereof, and promising
that his satisfaction made for the behove of the Elect, shall be applied to
them. 2. In respect of the effects, which are two; Which though they seem
contrary, the one to the other, yet they are well consistent together, and
subordinat the one of them to the other; The 1. is of Justice on Christ's side,
he satisfies for the debt due by the Elect. The 2. is of Mercy and Grace to the
Elect, which is also employed, but comparing these words with the former, it is
very clear; He is wounded and bruised, and they are healed, the chastisement of
their peace was on him, the imputing of their debt to him, makes that it is not
imputed to them. 3. In respect of the influence that the eternal Covenant has
on these effects, it lays down the way how these may be justly brought about,
which is the scope of all, even to show how Christ Jesus being the innocent Son
of God, and without sin, was made liable to the debt of the Elects sin; He
became Cautioner for them, and is made liable on that account to satisfy for
them; It clears also how his sufferings stood for theirs; which may seem to be
unreasonable and unjust among men, that the sufferings of an innocent party
should stand for the guilty; It was so articled in the Covenant of Redemption
that the Son as Mediator interposing and undertaking to pay the Elects debt,
the Lord Jehovah the Creditor, should not reckon it on their score, but on the
Mediators, and that he should count for it: The Prophet in every verse almost,
is striking on the sweet and pleasant string of this noble plot and contrivance
of God conc^rning the Redemption of Elect sinners, called the Covenant of
Redemption; Which these words considered with respect to their scope, do in all
the parts of it clearly hold out; And therefore the clearing of it being the
clearing of a main ground of our Faith in reference to Christ's sufferings, and
to the way how they are made forthcoming to us, and withal to the benefits
that come by them to us, we cannot speak too much nor too often of it, if we
could speak of it suitably to the passing excellency of the matter.

The first Doctrine supposed here is, that there is an eternal Covenant and
Transaction betwixt the Lord Jehovah and the Mediator, wherein the whole
business concerning the Redemption and Salvation of the Elect is c^ntrived;
There is an eternal Covenant past betwixt God and the M^diator, wherein all
that is executed, or will be, concerning the Elect till the day of Judgment,
was contrived; There is nothing relating to the Elects Salvation, but it was in
this Transaction exactly contrived and laid down, even as it is in time
executed; And it is called a Covenant in Scrip ure, and we call it so, not
strictly and properly, as if all things in Covenan^s among men were in it, but
because materially and substantially it is so, and the resemblance will hold
for the most part; The Lord having laid down in it the plot of man's Salvation
in a legal way, so as his grace and mercy may be glorified, and his justice
satisfied, has put it in this form so as it may bear the name of a Covenant.
Wherein we have, 1. Mutual Parties, the Lord Jehovah the Party offended on the
one side, and the Lord Mediator, Him, the Party engaging to satisfy on the
other side; Which shows the freeness of the Redemption of the Elect as to them,
and the certainty of their Salvation; And withal, the immutability of Gods
purpose, for the Parties are not mutable Creatures, but on the one side
Jehovah, and on the other side the Mediator, though considered as to be
Incarnat and the Head of the Elect; This whole business bred there, to wit in
the Council of the Godhead, for promoving of that great end, the glorifying of
the Grace and Justice of God in the Elects Salvation. 2. Whereabout is it? It Is
about this matter, how to get the Elect saved from the curse, to which on their
foreseen fall and sinning they were made liable; Redemption necessarily
presupposing man's fall and the Covenant of Works, to which the certification
and threatening was added, The soul that sins shall die, and the Elect
presupposed as fallen as well as others, are liable to that curse, except a
satisfacton for them do interveen; So that the Elect are considered as having
sins, and as being in themselves lost: And what is the Lord Jehovah and the
Mediator doing, what are they about in this Covenant? It Is how to get the
punishment due to the Elect for their sin removed from them: And these persons
us all in the Text, are all the Elect, wherein there is imlyed a paticular
consideration of them that are designed to Life and Salvation, and a particular
consideration of all their sins, and of their several aggravations, that there
may be a proportion betwixt the price and the wrong that God has gotten by
their sinning against him. 3. The occasion of this Covenant, and the reason why
it behoved to be, is holden forth in the first, All we like sheep had gone
astray, and turned every one of us to his own way; The Elect as well as othe^s
had made themselves through their sinning liable to Gods wrath and curse, and
they were incapable of Life and Salvation till the curse was removed; And so
there is a let and obstruction in the way of the execution of the Decree of
Election (which must stand for the Glorification of God's Grace and Mercy,
primarly intended in all this work) and till this let be removed, the
Glorification of God's Grace is let and obstructed; For the removal of which
obstruction there is a necessity of a Redeemer, for the Elect are not able to
pay their own debt themselves; Now that there may be a Redeemer, and that a
price of Redemption may be laid down, there is also a necessity of a Covenant,
otherwise the Redeemer cannot be, if a Transaction do not preceed, on which the
Redeemers interposing is founded. 4. What is the price, what is the
stipulation, or that which the Mediator is engaged to, and that which provoked
Justice required? It is even satisfaction for all the wrongs that the sins of
the Elect did or were to do to the Majesty of God; These sins deserved wounding
and smiting, and the Capitulation runs on this, that Justice shall get that of
the Mediator, that the Elect may be spared; And comparing this verse with the
former, upon the one side our Lord Jesus gives his back to bear their burden,
and engages to satisfy for their debt, and to undergo the punishment due to
them; And upon the other side Jehovah accepts of this offer and engagement, and
lays over the burden of their debt on him; As the Mediator instates and inacts
himself in their room for payment of their debt, so he lays it on him, and
accepts of it. 5. The end of this great Transaction, to wit, of the undertaking
on the Mediators side, and of the acceptance on the Fathers side, is, that the
Elect may have pardon and peace, and that by his stripes they may be healed;
That Justice may spare them and pursue him, and that the discharge of the debt
purchased by him, may be made forthcoming to them, as if they had paid the
debt themselves, or had never been owing any thing to Justice.

Hence Deductions may be made holding forth several points of truth, As, 1.
Concerning the determinatness of the number of the Elect. 2. Concerning the
virtue and efficacy of the price which the Mediator has paid, and the fullness
of his Satisfaction. 3. Concerning imputed Righteousne^^, which is or may be
called the laying of his Righteousness on us as our Iniquity was laid on him;
he is counted the Sinner by undertaking our Debt, and the Elect by receiving
the offered Righteousness in the Gospel, are accounted righteous by virtue of
his satisfying for their Debt. 4. Concerning the ground and matter of wonderful
Soul satisfaction and ravishment that it is here; that God should be thus
minding the salvation of the Elect, and thus contriving and ordering the work
of their Redemption, that their Debt shall be paid, and yet nothing (to speak
so) come out of their Purse; and that by so excellent a mean as is the
intervention of the Mediator, and that this shall notwithstanding of the dear
price paid by him, be made freely forthcoming to the Elect.

Use 1. O! Look not on the salvation of Sinners, and the bringing of a Sinner
to Heaven, as a little or a light business and work; it is the greatest work and
most wonderful that ever was heard tell of; yea its in effect the end of all
things which God has made, and of his preserving and guiding the World in the
order wherein it is governed, even that he may have a Church therein for the
praise of the glory of his Grace; we are exceeding far and sinfull^ wrong in
this, that we value not the work of Redemption as becomes, and that we
endeavor not to pry unto, and take up the admirable love an^ deep wisdom of
God that goes along and shines brightly in this whole contexture; who could
ever have found out this way? when he Elect were lying under Gods Curse and
Wrath, that then the Son of God should undertake to satisfy for them, and that
the Majesty of God should be so far from all partiality and respect of Persons,
that he will pursue his own dear Son for the Elects Debt when he undertakes it;
This is the rise of our Salvation and the channel wherein it runs; O! rare and
ravishing, O! admirable and amiable, O! beautiful and beneficial contrivance,
blessed, eternally blessed be the contriver.

Use 2. The second Use serves to stir us up to study to know somewhat, and to
know more of the way of Salvation under this notion of God's covenanting with
the Mediator; not thereby to astrict God to man's laws and forms, but for
helping us to the better and more easy up-taking of these great things; and
that we may see that the salvation of the Elect is sure, forasmuch as it it
laid down by way of Bargain, Transa^^ion or Covenant betwixt Jehovah and the
Mediator, whom the Lord will no more fail in performing the promises made to
him, then he has failed in giving the satisfaction required: This would help
both to clear and confirm the faith of Believers, and to strengthen the hope of
all who are fled for refuge to take hold of him, in the certain expectation of
these things engaged for in the Covenant; seeing there is no less reason to
think that Jehovah will be forthcoming to the Mediator, then there is to think
that he has performed all that he engaged himself for.

The 2d. thing here, Is the native effect or fruit of the Covenant, and that
which the Prophet aims at; even to show how it came to pass that Christ
suffered so much, because it was so covenanted, statute and ordained, because
he was by a prior contrivance and contract substituted with his own hearty
consent in the room of the Elect who had many and great sins to count for;
whence ^bserve, That by virtue of this eternal Covenant betwixt Jehovah and the
Mediator, all the sins of the Elect with their several aggravations, are
imputed to Jesus Christ, and reckoned upon his score; Or take it thus, by this
eternal Covenant that past betwixt God and the Mediator, the complete
punishment that was due to all the Elect for their sins in their greatest
aggravations, was laid upon Jesus Christ; Jehovah laid upon him the iniquity of
us all; this is frequently touched on in this Chapter, as particularly in the
words going before, He carried our sorrows, he was wounded for our
transgressions and bruised for our iniquities, etc. and it is sufficiently
confirmed in the New Testament, as 2 Cor. 5. He who knew no sin was made sin
for us; he had no sin in himself, but by virtue of this Covenant, he was made
the Sacrifice for our sin, and made to bear the punishment thereof; and Gal.
3.13. He has redeemed us from the curse of the law, he himself being made a
curse for us.

There are two words which we shall a little clear in this Doctrine; and
secondly, give some reasons of it; and then thirdly, we shall speak to some
Uses from it.

1. For the two words or things in the Doctrine to be cleared, they are these,
First, What we mean by this, when we s^y iniquity is laid upon Christ; the
second is, How it is laid upon Christ? As to the first, When we say in^quity is
laid upon Christ, we mean these things shortly, 1. That our Lord Jesus is
really made comptable and liable to Justice for these iniquiti^s as if they had
been his own, by virtue of his Covenant; in Gods Justice he having engaged to
pay Elects Debt, his engagement makes him liable to it. 2. We mean that's not
only our Lord Jesus is made liable to our Debt, but that really he is made to
satisfy for it,; In short, we have done the wrong, but he makes the amends as
if he had done the wrong himself, The just satisfied for the unjust; He in
whose mouth there was no guile, was made to satisfy for guilty Sinners as if
he had been the guilty person himself; By the sins of the Elect God's
declarative Holiness suffered; Creatures malapertly brake his Command, and his
Justice was wronged; Creatures topped with it, to say so, and that even after
the Curse was pronounced, and after they had believed the Devil more than God;
But our Lord Jesus comes in to make the amends, and the Holiness of God is
vindicate by his obedience, and his Justice is vindicate by his suffering; the
Elect have deserved wounding, but says the Mediator, let the wounds which they
have deserved come on me, let them be mine; and thus he makes reparation of the
wrong and the amend, because though the Elect be spared, yet hereby the Lord is
known to be as really and as much a hater of sin, and as just in fulfilling his
threatening, as if the Elect had been smitten in their own persons; because he
punished Sin in his own Son; yea by this means he is seen so much the more to
be holy, severe, pure and spotless; and that the Son of God sweetly submits to
his becoming Man; and to these terrible Sufferings for satisfying Divi^^
Justice; Here, O! here the spotless and severity of the Justice of God, as also
the greatness of the glory of the free Grace and Love shine forth
conspicuously. 3. It implies this, That really there was a conventing and
turning of that Wrath and of these sufferings proportionably on Jesus Christ,
which Justice was to have inflicted on the Elect eternally if he had not
interposed for them; and that altogether in a full Cup propined to him and put
in his hand; that which would have been in so many drops an eternal Hell to
Elect Sinners, is made to meet on him in one great Sea; He gets it to drink up
dregs and all; in which respect Gal. 3.13. He is said to be made a curse for
us; The Lord will not pass from one Farthing of what was due to him, and will
be satisfied with no less than proportionable satisfaction to that which was
due to Justice by the Elect themselves, though the Surety was his own only Son;
Therefore it behoved Christ to come under the Curse, in which sense he is said
to be made a curse for us, which supposes that he endured the same curse and
punishment due to the Elects sins in all the essentials of it; He behoved to
die, and to have his Soul separate from his Body for a time, and for a season
to want in a great measure the comfortable manifestations of Gods favor and
presence, and to have wrath pursuing him, and to have horror seizing upon him;
though our blessed Lord being spotless and without sin, and having a good
Conscience, was not capable of these some way accidental circumstances, of
Unbelief, sinful Anxiety and Desperation, that sinful finite Creatures are
liable to when they come under wrath.

The 2d. word or thing to be cleared in the Doctrine, is, How are Iniquities
laid upon Christ Jesus? In three respects, 1. In respect of the eternal
Transaction betwixt Jehovah and him as Mediator sustaining the person of the
Elect; even as one man has another Debt laid on him, when by a Law-sentence
he is made liable to it; so is Christ made liable to the Elects iniquity, when
their account is blotted out, and the Debt as it were written down in his
account to be satisfied for. 2. In respect of Justice pursuing him for it; When
he becomes Cautioner and full Debtor for the Elect, he is put to pay their
Debt to the least Farthing; the Lord musters up against him his terrors, and
commands his sword to awake and to smite the man that is his fellow. But 3ly.
and mainly. In respect of his actual undergoing the Curse and Suffering, that
which the Elect should h ve suffered; for It is not the work of a Court to pass
a sentence, but also to see to the execution of the sentence; not only are
orders given to the sword to awake and smite, but the sword falls on and smites
him actually; and though from the apprehension of the anger of God, as Man, and
without the sensible and comforting manifestation of his Fathers love, and his
seemingly forsaking him for a time; He prayed, Father if it be possible, let
this cup pass from me; yet it will not be, and he submits most sweetly to it;
and not only is the cup put in his hand, but the dregs of wrath are, as it
were, wrung out into it, and he must needs drink it up all; which manifestly
kythes in his agony in the garden when he is made to sweat blood; and in his
complaint (if we may so call it) My soul is exceeding sorrowful, and what shall
I say? and in these strange words uttered by him on the Cross, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? all which tell us plainly, that not only was he
enacted Sure^y, and had the sentence past on him, but that really he satisfied,
and had the sentence executed on him; that in his Soul he was really pierced
and wounded, and that with far deeper wounds then these were which the
Soldiers by the spear and nails made in his Body; before the Elects discharge
of their Debt could be procured and obtained: What it was more particularly
that he suffered, the following words hold out: But here it is clear, that he
suffered really, and suffered much; that not only he undertook to pay, but that
he was actually pursued and made to lay down to the least Farthing whatever was
due to Justice by the Elect: And this is the cause why these words are brought
in as the reason why he suffered so much, even because so many and so great
sins with all their aggravations were laid upon him; and if his sufferings were
not great and undergone for this end, to satisfy for the Elects Debt that they
might be set free, the Prophets scope would not be reached, neither would there
be a suitable connection betwixt the latter and the foregoing words.

As for the 2d. To wit some Reasons of the Doctrine, we shall shortly give you
these three why the Elects sins were laid on Christ and put on his account, and
why he was made to underly the complete punishment of them by virtue of the
Covenant of Redemption. 1. Because it did much contribute to the glory of God,
for he had designed in his eternal Council that his Grace should be glorified
in the salvation of the Elect; and that his Justice should also be glorified in
punishing of sin either in themselves or in their Cautioner; and as free Grace
and Mercy must be glorious in saving the Elect, and Justice in being satisfied
for their sins; so it is to that end, that since the Elect cannot pay their own
Debt, that their Cautioner pay it, and pay it fully, that the Lord in exacting
satisfaction from him in their name, may be known to be just. 2. This way makes
much for the confirmation of the Faith of the believing Elect and for their
consolation; for the confirmation of their Faith, for what can Justice demand
that it has not gotten? it is fully satisfied; and then for their consolation;
seeing the Father put his own Son to suffer, and to so great suffering for them,
what is it that they may not confidently expect from such a Fountain? 3. This
serves to hold out the wonderful great obligation of the Elect to God and to
the Mediator; for the greater their sin was the more he suffered; the greater
their Debt was, the more he paid; and they are the more in his common and the
greater Debtors to him; and ought the more to love him, and their duty for his
sake; as it is said of the woman, Luke 7. She loved much for much was forgiven
her; so this way of paying the Elects Debt, calls and strongly pleads, and also
makes way for much warm and tender love in them to Jesus Christ.

In the 3d. place, We come to the Uses of the Doctrine; To which I shall premit
this word of desire to you, That ye would not look on these things as tasteless
or unsavory; for had we not had these precious truths to open up to you, we
should have had no meetings to this purpose, no ground to speak of life to you,
nor any the least hope or expectation of life; And indeed it may be sadly
regrated, that amongst a multitude of professing People, these substantial
truths of the Gospel are so wersh and little relishing to the most part; which
too evidently appears in the unconcerned, wearying, and gazing posture of some,
and in the slumbering and sleeping of others in our public Assemblies; If our
hearts were in a right frame, half a word, to say so, to this purpose would be
a wakening and allaruming to us; However this is a great privilege in it self;
Heathens may and do know something of moral duties, but it is a privilege which
we have and they want, that the fundamental truths of the Gospel are amongst us
and not amongst them.

The 1. Use serves to let us see the brightness of the Glory of Grace and
Truth; of Mercy and Justice shining clearly here; Can there be any greater
mercy, and more pure mercy than this, that the Lord should be gracious to
sinners, and to great sinners, rhat had turned every one of them to their own
way, in providing a Mediator, and such a Mediator, in providing such a help for
them, and laying that help upon one that is mighty, and that he should have
done this of his own head (so to speak with reverence) when the Elect were in
their sins, and when th^re was nothing to be the impulsive or meritorious cause
of it; And that the Father should have laid this weight of punishment on Christ
the Son of his love, and pursued him at this rate of holy severity for sinners
debt? O! what grace and mercy shines here? And 2. The spotless Justice of God
does also here wonderfully manifest it self; O! How exact is Justice, when it
will not quite a farthing even to the second Person of the Godhead, when he
became Man, and man's Surety? But since he has put himself in the room of
sinners, The L^ed makes all their iniquities to meet on him; This is matter of
admiration to Men and Angels, to consider how Justice and Mercy run in one
Channel, and shine in one Covenant, the one of them not incroaching upon the
other.

Use 2. We may gather from this same insight and clearness in the very great
sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ; For these things are here put together, 1.
That he suffered for all the Elect, Us all. 2. For all the sins of all the
Elect, and for all the sins of all the Elect in their highest and most
aggravating circumstances, the particular reckoning of them all, as it were,
being cast up, they are all put on his score. 3. All these meet togcther in a
great Sea and shock upon him at one time, as they came from several Airts, like
so many Rivers; Or they were like so many Regiments, or rather Armies of men,
all meeting together and Marshalled, to fall pell mell (to say so) on him; One
sin were enough to condemn, the many sins of one is more, but all the sins of
all the Elect is much more; They deserved to have lain in Hell eternally, but
he coming in their room all their sins met as the violent preass of Waters on
him; What then behoved his sufferings to be, when he was so put to it for all
the sins of all the Elect, and that at once?

Use 3. We may gather hence a just account of the truth of Christ's
satisfaction, and a ground of refutation of the Socinian error, a blasphemy
which is most abominable to be once mentioned, as if our Lord had suffered all
this only to give us an example, and as if there had not been a proportionable
satisfaction in his sufferings to our debt, nor an intention to satisfy
Justice thereby: Every verse almost, not to say every word in this Chapter
refutes this; If he had not satisfied for our sins, why is he said to be here
on the matter put in our room? And if his sufferings had not been very great,
what needed the Prophet to show the reason of his great sufferings, in all the
sins of all the Elect their meeting on him? There was sure a particular respect
had to this, even to show that the meeting of all these sins of all the Elect
together upon Christ, did cause and procure great and extreme sufferings to
him; He suffered the more that they had had so many sins, seeing their many sins
are given for the cause of his so much suffering.

Use 4. Here is great ground of consolation to believing sinners, Out of this
eater comes meat, and out of this strong comes sweet; The more sharp and bitter
these sufferings were to Christ, the report of them is in some respect the more
savoury and sweet to the Believer, whose effectual Calling discovers his
Election; And indeed I cannot tell how many grounds of consolation Believers
have from this Doctrine; But 1. If they have sinned, there is here a Savior
provided for them. 2. This Savior has undertaken their debt. 3. He has
undertaken it with the Fathers allowance. 4. As he has undertaken it, so the
Father has laid on him all their iniquity. 5. All the Elect come in here
together in one Roll, and there is but one Covenant, and one Mediator for them
all; The sin of the poor body, of the weakest and meanest, is transacted on
him, as well as the sin of Abraham that great friend of God, and Father of the
Faithful, and the Salvation of the one is as sure as the Salvation of the
other; All Believers from the strongest to the weakest have but one Right of
Charter to Heaven, but one holding of the Inheritance. 6. The Lord has laid on
him all the iniquities of all the Elect with a particular respect to all their
aggravations, and to all the several ways that they have turned to sin; Their
Original sin, and all their actual transgressions, with their particular
predominants, as to their punishment; And there is reason for it, because the
Elect could not satisfy for the least sin; And it is necessary for the
glorifying of Grace, that the Glory of the work of their Salvation be not
halfed, but solely and singlely ascribed and given to God, therefore the
satisfaction comes all on the Mediators account, and none of it on theirs. 7.
All this is really done and performed by the Mediator without any suit or
request of the Elect, or of the Believer, at least as the procuring cause
thereof; He buys and purchases what is needful for them, and pays for their
discharge; And they have no more to do, but to call for an extract, and to take
a sealed remission by his blood: The application whereof, the Uses that follow
will give occasion to speak to.

Use 5. Since it is so, then none would think little of sin; which checks the
great presumption that is amongst men and women, who think little and light of
sin, and that it is an easy matter to come by the pardon of it; They think
there is no more to do but barely and ba^chly to confess they have sinned, and
to say, God is merciful, and hence they conclude that God will not reckon with
them: But, did he reckon with the Mediator, and that so holily rigidly and
severely too, and will he, think ye, spare you? If he dealt so with the green
tree, what will become of the dry? Be not deceived, God will not be mocked.

And therefore 6ly, As the close of all, see here the absolute necessity of
sharing in Christ's satisfaction, and of having an interest therein by this
Covenant derived unto you, else know that ye must count for your own sins; And
if so, woe eternally to you; Therefore either betake your selves to the
Mediator, that by his Eye Salve ye may see, that by his Gold ye may be
enriched, that by his Garments ye may be clothed, that the shame of your
nakedness do not appear; And that ye may, by being justified by his knowledge,
be free from the wrath to come, or otherwise ye must and shall ly under it for
ever.

Thus ye have the fullness of Gods Covenant on the one side, and the weightiness
and terribleness of Gods wrath on the other side laid before you; If ye knew
what a fearful thing his wrath were, ye would be glad at your hearts to hear of
a Savior, and every one would run and make haste to be found in him, and to
share of his satisfaction, and to be sure of a discharge by virtue of his
payment of the debt, and they would give all diligence to make sure their
Calling and Election; For that end the Lord himself powerfully persuade you to
do so.

SERMON XXVII.
ISAIAH LIII.VII. Verse. 7. He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he
opened not his mouth; He is brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a Sheep
before her shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth.


THough the news of a suffering Mediator seem to be a sad subject, yet it has
been, is, and will be, the great Subject of the Gospel, and of the gladest
tidings that ever sinners heard; This being the great thing that they ought in
a special manner to know, even Jesus Christ and him crucified; The Prophet here
takes a special delight to insist on it, and in one verse after another has
some new thing of his suffering.

Having in the former verse spoken to the occasion, ground and rise of his
sufferings, to wit, the Elects straying like sheep, their wandering and turning
every one to their own way, and the Lord's laying on him the iniquity of them
all; The Elect that were given to Christ, being naturally at enmity with God,
and having run on in the course of their sinful nature to the provoking God;
And there being no way for them to escape the wrath which by their sin they had
deserved, till the Lord found out this mids, to wit, the second Person
interposing as their Mediator and Surety, and ingageing to pay their debt; On
which followed the imputing of all their iniquities to him, according to the
transaction made about them; Which transaction being laid down as we have
heard, the Prophet proceeds to show Christ's executing and performing of the
transaction; And because it might be thought that it was so great matter as
could not but have much sad and sore suffering following upon it, to take on
all our iniquities; He answers, that notwithstanding of all that, yet he took
them on, and that very willingly and cheerfully; Or because it might be thought
that the former words look as if God had laid the punishment of our iniquity on
him, and that he had not taken it on himself, the Prophet tells us that it is
nothing so, but that there was a mutual Covenant betwixt God and the Mediator,
and that the Mediator was as well content to bear the iniquity of the Elect as
the Father was content to lay it on him; And that though he was exacted upon,
oppressed, afflicted, and suffered sad strokes, yet he rewed not the bargain,
but went on resolutely in paying the ransom of the Elect as singly as ever a
sheep went to the slaughter, or as it is dumb before the shearer, so he opened
not his mouth to speak against it.

There are three things asserted here that serve to make up the scope,
supposing the transaction to have gone before, 1. The Fathers exacting the
Elects debt of the Mediator. 2. The Mediators yielding and satisfying. 3. The
manner how he did it, willingly, readily and cheerfully. We shall first open
the words a little, and then speak to some Doctrines from them, reserving the
Uses to the close of all.

1. Where it is said, He was oppressed, the word signifies; to exact; And we
find it three ways applied in Scripture, 1. To the exacting of Tribute, as 2
King. 23.33. Where it is said, That Pharaoh Necho who put the land to a tribute
of an hundred talents of silver, and a talent of gold, it is the same word that
is here. 2. Sometimes it is applied to the exacting of debts; As when a man is
put to the Horn, and Caption and Imprisonment follows upon it; So Deuteronomy. 15.2.
When the Lord tells his people, that the creditor shall not exact of his
neighbor, or of his brother, in the year of release. 3. It Is applied to the
exacting of labor, as Isai. 58 3. ye exact all your labor; And Exodus 1.11.
The word Task masters comes from the same root; This being the ordinary
signification of the word, it is turned here oppressing figuratively because
such Exacters and Task masters in their rigorous usage of these whom they exact
upon, are often oppressive; And there being no Noun prefixed to the words in
the Original, they may stand as well thus, It was exacted of him; That which he
was engaged to pay, he was fully exacted upon for it, to the least farthing; Or
take the words as they stand here, he was oppressed, that is (as we use to
speak) stressed or distressed for our debt; He was not only engaged, but
according to his engagement was put hard to it, to satisfy. 2. It is said, He
was afflicted, which is sometimes rendered to answer; And these two agree very
well together, he was exacted upon and he answered the debt; As when a Bill of
Exchange for such a Sum is drawn upon a man, and he answers it; And this
Exposition runs well and smoothly with the words following, Yet he opened not
his mouth; He used no defense to elude or shift the debt: He said not that it
was not his, but he answered it indeed, and in a word said nothing to the
contrary; Or taking the words as here they stand translated, He was afflicted,
they signify the effect that follows on his being exacted upon; Though it
brake him not, yet it brought him very low, even to an afflicted condition. The
3. thing is, that though he was brought thus low, and though it was not for his
own but for other folks debt (which usually troubles men most) Yet he opened
not his mouth; to show his wonderful condescendency, and the great love from
which it flows; He paid the Elects debt with as good will, and as pleasantly
as if it had been his own proper and personal debt; Though he was the Son of
God, and God equal with the Father, and might have brought Legions of Angels to
destroy his enemies, yet as the lambs brought to the slaughter, and as the
sheep before the shearer is dumb, so he opened not his mouth; And it may be
that there is not only here relation or respect had to the sheep as it is an
innocent, harmless, simple tractable creature, and not untoward and refractory
as a Bull or ox uses to be; But also respect had to it as it was made use of
in the S^crifices; And so the meaning is, he yielded his life willingly when
none could take it from him, for performing the Indentor, to say so, and for
satisfying the transaction past betwixt Jehovah and him.

So, having shown how it comes to pass that Christ suffered and suffered so
much, and was brought so low under suffering; And having told that he was
engaged to pay the Elects debt, and that the Father had laid their iniquities
on him; Lest any might think that the Father would have spared his own Son, no,
says the Prophet, He was oppressed, and not only so, but afflicted and
humbled; And lest it should have been thought that the Lord Jehavah had better
will to the bargain than the Mediator had; It is added, that he did satisfy
the debt as willingly as the Father laid it on him, as these similitudes made
use of, plainly hold forth.

Take these Observations from the words, 1. That our Lord Jesus having entered
himself Surety for sinners, he was really put at, and Justice exacted the debt
of him which he had undertaken and engaged to pay: Read the whole story of the
Gospel, and it will make out this; It Is said by himself, Luke 24. It behoved
the Son of Man to suffer these things, and then to enter into his glory; He
must needs go to Jerusalem and suffer; And when the Cup is in his hand, and his
Holy Humane Nature, having a sinless scaring at it, makes him pray, Father, if
it be possible, let this cup pass from me; Yet seeing here was a necessity that
either he should drink it, or that the Elect should perish; In the very next
words, he sweetly subjoyns, Not my will but thy will be done; And so hotly and
hardly was he pursued by Justice, that he must needs come to the cursed death
of the Cross, and actually die; And as if death had gotten a piece of dominion
over the Lord of Life, he is laid in the grave; So Zech. 13. the Lord says,
Awake, O sword, against my shepherd, and against the man that is my fellow,
smite the shepherd; Where we see, that when the good Shepherd and great Bishop
of Souls, has undertaken for the Elects debt, Justice gives a Commission as it
were to its own holy revenge, to pursue the man that is God's fellow for that
debt: That which we design to confirm in the Doctrine, is not only, that our
Lord Jesus suffered, but that his suffering was by Justice it is exacting of him
the debt of the Elects sin, according to the engagement that he came under to
the Father; For the scope is to show, not only that he suffered so great things
as oppressed and brought him very low; But also that he was put at by Justice
in these sad sufferings, to pay the debt that he had taken on: For confirming
and clearing of this a little, ye may consider 1. The Titles which he gets in
Scripture, he is called the Cautioner or Surety of the better Testament or
Covenant, Heb. 7.22. And by that Title he is showed to be instated in our room,
and answerable for our debt; And he is called the Lamb that takes away the debt
of our sin by the sacrifice of himself; He steped in into our place, and kept
off the stroke of the Sword of Justice that would have lighted on us, had he
not interposed. 2. Consider the Titles which his sufferings and death gets,
Heb. 9.12. He is said to purchase (to wit by it) eternal Redemption for us; And
Romans 3.24. we are said to be justified through the Redemption that is in Jesus;
We were slaves to the Devil, subject to the curse, discerned and adjudged to
suffer for the wrongs that we had done to Justice; And his suffering is called
Redemption, because as the man that redeems the Captive, gives a ransom for
him, so he interposed and paid a ransom for us; It Is also called a
propitiation, 1 John 2.2. He is the propitiation for our sins, to wit, pleasing
to God, and accepted of him in the room of all the Elect; And this word
propitiation as it supposes God's being displeased with the Elect before
Christ's satisfaction, so it plainly holds forth his being well pleased with
them on the account of his satisfaction. 3. Consider these Scriptures that
speak not only of Christ's sufferings, but of their end and scope, even the
drawing of him down (to speak so) into the Elects room, as v. 5. of this
Chapter, He was wounded for our transgressions, etc. He got the strokes, and we
got the cure, 2 Cor. 5.21. He was made sin for us who knew no sin, that we
might be made the righteousness of God through him; We are sinners, and Christ
is to purchase righteousness to us; And the way how he does it, is by steping
in into our room, and becoming our Cautioner, and he engaging as Surety, the
Law wins at him on that ground; so Gal. 3.13. He has redeemed us from the
curse of the law by being made a curse for us; we were under the Curse and
liable to be pursued by it, and our Lord Jesus becomes a Curse to deliver us
from it: Considering then the end of Gods Covenant, which is to glorify his
Justice and Grace, that Sinners may know it is an evil thing to sin and depart
from God, and that Grace is a very costly thing, whereunto he has made access
through the Vail, which is his Flesh; and considering Christ's undertaking,
without which they could not be set free, it could not be otherways. This is a
truth that has in it much of the marrow of the Gospel, and tends much to
humble us, and is also very much for our comfort: What was Justice seeking of
Christ when he suffered and was in an agony? if thou be a Believer or an
elect Sinner, it was even exacting thy Debt of him; and would it not affect an
ingenuous Debtor to see his Cautioner dragged haled, and hurried to Prison for
his Debt? Even so, if we could look on Christ's Sufferings as so many Summons
and Pursevants arresting him for our Debt, it could not but affect us with much
sorrow for our sins that brought him to this, and with much love to him who was
content to be so dealt with for them; and no doubt this is one of the reasons
why he will have his death remembered till he come again, even that we may see
our obligation to him, and be suitably affected with it.

2ly Observe, That the Debt of the Elects sins was severely and with holy
rigidity exacted of Christ to the very full worth or value; this proceeding was
as to Christ by way of Justice, whether we look to the purchase that he made,
to wit, the Elects Souls, he laid down as good in their room, or whether we
look to a Transaction or Bargain going before, whatever was in the stipulation
he paid and satisfied to the full, nothing was remitted nor given him down; or
whether we look to the Curse due to the Elect, that was inflicted on him, and
he himself was made a Curse for us, looking on the Curse simply as penal and
what was bitter in it, which shows his condescendency in his Sufferings so much
the more.

3ly Observe, That our Lord Jesus was brought exceeding low while the Debt of
the Elect was exacted of him; He was put to exceeding sore affliction, much
straightened and stressed by the Justice of God exacting of him the Debt due by
elect Sinners. We spoke to some words before, which bare out this, as he was
wounded, bruised, chastified, etc. and now we see the effect here when Justice
puts him to it; After he has taken on the Debt, he is tried, stripped as it
were to the skin, punished and distressed ere he get it paid; If we consider
our Lord Jesus as God, he is neither less nor more punished, being so
considered, utterly incapable of any such thing; But if we look on him as
Mediator, God-man, God much withdrawing from him the influence of his
comforting presence while he has the cup of wrath in his hand, so, he is
brought exceeding low and sadly afflicted; And these four considerations (under
which we may see him paying our Debt) may clear it, 1. That he laid aside the
glory which before the World was he had with the Father, for a time; which
therefore that it may be restored to him again, he prays John 17.5. it having
been as to the manifestation thereof in his person eclipsed, interrupted, and
darkened for a season; hence the Apostle says Philip. 2. that he emptied
himself and became of no reputation, as if his glory had not been discernable
for a time; He that is Judge of Quick and Dead is himself judged; He that
created Heaven and Earth, has not whereon to lay his head; Though all the
kings of the Earth hold their Treasures of him, yet he was so poor that he
lives upon the alms of others, for women ministered unto him. 2. Not only has
he a Being that is mean and low, but he is exceedingly afflicted, he suffered
hunger; he is pursued as if he had been a thief or a robber; a band of men
comes and apprehends him in the night as if he had been a Malefactor or
Evil-doer, and drags him away to the civil Judge; his back is smitten, his face
is spitted on, his head ratted and pricked with thorns, sentence is passed upon
him, he is condemned and scourged; and when he dow not bear his own cross, (his
body, being a true humane body, is so fainted and infeebl^d,) it is accounted a
favor that he gets one Simon to help him to bear it, or to bear it afte^ him;
which is not mark^d to show that they did him any kindness or courtesy beyond
others, but to hold out the low and weak condition he was brought into, that he
was not able to bear it himse^f; and not only so, but he must come to death,
and to the shameful and cursed death of the Cross; and he dies very quickly,
further to point out his lowness, which was such that death overcame him sooner
than the others, because he had other things to wrestle with. 3. In his name he
suffered, he was rep^oached, nodded at with the head, reviled, mocked, sent
about as a spectacle from Pilate to Herod, back again from Herod to Pilate; He
had a scarlet rob put on him in derision; the high Priests also deride him; the
Jews wag the head at him, and count him not at all worthy to live, and
therefore prefer a Robber and Murderer to him. 4. Consider his inward
sufferings, O! these were far more piercing; Justice laid claim to his soul,
the sorrows of hell compassed him; his soul is heavy unto the death; he sweats
blood, and cries if it be possible that that wrathful cup might pass from him;
and on the Cross with a pitiful voice, my God, my God why have thou forsaken
me? which, by the way, is not an expression of any quarrelling complaint or
discouragement, but of sinless nature when he is arraigned and made to stand
before the Tribunal of God, affected with the horror of divine Wrath, and
cannot easily endure that there should be a Cloud betwixt God and him: But
these Soul-sufferings of his, will fall in to be spoken to afterward; only we
see here that he was afflicted, and in suffering was greatly humbled and
brought very low: And indeed considering that all the Elects sins were laid
upon him, and that Justice was exacting all their Debt of him, he could not be
otherways, but behoved to be exceedingly afflicted and sore distressed.

4ly Observe, That forasmuch as our Lord suffered, yet he did most willingly
and cheerfully undergo it all; He thwarted not with it; he repented not, he
grudged not, he flinshed not nor drew aback; or, which is to the same purpose,
our Lord Jesus in his lowest humiliation and affliction, and all ^longst his
deepest suffering, showed exceeding great willingness, desirousness and
heartsomness; That word was always true of him, I delight to do thy will O my
God; and the Prophet holds out this as a great wonder, that though he was
oppressed and afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: We shall for clearing of
this, propose these Consideration^, 1. In his undertaking of the Bargain, his
willingness appears, when burnt Offerings and Sacrifices would not do it, and
when there was no obligation on him to do what he did, then comes in his free
offer and consent, and that with delight, Psalm. 40. Then said I, Lo, I come: in
the volum of thy book, it is written of me, I delight to do thy will O my God;
where we see that there was no extorting or throwing of a consent from the
Mediator against his will, but a delightsome offering of it; and that word of
his Prove. 8. is very remarkable to this purpose, Rejoicing in the habitable
parts of the earth, and my delight was with the sons of men; The contemplation
and foresight of his Incarnation and Suffering for the Elect was (to speak so)
refreshing to him, and made him leap as it were for joy, ere the World was
made, and before they had a Being. 2. Consider the great things that he
undertook, not only to be Man, but a poor mean man; It had been much for him to
have humbled himself to be Monarch of the whole World, as his vain and profane
pretended Vicar the Pope of Rome claims to be; yet he not only will not be so,
but emptied himself and became a worm in a manner, and no man, an outcast of
the people, O such a proof of his love; And when he took the Cup, that bitter
Cup, and said, Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me, lest it
should seem a thwarting with the work of Redemption, and with his Fathers will
therein; He says, let it come Father, not my will but thine be done. 3.
Consider the manner of his Suffering, and we will see a further proof of his
willingness; How little pains takes he to escape them, yea, when Peter labors
to diswade him Mat. 16. from suffering, he disdains and rejects the suggestion
with a severe check, Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense unto me,
thou savourest not the things that be of God but of men; and when his Disciples
said to him (resolving to go up again to Judea) John 11.8. Master, the Jews of
late sought to stone thee, and will thou go thither again; He will needs go up
notwithstanding; and when they were going up to Jerusalem, Mark 10 32. He went
before all the rest, to wit at a swift pace; and Luke 12.50. he says, I have a
baptism to be baptized with, and how am I straightened till it be accomplished?
Never did men long so much for their Marriage-day, and for the day of their
triumph, as our Lord Jesus did to get the Elects Debt paid and their Discharge
extracted and drawn out. 4. Consider his easiness and willingness to be taken;
He goes forth John 18. to meet the band of Soldiers that came with the Traitor
to apprehend him, and asks them again and again, whom seek ye, and says as
often, I am he; he will not suffer his Disciples to draw a sword in his
defense, Matthew. 26. but when Peter drew his sword, he bade him put it up again,
for he could have commanded more then twelve legions of angels; but it behooves
him now to suffer, he came for another end than to oppose his sufferings; and
hence he says John 10. No man takes my life from me, but I lay it down of my
self, and I have power to take it up again; it was neither Judas nor Pilate
that took his life against his will, but he willing^y laid it down; for either
the Elect behoved to die, or he himself; and since it is so, as if he said,
then behold here is my life, take it and I will lay it down, that they, poor
things, may go free; and therefore does my Father love me (says he) because I
lay down my life for my sheep; not because it is taken from me against my will,
but because I wi^lingly and of my self lay it down; and when he is brought
before Pilate and Herod, and they lay many things to his charge, Mat. 26.63.
and Mark 15. He held his peace, so that it is said, that Pilate marvelled, Mark
15. he knew that he could not but have much to say for himself as all men in
such a case use to have, but he answered nothing; or as it is in the Text, yet
he opened not his mouth; the reason was, because he would not divert the course
of Justice, nor mar the Lords design in the work of the Elects Redemption
through his death and sufferings; He came not into the world to accuse Pilate
or the Jews and to justify himself, though now and then for the conviction of
enemies, and for his own necessary clearing he did let a word fall, but being
engaged for the Elect, he will needs perform all that Justice called for: And in
this willingness he has a respect to two things, 1. To the Fathers
satisfaction, for his willing suffering is that which makes it a Sacrifice
acceptable and well-pleasing to him. 2. To the Elects consolation, that they
may know they had a willing Savior that had no necessity laid on him to
satisfy; but satisfi^d willingly; And from these two arises a third, even the
glory of the Mediators satisfaction, for herein his love to the Elect shines
brightly, I lay down my life for my sheep; this is the heart-wa^ming
commendation of his sufferings, that with delight and pleasure he underwent
them, as if he had been purchasing a kingdom to himself.

Now, to come to the Use of all these Doctrines; when they with the things
contained in them are laid together, we profess we cannot tell you what
excellent Uses they yield; Would to God we were all in such a frame as the
Eunuch was in, when he read this Scripture (as the divine History gives us an
account Acts 8. ver. 32. and forward,) who when Philip had begun to preac^ to
him on this excellent su^ject, was so taken, that before the Sermon or
Discourse was at an end, be ng holily impatient at any longer delay; he says to
Philip, Here is water, what hinders me to be baptized? I say again, would to
God we were all in such a frame, and that this were the fruit of such a
Doctrine as this to many of you, nay, to all of you.

Use 1. Wonder Believers at the extensiveness and infinitness of the Grace of
God, and at the heart-affecting and soul-ravishing love of the Mediator* at
Grace in God that spared the Debtor and exacted payment from the Cautioner the
Son of his love; at love in the Mediator that paid so much, and so willingly
and cheerfully: If any subject of thoughts be pertinent for us while we are
about to celebrate the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, certainly this were
pertinent; concerning a crucified Christ in stating himself in our room to pay
our Debt, and doing this of his own accord, without the solicitation or
interposing of any Creature, and doing it withal so frankly and cheerfully:
Was ever the like of this love heard tell of, for one, and more especially for
such a one, to suffer so much and so cheerfully unrequired? we would have you
confirmed in the Faith of this great and sweet Truth, that he had never better
will, nay never so good will to eat his Dinner, then, and as, he had to suffer
and satisfy Justice for you, though at a dear rate; He says John 4. It was his
meat to do the fathers will that sent him, and to finish his work; Have ye
suitable thoughts of his love when ye read the Gospel? have ye in the Word seen
him standing before Pilate in your room, not answering when he is accused, and
Pilate marvelling at his silence? and did Pilate marvel, knowing and being
convinced of his innocence? and have ye never marvelled, or marvelled but very
little? sure, your little marvelling at his silence is the more sadly
mavelous, that the cause of his silence when he was charged with your
iniquities, with such and such a piece of your miscarriage, with such a vain
and roaving heart, with such a wanton look, with such a profane or idle word of
yours, with the horrid sin of your having so abused, slighted and neglected
him, etc. that the cause, I say, of his silence at such a terrible accusation
and charge, and not vindicating of himself, or saying, these faults,
miscarriages, and transgressions are not mine, as he might have done; was pure
love to you, O! is not this strange? and yet most true; wonder then more at it.

Use 2. Here is strong consolation to Believers, and wonderful wisdom in the
rise and convey of it, in uniting Justice and Love; out of which the
consolation springs; Justice exacting upon and distressing the Son of God, and
he satisfying Justice so fully, that though all the Elect had satisfied
eternally in Hell, it had not been made to shine so splendidly and gloriously;
Justice also on the Mediators side in yielding and giving satisfaction though
it should oppress and break Soul and Body: And yet love, both on the Father and
Mediators side; on the Fathers side, love, in finding out this way of
satisfaction to his own Justice, when there was no cure but by wounding of his
own Son, and yet he was content rather to wound him, than that the Elect should
suffer and be wounded eternally; and love on the Mediators side, who willingly
yields and undergoes their Debt, and will not hide his face from shame and
spitting; what may not the Believer expect from God when he spared not his own
Son for him? and what may he expect from Christ who spared not himself for his
sake? and who is that good Shepherd that laid down his life for the Sheep, and
held his tongue and quarrelled not with those that smote him, will he quarrel
with a poor Sinner coming to him and pleading for the benefit of satisfaction?
no certainly; but as the word is Zeph. 3.17. He will rest in his love, or as
the word signifies, He will be silent or dumb in his love; he will not upbraid
thee nor cast up thy former miscarriages, he will not say reproachfully to
thee, where wast thou so long playing the Prodigal? he is better content with
thy recovery than ever he was discontent or ill-pleased with all the wrong thou
did unto him.

Use 3. This word of Doctrine lays down the ground whereupon a sinner sensible
of sin may build his expectation of peace with God; The transaction concluded
and agreed upon is the ground of his coming, and the exacting of the price
according to the transaction, is the ground of his expectation of the benefit
of Christ's purchase; And there is Justice for it, as the Apostle intimats, Romans
8.34, 35. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that
justifies; who is he that condemns? it is Christ that died, yea rather that
is risen again, etc. And upon this follows the believing souls triumph: O! but
there is much need to be thoroughly acquainted with the mutual relations that are
betwixt Christ and believing sinners, with the ground of their approaching to
him, and with the good they are to expect through him.

Use 4. This word is made use of, 1 Pet. 2.21. To give us a notable and none
such pattern of patience; Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example
that we should follow his steps; He did bear all wrongs patiently, and packed
them up quietly (to say so) and opened not his mouth; He could have told Pilate
and Caiaphas what they were, but spoke not a word save one to the High Priest,
notwithstanding all his provoking carriage, and a very meek one too, If I have
spoken evil, bear witness of the evil, and if well, why smitest thou me? Among
other Copies then that Christ has casten, take this for one, make him a Copy
and Pattern for Patience; It is to be regrated that folks are so unlike to
Christ in this respect; they think it a disdainful thing to pack up a wrong,
and they will scorn and rush at it; But, what if Jesus Christ had been of that
temper and disposition? (if it be fit to make such a supposition) ye had been
without a Redeemer, and had perished for ever; When he calls you to be
followers of him, and to suffer patiently as he did, though most unjustly as to
men; for you to think or say that ye scorn it, and that ye are not so mean
spirited, what is it else but to think and say on the matter, that blessed
Jesus in his patient and silent carriage under all the injuries that he
suffered very unjustly from men, showed himself to be of a low and base spirit,
and that ye disdain to follow his way; O! intollerably saucy and proudly
blasphemous reflection. The many contests, the many high re^entments of wrongs,
the great grudging, fretti^g and foaming at them that there are in Ch^istians
say plainly, that there is little of the meek and patient Spirit of Christ in
and amongst us, and that many of us know not what spirit we are of.

SERMON XXVIII.
ISAIAH LIII.VIII. Verse. 8. He was taken from prison and from judgment, and
who shall declare his generation? For he was cut off out of the land of the
land of the living, for the transgression of my people was he stricken.


WE need not tell you of whom the Prophet is speaking here, every verse and
every word almost do make it manifest that he speaks of Christ the Savior, and
indeed it can be applied to none other; It Is the same verse, Acts 8.34. from
which Philip proceeds to preach Christ to the Eunuch: The Prophet has been
largely holding forth Christ's sufferings in the former verse, and we conceive
he takes a turn to speak of Christ's exaltation and out gate from these
sufferings; It Is true (as if he had said) He was brought to Prison and
Judgment, He was indeed straightened, and pinched, and laid very low, but Prison
and Judgment did not keep him; He was taken, or as the word is, He was lift
up, from both; And for as despicable as he was in man's eyes, yet he was not so
in himself, for who shall declare his generation? There is a wonderfulness in
him who suffered, that cannot be reached, but must be left with admiration; And
a wonderfu^ glory whereunto he was after his humiliation exalted; and there is
a reason of this given for preventing of offense; if any should say, how then
could he suffer and be brought so low in suffering, if he was so glorious a
person? He answers, it is true that he was cut off out of the land of the
living,, but for no offense in himself, but for the transgression of Gods Elect
was he stricken, or as the word is, The stroke was upon him; Yea this (as we
conceive) is given as a reason of his exaltation. Because in the lowest steps
of his humiliation he condescended to fulfill his engagement to the Father, in
satisfying Justice for the sins of the Elect, according to that of John 10.17.
Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my life that I might take
it again; Because according to his engagement he suffered for the sins of his
Elect People, therefore he could not but have a comfortable and glorious
outgate.

There are these three things in the words, 1. Somewhat asserted concerning
Christ Jesus, He was taken from Prison and from Judgment. 2. Something hinted
at which cannot be expressed, Who shall declare his generation? 3. There is a
reason given in reference to both, For he was cut off, etc. which we shall
expound when we come to it.

For the first, He was taken from Prison and from Judgment; We conceive these
words look both to his humiliation and to his out-gate from it, the one being
clearly supposed, that he was in prison or straits, and brought to judgment,
and the other being expressed, that he was brought from prison and from
judgment: 1. Prison here may be taken generally for any strait pinch or
pressour tha^ one may be brought unto, which we conce^ve both the Words and the
Prophets scope will clear; Christ never having been properly in prison, at
least for any considerable time, but straightened and pinched; And he was taken
from that, being in his humiliation, and in his sufferings in the room of the
Elect pursued by the Law and Justice of God, 2. Judgment is taken passively
for Judgment past on him, and it looks not only to the procedour of Pilate, of
the Chief Priest, and of the Scribes and Pharisees, but to a Judicial Process
which the Justice of God led against him, in which respect he answered (as the
words after will clear) for the sins of God's people. 3. The word, He was
eaken, sometimes signifies to deliver, as a Captive is delivered when he is
taken from him that took him Captive, as it is, Isai. 49.24. Shall the prey be
taken from the mighty, or the lawful captive delivered? To which the Lord here
answers, It, or he shall be taken.

So then, the scope and meaning of the words is, that the Prophet subjoyns a
narration of Christ's Exaltation upon the back of his Humiliation, as it is
usual in the Scripture to put these together, and in this order, as namely,
Philip. 2.8, 9. He bumhled himself, and became obedient unto death, even to the
death of the cross; Wherefore God has highly exalted him, and given him a
name, etc. He was exceedingly straightened and pinched for the Elects sins, but
death had no dominion over him, he had a glorious out-gate; He was taken out
and set free from the prison or straits wherein he was held, And from these
judgments that past upon him; The reason of the Exposition is drawn from the
plain meaning of the words, which must run thus, He was taken from judgment,
the very same which is in the following expression, He was cut off out of the
land of the living, that being the ordinary signification of the preposition
from, the meaning must be this, that he was taken out of the condition wherein
he was; It agrees also best with the scope of the very next words, Who shall
declare his generation? Wherein he proposes an admirable aggravation of this
delivery.

The 2d. thing has a connection with the former, and therefore take a word or
two for clearing of it; What to understand by Generation here, is somewhat
difficult to determine, the word in the Original having several meanings, yet
generally it looks to one of two, as it is applied to Christ, 1. Either to the
time past, and so it is used by many to express and hold forth Christ's
Godhead, and so the meaning is, though he was brought very low, yet he was and
is the eternal Son of God: Or 2. (as commonly it is taken) it looks to the time
to come, and so the meaning is, who shall declare his duration or continuance?
Generation is often taken thus in Scripture for the continuance of an Age, and
of one Age following another successively, as Joshua 22. This Altar shall be a
witness to the generations to come; So then, the meaning is, he was once low,
but God exalted him, and brought him through, and who shall declare this
duration or continuance of his exaltation? As it is Phil. 2.8, 9. He humbled
himself, etc. Therefore God highly exalted him; As his humiliation was low, so
his exaltation was ineffable, it cannot be declared nor adequatly conceived,
the continuance of it being for ever; There is no inconsistency betwixt these
two Expositions; His duration or continuance after his suffering necessarily
presupposing his Godhead, brought in here partly to show the wonderfulness of
his suffering, it being God that suffered, for the man that suffered was God;
Partly to show Christ's glory, who notwithstanding of his suffering was brought
through and gloriously exalted: And these reasons make it evident, 1. Whatever
these words, Who shall declare his age or generation do signify, certainly it
is something that can be spoken of no other, but of Christ, and that agrees to
him so as it agrees to no other; Now if we look simply to the eternity of his
duration or continuance, that agrees to all the Elect, and will agree to all
men at the Resurrection; Therefore the Prophet must look here to his
continuance and duration as he is God. 2. Because, Who shall declare his
genaration? is brought in here, to show the ineffableness of it, and so to make
his sufferings the more wonderful, it was he who suffered, whose continuance
cannot be declared. 3. It Is such a continuance as is brought in to show a
reason why death could not have dominion over him, nor keep him, according to
that, Romans 1.4. He was declared to be the Son of God with power, according to
the spirit of holiness by his resurrection from the dead; And the reason
subjoyned to this will someway clear it, for he was cut off out of the land of
the living, for the transgression of my people was he stricken; Thereby
insinuating, that because of the great work which he had to do, there behoved
to be some singularness in the person that had the work in hand, who
notwithstanding of the greatness and difficultness of it, came through, and was
hereby exalted: However it be, the Prophets scope being to set out Christ's
Humiliation and Exaltation, his Humiliation before, and his Exaltation after,
which is, as we said, ordinary in Scripture; We conceive the meaning we have
given is safe, and agreeable to the Prophets scope.

We may observe three things from the first part of the words, 1. That our Lord
Jesus Christ in his performing the work of Redemption was exceedingly straightened
or pinshed, or held in, as the word is elsewhere rendered, bound up and hemmed
in as men are who are in Prison; and by these straitnings we mean not only such
as he was brought into by, and before men, (whereof we spoke before;) but
especially these that were more inward; and these being amongst the last steps
of his Humiliation, more immediately preceding his Exaltation, and spoken of
as most wonderful, we conceive they look to these pressures that were upon his
spirit; and we shall instance several places of Scripture that serve to hold
them out; the first is that of John 12.27, 28. Now is my soul troubled, and
what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour; here our blessed Lord is
troubled in Spirit, and so pinshed and hedged in as in a Prison, that he is
holily non-plussed what to say. The 2d Scripture is Matthew. 26.38. My soul is
exceeding sorrowful even unto death, which is like the expressions used by the
Apostle 2 Cor. 11.8. We were pressed above measure, above strength, in so much
as we despaired of life, and we had the sentence of death in our selves; there
was no outgate obvious to humane sense and uptaking; so is it here; wherein we
are not only to consider his Soul vexation, but that his Soul vexation was very
great, extremely pinshing, vexing, and in a manner imprisoning to him. The 3d
Scripture is Luke 22.44. He being in an agony prayed more earnestly, and his
sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground; there was
such a striving, wrestling and conflicting, not with man without him, but with
inward pressures on his spirit, that he is like one in a Barrace, or Cockpit,
or engaged in a Duel with a mighty Combatant, sore put to it, very far beyond
ought that we can conceive of; so that he swat great drops of blood, and says,
father if thou be willing remove this cup from me, nevertheless, not my will
but thine be done; it is in Matthew, if it be possible, and thereafter if it be
not possible; which says, there was no winning out of the grips of the Law and
Justice till they were fully satisfied; and these dreadful words uttered by him
on the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? hold out that from the
sinless humane nature of Christ, the comfortable and joyful influence of the
Godhead for a time was in a great measure suspended, (though the sustaining
power thereof was exercised mightily on him) so that he looks on himself some
way as forsaken and left in the hand of the Curse.

To clear this a little, we would consider these pressures that were on our
Lords Spirit. 1. In respect of their cause. 2. In respect of their effects.

1. In respect of their cause; There is upon the one side his undertaking for
the Elect as their Surety, and Gods Justice pursuing and holding him in on the
other side, so that he cannot decline being sisted at the Bar of Justice,
because as it is verse. 6. the sins of all the Elect met upon him; and he having
as it is verse. 7. the bitter cup in his hand which by his engagement he was
obliged to drink, he stands there by the Decree of God and by the Covenant of
Redemption tying him to satisfy; and being pursued by Wrath and Justice, the
words come out, Father, if it be possible, let this cup depart from me, yet not
my will but thine be done; his engagement hemming him in, and wrath pursuing
him, he stands betwixt these two as a prisoner; and upon these two the Lord
laid on him the iniquity of us all, and he was exacted upon and answered for
them; follows well the third, that he was put in prison; for in these Verses,
the steps of our Lords Humiliation are followed out in a legal way as before
the bar of Gods Tribunal.

2ly. This being our Lords posture, we shall consider the effects of this
pressure of spirit, which we may draw to these four heads. 1. He was under the
sense of great Soul-pain, sorrow and trouble; for the cup of the wrath of God
being bitter which he was to drink, it could not but deeply sting his holy
humane nature, which was the procuring cause of his agony, and that which made
his soul sorrowful and brought out the bloody sweat. 2. Beside his grief and
dolor, there was a holy horror; and considering the party that he had to do
with, it was impossible it could be otherways, impossible for a finit though a
sinless creature, to look on an angry God, and on wrath poured forth into the
cup which it must needs drink, and not to have a horror at it; it were not
becoming the sinless humane nature of our blessed Lord not to be affected with
a holy and sinless horror at that most bitter cup, which brought out that sad
cry, Father, let this cup depart from me; which did not proceed from any
dislike he had to fulfill his engagement, or from any rewing or unsuitable
resentment that he had so engaged himself, but from an apprehended sinless
disproportionableness (to speak so) in his finit sinless humane nature, to
encounter with the wrath of his Father; to which, though he most willingly
yielded, yet in it self it was dreadful. 3. There was a pinshing and straitning
of holy fear, as if there had been in him a sinless dispute or debate, what
will become of this? can a man win through this? (though he was God as well as
man) how will this be gotten born? This looks as if death would get the
victory; Thus it is said Heb. 5.7. In the days of his flesh he offtred up strong
cries and supplications with tears, and was heard in that which he feared, he
put up strong cries to be delivered, not from dying, but from the power of
death, and was heard in that which he feared, to show a holy care to prevent
death, could that have been, and a sinless fear of it lest it should swallow
him up. 4. There was a pinshing and straitning from love to the Father and to
the doing of his Will; and from love to the Elect and to their Salvation, which
pushed him forward to perform and fulfill his engagement; accordingly Luke
12.41. he says, I have a baptizm to be baptized with, and how am I straightened
till it be accomplished, and hence it was that these words were uttered by him,
Father, not my will but thine be done; and therefore though he had power to
command twelve legions of Angels for his relief, yet, to speak so, love binds
his hands that he will not use his power for his own liberation. But to guard
this Doctrine from mistakes, take a fourfold advertisement concerning this
inward soul-pinshing, which will help to clear somewhat of his Soul-suffering
that follows, And. 1. Think not that there was any sinful or unsuitable
confusion or perturbation of mind in our Lord, such as uses to be in us, there
being no dreg of corruption in his mind to jumble or discompose his holy humane
nature. 2. Beware of thinking that there was any fretting or anxiety in him, or
any discontentedness with the Bargain, his expressions show forth the contrary,
for (says he) I could command twelve legions of angels, yet he would not do
it. 3. Think not that there was any jealousy in him of the Fathers love,
though there was a suspension of the comfortable and joyful sense of it, yet
there was not the least lousing of the faith of it, as is clear by his doubling
of these words, My God, my God, when in his saddest pinsh he cried out as b^ing
forsaken. 4. Ye would not look on this as holding out any distrust as to the
event. I have (says he) power to lay down my life, and I have power to take it
up again; and I will rise again the third day; he knew that the Covenant of
Redemption betwixt the Father and him stood firm and sure: But it is the
consideration of God's now coming as his Party to exact the Elects Debt of him,
and his standing at the Bar to answer for it, which puts him in this agony; and
though considering Christ as man personally united to the Godhead (whereby he
was kept from sinking,) he had no distrust to be carried through; yet
considering him as Man suffering, and that (to speak so with reverence in such
a divine subject) there was an eclipse of that sensible joy that proceeded from
the two natures together, It Is not possible to conceive of Christ in this
posture, but wrath and anger behoved to be some-way dreadful or terrible to him.

The Uses are, 1. To evidence the truth of what our Lord suffered, and how
severely he was pinshed and straightened; It was not the Scribes and Pharisees
pursuing him, nor the Soldiers buffeting and mocking of him, and carrying him
to the high Priest's hall, and from Pilate to Herod and back again, that so
much troubled him; but there was a higher H^nd that he had to look to, and a
Judge and Court to which he was now answering, that was very far above theirs.

And therefore, as a 2d. Use of the Doctrine, Think it not such a light thing
(as many do) to satisfy Justice, or to give God a ransom for Souls, ye see how
it pinshed the Cautioner, and put him as in a prison; unspeakably deceived are
they who think that two or three formal words will make their peace with God,
and that they will slip in to Heaven so; Be not carried away with this
delusion, but consider seriously what will become of you if ye be put to answer
for your own Debt, when he handled the Cautioner his own Son so roughly; ye
that will sleep on, and scorn to let any word pick at you or prick you, the
Justice of God shall prick you and put you to straits, out of which ye will not
be able to extricate your selves; and he shall appear like everlasting burning
when the great day of his wrath comes, and when it shall be said by you, who
can stand before it, or abide it? It were good that ye who are most
atheistical, and who with a sort of triumph and gallantry will needs destroy
your selves, would lay this to heart, and remember that the day comes when ye
will be brought to this Bar; and gravely consider what a Hell that will be, to
have the desperateness of the outgate sealed up in your Consciences; and these
evidences of Gods hatred, and these aggravations that our Lords holy nature
could not admit of, in your bosom; when Wrath meets with Corruption, and
Corruption with Wrath, and when these mingle, how dreadful will your case be?

3ly. Let Believers see here what ye are obliged to Christ; Consider what he
has paid, and what the satisfaction of Justice for you cost him; Folks are
ready to think that it was an easy thing to satisfy Justice, and to drink of
the brook by the way; but if Sinners were sensible of challanges for sin, and
if they had the Arrows of the Almighty drinking up their spirits, they would
think otherwise of Christ's drinking out the cup of Wrath for them, not leaving
so much as one drop of it; It Is but the shorings or threatenings with some drops
of it that any of you meet with in your sharpest Soul-exercises; O! believing
Sinners, are ye not then eternally obliged to Christ who drunk out this
wrathful-cup for you?

4ly. There is notable consolation here to poor Souls that would fain make use
of Christ, As 1. That Christ has stepped through this deep Foord, or rather Sea
before them; and if the Cup come in their hand, it is empty; Freedom from the
Wrath of God is a great consolation, and yet it is the consolation of all them
that are fled unto him for refuge. 2. It Is comfortable to them in their
comparatively petty straits and difficulties when they wot not what to do, when
the Law seizes and Justice pursues, and when the Conscience challenges; to
consider that Christ was a prisoner before them, though he had no challenge for
his own debt, yet he was challenged for ours, that he might be a compassionate
high Priest, being made like to us, but without sin; Justice pursued him, the
Law arrested him, wrath seized on him; so that when we are set upon by these he
will be tender of us, for he knows our frame and that we cannot bear much; and
therefore on this ground a believing sinner may go with boldness to the Throne
of Grace, because Christ the Cautioner who has paid his Debt, is there; it is
a shame for believing sinners to walk so heartlesly, even under these things
that are terrible, as if Christ had not gone through them before them and for
them. 3. There is consolation here when they are under any pinshing cross and
difficulty; as there is also ground for patient and pleasant bearing of it,
because it was another sort of prison that Christ was put in for them; ye may I
grant lament over the long want of sensible presence, it being kindly to the
Believer to miss it, and to long for it, but ye should not be heartless under
the want of it, nor complain as the Lords people do lament, Is there any sorrow
like unto my sorrow? but submissively and contentedly bear it without fretting,
seeing our Lord bare so much for you.

5ly. There is here a notable encouragement to believe, and a notable ground
for the Believer to expect freedom from sin and from the pinshing straits that
it deserves, because Christ paid dear for it; wherefore was all this pinshing
but to pay Believers Debt? But when we come to speak of his outgate, it will
clear this more.

2. While it is said, That he was brought from judgment, which supposes and
implies, that he was once at, or under judgment, even the judgment of God, who
is his great party all along; He laid on him the iniquity of us all; and verse.
10. It pleased the Lord to bruise him; He was the Creditor that caused take and
arrest him; Observe, That in all the Soul-vexation, in all the pinshing
pressure of spirit that our Lord sustained, he was standing judicially before
the bar of God, and was judicially proceeded against as the Elects Cautioner
and Surety; there was no access to bring Christ to ^udgment had he not engaged
to be Surety, and had not God laid on him our iniquities, for it was for no
Debt that he was owing himself, but for what by his engagement as the Elects
Surety he came under and was made liable to: That which I mean by his being
brought to Judgment, is not only that he suffered and was occasionally
condemned by a Court of men, or by a humane Judicatory, which was rather like a
tumultuary Meeting, or a company of men in an uproar, than indeed a Court; but
whatever was before men, there was a legal and judicial procedure before God:
For clearing whereof, ye would consider, 1. The account whereon he suffered and
was brought before Gods Court of Judgment, to speak so; It was not for any
thing that the Scribes or Pharisees, or Pilate had to lay to his charge; it was
envy in them, the former at least, that stirred them in what they did; but the
next words tell us what it was, for the transgression of my people was he
stricken; The Priests and People had no mind of this, but this was indeed the
ground of his judicial Challenge and Arraignment before God; the Elect were in
their sins, and he by the Covenant of Redemption stood liable for their Debt,
because in it he had undertaken for them as their Cautioner and Surety. 2.
Consider who was his great party in his Sufferings; it was not Pilate and the
Jews, he cared not so much for them, but it is God, and therefore he cries, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? and therefore he makes his address to
God, Father if it be possible let this cup pass from me; he cared not for
answering them, but looks to a higher hand, and upon himself as standing before
another Tribunal; therefore it is said v. 10. yet it pleased the Lord to bruise
him; he looked not to Pilate but to the Lord pursuing him. 3. Consider our
Lords submission to his being brought to Judgment, not only nor chiefly before
men, but before God, therefore says he, John 12.48. Father save me from this
hour, but for this cause came I to this hour; come th^n F^ther and let us
count; he looks not only to the present dispensation, but also to the ground
whence it came, and to the end that God had in it; for this cause came I unto
this hour, even to have my soul troubled, and to be put to answer for the D bt
of my elect People according to my Engagement; Lo, I come (says he, in that
often cited 40. Psalm) in the volum of thy book, it is wretten of me, I delight
do thy will. Consider 4ly. The effects of his bringing to Judgment; A sentence
passes 1 Timothy 3. ult. Great is the mystery of godliness, God manifested in the
flesh, justified in the spirit, not before Pilate, but in Gods Court, having
satisfied for the Elects Debt according to his undertaking, he gets an
absolviture, which reaches not only to himself but to all them whose persons he
sustained, as is clear 2 Cor. 5. ult. He was made sin for us who knew no sin,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him; and the Elects obtaining
eternal Redemption and Absolution by his death, with the accrescing of his
satisfaction to their justification, clears that he stood there judicially at
the Bar of God in their name to answer for them. And there are three steps of
this his judicial answering, 1. He gets the Libel of the Elects Debt put in his
hand; though there was no guile in his mouth, yet it pleased the Lord to bruise
him, he laid on him the iniquity of us all, and for the iniquity of my people
was he stricken; these are the persons that he undertook for, and for their
Debt he answers; the verity of the fact is clear, for they are under guilt; the
Laws claim is clear, for it is broken, and upon this the Libel is put in his
hand; hence it is said, He died for us, He was made sin for us, and he died for
our sins. 2. As the Libel is put in his hand, so a sentence passes accordingly,
he is found liable to the Elects Debt and must answer for it, as the former
word is, it was exacted on him, and 2 Cor. 5. ult. He was made sin for us, and
Gal. 3.13: He was made a curse for us, that is, by the sentence of Justice he
is decerned to bear the curse. 3. The sentence is executed as it was past, the
cup is put in his hand, and not only is he decerned and doomed to the curse,
but actually he is made a curse, and all this as judicially sustaining the
persons of the Elect, and as their Cautioner and Surety.

Here we have some sweet and profitable Uses, 1. See here and take up the way
of Redemption contrived, so as it runs on Mercy and Justice, Mercy to the
Elect, and Justice to the Cautioner, their Debt being fully exacted of him.

2. It learns us how to establish our Faith, and also gives us a ground of
Believing; To make it distinct; Justice behoved to be satisfied, without which
no Mercy could be showed to the Sinner; and God has laid down the way by the
Cautioners interposing; even as it is among men, the Cautioners being
imprisoned and satisfying, is the Debtors liberation; and as God has
condescended to deal with us by way of Covenant, so he condescended in the
Covenant of Redemption to proceed legally and judicially with Christ, that we
might have the clearer way to make application of it.

3. Are there any here that look for Redemption through Christ, and hope that
their sins were in the Libel given to him? O! how warming would this be to your
hearts? and how should it make them to melt in love and godly sorrow, to behold
Christ standing at Justice-bar, and that for you? O! what an aspect would his
sufferings have on us if we were clear about our interest in him, and could
hear him in our name, saying, Father here am I, if thou take me let these go;
thy will be done, for this cause came I here to answer for my peoples debt, to
take with the challenges given in against them, and to undergo thy sentence for
them; then says Justice, thou must pay their Debt, Content says he, Here am I;
and so he gives his back to the smiter, and his cheeks to them that plucked off
the hair, and hid not his face from shame and spitting: If we were clear that
our share was there, and that our iniquities came in among the rest to make up
the Libel, and if we could aright discern him so pinshed and straightened in
satisfying for us, would we not think our selves eternally obliged to him, to
hate sin, and to glorify him in our bodies and spirits which are his? as it it
1 Cor. 6. ult. If indeed ye be Christ's (as ye are all ready to profess your
selves to be) he pays dear for you, and if so, will not this ly upon you as a
just Debt to him, to glorify him in your bodies and in your spirits? for both
in body and spirit he paid for you.

4. It Is a notable ground of consolation to Believers against dispondency and
fear to appear before the Throne of God^; because our Lord Jesus Christ has
been before us and in our name, and has answered for us to the full, and has
satisfied all that Justice could crave of us: What wakens terror at Death, and
makes the thoughts of Christ's appearing to be dreadful, but our looking on our
appearing at the Bar of God? but it is a comfort against it, that Christ as our
Cautioner was brought to Prison and to Judgment, and was also brought from
both; yea which is more, and without which the consolation is but halved, he
was brought to both for us, and he was also brought from both as our Surety, as
Surety for all them that betake themselves by Faith to him: He was carried to
Prison and to Judgment as Cautioner for the Elect, and he was pursued as their
Cautioner, and therefore his payment of the Debt as Cautioner must be accepted
in name of them for whom he paid the Debt: Our Lord Jesus not only died and
was laid in the Grave, but he went further in (to speak so,) he was even at the
Bar of Justice, libelled, exacted upon and sentenced, and the sentence executed
upon him, else, woe had been unto us; on this ground is that triumph, Romans 8.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? it is God that justifies;
who shall condemn? it is Christ that died, year rather, who is risen again, etc.
and it is said Romans 7. That we are delivered from the law being dead to that
wherein we were held; the Law had us in Prison, and a lock on the door, and had
us under irons, but our Lord came, and (as Sampson did in another case) carried
the ports and bars to the hill top, He spoiled principalities and powers, and
triumphed openly over them on the cross, so that now the prince of this world
is judged; These are the true and faithful sayings of God: We have through
Christ access, and may with boldness come to the throne of Grace, having him as
high priest who is touched with the feeling of our infirmities, and was in all
things tempted like as we are; he knew not only what it was to be hungry and
thirsty and weary, to be pained, and to die; but what it was to come before the
terrible Tribunal of God, and to be libelled for sin though not for his own
sin, and what it was to be sentenced and to meet with wrath; which gives to
sinners a safe and refreshful shelter under him, as under the shadow of a great
rock in a weary land: This is the great design of the Gospel, to make proffer
of the benefit of these sufferings to you, and to pray you in Christ's stead to
be reconciled to God: Now God himself persuade you to it.

SERMON XXIX.
ISAIAH LIII.VIII. Verse. 8. He was taken from prison and from judgment, and
who shall declare his generation? For he was cut off out of the land of the
living, for the transgression of my people was he stricken.


EVery step of Christ's way to sinners, and every word whereby it is expressed, is
wonderful; And therefore it is no marvel that the Prophet does by way of
admiration cast in this word, And who shall declare his generation? We show you
that we conceive these words to be these that express the Prophets turning of
himself from Christ's Humiliation to his Exaltation; He has insisted long in
setting out his wonderful abasement, exinanition, and humiliation, which these
words import, He was brought from prison and from judgment; Which look not
only to his external imprisonment, to his coming to judgment before men, but
also, and mainly and principally, to the pinches and straits that he was
brought into, and his arraignment before Gods Tribunal, and so to the cause of
his suffering, to wit, for the transgression of his people, as the words
following hold out, which was not the cause of his censure before men, but the
procuring cause of what he met with from, and before God.

But though he was brought to prison and to judgment, to death and to the
grave, yet they did not, they could not detain him; He was taken, or as the
word signifies, he was lift up from prison and from judgment, being the same
word that follows, He was cut off out of the land of the living, which
supposes a turn and change from his Humiliation to his Exaltation, and these
words, Who shall declare his generation? Set out the unconceivable and
unexpressible glory that Christ is exalted unto, so Acts 8.33., 35. Where these
words are cited, it is said, In his humiliation his judgment was taken away;
That is in his lowest step of his Humiliation, his judgment, or that to which
he was adjudged, was taken from him, and he was declared free; However, since
in these words our Lords Humiliation is employed, and his Exaltation expressed
as following on it, we think it safest to understand them so. The words put
together hold out the high degree of Christ's glorious exaltation, so as his
generation cannot be declared; He was taken from prison and from judgment, and
gloriously exalted in another manner, and to another degree of glory then
either Angels or Believers are, or are capable to be; For he that is exalted is
God, whose generation cannot be declared; Death having no more dominion over
him, and he having the keys of hell and of death; In a word, we take this, Who
shall declare his generation? most immediately to relate to Christ's Exaltation
as Mediator, and to the glory wherewith he was invested, and to the dominion
that he has over all creatures: yet considering that the Prophets scope is to
set out this as wonderful, and considering that the first step of his
Exaltation is his Resurrection, whereby (as the Apostle speaks, Romans 1.4.) he
was declared to be the Son of God with power; His Resurrection being singular
in this respect that he rose by his own power, and considering that Acts 8.35.
Philip began to preach to the Eunuch Jesus Christ as the object of Faith; We
think it reasonable to conceive, that he preached Christ to be God, from this
Text, so as the Eunuch might have a solid foundation for his faith; And this
subserving the scope, which is to set out the wonderfulness of Christ's love to
Elect sinners, who being God, yet condescended to come thus low for saving of
them; We may take in his Godhead mediatly from which as the former steps of
his Humiliation received worth and efficacy, so he was thereby sustained and
born up under all these sufferings whereby his people are saved.

From the first and second expressions put together, we shall draw three
Doctrines relating to three main Articles of our Faith.

The 1. whereof is this, That our Lord Jesus had an out-gate from, and victory
over the lowest and most pinching pieces of His Humiliation and suffering; so
that though he was at prison and judgment, yet he was lift up from both, and
had a glorious out-gate: This takes in three things which the same grounds will
confirm, 1. That in his lowest state and step of Humiliation he was sustained
and carried through, so that all the assaults which he was put to endure and
encounter with from all his enemies, wicked Men and Devils, did not overcome
him. 2. That as he in himself was born through and sustained; So in respect of
God's bar at which he was arraigned, he was absolved and set free; He so came
through by paying of the debt, that he had an Absolviture, as it is, 1 Timothy 3.
ult. Great is the mystery of godliness, God was manifest in the flesh,
justified in the spirit; Our blessed Lord Jesus being sustained by the power of
his Godhead, was carried through in his sufferings, paid the Elects debt, and
received the sentence of absolution, even as a person (to speak with reverence
in such a subject) having paid the debt for which he was imprisoned, is
absolved and set free. 3. It takes in our Lords actual delivery, he not only
received the sentence of absolution, but was actually set free; so that as he
was pleased to put himself in prison and in straits for us, so he was brought
from every step of his humiliation, from prison and from judgment, from death
and from the grave, He nailed the handwriting which was against us to his
cross, as the Apostle says, Col. 2.14, 15.) And having spoiled principalities
and powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it; And as
it is, 1 Cor. 15. at the close, He took the sting from death, disarmed it, and
trod upon it: And there was necessity for this, even such necessity that it
was impossible it could be otherwise, as we have it, Acts 2.24. It was not
possible that he could be holden of death. This will be clear if we consider
these things, 1. The person that suffered, he was not an ordinary, nay nor a
mere man, but God-man; As is clear, Acts 2.27. cited out of Psalm. 16. where it
is said, Thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou suffer thy Holy
One to see corruption. 2. The end of Christ's sufferings; which was to satisfy
for the debt of his people, there having been no reckoning on his own score or
account, he being still in Gods favor and his Holy One in whom his Soul
delighted all along his sufferings; His sufferings being for the sins of his
Elect, and he being to make application of his satisfaction, and of the
purchase made thereby to the Elect for whom he suffered and purchased these
things, by his intercession; There was a necessity that he should come through;
otherwise he should not have been a perfect and complete Savior, Able to save
to the uttermost these that come unto God by him, as the Apostle speaks, Heb.
7.25. But such a High Priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled,
separate from sinners, and made higher then the Heavens. 3. It Is clear also if
we consider the nature of the Covenant, and of the promises made to him
therein, upon his engaging and undertaking for the Elect, as particularly verse.
10. of this Chapter, He shall see his seed, and prolong his days, his duration
shall be for ever, The pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand, and I
will divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with
the strong: Our Lord's Exaltation and victory over death being on the Lord's
side conditioned to him the Mediator, as well as he engaged to suffer, hence
it is said, Psalm. 110. He shall drink of the brook in the way, therefore shall
he lift up the head.

The Uses are two, The 1. whereof serves for clearing and confirming our Faith
in a fundamental Article of Christianity, without which it were needless for us
to preach, and needless for you to hear or believe, and that is, that our Lord
Jesus suffered and also got the victory over suffering, that he was raised from
the dead, and declared to be the Son of God with power; intimating that Justice
had gotten full satisfaction, in evidence and testimony whereof he was declared
free; which is a main thing that believers have to believe; even that we have
an exalted Christ, a raised up Savior, who could not be detained by all the
Elects guilt in prison. 2. It serves to be matter of strong consolation, it
puts life in all Christ's Offices and Qualifications, and in all the Promises
made to Believers; to wit, that our Lord Jesus is a living Christ, over whom
death had no dominion, and he overcame it, now to die no more; So that, as it
is, Heb. 7.25. He is able to save to the uttermost these that come unto God by
him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them: There is nothing that
a Soul needs or can desire, but it is to be had in him: And if we would look to
particular instances, much consolation will arise from this ground; For 1. Has
a believing sinner to do with challenges at the Bar of Justice, is it not
unspeakable consolation that their debt is paid? Hence it is said, Romans 8.33.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It Is God that justifies;
who shall condemn? It Is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again; It Is
that which gives proof of complete payment of the Elects debt and defiance to
any challenges and accusations to come against the Believer to his prejudice,
because Christ has not only died, but is also risen, Justice being well
pleased with his satisfaction, he is let out of the Prison. 2. If the Believer
has to do with corruption, with the Devil and with many enemies; Is it not
strong consolation that our Lord is risen and up, that the Prince of this world
is judged, that Satan is trodden under foot, and that be shall and must reign
till all his enemies be made his footstool? 3. Our Lord's Resurrection has a
twofold further consolation with it to Believers, 1. It serves to be a ground
for the exercising of Faith on him, that as he is risen, (so Romans 6.) may we
expect that being spiritually dead with him to sin, we shall be with him raised
up to newness of life. 2. It is a pledge of Believers Exaltation and complete
victory over Death and the Grave, and over all Enemies; for Christ being raised
as the Common Head of all Believers who are his Members, they by virtue of his
Resurrection, and by that same efficacy shall be raised; And it is impossible
that they can ly under corruption; This is our great consolation who are
Believers, and live under the Gospel, that we have not these things as a
Prophecy of things to come, but as a plain History of things in part done, and
by and by to be completely done. 4. It has also in it consolation in respect
of temporal difficulties, what are they all? They are not sure such as Christ's
were, and the day is coming when Believers shall have an out-gate from them
all; And therefore since our Lord is up, let not Believers be afraid of any
changes whatsoever.

2dly. Observe, That our Lord Jesus being raised up from his state of
Humiliation, is invested and put in a most excellent and glorious condition,
even such as the Prophet cannot express, Who can declare his generation? says
he; Who can declare how glorious he is now? Take two or three Scriptures to
confirm this, 1. That Ephesians. 1.20, 21. He has set him at his own right hand in
the heavenly places, far above all principalities and powers, and might, and
dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world but also in that
which is to come, and has put all things under his feet, and gave, him to be
head over all things to the Church; Our Lords Throne is exalted far above
Angels and Archangels, even out of sight: The 2d. is Phil. 2.9. Where having
spoken of his Humiliation, it follows, Wherefore God has highly exalted him,
and given him a name which is above every name, that at the Name of Jesus every
knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and, etc. His Exaltation is such as has
a Dominion and Supremacy with it over every name; He having as it is, Col.
1.18. in all things the preheminency. The 3d. place is, Heb. 8.1. Of the things
which we have spoken, this is the sum, we have such an High Priest who is set
on the right hand of Majesty in the Heavens; Where Christ's Exaltation is set
out to be such as has exalted him to the right hand of the Majesty on high.

Because this is one of the great Articles of our Faith, to wit, That Christ
rose from death the third day, and ascended into Heaven, and is set down on the
right hand of God; We shall add a little more to clear it, and 1. We would know
that this Exaltation of our Lord is not to be understood of his exaltation
properly as he is God, in which respect there is no up nor down in him, though
his declarative glory was valid for a time during his humiliation, yet in
himself as he was God, he was still glorious and blessed over all. 2. When we
speak of Christ's Exaltation as Mediator, and as Man, we do not mean that his
Humane Nature has lost the essential properties of a Creature, As if now when
exalted he were wholly or only God, or as if the properties of the Humane
Nature were swallowed up in the Godhead; That were inconsistent with his being
true Man, and would mar and obstruct our consolation exceedingly; But his
Exaltation consists, 1. In the manifestation and dec^aration of the person
that was humbled and brought low, to be God Omnipotent, Omnipresent,
Alsufficient, infinitely Wise, Powerful, Just, etc. For though these properties
agree not to the Humane Nature, yet they agree to his person, and they are
manifested to be in him without question. 2. In the Exaltation of the Humane
Nature of Christman, to an inconceivable hight of glory, such as the Humane
Nature united to the Divine Nature is capable of, by very many degrees beyond
any thing that the Elect whether Angels or Men are capable of; The personal
union making him capable of far more glory, and his excellent Offices calling
for it. 3. This Exaltation consists in his absolute Dominion and Kingly Power,
which is more observably, directly, and plainly manifested in the days of the
Gospel-administration then it was under the Law; So that now he is clearly
known in respect of his Kingly Office to be God in our nature, clothed with
our flesh, and to be Immanuel, Go^ ^^th us, and that this Immanuel, has a^^^
^^er in Heaven and Earth committed to him; He has the keys of Hell and of
death, and is King of kings, and Lord of lords, is exalted far above all
principalities and powers, and is given to be head over all things to the
Church; In which respect that is most properly to be understood when it is
said, that he is set on the right hand of God; So that now Jesus Christ, God
and Man in one Person is in highest Glory, and in absolutest Dominion, nearest
unto God, far above that which Angels or Saints are capable of; As Kings use to
set their greatest Courtiers and Minions whom they would honor most on their
right hand, and as Solomon set his Mother on his right hand, so is our Lord set
on the right hand of God in highest glory: It is true, that as God he has an
absolutely Sovereign and independent Kingdom, yet as Medi^tor God-man, he has
a dispensatory Kingdom next unto the Father in glory. 4. This Exaltation
consists in Christ's being furnished with qualifications suitable to that
glorious condition wherein he is invested; And though these qualifications of
the Man Christ be not simply infinite, yet they are far above what we can
conceive; And the qualifications of the Person God-man are infinite, in which
respect he is Omnipotent. All-seeing, and infinitely wise to provide every thing
that may be for the good of his Church and People, and to prevent what may tend
to their hurt, Omnipresent, etc.

The Uses are three, 1. This would waken and rouse our Spirits to a high, holy,
and reverend esteem of Christ; he is God above all gods, King above all kings;
he has gotten a name above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee
should bow, not superstitiously when he is named, but holily and reverently to
think of him, and to worship and serve him. We conceive among many faults and
evils in Believers, this is a root-evil, even low thoughts of glorious Christ,
so that because he has become low to lift us up, we are ready to think the
less of him, but, O! that we could behold the glorious condition, he is exalted
unto, and could look upon (...) as ere long, coming in the clouds with (...)
and great glory, in the glory of his Father, and all the holy angels with him,
it would furnish reverend thoughts of him, though not to hurt faith and
confidence, yet to breed holy awe and reverence in us to him-wards.

The 2d. Use serves to show what a formidable party they engage to top with
them, who slight our Lord Jesus Christ, what loss they are at who loss him, and
what a great aggravation their sin has who sin against him; ye that slight,
refuse and oppose him, do ye know whom ye refuse, and whose dominion ye spurn
against, and how hard it will be for you to kick against the pricks? do ye know
your loss who loss him, and how it will aggrege your guilt who despise him? the
more glorious Christ be, the greater will the sin of the Unbeliever be;
therefore be aware what ye are doing, ye have a mighty great and strong party
to deal with; and when the great day of his wrath comes, and when he shall
appear in his glory, how will you be able to abide the least touch of it? it
will aggrege your sin and highten your misery, that he whom the Father exalted
was undervalued by you, that ye scorned to take a direction from him, or to
submit to a censure drawn forth in his name, and said, at least by your
practice, Let us break his bands asunder, and cast away his cords from us, but
he has set his king on his holy hill of Zion for all that, and he that sits in
heaven will laugh, the Lord will have you in derision; think on it seriously,
and know that he is no mean person whom ye slight and despise; and though this
may now seem less than other sins, yet it will one day ly heavy on your score
and Conscience, above many, yea above all other sins.

The 3d. Use serves to be a motive and encouragemt to them that hear this
Gospel to receive Christ, and for the consolation of Believers who have
received him. 1. It serves to encourage you all to receive him; He is no mean
person that wooes you, but King of kings, and Lord of lords; and if ye think it
a happiness to be for ever with him, then let it move you to close with him; if
ye do so, ye shall be made glorious as he is glorious, a due proportion betwixt
the Head and the Members being kept; ye shall sit on the same throne with him
and behold his glory; as he prays John 17. I will that these whom thou have
given me may be with me to behold my glory; this is certainly a great Bargain;
if Christ be glorious, he calls you to share with him in the same glory. 2.
It serves for the consolation of Believers who have received him, ye have an
excellent Mediator, a most glorious Head and Husband, and a most excellent
Dowry, and ye shall know it to your superabundant satisfaction and joy in that
day, when (as it is Psalm. 45.) Ye shall be brought unto the king in raiment of
needle work, and shall enter into the kings palace, and share of his glory, and
see him face to face, and sit with him on his throne, even as he has overcome,
and is set down with his Father on his throne; labor to be stayed in the faith
and hope of this good, glorious, and desirable day that is coming, when we
shall not only see but partake of, and be fully and for ever possessed in that
which eye has not seen, ear has not heard, neither has it entered in the
heart of man to conceive of.

3. From the words as we exponed them Observe, That our Lord Jesus Christ who
suffered, and was in suffering brought very low, is God; We find ordinarily in
Scripture, especially through the New Testament, these three going together, 1.
Christ's Humiliation. 2. His Exaltation on the back of that, And 3ly. His
Godhead; His Humiliation is not readily spoken of without his Exaltation, nor
his Exaltation without his Godhead; because it is impossible to separate Christ's
Exaltation from his Godhead; his Exaltation being the evidence of his Godhead;
and the Prophet's scope here being to set but Christ's Exaltation, and Philip
preaching of it to the Eunuch from this Text; it is doubtless the contemplation
of Christ's Godhead that occasioneth this admiring-exclamation, who shall
declare his generation? which we apply not so much to the ineffableness of his
generation, as to its being an evidence that he is God: There are three or four
ways whereby the Scripture confirms this, let me desire you by the way not to
look on this as a little momentuous or but a common Doctrine; and since there
are many so ignorant, that we would be ashamed to tell what we hear from some
of you concerning the Godhead of Jesus Christ, ye would take the better heed to
it, it being a main pillar of Christian Religion, without which our Preaching
and your Faith are vain, for he is not believed on at all if ye rest not on him
as God: But to prosecute what we proposed, to wit, these several ways whereby
the Scripture confirms this truth, and to this purpose consider, 1. The express
Titles and Names that are given to him in Scripture, and some Scripture-sayings
of him which hold it out; three whereof we shall instance, The first is that of
Isaiah 9.6, 7. Where, when Christ is prophesied of, it is said, Unto us a child
is born, unto us a son is given, and the government shall be upon his
shoulders, and what is he? He shall be called wonderful, Counselor, the
Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, of the increase of his
government and peace there shall be no end; Here we have these three, His
Humiliation, Exaltion and Godhead; His Humiliation, Unto us a child is born,
unto us a son is given; His Exaltation, Of the increase of his government^ and
peace there shall be no end, upon the throne of David and his kingdom, to order
it and to establish it with judgment and with justice; And his Godhead is
interjected and put in between these two, In the names and titles given to him,
Wonderful Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, not as
personally taken, but (as the word signifies) The Father of Eternity, from whom
all things have their Being; and for the same reason Chap. 7.14. He is called
Immanuel, God with us, A 2d. place is that of Phil. 2.6. Who being in the form
of God, thought it no robbery (he did God no wrong) to be equal with God, he
made himself of no reputation; and took on him the form of a servant, etc.
wherefore God also has highly exalted him and given him a name above every
name, etc. A 3d. place is that of Heb. 1.2, 3. God who at sundry times, and in
diverse manners, spoke in time past unto the fathers by the prophets, has in
these last days spoken unto us by his son whom he has appointed heir of all
things, by whom also he made the worlds, and what is he by whom he spoke to us?
who being the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person, and
upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by himself purged
our sins, he sat down on the right hand of the majesty on high; there is here
much of Christ's excellency holden forth, he is the brightness of the fathers
glory, and the express image of his person; the beam of the Sun is not liker to
the Suns light, the impression of the seal on the wax is no liker to the seal,
then the Son is to the Father, (nay, the livelyest resemblances fall infinitely
short of a full and exact resemblance) the Father and he being the same God,
and he being compared with the Father, not simply as God essentially taken, but
as the second person of the Trinity compared with him who is the first person;
O deep and adorable mystery!

A 2d. way to clear and confirm it, is to consider his works oft-times joined
with his name; The works of Creation, Providence, Redemption, and guiding of
his Church, so we have it John 1.1. In the beginning was the word, the
substantial word of the Father, the Son of his love, called the word, either as
expressing the Fathers image as a man's word expresses his mind, or because as
Prophet of the Church he has revealed the Fathers will; Its said that this
word was not only with God, but was God; and then follows in several Verses
together his Works, the works of Creation, all things were made by him, etc.
the works of Providence are attributed to him, John 5.17. My father works
hitherto, and I work, and the work of Redemption and his glorious going through
with it, declare him to be the Son of God; for none but God could redeem his
Church.

3ly. For clearing and confirming of this truth, we may take the express
confession of the Saints in Scripture whereon there is much weight laid; and I
shall name but five or six of their confessions, which to this purpose are
expressly and fully recorded, The 1. Is that of Matthew. 16.16. Whom do men say
that I am, Peter answered; thou art the son of the living God and Christ says,
Blessed art thou Simon Barjona flesh and blood has not revealed that unto
thee, but my Father which is in Heaven; to let us know that it is not such a
little thing to believe Christ's Godhead as many take it to be; and then he
calls himself the rock on which his Church is built; Christ's Godhead is the
foundation of Christianity. A 2d. is John 1.49. in Nathanaels words; Christ's
tells him, before Philip called thee when thou was under the fig tree, I saw
thee, and he having gotten this proof of Christ's omniscience, presently breaks
out, Rabbi, thou art the son of God, thou art the king of Israel; and that is
the first thing his faith evidenceth it self in. A 3d. place is John 6.67, 68,
69. where, when Christ is saying to the twelve, will ye also leave me? Simon
answers, Lord, to whom shall we go, thou have the words of eternal life, and we
believe and are sure, that thou art the Christ the son of the living God; there
is much in these words, we believe and are sure that it is so. A 4th. place is
John 11.27. and it is Martha her confession, yea Lord, I believe that thou art
the Christ the son of God which should come into the world. The 5th. place is
that of John 20.28. where, when Christ bids Thomas reach hither his hand and
put it into his side, his glory shines so full in his face, that he cries out,
My Lord and my God, and his faith is summed up and compended in that. The last
place that we shall name is that of Acts 8.37. and its the Eunuchs confession,
I believe that Jesus Christ is the son of God, which is the sum of his faith.

The 4th. and last way of confirmation of this great truth, is drawn from the
worship which is due unto him, and has been given unto him; He is the object
of Faith, John 14.11. ye believe in God, believe also in me; He is the object
of Prayer, Acts 7.59. They stoned Stephen calling upon God, saying, Lord Jesus
receive my spirit, and frequently elsewhere in Scripture he is prayed unto,
though these two are not too curiously to be separated.

Use 1. The first Use serves to strengthen your Faith in this, that our Lord
Jesus Christ who suffered for sinners, and is made offer of to them in the
Gospel, is God equal with the Father, and so he is to be closed with and rested
on as the brightness of the Fathers glory; the reason why we would have you
confirmed in the Faith of this, is not small, for its a most necessary thing,
and without the faith of it, all the work of our salvation will hang louse;
neither can we have any claim to Eternal Life; and therefore we desire you
particularly who are ignorant Hearers, and who have the name of Christ often in
your mouths, and yet know not what he is, to know, remember and believe, that
he that is the son of Mary, is also the eternal son of God, being God before he
was incarnate, and before the World was made, and the Maker of all that was
made.

Use 2. The second Use serves to let you know, That though it be a most
necessary thing to be confirmed in the faith of this Truth, that Christ is God,
yet it is a greater difficulty to believe and be persuaded of it then the most
part take it to be; many sad proofs whereof we have in Folks words, and more in
their practice, Flesh and blood (says Christ Matthew. 16.) has not revealed
this unto thee; It Is a wonder whence many Folks faith comes who never found any
the least difficulty in this, and it is a wonder that so few are through in the
faith of it, so that if they were called and put to it, they durst not swear
that he is God; yea, if we would look in a little further, we would find that
the faith of this is but scarce amongst us, not to speak of the gross ignorance
of many, who will say when asked, that he is not equal with the Father, or that
he was made God, and other such like expressions will they have, that are
abominable to be once named amongst Christians; Folks through their ignorance
falling into damnable Heresies on the matter, and yet not knowing that they do
so; As if our blessed Lord were a made god, and not the same God with the
Father; For the proving of him to be God, proves him to be the same God, there
being but one God.

Ye would consider for convincing you that it is thus with many of you, 1. The
little fear that is in men and women of the Majesty of Christ as God, they
durst not walk with so little fear of him if they believed indeed that he were
God; What made the Jews with the Scribes and Pharisees to spit upon him and
despise him? But because they wanted the Faith of his Godhead; And have not ye
the same nature in you? Ye live in a place where the Faith of Christ's Godhead
is professed and is not questioned, but your practice says to beholders that
ye believe it not, because ye fear him not. 2. That your souls do so little
welcome the offer of the Gospel, that tells that ye believe him not to be God.
3. That ye do not place your happiness in Believing on him, and in the way of
holiness; ye say in effect, wherefore serves Christ? ye care not for him; Hence
it is that so many live contentedly without him, and are not sollicitous about
the enjoying of him. 4. Even in Believers there is much unbelief of this truth,
which is sadly evidenced by this, that they do not so bless themselves in him,
and that they do not so reckon themselves to have come well to, and to be made
up in him, as David does, Psalm. 16. Where he says, and holily glories, The
lines are fallen unto me in a pleasant place, etc. And by the frequent
discouragement that is incident to Believers, as if Christ had not the guiding
of them, and of what concerns them, or could not guide all well enough for
their good; If he were believed to be God, it would quash temptations, banish
discouragement, comfort under crosses, sweeten every condition, induce to
holiness, restrain from sin; And in a word, it cannot be told what is in the
bosom of this one truth when solidly believed; For what can possibly be
wanting to the Believer in him that is God? He has the fullness of the Godhead
to supply what ever they want, and sustains the relation of a Husband to the
Believer to make it forthcoming; And he is furnished with suitable
qualifications to make the application thereof; What then could be wanting if
this were thoroughly believed that he is God? Let me say it to you, the Faith of
this would provoke to more holiness, and to study more the power then the
profession of Religion, and would help to live a more comfortable life in every
condition.

SERMON XXX.
ISAIAH LIII. VIII. Verse. 8. He was taken from prison and from judgment, and
who shall declare his generation? For he was cut off out of the land of the
living, for the transgression of my people was he stricken.


THese words are a proof of that which we discoursed in the Lecture concerning
Christ's wonderful love to his people, Then which, no man has greater, that a
man should lay down his life for his friend; But he has commedned his love to
us, in that while we were yet enemies he died for us; This is the great
commendation of Christ's love, and what will he refuse to his people who in his
love has come this length to them?

In the former part of this verse, we show, that there was a hint given of
Christ's Exaltation, of the Exaltation and Glory of the Mediator following on
the back of his lowest sufferings; An ineffable and inexpressible Glory, which
the Prophet rather passes with a sort of non-plussing silence, then insisteth
in the declaration of it, Who shall declare his generation?

We come now to the last part of the words, For he was cut off out of the land
of the living, for the transgression of my people was he stricken; They are
added as a reason of the former, and the one part of them is a reason of the
other, he had said before. Who can declare his generation? Who can sufficiently
declare and unfold how gloriously the Mediator is exalted: And he gives this
for the reason of it, For he was cut off out of the land of the living; The
force of which reason is, that he humbled himself, therefore God has highly
exalted him, as the Apostle reasons, Philip. 2.9. So tha this is not added as
being posterior to his Exaltation, but as a reason showing the connection of his
Ex^ltation with his Humiliation; And left it should be a stumbling to any, that
this glorious person suffered death, he gives the reason of that also, which
strengthens the reason of his Exaltation For the transgression of my people was
he stricken, or (as the word is) The stroke was on him, he suffered not for any
wrong in himself, but for the sins of his own elect people: The first part
clearly looks to Christ's death, which was a Prophecy in Isaiah his time, but
is now a Historical narr tion to us, we having the Gospel as a Commentary on
it. To be cut off out of the land of the living, is to have an end put to the
natural life, which is ordinarily done by death; But cutting off here signifies
to be taken away not in an ordinary but in an extraordinary way, to be removed
by a violent death by the stroke of Justice.

We may shortly take these two Observes here for the confirmation of two
Articles of our Faith; Looking on it, 1. As a Prophecy, we may Observe, That
our Lord Jesus behoved to suffer and die, it was Prophesied of him, That he
should be cut off out of the land of the living; And Dan. 9.26. it is plainly
and clearly asserted, that the Messiah shall be cut off, which being compared
with the History of the Gospel, we have it as a truth ^ulfilled, for our Lord
Jesus was cut off, and as he himself says, Luke 24. It behoved him to suffer
these things and to enter into his glory; And supposing the Elect to be
sinners, and the curse to be added to the Covenant of Works, The day thou eats
thou shall surely die, supposing also the Mediator to have engaged and
undertaken to satisfy Ju^^ice, and undergo that curse for the El^ct; There was
a necessity that he should die, as it is, Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us
from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us, which curse was eviden^
in his death, for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree.

2. Observe, That our Lord Jesus behoved to die a violent death, and not an
ordinary natural one; which this expression and that other Dan 9 clearly holds
forth; And consideri^g his sinless nature that was not liable to death, and
that he had not these principles of dying in him, disposing him to die, that we
sinful miserable mortals have is us; And considering withal that the Lord
J^hovah was (to speak so) pursuing him as si^ners C^u^ioner at the Bar of
Justice, it was meet, yea nec^ssary that our blessed Lord should not die an
ordinary death as men die ordinarily through weakness or sickness on their
beds, but a violent death.

Use, It serves to be a confirmation of this truth, that the Messiah behoved
thus to die, therefore we say in the Belief, He suffered under Pontius Pilate,
was crucified, dead and buried: Which shows, 1. The reality o^ his
satisfaction, and the complete payment that he made to Justice, when he lays
down that price which the sinner ought to have laid down. 2. It shows the
reality of our Lord's sufferings, and that they were not imaginary, but that as
he was a real and true man, so his sufferings were most real; His soul was
separat from his body, though the union betwixt both his body and soul and the
Godhead continued still. 3. It holds forth a proof and confirmation of our
faith in this, that our Lord Jesus is the Messiah that was Prophesied of, and
promi^ed, in whom all the suff^rings in his soul and body that were spok^n of
to go before his death, were accomplished, and in whom this was also
accomplished, that he was cut off out of the land of the living; So that if we
look rightly on the Scriptures, our Lords sufferings will be so far from being
matter of stumbling, that they will rather be a clear, convincing, and evident
proof, that Je^us of Nazareth is the true Messiah, and that in him all th t was
spoken concerning the Messiah is fulfi led and came to pass.

4. It Is m^tter of great consolation to believers, that our Lord Jesus who is
now exalted, died, and so death is spoiled, and there needs not be any great
fear for them to yoke with it; This land of the living is not their rest,
within a little they must be gone hence; Our Lord was cut off from it, and that
by a shameful death for the behove and sake of others, and not for himself, and
therefore his death cannot but be made forthcoming for them for whom he
under-went it, and their petty suff^rings need not much to vex them; Those
plainest truths that are most ordinary have in them most of spiritual sap,
ju^ce and life to strengthen Faith, and to furnish consolation to Believers;
And were they rightly understood and fed upon by Faith, O how lively might they
be! And were there no more but these two words in the Text. O how much
consolation do they yield in l^fe and in death? Our Lord is gone before
Believers and they may be greatly heartned to follow him.

The last part of, or the last thing in the words seem to have some more
obscurity in it, and therefore we shall insist the more in opening up of the
same.

For the transgression of my people was he stricken; These words do not look to
the reason why Pilate and the Priests condemned him, for they had no thoughts
of the sins of Gods people; Though Caiaphas stumbled as to himself by guess on
a Prophecy of his dying for them, but they give a reason why he was cut off
out of the land of the living; And look to the Court and Tribunal of God's
Justice, before which he was standing, by which he was to be sentenced to death
for the transgressions of God's people, and also absolved; He was thus stricken
in respect of God's purpose and design.

For clearing of the words, it may be inquired, 1. What is meant here by my
people? 2. What is it to be stricken or smitten for them?

For the 1. My people, it is a discriminating or differencing thing of some
from others; And therefore, by my people here is not meant, 1. All the world,
or all that ever lived and had a being; We find not any where in Scripture
that these are called my people, or God's people, but when ever my people is
spoken of, it is used to rid Marches betwixt his people and other people that
are not his, as Joh. 10 26, 27. Ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep,
my sheep hear my voice, and I know them, which supposes that some are his, and
others not so his, and so my people cannot be all the world. Neither 2. Can it
be meant of the whole visible Church; who in respect of the external
administration of the Covenant, are sometimes called his people, as all Israel
are; There is a narrower march or boundary drawn, John 10.26. Where the Lord
speaking of them that were only externally in Covenant with him, says, Ye art
not my sheep, to show that his reckoning there must not go upon external
profession; And verse. 16. Some that were not for the time professing themselves
to be his people, are reckoned, Other sheep I have which are not of this fold,
them also I must bring in: Nor 3. Can it be limited to them that were actually
converted and Believers, for he says (as I just now hinted) that he has other
sheep that are not yet brought in, and he is said to gather together into one
the children of God that were scattered abroad, John 11.52. So then by my
people must be understood these who in G^d's eternal purpose are separat by the
Decree of Election to be his own, even these whom he has chosen to glorify
himself in and by them through his Grace, and to glorify them with himself;
Even these spoken of, John 17.6. Thine they were, and thou gave them me; They
are the people who were transacted for in the Covenant of Redemption, and that
were given by the Father to the Son to be redeemed by him; It was for their
sins, even for the sins of the Elect that our Lord Jesus was stricken.

As for the 2d. What is it to be stricken for their transgression? The meaning
is, the meritorious cause of their stroke was on Christ, which intimats to us,
that his sufferings and death were procured by the sins of the Elect of God;
His stroke, or the stroke that was upon him (as the word is) was the amends
that Justice got for their sins; In a word, the stroke that the Elects sins
procured and merited; Took him out of (or away from) the land of the living,
brought him to prison and to judgment, and made his soul an offering for sin:
Neither can this be otherwise understood; For it is not said that for their
good, or for their behove only, or to be an example and pattern of patience
only to them, he was stricken, as some grossly erroneous and profane men
expound the words, but for their transgressions was he stricken; That is, it
was their guilt which he having undertaken and engaged to satisfy for, which
made him liable to this stroke.

In this part of the words thus opened up, we have two notable Points
concerning the Covenant of Redemption, 1. The Party for whom it is contrived
and intended, and that is the Elect or God's People; It is not all the World,
nor all Visible-Church-members that God transacted for in the bargain with the
Mediator, but my people, the Elect of God; they were so considered in the
transaction and in the execution. 2. The great price that was sought or
required, that was offered, and that was agreed upon for the Redemption of the
Elect, to wit, the death of the Mediator, even his dying the cursed death of
the Cross; This is the sum, for the transgressions of God's people the stroke
was upon him; God's design being to glorify his grace in the salvation of so
many, sin having interveened to bring them under the curse; There is upon the
one side the Lord's giving of them to the Mediator to be redeemed by him, and
upon the other side, the Mediators accepting of them on the terms proposed, he
is content to satisfy for them, to take the stroke on himself deserved by
them, that they may go free; each of these may be considered several ways for
furnishing of sweet Doctrines.

1. From the first of these Observe, that there are some differenced from
others in respect of God's purpose, some chosen of God for his people beside
all the rest of the World; For some are here God's people ere they be born, and
ere Christ die for them, John 17.16. Thine they were, and thou gave them me;
They are supposed to be God's people in some peculiar respect, ere they be
given to Christ to be redeemed by him; In a word, the Lord has an elect
people, or a people chosen to salvation in his eternal purpose and decree, an
elect people, or a people chosen out of the world, which in this respect are
not his people, or are not elected. There are four qualifications or properties
in this Doctrine, which will serve to clear it; 1. When we say there is such a
decree of Election, we say that it is a discriminating or differencing decree;
wherein, or whereby there is a taking of some, and not all, a taking of one,
and leaving another, a taking of Isaac, and a leaving of Ishmael, a taking of
Jacob, and a leaving of Esau, as it is, Romans 9. And this discrimination or
differencing has these four steps, 1. There is a differencing in Gods purpose
in respect of the end, while all men are alike before him, some are designed to
erernal life, others not, therefore Mat. 25.34. it is said, Come ye blessed of
my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
world, and in this respect the Book of Life is said to be opened, Revel. 20.12.
2. This differencing is in respect of God's offering and giving of them to the
Mediator in the Covenant of Redemption, wherein some, not all, are given to
Christ, John 17 2. That he should give eternal life to as many as thou have
given him out of the world; Where it is clear, that so many are given to him in
reference to whom he is to exercise his offices. 3. There is a differencing in
respect of Christ's undertaking and executing his Offices for them, he accepts
of them, John 17.9. For their sakes I sanctify my self, I have separated my
self to the Office of Mediator, and do offer my self for them, that they also
may be sanctified; And I pray for them, I pray not for the world, it is of them
that he makes that sweet account, John 6.39. This is the Fathers will that
sent me, that of all that he has given me I should lose nothing, but should
raise it up again at the last day; And of whom he says, John 10.28, 29. I give
unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man
pluck them out of my hand; He answers and is accountable for them, and for them
only, he will count for no other as being redeemed by him, and to be made
partakers of his glory. 4. This differencing is in respect of the promises made
upon Gods part to the Mediator in favors of the Elect, and of the benefits
that flow to them from the Covenant; He has not promised to justify all, nor
to make all believe, but some only; He, as it were, says to the Mediator,
these I give thee to be redeemed by thee, and on the laying down of thy life,
and satisfying for them, I promise to make them believe, and that through faith
in thee they shall be justified, therefore says Christ, John 6.44. Murmr not
among your selves, no man can come unto me except the Father who has sent me
draw him; And who are they that shall believe on him? See v. 37. All that the
Father has given me shall come unto me, and him that comes I will in no wise
cast him out, but will make him dearly welcome; And verse. 45. Every one that
has heard and learned of the F^ther comes unto me; And John 17.2. That he
should give eternal life to as many as thou have given him: Thus ye see what we
mean when we call this a differencing Decree. 2. We say that it is a definite
Decree, both in respect of tho number numbered, that is, about so many and no
more, and not all; and in respect of the number that numbers, such a man and
such a woman in particular in such a place, and not such an other person; They
are all particularly designed and are therefore said to be written in the Lambs
Book of Life; It is not all who are foreseen to believe who are elected, as if
election did follow believing, as the cause of the Decree; But it is such a
number whom the Lord ingageth to the Mediator to draw, to teach and make them
believers. 3. We say it is a Decree that is free, as to all merit in them whom
it reaches, and it is free in these three respects. 1. In respect of any thing
in the person or persons elected, who are supposed to be lying as the rest of
the World, therefore it is said of Jacob and Esau, Romans 9 11. The children being
not yet born, neither having done good or evil, that the purpose of God
according to election might stand, etc. That is, God respected not the doing
good or evil in his electing of the one, and passing by of the other. 2. In
respect of Christ's satisfaction and redemption, which presupposes this Decree
to be, and is the mids by which it is accomplished; so that we are redeemed
because we are elect^d; The Elect were Gods people when Christ did undertake
and engage for them, and in this respect election is a Foun^ain-grace, and
Christ's death is not the cause of Election though it be the cause of all the
benefits that follow upon it. 3. It Is free in respect of God's absolute
Sovereignty, who acts herein according to the purpose of his own will, having
no reason without himself, as it is clear, Matthew. 11. Ev^n so, Father, because
it seemed good in thy sight; And Ephesians. 1.11. Being predestinate according to the
purpose of him who works all things according to the counsel of his own will:
As the Potter has power over the Clay, and makes of the same lump on Vessel to
honor, and another to dishonor as he pleases; So the Lord acts most
Soveraignly in the Decree of Election. 4. We say that this Decree is absolute
and peremptory; Which is not so to be understood as if it admitted of no midses
in the execution of it; But this is the meaning, that the performing and
bringing about thereof depends on nothing without God, neither can it be
possibly frustrated; These sheep can never be plucked out of his hand, neither
can they ever perish, but must needs all and every one of them actually enjoy
that which is decreed for them by this Decree, else they could not be called
God's people if they might, not be his; Thus ye see wh^t is the meaning of
these words my people, that is, his Elect people in or by the Decree of
Election.

I shall shortly give you some few grounds from Scripture to clear and confirm
this truth; The 1. whereof is taken from the names that the people of God get,
and from the expressions that are used in making mention of them in Scripture,
which will infer all that has been said, as namely they are called my sheep,
John 10. his Sheep that he knows, as it were by head-mark, by name and sirn^me,
which cannot but be his; they are call d the election of Grace, Romans 11.5. at
this present time there is a remnant according to the election of grace; and
verse 7. the election has obtained and the rest were blinded; it is impossible
but the Elect must obtain, there being an inseparable connection betwixt the
decree and the end thereof; they are said to be written in the Lambs book of
life before the foundation of the world, before there was any mention of
themselves, or consideration of ought in themselves, they are said to be loved
and beloved and ordained to eternal life, Acts 13.48. As many as were ordained
to eternal life, believed, where believing is made a fruit and effect of this
decree of election, its so far from being a cause thereof; they are called
blessed of the Father, Matthew. 25. and these whom he blesses cannot but be
blessed; they are called such as are given to Christ, holding forth a peculiar
differencing of them from others; they are called the people whom he foreknew
and predestined, Romans 8.29. whom he did foreknow, them he did p ea^stinate,
etc. and Romans 11.2. God has not cast away his people whom he foreknew; every
one was not so foreknown; for Christ will s^y to many at the great day, depart
from me I never knew you; Titles and names of this kind are frequent in the
Scripture, whereby God differenceth some from others, which has its rise from
Gods purpose and decree of election. A 2d. ground is taken from the opposition
which the Scripture makes betwixt the Elect, and others who are not elected,
which shows clearly that election cannot be understood of all, as if there were
a general and conditio^al election; hence it is said Jacob have ^^loved, and
Esau have I hated, the electing of the one is laid foregainst the r^jecting of
the other; so John 10 the Lord say^ of some, that they are his sheep, and of
others, they are not my sheep; and Romans 9. the Apostle speaks of some vessels
of mercy which are before prepared for glory, and of some vessels of wrath
fitted for destruction; and 2 Timothy 2.21. some are said to be vessels of honor,
some of dishonor; some are ordained to eternal life, Acts 13. and some are
ordained of old to that destruction, as Jude speaks; some are written in the
Lambs book of life, and some not, Revel. 20. and wherefore is all this spoken?
but to let us know that God has freely and soveraignly in his decree put a
difference betwixt some and others, which as it began (to speak so) in God's
eternal purpose so it will continue in the event: Which is a 3d. ground of
confirmation; and it will be clear if we compare Gods purpose and decree with
the event and eff ct; for as a thing is in the event and ^ff^ct, so God
intended and purposed in his decree it should be; thus the Lords final sentence
at the day of Judgment, is but the result of his eternal purpose; the book of
life containing the names of all the El^ct, was written, to speak so, before
the Elect existed; and as it is said Acts 15. Known unto God are all his works
from the beginning, so in a special manner and peculiar way this great work of
the Redemption was, and they that were to be redeemed, particularly known and
written down in the book of God's decree of election; hence it is said Romans
11.7. Israel has not obtained that which he seeks for but the election has
obtained; and John 6.37. All that the Father has given me, shall come unto me;
and John 10.28. I give my sheep eternal life and they shall never perish; there
is Rom 8.30. a concarination and linking together of things from Gods purpose
and decree of election, ^ven to eternal glory which is the result of el^ct^on:
And it being very clear tha^ some are admi ted and owned (...) Christ in the
great day and others nor; this is also clea^, that there was a differencing
decree betwixt these so admitted and owned before the world was, and others not
so owned and admitted; especially considering that this diff^^encing a^ the
great day of Judgment is drawn from the decree of election, Matthew 25. Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom p^epared for you before the
foundation of the world was laid; as if the Lord had said, there was a purpose
and design of bringing you to Heaven before the world was. A 4th. ground is
taken from the nature of Gods Covenant of R^demption, which holds clearly forth
^he truth of this Doctrine concerning election in all the steps of it. As, 1.
In Gods making the offer and gift of some to the Mediator, it is only some that
he gives and not all. 2. In Christ's acceptance of the offer and gift: He prays
for some, he sanctifies himself for some, and for some he compts and not for
all. 3. There is not a promise in all the Covenant of Redemption, whether it be
of Grace or of Glory, but it is intended for the Elect only, and not for all, I
give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish John 10. Thy people
shall be willing in the day of thy power, Psalm. 110.3. Christ's undertaking is
for them only, John 10. Other sheep have I which are not of this fold, them
also I must bring in; there is a necessity of the bringing in of them and of no
others, because he undertook for them and for no others. We the rather take
notice of, and insist so much on this, because it will much serve to clear the
following Doctrine concerning the redemption of the Elect; for if there be a
differencing of them from others by the decree of election, then there must be
a differencing of them from others in Christ's laying down of his life for them
and not for any others; Election is the key of all; there is such a people, and
they are the object of the Covenant of Redemption, whose good is sought after
and agreed upon therein, and not of any others.

Use 1. It serves for the confirmation of a weighty truth, and we would have
you not to think little of any piece of truth. We shall not here follow the
subtle cavillings of Adv^rsaries against this truth, only we would have you
confirmed in the faith of it, For, 1. If ye be not clear and established in the
faith of this truth, ye will be in great hazard not only to make muddy, but to
obstruct and stop the whole current and tract of Grace, so that Grace shall be
a common thing, Heaven and Happiness shall go by by guess; Redemption shall be
universal, etc. but let this truth be once well established, that God has a
peculiar people for whom the Mediator transacted, and these errors fall to the
ground and evanish; for it is the love of election from which all the rest of
the benefits that come to the elect flow, and this love is peculiar, therefore
there cannot be a common application of it; it is the peculiarness of Grace that
commends it to the souls of Believers, and makes it wonderful to them; that God
should have taken notice of them that were by nature separate from God as well
as others; that their case being common, his love should be peculiar, is indeed
just and great matter of wonder; hence comes in that song, Rev. 5.9. Thou have
redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred and tongue and people and
nation; not all of every nation, people, tongue and kindred are redeemed, but
some out of every one of these; let this then be taken for a solid truth, that
the Lord in his eternal purpose has made a difference and separation of some
from others, which is the great ground of the title that God has to these some.

2ly. Clearness in this truth, serves to keep the hearts of Gods people in awe
of him, to lift him up very high in their esteem as Sovereign over the
Creature: And if any should quarrel with God and say, why did God so? that of
the Apostle comes well in for an answer, Who art thou O man that replyest
against God? it is his sovereign pleasure who is supreme Potter and has power
over the clay to make one vessel to honor and another to dishonor: when the
Soul does thus take up God as having all Mankind before him as a lump of Clay,
and choosing out of it, and writing up one man and not another, it must needs
in a transport of admiration say, O! what a great and sovereign God must he be,
who did determine and write down the eternal condition of men before ever the
world was?

3ly. This to the people of God, 1. Preaches wonderful grace, when they having
gotten their calling and election made sure, come in and read their names in
Gods decree of election before they had a Being; And 2. It is to them matter of
exceeding great consolation: 1. I say it preaches wonderful grace, that freely
choosed them; and that when thousands of great Men, and Noblemen were passed
by, such a poor body that was half a fool in comparison with them, should be
chosen; according to that 1 Cor. 1. Not many wise after the flesh, not many
mighty, not many noble has God called, but he has chosen the foolish things
of the world, weak and base, and things that are not, to make them kings and
priests unto God and his Father. 2. It Is matter of exceeding great consolation
to them that it is free and sure; free, even so free that it stops the mouth of
boasting; for what I pray has an elect more to speak of as a ground of
boasting than a Pagan in America, or one in Hell? Who made thee to differ, or
what have thou O man that thou have not received? it is election that makes the
difference, and it is sure, for their salvation is founded on Gods purpose and
decree, which is the solid rest of a Believer; kindness began not on our side
but on Gods, as Christ says, Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, John
15.16.

4ly. It says this, That all of you had need to make your calling and election
sure, that is the very hinge of Believers consolation, even to have the proof
of it in your Conscience that ye are enrolled here, to get out the extract of
this decree, that ye may see and read your names in it: Hence many streams of
consolation flow out; if it be so with you, then ye were given to Christ;
Christ undertook to satisfy Justice for you; ye shall get Faith and more
Faith, ye shall get Repentance and Sanctification, and ye shall get Heaven and
Glory at the end of your course. If it be said, this is much, how shall it be
brought about? we answer, it is not impossible, and to make it out, take but two
words, that are both directions and marks, the practice whereof will give a
solid proof of your inrolment in Gods book, whence all these great and glorious
things have their rise. 1. Where there is a yielding to Christ's call in the
Gospel, and a closing with him, that evidenceth election; for it is certain
that none shall, nor can come to Christ and believe in him but the Elect, and
whoever are elected must and shall come, sooner or later, John 6.37. All that
the Father gives me shall come unto me, and John 10.4. His sheep follow him
and know his voice; they accept of and make welcome Christ's call in the Gospel,
and they that accept of it are elect: So that there is no need of any new
revelation about the matter, neither needs there any torturing anxiety to know
how to come by thy name in the roll of the Elect; try it by this, if thou have
given obedience to the call of the Gospel, if thou have in the sense of thy
need of a Savior fled unto jesus Christ, and on his own terms closed with him,
by this thy tenure or holding is sure; and by this thou have an evidence that
thou art an elect; for his Sheep come unto him and hear his voice; and as many
of you as soundly believe on him, and have betaken your selves to him for life
and salvation, have the seal and witness in your selves that your names were in
Gods roll and book before the World was: But if this be not, debate, dispute
and question as ye will about it, whatever may be afterward, ye have no
evidence for the time of your election. 2. Where there is real Holiness, or a
real study and endeavor to be holy and more holy, it is an evidence of
election, and of a persons being enrolled in the volumn of the book of Gods
decree; because Holiness is a fruit of election, as is clear Ephesians. 1.4.
According as he has chosen us before the foundation of the world that we
should be holy; never a person is really holy but such as God designed should
be holy; to this purpose the Apostle having 2 Timothy 2.21. spoken of election,
The foundation of the Lord stands sure, having this seal, the Lord knows who
are his, and let every one that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity,
but in a great house are not only vessels of gold, etc. he subjoyns, If a man
therefore purge himself from these he shall be a vessel unto honor sanctified,
etc. not that election depends on man's Holiness, but by his holiness he shall
be manifested to be, and accounted an elect Vessel, and may warrantably
conclude himself to be such; so that true holiness brings folk to be acquainted
with the great secret of Election, and gives them boldness to make the
application of it: There is nothing that men readily desire more to know than
this, whether they be elected or not, here is a sure way to come by the
knowledge of it, even to study to believe and to be holy, and then we may be
confident that our names were written in the Lambs book of Life, but if we
slight faith in Christ and Holiness, whatever may be in God's purpose about us,
we have for present no ground to conclude our election upon God himself fixus
in these things that have such mighty consequents depending on them.

SERMON XXXI.
ISAIAH LIII. VIII. Verse. 8. He was taken from prison and from judgment, and
who shall declare his generation? For he was cut off out of the land of the
living, for the transgression of my people was he stricken.


THE Prophet has been long in describing Christ's Sufferings, and has showen
what height they came to, even to prison and to judgment, and to death it self,
He was cut off out of the land of the living; now he casts in a word to show
wherefore all this was, or what was the procuring cause that brought all this
suffering and sorrow on Christ, which also was the end that he had before him
in it, in these words, for the transgression of my people was he stricken; we
show that by my people here, was not meant all men and women in the world, nay,
not all men who are externally called in the visible Church, but his Elect
only, these whom he has chosen to be his People, and separated from others by
an eternal decree of Election; we show also that these words, for the
transgression of my people was he stricken, do not contain only a reason of
Christ's extreme suffering, even of his being brought to prison and to judgment
before men, but also and mainly of his being brought so before God, and of his
being cut off; for the sins of Gods People are not laid to his charge before
men, but before God they are; and so it does imply an influence that the sins
of the Elect had upon Christ's Sufferings, and a respect that his Sufferings had
to their sins; the Elects sins procured these Sufferings to him, and his
Sufferings were undergone by him for the satisfying of Justice for their sins,
and for the removing of them.

I shall not insist further in the exposition of the words, having opened them
up the last day, but shall hint at a few Doctrines from them; and because they
are general and more doctrinal, I shall be the shorter in speaking to them;
though it may be ye think not so much of them, yet they are not a little for
your edification; and if ye were suitably sensible of sin, and of your hazard,
there is no Doctrine concerning the Covenant of Redemption but it would be
useful and refreshing to you.

There are several things employed here concerning the efficacy of the price of
Christ's death, and concerning the extent of it, as it is laid down as a price
for the sins of the Elect, which I shall first passingly touch upon, and then
come to these Doctrines that are more directly held forth in the words.

1. Then, it is employed, that there is a people of God separated from others,
and chosen by him, on whom he intended and purposed before the World was, to
glorify his grace; The very designation that they get here clears this; It Is
my people, not only of the Jews, nor my people only of the Gentiles, but my
people both of Jews and Gentiles; as Christ says, John 10. Other sheep have I
which are not of this fold, them I must bring i^.

2. It is employed that this Decree of Election is antecedanius to, and goes
before the Covenant of Redemption in order of Nature, it flows not from Christ's
death as the effect of it, but is prior to it; for if Christ's death be the
mean, or price (as indeed it is) Whereby the sins of God's Elect people are
satisfied for, then the Decree of Election must preceed it; Only we would
beware to ascribe to God any priority or posteriority in his Decrees in order
of time, for he is infinite in wisdom and foresight, and able to look on all
things with one blink of beholding, and to decree things infinite in number at
once, which we cannot conceive of, nor comprehend; But this we say, that
considering the order of things, the Decree of Election is not a fruit or
effect of Christ's death, but prior to it, and Christ's death follows as a mean
to make it effectual; He is appointed to save the Elect from their sins, and
from that which their sins deserved. For the transgression of my people was he
stricken; They were God's people by Election before Christ's engagement to
suffer and satisfy for them, much more before his actual suffering, and so
their Election cannot be a fruit and effect of his suffering.

Use. It serves to vindicate this truth from an error and mistake of the
Arminians, who, as they overthrow the design of grace in the salvation of
sinners in other steps thereof; So do they in this, in making Christ's death to
preceed Election, and Election to follow it; But, as we hinted before, the
Decree of Election is Sovereign, being an Act of Grace absolutely free, the
Lord in it having designed some for manifesting the glory of his grace upon
them as the end, he has taken in Christ's death and other midses for the
promoving of it.

3. It is employed here, that even the Elect or God's People are considered as
sinful in the Covenant of Redemption, For the transgression of my people was he
stricken; They were considered as sinful as well as others when they were
bargained for: We need not here dispute whether they were considered as sinful
in the Decree of Election, it not being necessary in this place, nor profitable
for you, but sure in Christ's undertaking for them they are considered as
sinful; for God sent not Christ, neither came he into the world to purchase
life and salvation to righteous folks, but he was sent and came to lay down his
life a ransom for many, to wit sinners, and therefore it is given as the
reason of his Name, Matthew. 1.21. Thou shall call his Name Jesus, for he shall
save his people from their sins.

Use 1. It serves to humble the Elect greatly, who, when ever they come to get
grace, they get it most freely, for they were no better by nature than others
whom God past by, as is clear, Ephesians. 2.1. We were dead in trespasses and sins,
and were by nature children of wrath even as others; Peter and Paul were by
nature children of wrath as well as Judas; And David was a child of wrath by
nature as well as Saul, when this transaction concerning the work of Redemption
was agreed upon and concluded betwixt these most responsal Parties.

2. It serves also much for the encouragement of a Believer who is sensible of
sin, and afraid of wrath, and in that posture betakes himself to Christ for
refuge; though his misbelief should make him say with Peter, Depart from me,
for I am a sinful man, O Lord, yet this consideration may hearten him to draw
near, that Christ was stricken for sinners, for the transgressions of his Elect
people; yea, if t^ere had not been sin, and if the Covenant of Works had hold^n
foot, there needed not to have been a Savior, and therefore sinners have here
a solid ground to lay hold upon for life and salvation.

And therefore as a 3d. Use of it, it is an unsafe assertion, beside the
curiosity of it, that Antinomians maintain, which is, that though man had never
fallen, yet Christ would have become Man; For we see here, that Christ's
becoming Man, and his being stricken, flowed from his being Surety for Elect
sinners; and his being Surety flowed from the Covenant of Redemption concerning
Elect sinners: To be wise without, or beside and above what is written in the
Scriptures, it is vanity, pride and folly.

4. It is employed here, that sin wherever it is deserves strokes, even the sin
of the Elect; Yea we may add this to it, that not only do the sins of the Elect
deserve strokes in themselves, being breaches of God's Law, but that there is
an actual curse standing against them till it be removed; And God's threatening,
The day thou eats thou shall surely die, infers a necessity of strokes; This we
say is clearly employed here, because the Mediator entering himself Surety for
the Elects debt behoved to be smitten, and when he was so smitten, sure sin
must deserve much; We speak not of an absolute necessity, but God having
revealed to man his duty, and added a threatening, that in the day he should eat
he should die, there is a necessity in respect of God's truth, faithfulness,
and unchangeableness who had spoken the word, that strokes should follow sin,
for sin cannot be removed till the threatening be satisfied.

Use. This may point out to us that sin is no little nor light thing, neither
is the obtaining of pardon any easy business whatever men generally think of
them; There are many sad strokes that follow sin, which will hotly pursue
sinners who are not in Christ; O! do not then think lightly of sin which is the
Fountain of so much misery and woe to the sinner; If ye knew how exceedingly
bitter wrath and the curse is that fo^lows sin, ye would as soon put your head
in the fire as ye would meddle with it; If ye believed that word to be true
which is in Exodus 34 He will by no means clear the guilty; And if ye believed
God's faithfulness that is engaged to make good his threatenings, challenges for
sin would be more strong and stinging.

5. It is employed here, that though the Elects sins deserve wrath, and that
there must be a satisfaction ere they can be removed, that yet the Elect cannot
satisfy for themselves, For the transgressions of my people was he stricken;
Christ behoved to be smitten ere their sin could be removed; If the Elect could
have done their own business they needed not to have been so much in Christ's
common and debt, nor to have given him thanks for his undertaking; But this is
brought in to hold forth the condescendency of his love, that when no other
thing could do it, he interposed as Surety; The abominableness of sin was so
great, that the Majesty of God his infinite Holiness and his spotless Justice
being wronged, and the finite Creature not being able to make amends for the
wrong done, did require this; For all mankind, yea all the Holy Angels could
not satisfy for the wrong done by one man to the infinite God, therefore he
says, I am the Savior, and there is none else; He gives defiance to all
Saviors beside himself, None can redeem his brothers soul from death, nor give
a price sufficient for it, the redemption of it cease for ever among the
Creatures.

Use. Study then to be suitably sensible of this; ye may possibly think it to
be but a common Doctrine, but alaee ye walk not under the due and deep
conviction and sense of it, hence it comes to pass that so few think themselves
in Christ's common, and that so few make their address to him: Ask the most part
how they think they will win to Heaven? They will readily name many things and
ways ere they light on Christ and Faith in him; If they have done a fault they
say they will make a-mends, or they will pray for pardon, and they think that
will do the turn: Such have this language in effect, that either there is no
need of satisfaction for sin, or that they can satisfy for themselves.

6. It is employed here, that though the Elect have sinned, and cannot satisfy
for themselves, yet it is necessary that a satisfaction be provided for them; I
do not say simply that whoever has sinned must have a satisfaction made for
them; For the Lord has left Legions of Angels and many thousands of reprobat
Men and Women without hope of a Savior, or of a satisfaction; But considering
God's purpose to bring many Sons to Glory, and his Decree of Election which
must needs stand, and that the Elects names are written in the Book of life; It
is impossible that they can ly still under the curse, but must be satisfied
for, and redeemed from it; For the transgression of my people was he stricken;
My people have sinned, and must be redeemed; On supposition of the Decree of
Election our Lord undertook that great work, the Elect cannot perish, sin
cannot draw them utterly away from God; Not only shall no externals such as
Devils or Men, Persecution, Tribulation, etc. be able to come betwixt them and
life, but not sin it self that is within them; His Decree being peremptory must
stand, as he says, John 10. I have other sheep which are not of this fold,
them also I must bring in; God's purpose cannot be frustrated nor altered,
therefore of necessity their sins must be satisfied for.

7. It Is employed here, that for this end, to wit, that the Elect might be saved
from sin, and that Gods Decree of Election might stand sure, Christ Jesus
became Surety, and did undertake to satisfy for their sins; otherwise he could
not have been liable to be stricken for them, if he had not become Surety for
them; That he was for the transgression of God's people stricken, says plainly
that he was engaged for them, as it is, Heb. 7.22. He was made Surety of a
better Testament; And Psalm. 40.7. Then said I, Lo, I come: in the volume of the
book it is written of me: I delight to do thy will, O my God: These things
being spoken after the manner of, and borrowed from, the bargainings or
transactions that use to be amongst men, we may conceive the business thus,
(hinted before) there is the Fathers refusing of somewhat, Sacrifice and
offering thou did not des^re, and his proposing of another thing, and that
is, that the Mediator would engage for the Elect; And upon the other side,
there is the Mediators offer to undertake, and his actual undertaking and
accepting of the Fathers proposal, when Sacrifices and Offerings, when
thousands of Rams, and ten thousand Rivers of Oil will not do it, Lo, I come,
says he; And then for a conclusion of the Bargain and Transaction, there is
the Fathers accepting of his undertaking, he is content to take his sufferings
as the price for the Elects debt; Hence John 17. he says, Thine they were, and
thou gave them me, that is, thine they were by Election, and thou gave them
me to be redeemed by me; And Heb. 10.10. it is said, that it is by this will
that we are sanctified, that is, by the will of the Father, that the Son should
be Surety.

Use. Look upon the work of Redemption as a great, gracious, and glorious work;
about the designing and contriving whereof the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost were
occupied (to speak so with reverence) before the World was; He might have made
Worlds of Angels and of sinless Men and Women at a word, and yet he has
graciously condescended to this way for redeeming of the poor Elect. We are
alace sinfully disposed to think little of the Salvation and Redemption of a
Soul, but it is a great matter in God's account, the deepest of whose
consultation (to say so) is taken up about it, and in the contrivance whereof
the manifold wisdom of God conspicuously shines forth; and as in other things
therein, so in this, that there was an ancient undertaking and engaging by
Jesus Christ in the room of the Elect as their Surety.

8. While it is said, For the transgression of my people was he cut off and
stricken, it imply^s that Christ in his undertaking for the Elect did oblidge
himself to undergo all these sufferings that were due to them, and even the
suffering of a cursed death, which was the curse threatened against man for sin,
The day thou eats thou shall surely die; And though Christ becoming Surety and
Cautioner, the Party is altered, yet the price is still continued to be the
same, as is clear, Gal. 3.13. He was made a curse for us, that the blessing of
Abraham might come on us Gentiles; Whereby the Justice of God is vindicat, and
he has access to show mercy to the Elect without any the least imputation to
it; Nay, this way is more for the vindicating of God's Justice, and for the
making of his faithfulness to shine, that Christ became Man, and died for the
Elect, than if the curse had lighted and lain on all the Elect themselves, and
it is a greater aw-band on sinners against sin: I say again, that hereby the
pure and spotless Justice of God is more vindicated, and hIs faithfulness more
demonstrated, when he will needs so severely, and with so much holy rigidity
exact of the Cautioner the Elects debt to the least farthing, then if they had
suffered themselves eternally; It shows forth also, both the manifold wisdom
and the riches of the free grace of God, there being a Decree of Election for
saving so many, and for bringing them to Glory; And they being under sin, there
is another decree and threatening that goes forth for cursing the sinner, and
these two seeming to be altogether irreconciliable, the Question comes in on
the one hand, how is it possible that a sinner under the curse can be saved?
And upon the other hand, how is it possible that an Elect of God can be damned?
The wisdom of God loses the knot; Spotless Justice is satisfied by taking
hold of, and falling on the Cautioner: Wonderful Grace and Love vent themselves
in pardoning the sinner, and in accepting of a ransom for him; And manifold
wisdom manifests it self in knitting these two together, so as none of them
can want its effect; But all returns to the manifestation of the Glory of Grace
in the up-shot; It cannot be that the Elect shall be damned; Yet here stands
the threatening of a just God, and his curse ready to be execute, but here is
the reconciliation; The curse is execute on the Mediator; whereby God shows
himself to be a hater of sin, and an avenger of the wrong done to his Justice;
And the Elect sinner is pardoned, whereby God manifests the freedom of his
grace, and his wonderfully condescending love.

But now we come to a 9th Doctrine, which is more directly held forth in the
words, and it has two Branches, that our Lord Jesus his death and sufferings
is a proportionable price and satisfaction laid down for the sins of the Elect,
and for them only; This is in the express words of the Prophet; If the Question
be asked, Wherefore suffered Christ all this? He answers, he suffered it as a
price for transgression; If it be asked again for whom, or for whose
transgression did he suffer? He answers, not for all Men and Women in the
World, but for the transgression of my people was he stricken, or the stroke
was on him for their transgressions; The first Branch of the Doctrine is to
this purpose, that Christ's suffering is intended to satisfy for the
transgression of Gods elected people, and with respect to satisfying for their
sins did he suffer: And if we take these to be truths that we marked before, as
employed in the words, this will natively and necessarily follow; If he engaged
to be Cautioner and Surety for the Elects debt, then his laying down his life
must be on the same account, and for the same end; Now, when we speak of
Christ's laying down a price to satisfy for the transgressions of the Elect, we
mean not only this, that his sufferings and death have a value in themselves to
satisfy for their sins, but that they are so intended by him in undergoing of
them, and that they are so accepted of God according to his purpose, and
according to the transaction that past betwixt Jehovah and the Mediator: They
are not only (as Socinians say) to be a confirmation of the Doctrine which he
preached, and to be a rule and example to us of patient suffering, and of
giving obedience to the death, as he did; But it is also and mainly to satisfy
the Justice of God for our debt; So then this wicked Tenet of the Socinians is
exceeding derogatory to the sufferings of Christ, and to the matchless love
that shined in them, yea, and even to the whole design of Redemption; For if
Christ's sufferings be not a satisfaction to Justice, we are left without all
just plea and apology for our selves at Gods Bar, and if we have none, then
that curse looks the wakened sinner full in the face, The day thou eats thou
shall surely die; And however men in their security may please themselves with
such dreams, and think that a satisfaction to Justice is not needful, yet if
the conscience be once wakened, it will not be quieted without one; And if men's
Faith give not credit to Gods threatenings, they can have but little, or rather
no comfort at all in his promises; There is therefore a necessity of a
satisfaction, and if Christ's sufferings be not the satisfaction, there is not
another, and so the whole work of Redemption is overturned; So then, though
Christ in his sufferings has left us a Copy how we should suffer, yet that is
not the only nor the principal end of them; but it is contrived in the Covenant
of Redemption, and intended by the Medi tor, and withal accepted by Jehovah,
that they should be the meritorious cause of procuring pardon to the Elect, and
the price of their Redemption.

This may be further cleared and confirmed, 1. From the phrase that is
ordinarily made use of in Scripture, He suffered for the sins of his people;
And in the Text, For the transgression of my people was he stricken; Their sins
had a peculiar influence in bringing the stroke on him; And what influence I
pray could they have but as they procured the stroke to him? And if his strokes
were procured by our sins, then the desert of them was laid on him, and his
sufferings behoved to be the curse that we elect sinners should have suffered;
So when he is called their Cautioner, it tells that he undertook their debt,
and his laying down of his life is the performance and fulfilling of his
undertaken Suretyship and Cautionry; And considering that their debt was
exacted of him, and that he was arraigned before Gods Tribunal as their Surety
in their room, and that this could be for nothing else but to answer for them
as being their Cautioner; His sufferings behoved to be intended as a
satisfaction for their sins; For the Elects sins were not the cause why Pilate,
the people of the Jews, and the Scribes and Pharisees pursued him to death, but
for our sins he was sisted before God's Tribunal, and being our Cautioner he
was called to reckon for them, and they were put upon his account or score. 2.
It Is clear also from the names that his sufferings get in the Scripture, where
they are called the price of our Redemption, a buying of us, a propitiation for
our sins that pacified God, Romans 3.25. and 1 John 2.2. A Sacrifice often and
Ransom, Matthew. 20.28. The Son of man came to give his life a ransom for many,
that is, for all his Elect people, to relieve them from the bondage they were
under; which plainly shows the resp^ct that his sufferings had to our sins,
that they were a propitiation for them to God. 3. It Is clear, if we consider
that Christ's death as to its object is for the transgressions of all Gods
people, of all the E^ect that lived before he suffered, whether they died in
their infancy or at age, and for all that lived or shall live and die after his
suffering, to the end of the world; Now, what benefit could redound to them
that died ere Christ came in the flesh by his sufferings, if it were as
Socinians say? for his death could not sure be a pattern of patience and
obedience to them: But the efficacy of his death was from the beginning of the
world; He was still in that sense the Lamb slain before his Incarnation, as
well as since: And if it be not meritorious in procuring Salvation to Elect
Infants, what influence or advantage can it have as to them? Either they are
not taken to Heaven at all; or they are taken to Heaven and yet not in the
least obliged to Christ for their being brought thither; or if they be obliged
to him, it is certainly by virtue of the merit of his sufferings for expiating
the sins of his people. 4. It Is clear from this, that in this same Chapter and
throughout the Gospel, all the benefits that come to Gods people, as namely
Justification and pardon of sin, they are attributed to this as the cause of
them, as verse. 11. By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many;
And if all the spiritual benefits that come to us were procured by his death,
there must necessarily be virtue in it that procured them, and it must be a
price and satisfaction in reference to the procuring and purchasing thereof,
that he laid down in his dying. 5. It is clear from the end that God had before
him in the work of Redemption, and in Christ's Sufferings; which was to glorify
his Justice as well as his Mercy, and that neither of them might be clouded or
reflected upon; now, by Christ's death God's Justice is glorified, and he is
seen to be just in executing his threatening against sin, even in the person of
his own dearly beloved Son when he became Surety for sinners; but if his
sufferings had not a satisfaction in them to Divine Justice, though there might
be some show of showing Mercy, yet none at all of a satisfaction to Justice;
but says the Apostle Romans 3.25, 26. God has set him forth to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness, and that
he might be just and the justifier of them which believe in Jesus? by this, God
has made it manifest that he is a just God, that none may preposterously
presume upon Mercy, nor dare to bourd with sin when it is pursued in the Surety
with such severity:

For Use and Application, 1. Do not think these truths to be of little
concernment to you, as alace they and such like truths of the Gospel are often
thought of by many, and therefore they are tasteless to them, and it is a
weariness to people to hear them spoken of; and yet notwithstanding, this same
truth that we are now upon, is a great ground of our faith; for if we believe
not this, that Christ was a propitiation for sin, we can have no ground of
lippening to him, or believing on him; but knowing and being confirmed in the
faith of this truth, we have (cordially closing with him) ground from it to
expect God's favor and to be fred from the curse; because Christ as our Surety
undertook and accordingly satisfied for us; which is the thing that makes his
death to be sweet; that Christ in his death should demit himself to leave us an
example, is much, yet if we had no more by it, it would be but cold comfort,
except we had it as a satisfaction to Divine Justice to rest upon: Though this
may be looked upon as doctrinal only, yet it comes nearer to our practice then
we are aware of; and though we have not Socinians in opinion and profession to
deal with; yet we have two sorts that are Socinians in heart amongst us. 1.
These that securely sin on still, and yet hope to get mercy, and who will
confess that they are sinners, but that for making an amends they will pray and
mend their life, and they will speak of a number of things, but it may be, not
one word of Christ or of his purchase, or of their natural inclination to
presume and to slight Christ, as if they had nothing yet to look to but a
Covenant of works without a Savior, or as if God had removed or would remove
the curse threatened without a satisfaction; so that Christ's satisfaction is not
known nor rested on by the multitude of Hypocrites that live in the visible
Church; and this is easily proven from this, that there are but very few who
make use of him or stand in awe to sin; if it were believed that Justice
required and will have satisfaction either of the sinner himself or of a surety
in his room, and that Christ is the only Surety, Folks would either quite their
hopes of Heaven, or be more in Christ's common; and that so many mantain the
hope of Heaven without a due consideration of a satisfaction to Justice by
Christ, and without employing of him, it declares plainly that they are drunken
with this error. A 2d. sort are these who being wakened in Conscience and
sensible of sin, yet are as heartless, hesitating and hopeless to get peace
through him, as if he had not satisfied; what else does the doubting and
despondency of such say, but that there is not a complete satisfaction in
Christ's death? and that therefore they dare not trust to it, otherwise they
would wonder that God has provided such a remedy, and yet adventure to rest
upon it, seeing God is as well pleased with it as if they had not provoked him
at all, or had satisfied his Justice themselves.

2ly. It serves to let us see what we are in God's common and debt, and how
much we are obliged to the Mediator; when there was a necessity that either he
should suffer or that we should perish; and that though his sufferings drew so
deep as to bring him to prison and to judgment, and to put him to a holy
sinless anxiety and perplexity, that yet he yielded to it and underwent all for
our sakes; this is our great ground of confidence, and the strong stay of the
mind of a wakened Believer: And should make us wonder at the Fathers love that
gave the son, and at the Sons love that was so condescending, and should make
our souls warm toward him, who, when we deserved nothing but to be hurried
away to the Pit, was content to enter himself as our Surety, and to pay our
Debt: It should also be a motive to chase souls in to him, knowing that where
sin is, there a satisfaction must be, and that there is therefore a necessity
to fly to him and to be in him, because there is no other way to get Justice
satisfied; the through conviction whereof is that which through grace not only
chaseth the soul to, but engages it to close with Christ and to rest upon him,
and to give him the credit of its thorow-bearing when it is ready otherwise to
sink: Now the Lord himself teach you to make this use of this Doctrine.

SERMON XXXII.
ISAIAH LIII.VIII. Verse. 8. He was taken from prison and from judgment, and
who shall declare his generation? For he was cut off out of the land of the
living, f^r the transgression of my people was he stricken.


THere is nothing that concerns us more than to be well acquainted with the
doctrine of Christ Jesus and his Sufferings; The Prophet has therefore been
much in showing what Christ suffered in the former words, and has largely
described his Humiliation to Judgment and Death, for (says he) he was cut off
out of the land of the living: In the words read he answers two important
questions concerning his sufferings, 1. To what end were all these sufferings?
he answers that they were for transgressions, even to be a satisfaction to
Justice for them. The 2. Question is, For whose sins were the sufferings of
Christ to be a satisfaction? It is answered expressly in the words, for the
transgression of my people was he stricken, or the stroke was upon him; it was
for the sins of the Elect, and of the Elect only, for this is the Prophets
scope, who, having spoken of Christ's sufferings and death, holds forth the
meritorious and procuring cause and end thereof; and this is the result, design
and sum of all, even to be a satisfaction for Gods elect People; for (as we
show) by Gods People are not meaned all men in the world, nor the Jews only,
for Christ has many sheep beside them; but it is Gods peculiar People in
opposition to the multitude who are not his People.

The Doctrine, or rather the branch of the Doctrine we left at, was this (and
it is exclusive) that Christ's death is only intended to be a price for the sins
of God's elect People and was laid down with respect to them; his death and
sufferings are to be looked upon, and considered only as a price and
satisfaction for their sins, and for the sins of none other; or thus, Jesus
Christ in his suffering and in the laying down of his life; had a respect to
the elect, and intended the removing of the sins and transgressions of God's
elect people only, and of none other; we know nothing that we can make of these
words, nor of the Prophets scope in them but this; who as he has been
describing Christ's sufferings in all other respects, so does he in this; to
wit, in respect of the persons for whom he suffered, and of the meritorious
cause and end of his sufferings; for says the Text, for the transgressions of
my people, that is of Gods elect people was he stricken.

This branch of the Doctrine is of great weight and concernment in the whole
strain of Grace, for if this march-stone be lifted and removed, Grace becomes
common, and as some call it, universal, and so to be in effect no grace at all;
for Grace has a peculiar channel of its own wherein it runs toward a certain
select number and not toward all: I do not mean of grace taken in a large
sense, for so all men as they are partakers of any mercy, or of common favors,
may be said to have grace extended to them; but I mean, God's special grace,
favor and good will which is extended only to the Elect for whose sins Christ
suffered; the right bounding of which Doctrine shows forth both God's
sovereignty in the dispensing of grace, and the freeness thereof in
communicating and manifesting of it to whom he will, and which thus considered
is especially engaging of the hearts of them on whom he pleases to manifest it.

Ere I come to confirm this branch of the Doctrine, take a word or two of
advertisement in the entry. 1. That Christ's death may be considered two ways,
1. In respect of it self, and as abstracting from the Covenant of Redemption
wherein it is contrived as to all the circumstances of it; in which sense as
his death and sufferings are of infinite value and worth, so they are (as
Divines use to speak) of value to redeem the whole world, if God in his design
and decree had so ordered and thought meet to extend it. 2. We are to consider
his sufferings and death as a price agreed upon in the Covenant or Bargain of
Redemption, wherein these two or three things concur. 1. God's proposal. 2.
Christ's acceptance and design in laying down his life. 3. The Fathers
acquiescing therein and declaring himself well pleased therewith; we speak not
here of Christ's death in the first respect, that is as abstracting from the
Covenant, for in that respect he might have laid down his life for few or more,
for some or for all, if it had been so intended; but we speak of it in the
second respect, as it is a price agreed upon in God's purpose and Christ's
design and in God's acceptance; and thus we say, that his death is only
intended as a satisfaction and recompense for the sins of the Elect, and was
laid down for them only.

2ly. We may consider Christ's sufferings and death in the fruits of it, either
as they respect common favors and mercies, common gifts and means of grace
which are not peculiar and saving, but common to Believers with others, being
bestowed upon professors in the visible Church; or as they are peculiar and
saving, such as Faith, Justification, Adoption, etc. Now, when we say, that
Christ's sufferings and death, are a price for the sins of his People, we
exclude not the Reprobate simply from temporal and common favors and mercies
that come by his death; they may have and actually have common gifts and works
of the Spirit, the means of Grace, which are some way effects and fruits of the
same Covenant, but we say, that the Reprobate partake not of saving Mercy, and
that Christ's death is a satisfaction only for the Elect, and that none others
get pardon of Sin, Faith, Repentance, etc. by it, but they only, it was
intended for none others, and this we clear and confirm from, and by these
following grounds and arguments, which we shall shortly hint at.

The 1. Argument is drawn from this same assertion of the Prophet, thus, If
Christ's death be only a satisfaction for the sins of Gods People, then it is
not a satisfaction for the sins of all, but it is a satisfaction only for the
sins of Gods People, therefore not for all, for his People are not all men, or
all men are not his People, but his People are a peculiar People separate from
others in God's purpose and decree, as we cleared before from John 17. Thine
they were and thou gave them me and the Text says expressly, for the
transgressions of my people was he stricken; he respected the sins of God's
People in accepting of the Bargain, and in laying down his Life, and for their
sins only God accepted him; yea, the very mentioning of them thus here,
secludes all others; and we must expone them exclusively as taking in none
others, and must look upon the things spoken of them as agreeing to no other;
even as it is said Heb. 4. There remains therefore a rest to the people of God,
which is certainly exclusive of all others; and hence, when our Lord speaks of
them John 17. he opposes them to, and contradistinguisheth them from all
others, I pray for them, I pray not for the world, buy for them that thou have
given me out of the world, to let us know that the things, prayed for to the
one are denied to the other according to the strain of the Coven^^t.

A^ ad ground is drawn from the strain and frame of the Covenant of
Redemption, where we find two things clear 1. That as to the end and convey of
it the Elect are the only Persons for those good and behove it is intended; and
if it be the Elect for whom he entered in that Covenant, the^ the advantage,
good and benefit of the Elect must be e^ed in this main a^ticle of the
Covenant which relates to Chri^'s death and sufferings; For, 1. In the Covenant
of Redemption the good of the Elect is proposed and designed by the Father, as
is clear John 6.39, 40. This is the Fathers will that sent me, that of all
which he has given me I should lose nothing; and this is the Fathers will that
sent me, that every one which sees the Son and believes on him may have
everlasting life: which will be the more clear if we consider the time when
this is spoken it is at such a time when many will not come to him and bel^^ve
on him, as verse. 36, 37. Ye also have seen me and believe not, all that the
Father has given shall, come unto me, and him that comes I will in no wise
cast out; for I came down from heaven not to do my own will, but the will of
him that sent me; and then follows, This is the will of him that sent me etc.
and verse. 43, 44. Murmr not (says he) among your selves, no man can come to
me except the Father that sent me draw him; this ye heard of from John 17.2. at
greater length, 2. Look on the Son's side of the Covenant, and it will also be
clear, for his undertaking must be according to the Fathers proposing; if the
Father did not propose all but some only to be redeemed, then his undertaking
must be for these some and not for all, conform to the Fathers proposal, Psalm.
40. Then said I, lo, I come to do thy will O my God; now, the Fathers will is,
that the should undertake for these given him, and it is not his will that he
should, undertake for others, therefore he did not undertake for them. 3.
Christ's sufferings and death are the execution of the Fathers will, and
therefore must be the execution of his undertaking according to his engagement
for the Elect and given ones, therefore these two are put together, John 17.9.
and 19. I pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for them which thou have
given me: and, for their sakes I sanctify my self, that is for their sakes
whom thou have given me and not for the world; He sancrifies himself for them
for whom he prays, for them that are given him and no more.

2ly. This is clear in the Covenant, that Christ's death is intended there^n as
all other Mercies covenanted, are; that is to say, to whom Faith Effectual
Calling, Justification, etc. are covenanted, for these is Christ's death
covenanted, and for none others; for the Covenant being mutual, the
reprom^ssion on the Fathers part must be of equal extent with the Son's
stipulation, but all these are only peculiarly applicable to the Elect, as
benefits flowing from, and following upon Christ's death, which therefore must
be peculiarly intended for them as being undergone for them; hence when Christ
speaks of Faith and Effectual Calling, John 6. he says All that the Father has
given me shall come unto me, and none other will nor can come; so
Justification, Pardon of Sin, etc. are bought to the Elect and to none others;
and when the smallest of blessings are covenanted and articled for none other
but for the Elect, shall Jesus Christ himself, that gift of God, or his death,
which is the chief thing articled in the Covenant, be covenanted for or applied
to any others but to them?

A 3d. ground is drawn from Christ's executing of his Offices; for this piece
or part of Christ's executing of his Office, must correspond and be of equal
extent with all the other parts and pieces of his Offices, such as his
effectual teaching, interceeding, subduing to himself, etc. which are no
broader then the Elect, for he executes no part of any of his Offices for the
behove and benefit of any but of the Elect^ he sa^ingly enlightens no others;
he sub^uts none others to the faith of the Gospel; he interceeds for none
others, his intercession is not for the world; therefore his death must be for
none others, all these being commentur^^le and o^ equal extent; his
intercession being grounded on his suff^ring; therefore Joh. 17. he lays by the
world expressly as the^e for whom he will not pray, and looks back to the
Covenant as the ground of his undertaking for the Elect given him out of the
world, and not for others; and if he will not pray nor interceed for others,
what reason can be given of his dying for others? when he will not do the less
which is to pray for them, it were absurd to think or say that he will do the
greater which is to lay down his life for them.

A 4th. ground is this, Christ's death is one of the peculiar evidences of his
de^rest love, beyond which there is none greater, and a main proof and fruit^
thereof, and therefore is not common to all, but is intended for them only whom
he peculiarly loves and designs to bring through to glory; which is clear Ephesians.
5.26. Husbands love your wives as Christ loved his Church and gave himself for
it, etc. Romans 5.5. God commends his love to us, in that while we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us; John 15.13. Greater love has no man then this,
that a man should lay down his life for his friends; there is a world of
Reprobates whom Christ never loved with peculiar love, and sure for these he
did not die; Jacob have I loved but Esau have I hated, says the Lord, Romans
9.13. which the Apostle holds forth as a sort of copy of God's dealing in
reprobation and election in reference to all Mankind; and where the Lord
himself has set bounds betwixt them whom he loves and hates, it is too great
liberality, or rather too great presumption for any, under whatever specious
pretenses, to extend this his peculiar love to these whom he disclaims.

A 5th. ground is taken from the effect, thus, All for whom Christ died, are
justified and freed from the guilt of their sins in due time, but Christ Jesus
has not purchased and actually procured freedom to all men from their sins;
all men be not justified, therefore he laid not down his life for all; For, 1.
It cannot be said that he laid down his life for purchasing and buying of such
wares, and yet that he got not that which he bought; and seeing the event tells
plainly that all are not justified and brought to Heaven, it cannot be that he
laid down his life a Ransom for all, but it must be for the Elect only that he
died. 2. To say that God exacts double payment of one and the self same De^^,
that he exacts from men over again that which Christ paid already for them
reflects on the Justice and Wisdom of God; and to say that a person that goes
to hell shall be no less in his common then another that goes to Heaven, is no
less absurd; for the Apostle says Romans 5.10. If while we were enemies we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled we shall
be saved by his life: where he plainly insinuates, that if a person be bought
by Christ's death, it cannot be that he can perish; for if the price be paid by
his death, and so the greater thing be done, much more will the lesser, we
shall be saved by his life; now this reasoning could have no force, if Christ
died for any that shall perish; yea verse. 11. of this Chapter it is said, By his
knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many for he shall bear their
iniquities; where it is clear, that as many (and no mo^) whose iniquities Christ
has taken on and born, shall be justified; for the one is given as a reason of
the other; and there should be no consequence to his justifying of them, from
his bearing of their iniquitries, if he could by his death bear their
iniquities whom he never justified.

A 6th. ground is taken from the end of the Covenant, which is to put a
difference betwixt special Grace peculiar to some, and severe Justice to
others, and particularly and especially in Christ's death, which makes out what
we affirm; for if when Christ died many were actually damned, it cannot be said
that he died for these; not that it was with them as with Believers before his
death; for it cannot he said that the intention of his death in the Covenant,
could be beyond what it was at his death, the one being the execution of the
other; And sure it could not be intended at his death for the damned; For it
would seem a very absurd thing to say, that when Christ was to go and lay down
his life, that he was going to suffer for many that were suffering for their
own sins in Hell, as many reprobat sinners were before he came in the flesh;
Can any imagine a possibility of such a thing? Our Lord was not to be so
indifferent in the administration of Grace, as to cast it thus away; And can
any reasonably think, that at one and the same time, the same punishment shall
be exacted from Christ, and from the persons themselves for whom he suffered?
It is possible that this could be intended in the Covenant of Redemption; Or is
there free access to Justice to pursue? Christ as Cautioner when the Principal
Debtor is actually siezed upon? Indeed when the Principal is set free as the
Elect were before his death, there is access to pursue the Cautioner for their
debt; But no such thing can be alleged for others that were already damned;
But their being taken hold of by Justice, is a proof that he answered not for
them, nor paid their debt.

7. We may argue thus, If Christ died for all, then either for all
indifferently, and so all were alike obliged to Christ; Or for some more
absolutely that must be satisfied for, and for others conditionally on
supposition that they should believe; But this last is absurd, for 1. The
Scripture makes not two considerations of Christ's death. 2. It were absurd to
say that now it cannot be told whether Christ died for such an one or not. 3.
Either that condition is bought to them, or not; If it be bought, then it must
be fulfilled (If it be not bought, then 1. That person cannot be said to be
bought, because all needful for his Redemption is not bought and paid for. 2.
Either that condition can be fulfilled by themselves or not, if it may be by
themselves, then is Free Will established, and none are absolutely redeemed; If
it cannot be fulfilled by themselves, and yet bought by him for them, then they
are determined for another end, to wit, not to get it, and what wisdom can
there be in such a Redemption as this?

The 1. Use serves for clearing and confirming of a Gospel truth of the
Covenant of Redemption, and for the refutation of a contrary error; As we have
somewhat of many errors practically in our hearts, so have we this amongst the
rest, that Christ died for all sinners; which fosters peoples security, and
their groundless hope of admission to Heaven; But here we see that our Lord
Jesus in laying down his life, intended the satisfaction of Divine Justice for
none but for his Elect people, and if so, there are many for whom he never
intended the benefit of his death; There are three particular Branches of the
error which this Doctrine confutes; 1. Their opinion which is more lax, and
takes in the sins of all men and women in the world, and gives them an equal
share in Christ's sufferings; as if in his intention in laying down of his life,
and in Gods purpose he had suffered and died for all, for him that goes to Hell
as well as for him that goes to Heaven; But if Christ stand as Cautioner for
the Elect only, then sure this opinion cannot hold; for all are not Gods Elect;
And therefore all are not indifferently redeemed: And though it may be that
some of you think that this looks liker grace, yet its not only absurd as being
contrary to truth, but its absurd also even with respect to grace; For 1. It
makes grace a common thing, a man that is in Hell to be as much obliged to
Christ as one that is in Heaven; And though it plausibly pretends to give grace
abroad and large extent, yet it takes away the power of it; For if grace be
thus largely extended, it is not grace that makes the application of grace, but
the free will of the Creature; For grace according to this opinion, leaves men
to be saved or not as they please, and leaves it self to be overcome by man's
will; And therefore these errors divide not, but go together hand in hand; For
where grace is made so large, free will is made to have a dominion over it, and
thus the weight of grace and of election are laid upon it. 2. It lessen^^ the
estimation of Gods grace in the minds of people; for thus, they think little of
Heaven, and suppose that it is an easy matter to win at it, and it breeds in
them a fearlessness of Hell and of Gods Wrath: And if many of you had not
drunken in this error practically, ye would not be so confident of, nor so
obstinatly maintain your hope of Heaven without ground; Hence alace it is, that
many will say, God is merciful, and Christ died for all sinners, and for me,
and so sleep it out in security; I am persuaded that much of the security and
presumption that abounds among carnal Professors is from this ground, that
grace is fancied to be thus broad and large; We grant that as to the convey and
nature of it it is broad, but in respect of the objects on whom it is bestowed,
it is narrow, though it comes from large bowels. 3. It exceedingly marrs and
diminishes men's thankfulness, for when a mercy is judged to be common, who
will praise for it as he would do if it were special and peculiar? That which
is a great ground of thankfulness for Election, Effectual Calling,
Justification, etc. is because these mercies are peculiar; even so that which
makes the redeemed thankful for Redemption, is because they are redeemed and
bought when others are left, hence is that Song of the redeemed company, Rev.
5.9. Thou art worthy to open the Book, for thou wast stain, and have redeemed
us to God by thy blood out of every kind ed, and tongue, and people, and
nation; It hightens not their praise that all of every kindred, and tongue, and
nation were redeemed, but this does it that when the Lord had the whole world
before him, he was graciously pleased to purchase and redeem them out of it,
that as it is, John 11.52. He should gather together in one the children of God
that were scattered abroad; They therefore I say bless him, and wonder when
they consider that they are pitched on who are by nature the same with these
that are past by: and were a strange thing to affirm that they who are in Hell
have as great ground of praise, and of saying, We thank thee, for thou have
redeemed as by thy blood, as these that are in Heaven have. 4. This making of
grace so wide and large in his extent as to take in all; does leave the people
of God altogether comfortless. But it may be here said, How is it that it is
more comfort to Believers that grace is peculiar in saving, and that but a few
are redeemed in comparison of others that are not redeemed, then if we should
extend it unto, and account it to be for all? Or how is this more comfortless
to them, that grace is made universal? Answer 1. Because if it were universal,
many whom Christ died for, are now in Hell, and what consolation can there be
from that? A man may be redeemed and yet perish and go to Hell for all that?
But it is strong consolation when this comes in, If when we were enemies we were
reconciled by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled we shall be
saved by his life, If he died for us when we were enemies, will he not much
more save us being friends? 2. Suppose a person to be in black nature, what
comfort could he have by looking on Redemption as universal? He could not
expect Heaven by it; for many expect Heaven on that ground who will never get
it; But it is a sort of consolation even to them that are without, to consider
that Redemption is peculiar to some; For though all get not Heaven, yet they
that believe get it, and so upon their closing with Christ the consolation
presently flows out unto them; Whereas if they should lay it for a ground that
Christ's death were universal, they could never have solid ground of consolation
by flying to him. 5. This error does quite overturn and enervat the whole
Covenant of Redemption and peculiar love. 1. It enervats and obscures the
wisdom that shines in it, if Christ may buy and purchase many by his death,
who shall yet notwithstanding perish. 2. It enervats and obscures the love and
grace that shine in it; for it makes Christ to cast away the love and grace of
it to repro^^e, and ^o to cast pearls to swine. 3. T^ obscures the freedom of
it, which ^^y t^^^ in his taking of one and refusing another, as it is, Romans
9.11, 12. The children not being yet born, and having done neither good nor
(...), that the p^^pose of God according to election might ^^^^d, (...) of
works, but of (...) that calls, it was said, the elder shall serve the (...),
(as it is written, Jacob have I loved, and Esa^ have I hated. 4. It obscures
the Justice of it, if he should but all and yet get but some for it being the
design of God to inflict on Christ the curse that was due to sinners, and to
spare them; if this should be the result of it that many for whom he died and
took on him the curse, should p^rish, he should get but some of these whom he
bought, and Justice should twice exact satisfaction for one and the same debt,
once of the Surety, and again of the Principal Debtor that perishes; Whereas
when Christ becomes Surety they are set free for whom he was ^urety, and it is
Justice that it should be so. We do the rather insist in the refutation of this
error, because this is a time wherein it is one of the Devils, great designs
which he drives to trouble the clear Springs of the Gospel, and to revive this
error amongst the rest; And there is something of it in these poor fool Bodies
who speak so much of a light within, as if all were alike, and had something,
which if they use well they may get life by; This error always leaves men to
be Masters and Carvers of Gods Decree, and of Christ's purpose and design in the
work of Redemption, and suspends the benefit of his death mainly, if not only
on the consent of man's free will.

A 2d. Branch of the error which this Doctrine refutes, is that which is
vented by some who are not professed enemies, but in other things deserve well
of the Church of Christ, which therefore should be our grief to mention; And it
is this, that though Christ has not simply purchased Redemption from sin to
all men, that yet he has taken away from all, the sins of that first Covenant
of Works, as if there were (as they say) no sin for which men are now
condemned, but the sin of infidelity or unbelief; But this is dangerous for i^.
If this be true that Christ's death is only a price for the sins of the Elect,
then there are no sins of others reckoned on his score. 2. It halveth Christ's
purchase, and hardly will we find Christ's death divided, which were to say that
he has bought a man in part or ha^f, from wrath and not wholly, such a
dividing of Christ, and halving of his death, seems not consistent with the
strain of the Gospel, for as there is one Sacrifice, so there is one account on
which it is offered. 3. It seems to infer a good and safe condition to all them
that die without sinning against the Gospel, and so to Infants born out of the
Church that never sinned against the Covenant of Grace, and it pleads much for
them that never heard the Gospel, yea possibly for all, if they be not obliged
to believe the Gospel, as it is hard to say they are, who never heard of it. 4.
There are many in hell this day who know and feel this to be an untruth, being
condemned for sins against the Covenant of Works, therefore he undertook not
their debt, nor paid for them; And when the Books shall be cast open, there
will be many other sins sound to be reckoned for then sins against the Gospel;
Are not Whoremongers, Adulterers, Murderers, Thieves, etc to to reckon for
these sins? It Is very sad that such things should take place with men
otherwise useful, but is in other things, so in this hurtful, which we should
not speak of, were it not that they are spread abroad in Books wherewith many
may be leavened.

A 3d. Branch of this error which this Doctrine refutes, is, that Christ died
conditionally for all hearers of the Gospel, to whom he is conditionally
offered; and this is also vented by the same Authors who say, that though he
has not bought all men absolutely, nor died to procure life absolutely to
them, yet that he did so conditionally and upon supposition that they should
afterward believe on him: But there can be no conditional satisfaction intended
here, for 1. If respect be had only to the sins of the Elect in Christ's
undertaking, then none is had to the sins of all. 2. If the Fathers acceptance
of the price be absolute, then there is no conditional buying. 3. If it be
conditional then he suspended the effect of his death, the satisfaction for his
Soul-travel on man's will; And if this condition could not be fulfilled by man,
then it is an unwise bargain, and nothing of it may fall to be fulfilled, and
then believing is no fruit of grace. Again, he has either bought Faith to them
as he has done to the Elect, or not; If he has, then they reject it, and so
grace is not efficacious; If not, he has bought the end without the midses
leading to it. Or thus, if it be conditional, it is either on a condition which
they can fulfill, or on a condition that they cannot fulfill; If it be on a
condition which they can fulfill, then it hangs Grace on men's freewill, and
su^pends the Decree of Election on their receiving of Christ; If it be a
condition that is not in their power to fulfill, then either Christ has bought
that condition to them, or not; to say that he has not bought the condition of
Faith, it will infer a strange assertion that he has bought life and not the
condition, the end and not the midses: And if it be said that he has bought
it, it cannot be said that he has done so absolutely, because they never get
it; Or if absolutely, then to the Elect only in whom it must be, and is in due
time fulfilled; And so in effect it resolves in this, that Christ's purpose is
to be bounded and confined (to say so) to the Elect only.

There are some difficulties and objections that will readily here be moved,
which we will not enter upon, only for preventing of mistakes: It stands in the
way of some to hinder their believing as they suppose, that Christ has died
for some and not for all, aad they know not if they be of that small number; If
we were to speak to such, we would say, 1. God has not elected all, and so who
knows if he has elected them I And he will not save all, and who knows if he
will save them? And so the doubt will stick still; If folks will thus break in
upon Gods secret will and purpose which belongs not to them. 2. Christ's death
for you is not the formal ground not warrant of your Faith, not yet of the
offer of the Gospel, but the Lords will warranding you to believe, and calling
for it from you, and his commanding you to rest upon Christ for the attaining
of righteousness as he is offered in the Gospel: We are invited by his command
and promise, and we are not first called to believe that Christ died for us,
but we are called ^^^st to believe in him that is offered to us in the Gospel,
that is our duty, And folks are not condemned because Christ died not for them,
but because when he offered the benefit of his death and sufferings to them,
they slighted and rejected it; We are to look first to what Christ calls to,
and not to meddle with the other, to wit, whom Christ minded in his death, till
we have done the first: The Word bids all believe that they may be saved, and
such as neglect this command will be found disobedient. 3. Though Christ has
not died for all, yet all that flee unto him by Faith shall be partakers of his
death, and from this ye should reason, and not from his intention in dying; If
ye come not to him, ye cannot have ground to think that he died for you, but if
ye go to him by Faith, ye may expect that he will pray for you, and own you for
Believers; Christ casts in that word, John 17. They have believed thy word, as
well as that other. Thine they were, and thou gave them me; And if we put
these two together, the one will be found as sure a ground of consolation as
the other; But it were but a poor comfort to say that Christ died for all, and
yet that they may all, or most, or many of them perish for all that.

The 2d. Use serves to stir them up to thankfulness for whom Christ has
satisfied, and who are fled for refuge to him; If there be any here, to whom
Christ has manifested such love, that they can say he has loved me, and given
himself for me; O! How are ye obliged to wonder and bless him? Greater love
than this cannot be; and it should warm your hearts with love to him the more,
when ye reflect on God's design upon you in particular in the Covenant of
Redemption.

Use 3d. If Christ intended his Death and Sufferings only for behove of the
Elect; Then, as because few come to Heaven, all should be the more diligent; so
because Christ died not for all, every one should aim in Gods own way to have
it made sure to himself that Christ died for him, and should be the more
watchful and diligent to make his Calling and Election sure, because as its not
all that are elected, so its not all that are purchased by Christ's death;
Redemption is sure in it self, and free Grace kithes conspicuously in it, yet
Wisdom and Soveraignity do also appear in this, that its not of all; therefore
study ye to make it sure by fleeing to Christ by Faith, and by the study of
Holine^s and Mortification in his Strength, and through the power of his Death,
which will be a proof of your Interest in it: This were much more suitable than
to be quarreling with God's Decrees, as some are brought in Romans 9.19. Why does
he find fault? who has resisted his will? To whom the Apostle answers, Who art
thou that reply against God? it becomes you not to dispute with God, but to
seek with more Solicitude, and with holy and humble carefulness to make the
matter sure to your selves; we may well raise storms by our disputs, but shall
come to no peace by them; this can only be come at by fleeing to the hope set
before us.

SERMON XXXIII.
ISAIAH LIII. IX. Verse. 9. And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the
rich in his death, because he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in
his mouth.


EVery passage of our Lords way in prosecuting the work of Redemption has
somewhat wonderful in it; we heard of several of them, especially in his
Humiliation, how very low the blessed Cautioner condescended to come for relief
of the captivity; how he was put to wrestle and fight, and what great Strengths
or strong Holds he was put as it were to take in; there is one strong Hold (to
speak so) not spoken of as yet which must also be stormed, and the
fortifications of it pulled down by the Mediator, and that is the Grave; the
Prophet tells us, that as he declined not death, so neither did he decline the
Grave, but as he was cut off out of the land of the living as a wicked man in
the account of men, so in the account of men he was taken down from the cross
with the Thieves and buried in the Grave as one of them.

I shall not trouble you with diversity of interpretations, but shall only hint
at two things for your better understanding of the words, in which the
difficulty lies, The 1. is this, Whether does this relate to his Humiliation
only, or to his Exaltation, or to both? for it cannot be reasonably thought but
his being buried with the wicked is a piece of his Humiliation; to make it only
an evidence of his Humiliation, seems not to stand with the next part of the
words, because he had done no violence, etc. which is a causal reason of that
which goes before: But we answer, that there may be here a respect had unto
both; the first words respect his Humiliation, comparing them with the truth of
the History as it is set down Matthew. chap. 27. where it is clear that he was
destinate in the account of men, and by their appointment, to be buried with
wicked men: for they thought no more of him than if he had been a wicked man.
The next words, And with the rich in his death, look to his Exaltation, and the
meaning of them is, that however he was in the account of men buried with
Thieves, and laid in the grave as a Malefactor or wicked Man; yet in God's
account and by his appointment and overruling providence it was otherwise,
for he put a difference betwixt him and others, and gave him a honorable
burial with the rich, though he was designed by men to be buried with thieves;
yet as we have it Matthew. 27.57. Joseph of Arimathea went to Pilat and begged
his body and wrapped it in clean Linen, and laid it in a new tomb; which in
God's providence was so ordered, both to show a difference betwixt him and
those thieves, and also to declare that he was innocent, as the reason
subjoined tells, Because he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his
mouth; and to make way for the clearing of his Resurrection, he being buried in
such a remarkable place where never man had been buried before.

So then the sum of the words is this, he was ^^^n^led in coming to the grave,
and in men's account and destination was buried as a wicked man, yet by God's
Decree and Providence it was so ordered, that though he was poor all his days,
he had a honorable Burial such as rich men use to have, because he had done no
violence, neither was the^e any deceit in his mouth: God will not have it going
as men designed, but will have him honorably buried and laid in the Grave,
that thereby there might be the greater evidence of his innocence, and a more
full clearing and confirmation of the truth of of his resurrection.

What is rendered death here in our Translation, is deaths in the plural number
in the Hebrew; to show the greatness and terribleness of the death which he
underwent, and the sore spiri^u^l as well as bodily exercise that he was put
unto, at, and in, his death, so that it was a complication of many deaths in
one, and at once which he suffered. 2. Where it is said in our Translation, that
He made his grave; In the Original it is, He gave his grave with the wicked; so
that the Pronoun He, may be meaned, rather of the Father his giving, or it may
be understood of the Mediator himself his giving; and so the meaning is, that
it came not to pass by guess on God's side, but was by him well ordered; and
upon the Mediators side it sets out his willingness to go to the Grave, and his
having an overruling hand, as God, in his own death and burial; as he says
John 10.18. No man takes my life from me, but I lay it down of my self; His
death and burial were determined and well-ordered as to all the circumstances
of both, by a divine decree and by an over rul^ng hand of Providence; and this
agrees well with the reason subjoined, because he willingly con^escended to
die; God put a difference betwixt him and others, as is clear in that of John
10.17. Therefore does my father love me, because I lay down my life for my
sheep. The Verse has two parts, 1. Something foretold concerning the Messiah,
and that is, that he shall make or give his grave with the wicked and with the
rich in his death. 2. There is a reason subjoined, especially to the last part,
taken from his innocence, and from the difference that was in his life betwixt
him and all men in the world, that therefore God put a difference betwix^ him
and them in his death and burial.

First then, This point of Doctrine is employed here, that coming to the Grave
is a thing common and certain to all men; I mean, that death, or a state of
death and to be in the grave, in an ordinary way is common to all men; and
whoever want the privilege of burial, their condition in that respect is
rather worse then better; it is supponed here that wicked men come to the grave,
therefore our Lord is said to make his grave with them; and it is also supposed
that rich men come to the grave, therefore it is said, and with the rich in his
death; that which Solomon has Eccles 8.8. of death, may well be applied to the
gr^ve; there is no man that has power over the spirit to retain it, neither
has he power in the day of death, and the^e is no discharge in that war,
neither shall wickedness deliver these that are given to it; the most powerful
wicked man cannot prevail over it, nor is he able to resist and withstand it;
these who conquer most of the World, are constrained at length to be content
with some few foots of ground, and their Bodies are turned into dust: Job in
the 3d Chapter of his book speaks of it as common to all, to rich and poor, to
high and low, to the King and the Beggar, all are there in one Category; if any
were freed from it, it would readily be rich men, but as it is Psalm. 49.6, 7.
their riches will nor be a ransom for them; They that trust in their wealth and
boast themselves in the multitude of their riches, none of them can by any
means redeem his brother nor give to God a ransom for him, so precious is the
soul tha^ the redemption of it ceases for ever: Amongst all Mortals there is
none that can buy himself from coming to the Churchyard, or from coming to the
grave; but were he never so rich and honorable, he must be said in a hell as
well as the poor man; the bravest and best guided Tomb is but a grave; that
sentence past by God must stand and will stand, Dust thou art and to dust thou
shall return; The translation of Enoch and Elias who old not see death, do not
alter the common rule, though it show the sovereignty and power of God what he
can do.

Use 1. O! think more on Death and on the Grave, these sure would be much more
profitable subjects of thoughts, then many things which our thoughts run
ordinarily on, It Is appointed for men once to die, and thereafter comes the
judgment: As we walk over and trod on the Graves of others now, so some will be
walking over and troding on ours ere long; and within a few years our bodies
will be turned into dust, and our dust will not be known from the dust of
others that lived before us; it were good to have the faith of this more
rooted, and that we did meditate more frequently and seriously on it.

Use 2. It reproves the pride of men and women, and their lusting after earthly
vanities; When death and the grave come, where will all their brave Houses, and
Clothes, and well dressed Beds be? And what will become of your Silver and Gold?
These things will not go to the grave with you, As ye brought nothing into the
world, so its certain that ye shall carry nothing out of it; The consideration
whereof would be a restraint and aw band to men's exorbitant desires; The time
is coming when six or seven foot in length, and two or three foot in breadth of
ground will serve the richest and most honorable; And within a few years the
Lord Provost's dust will not be known from the dust of the poor body that got a
share of the common Contribution; the dust of both will be alike; Dress and
pamper the body as ye will, that beauty will not abide with you; Wherefore then
serves all this pride, ^anity and ^ravity? Seeing a very little whiles time will
lay it all in the dust; and when all our projects will take an end, as Job
says, Chap. 17. M^ purposes are broken, and what did break them off? The grave
(says he) is waiting for me, I have said to corruption, to the rottenness of
the earth, thou art my mother, and to the worms, ye are my brother and sisters;
they and I must ly together; These that now cannot get their bed made fine and
soft enough, the worms and they will lie together ere long in the grave, the
Chest or Coffin will not be so closs but they will win in, nay, they will breed
in their own bodies, do we not see this daily? Were it not then good that when
ye are going to the burials and graves of others, ye were thinking on your own
lying down in the grave? And what will be your thoughts in that day of all
things in this world? If dead Corpses could speak out of their graves, they
would preach sharp warning to them that are alive, and would say to such as are
carrying them thither, Beware of putting off thoughts of death and of the
grave. Though this be a common point of truth, yet few walk suitably to it, but
we are generally in our practice as if it were not a truth, no more minding
death and the grave than if we were eternally to live here.

Use 3. As this should make folks sober in prosperity, so it should make them
patient in adversity; A iittle time will make us all equal, and what is the
matter what our condition be if our peace be made sure with God? Heathens may
shame many of us that are professing Chri^^ians, who, by the consideration of
death, have been brought to be much more sober in their carriage, then alace
many of us are.

2dly, Observe. That the Messiah behoved to come to the grave and be buried; It
was so designed foretold, and fore-prophesied of, He made his grave with the
wicked, and with the rich in his death; Hence the Apostle, Acts 2.30 citing
Psalm. 16 8. gathers, that as there was a necessity of his being in the grave,
so there was a necessity of his resurrection out of it, because he should not
see corruption in it, His foul was not left in hell, or in the grave, neither
did his flesh see corruption; And in all the Evangelists* It Is clear, that
after death he was remarkably laid in the grave, and very particular and
special notice is taken of it: Take here shortly some few reasons of this
necessity according to the Lords appointment, and no further; The 1. whereof is
this, that the unstainedness and purity of Divine Justice may appear, and that
thereby the compleatness and perfection of his satisfaction as Mediator, to the
Justice of God, may be confirmed; If he had not been buried it might have been
questioned whether that which folk suffer after death be a reality or not; But
his three days lying in the grave is a greater evidence of the unstainedness
and purity of Justice, and of its impartiality, then the imprisoning of many
Creatures for many t^ousands of years would have been; This shows him to be a
just God, when sinners Cautioner is not only pursued to death, but to the
grave; And therefore this is always accounted the lowest part or step of his
suff^rings; And in the Creed his descending into hell is spoken of, which in
our excellent Catechism is expounded to be his continuing under the power of
death for a time. 2 It is much for the manifestation of the great love of God,
and of the rich condescending grace of the Mediator, who is not only content to
die, but to come to the grave, and to suffer death to have a kind of dominion
over him for a time; So that as death had power to separate his soul from his
body, so it prorogats that power during his being in the grave; His enemies, as
it were, cry, Take him up now, and they seal the stone and set a watch to keep
him in the grave. 3. It Is for the consolation of the Believer, and serves
mightily to strengthen him against the fear of death and the grave; So that the
Believer needs not be afraid of death, but may ly down quietly in the grave,
because it was Christ's bed, warmed, to say so, by him, he was there before him,
and the grave is now to the Believer no part of the curse, more than death is;
The grave will not swallow him up with a sort of dominion and right, as it does
the reprobate. 4. It serves to confirm the truth of the Resurrection of Christ,
more than if he had never been in the grave, as the Apostle proves, 1 Cor. 15.
from the beginning to the close, even till he come to that, O death, where is
thy sting, O grave, where is thy victory? Our Lord by dying and being buried,
has delivered his people from both; As neither a great Stone, nor a Seal put
on it could keep him in the grave, but that he rose again the third day, so no
thing will be able for ever to keep Believers at under; and as he died to
disarm death, so his entering in the grave was to disarm the grave, and to open
a door for Believers to come through it, by his power who was dead and laid in
the grave, but now is risen and alive for evermore.

The Uses are 1. To show the full conformity and agreeableness that is betwixt
what was foretold of the Messiah, and what is fulfilled; and so serves to
confirm our Faith in this, that he is the true Messiah, who was crucified, dead
and buried; This is one of the Articles of our Faith foretold by Isaiah, now
fulfilled and recorded to be so in the Gospel. 2. It shows the severity of
Justice, that when any person is made liable to the lash of it, were it but as
Cautioner, it will exact of him satisfaction to the uttermost; Therefore when
Christ enters himself our Cautionrr, it not only exacts death, and pursues him
till he give up the Ghost, but after death pursues him to the grave; It will
needs have that satisfaction of the Mediator, and he yields to it so as to lay
himself by as a dead man: O what a revengful thing is Justice when a sinner
must answer to it? When the Mediator was so pursued by it, what will it do to
others who are out of him? Here we may apply that word, Daughters of Jerusalem,
weep not for me, but weep for your selves and your children; If it be done so
to the green tree, what will be done to the dry? When the fire of the vengeance
of God shall kindle that lake that burns with fire and brimstone, and when
sinners shall be cast into it as so many pieces of Wood, or as so many pieces
of dry sticks, what will be their condition? It were good in time to fear
falling into the hands of the living God, which is indeed a most fearful thing,
Heb. 10.31.

3 It shows the Believers obligation to God that has so fully provided a
satisfaction for him, and has furnished him with such a ground of consolation;
Beside what is done for the satisfying of Justice (which is the great
consolation) there is here ground of consolation against all crosses, pain,
sickness, death and the grave; There is not a step in the way to Heaven but our
Lord has gone it before us; We have not only a Mediator that died, but that
was buried; And O! but this is much when Believers come to think on their going
to the grave; Will it devour them, or feed upon them for ever? No, he has
muzled it, to say so; They rest in their grave as in a bed, in their bodies
being united to him, and their dust must be counted for; Its true, the bodies
of the reprobate must be raised up, yet upon another account, and not by virtue
of their union with Christ, and of Christ's victory over death in their stead,
as Believers are; In a word, they have many advantages that have Christ, and
they have a miserable life, a comfortless death, and a hard lying in the grave
that want him; Therefore, as the short cut, to have a happy life, and a
comfortable death and burial, and the grave sanctified to you; seek to have
your interest in Christ made sure, then all things are yours, and particularly
death and the grave, which will be as a Box to keep the particles of your dust
till it restore them faithfuly to Christ, to whom it must give an account. But
as for you that sl ght and misken Christ, ye have a dreadful lot of it, no
interest in Christ living, no union with him in the grave, nor at the
Resurrection; And if ye did but seriously c^nsider that ye will die, ye would
also consider that it is good dying and being in the grave with Christ, and that
it is a woeful thing to be, and to be in it without him.

3ly. Observe That all the sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ, to the least
particular circumstance of them, were ordered of God, and before hand
determined and concluded upon; none of them came by guess upon him; That he
should suffer and die, and what sort of death he should die, and that he should
be laid in the grave, all was before concluded and determined; When we read
through the Gospel, it were good to take a look of the Old Testament-Prophesies
of the Covenant of Redemption, and of the ancient determinations concerning
him, as Peter does, Acts 2.27. Him being delivered by the determinate counsel
of God, ye have with wicked hands crucified; God's fore knowledge and
determination fixed the bounds, and laid down the rule (to speak so) to these
wicked hands in the crucifying of him, without all tincture or touch of
culpable accession to their sin; and in looking over his sufferings, we would
call to mind, that this and this was the Lords purpose, and that in these
sufferings, and in every part and piece of them, the Mediator is telling down
the price that he undertook to pay; All which demonstrats the verity of our
Lords being the true Messiah.

4ly. From comparing the two parts of the first part of the verse together, He
made his grave with the wicked, as to the estimation of men, and with the rich
in his death, in respect of Gods ordering it. Observe, That often God has one
design, and men another, and that God will have his design to ^^and, and
infrustrably to take effect: When some would design sh^me to his people, he
will have them honored.

The 1. Use serves to comfort Gods people when they are in their lowest
condition, and when their enemies are in highest power; our Lord is driving on
his design, and making his and their en^mies to fulfill it: Pilate and the
Chief Priests with the Scribes and Pharisees are putting Christ to death, the
multitu^e ar^ crying Crucify him, and preferring a Robber to him; But in all
this, they were fu fi ling what God had before determined to be done, which we
say is m^tter of great consolation both as to our own particular case, and as
to God's general guiding of the World, and especially of his Church therein;
There is nothing wherein the malice of men seems to be most prevalent, but our
Lord is still gaining his point upon, and by them; They are all the while
executing God's determination, though to their own ruin.

2. See here an exact correspondency betwixt all the circumstances of our
Lord's sufferings and God's determination, and a concurrence of all of them for
the promoving of it in the History of the Gospel; A bone of him is not broken,
when the bones of the two Thieves crucified with him are broken, a Spear is run
at him, and his side is pierced, when they are not pierced; And all this,
because it was prophesied of him, that A bone of him shall not be broken, and
they shall look upon him whom they have pierced; and when it comes to his
burial, Pilate wots not what he is doing when yet he is fulfilling the Lords
design in giving his body to a rich man Joseph of Arimathea, when he asked it
from him to be buried by him, whereby the Prophecy of the Text is fulfilled;
The wickedness of some, the contingent actions of others, and the ignorance of
many, concur all together, to make out the same holy and unalterable design
and purpose of God.

And therefore 3dly, Let us stay our faith here, that our Lord is yet still
working in all these confusions, and when matters returned up-side down to
humane appearance, our blessed Lord is not non-plussed and at a stand when we
are, he knows well what he is doing, and will make all things most certainly,
infallibly, and infrustrably to work for his own glory, and for the good of his
people.

From its being said that He gave his grave with the wicked, as holding forth
Christ's willingness to be buried, (as he says of his death, John 10.17. No
man takes away my life from me, but I lay it down, and take it up again.)
Observe, That in the whole performance of the work of Redemption, even in the
lowest and most shameful steps of it our Lord was a most willing condescender,
He gave his grave with the wicked; He was a most free and willing undertaker,
when as it were, the Question was put, Who will satisfy for Elect sinners? He
comes in and says (as we h^ve it, Psalm. 40.) Lo, I come, in the volume of thy
book it is written of me, I delight to do thy will, O my God; I am here,
Father, as if he had said, I offer my self and accept of the terms heartsomly
and delightsomly; I rejoiced, says he, Prove. 8.28. in the habitable parts of
the earth, before the foundation of the world was laid my delight was with the
sons of men: So it may be made evident, that in all the parts of his
sufferings, and in every step thereof, he did most exactly, and also most
willingly perform whatever was carved out to him; He preached and wrought
miracles, and did all with delight, as himself says, John 4.32. It is my meat
and my drink to do my Fathers will, and to finish his work; It refreshed him
when his body was hungry and faint to be carrying on the work of Redemption in
speaking to a poor straying sinner. If we yet look a little forward we will
find that he so longed for the saddest part of this exercise, that he is pained
till it be accomplished. Luke 12.50. I have a b^ptism to be baptized with, and
how am I straightened till it be accomplished? His heart longed so much to be at
it, that he would approve nor admit of nothing that might stand in the way of
it, therefore he rejected Peter's advice with holy detestation, with a Get thee
behind me Satan; He knew well what was in Judas mind, and yet would not divert
him, but bid him do what he was about, quickly; He went to the Garden where he
was known to resort, and gave his enemies opportunity to rake him, and would
not suffer his Disciples to draw a Sword to oppose them; When he was before
Pilate he would not open his mouth; When he was buffetted he gave his back to
the smiters, and his cheeks to him that plucked off the hair, and hid not his
face from shame and spitting; Because he knew what was aimed at in all this,
and accordingly says Matthew. 20.20. The Son of Man came not to be served, but
to serve, and to give his life a ransom for many; When His Holy Humane Nature
scarred at the Cup, and when he was thereby put to pray, Father, if it be
possible let this cup pass from me, he sweetly subioyns, but for this cause
came I unto this hour; And the nearer it came to his death he vented his desire
after it the more, With desire have I desired, says he, or with special desire
have I desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer; Even when he was
to eat the last Passover, and to take his last good night, and to be in
readiness for what was coming: What could have been the mean or motive to bring
it about, if he had not been willing? It was this willingness that Jehovah was
pleased with, and that made his Sacrifice to smell sweetly to his Father, who
loves a cheerful giver, and it had never been satisfactory if it had not been
willing but extorted, and therefore says he, Joh. 10. No man takes my life
from me, but I lay it down; And I delight to do thy will, Psalm. 40.

Use 1. See here a great evidence of the love of God and of the Mediator;
Behold what manner of love this is, that when it was not required, he should
offer and freely give himself to death and to the grave, this is the love of a
friend and beyond it, that he should have so loved his Church as to give
himself for her to death, and to the grave; Well may he say as he does, John
15.15. Greater love has no man then this, etc.

2dly, It shows what great ground of consolation and encouragement a sinner
has that would fain be at Christ, to believe on him, and to expect Life and
Salvation through him; Our Lord was most willing to lay down his life and to
come to the grave for that end, and is it possible that he will refuse a sinner
that comes unto him, and that would fain share in the benefit of his
sufferings, which was his great end in suffering? This one thing, to wit the
willingness that he had to suffer, and the delight that he had in suffering, to
purchase Redemption to sinners, may be as a strong cordial to strengthen the
heart of a swo^^ing Sinner, and a great motive and encouragement to come
forward to him. Thou will, it may be, say, I wot not if Christ loves me; O!
Consider these sweet words, Romans 5.10. If he died for us while we were yet
enemies, how much more shall we be saved by his life? I shall close this
discourse with these two words, the 1. whereof is, for encouragement; If there
be any body here that would fain have Christ's love, and partake of his death:
Take courage, seeing our Lord out of the great desire he had to promove the
Salvation of sinners, Gave him self to death and to the grave, will he not
willingly make application of his purchase to them when they seek it? That he
was willing to undergo all this is a far greater matter then to welcome a
sinner coming home to him; And if he did all that he did for this very end,
will he stand on it when it comes to the application? The 2d. word is, that
this is, and will be a ground of conviction to all who think little of our
blessed Lord Jesus, and of his love, and who will not part with a base lust for
him, and who will not make choice of him, but will refuse, reject, undervalue
and despise him, with all that he has done and suffered; it will exceedingly
aggravat your condemnation, that when he was so willing to die for the good of
sinners, ye were not willing to live for his satisfaction; Think on it, O!
think seriously on it; These things are the truths of God, and the main truths
of the Gospel, that ly very near the engaging of hearts to Christ; And if such
truths do you no good, none other readily will; God give us the Faith of them.

SERMON XXXIV.
ISAIAH LIII.IX. Verse. 9. And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the
rich in his death, because he had do^e no violence, neither was any deceit in
his mouth.


THis is a most wonderful Suj^ct that we have to think and s^eak of, which
concerns the ^uff^rings that our blessed Lord was pleased to undergo for
sinn^rs; And this makes it to be the more wonderful ^hen we consider what he
was made, and what his carriage was; He was numbered with the transgressors,
and gave his grave with the wi^ked; And yet he has this te^^imony that there
was no violence in his hands, nor any deceit in his mouth; He was a sinless
Mediator not only before men, but before God.

These words considered in themselv^s, hold out a little sum and short compend
of an holy walk, most perfectly and exactly fulfilled in the conversation of
Jesus Christ; He had done no violence, or, there was no violence in his hands,
that is, there was no sinful deed contrary to the Law of God in all his
practice and walk, And there was no deceit, or no guile in his mouth* that is,
no sinful or decei^ful expression: Io^um, neither in deed nor in word was there
sin in him; He did wrong to none by his deeds, and he deceived no body by his
words; This guile or deceit as it looks to the first Table of the Law, imports,
th t there was no falsehood nor corrupt Doctrine in his Ministry; He did not
beguile nor se^uce the souls of any in leading them wrong; And as it looks to
the second Table of ^he Law more immediately, it imports that he was sincere and
upright, that there was no deceit, no violence or dis^embling in his carriage;
so that whether we look to him ^s God's public Servant in the Ministry, or to
him in his private walk, he was completely innocent and without all sin, as the
word is, 1 Pet 2 22 Who did no sin, neither was guile ^ound in his mouth;
However men accounted of him, he was an innocent and sinless Savior.

If we look on them as they depend on the former words, they are a reason of
that diff^rence which in his death and buria^ God did put betwixt him and
others; Though he was by wicked men put to death as a wicked person, yet God in
his providence so ordered the matter that he was honorably buried with the
rich; Why so? T^is is the reason of it, because though they esteemed him a
false Prophet and a Dec^iver, a Wine-bibber, etc. Yet he had done no wrong to
any, neither by word nor by deed, and therefore God would have that respect pu^
on him after his death in his burial, and so a remarkable difference to be made
betwixt him and others.

Observe hence, 1. That our Lord Jesus, the High Priest of our profession that
laid down his life for sinners, is completely and perfectly holy; He has that
testimony from the Prophet here, that He did no violence, neither was there any
deceit in his mouth; He has this testimony from the Apostles* from Peter, 1
^et. 2.22. He did no sin neither was any guile found in his mouth; From John 1.
John 3* 5 He was manifested to take away sin, and in him is no sin; And from
Paul* Heb. 7.27. He was holy and harmless and undefiled* separate from sinners;
In this respect there is a difference betwixt him and all men in the world: And
i^ was necessary and requisite for Believers consolation that it should be so,
It became us, says the Apostle, to have such an High Priest, 1. If we consider
the excellency of his person, he could not be otherwise, being God and Man in
one Person, and having the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in him bodily. 2. It
was necessary if we consider the end of his Offices, he being to offer up an
acceptable Sacrifice to God, behoved to be holy and harmless, otherwise neither
the Priest nor the Sacrifice could have been acceptable. 3. It was necessary if
we consider the dignity of his Office; It behoved him to differ from the former
Priests under the Law; And if he had not been without sin he should not have so
differed from them. 4. It was necessary for the persons for whom he undertook
these Offices; Such a High Priest became them, and another could not have done
their turn; All these we will find to be put together, Heb. 7.26, 27. Where the
Apostle having said, verse. 25. That he is able to save to the uttermost these
that come unto God through him, subjoyns, For such an High Priest became us,
who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, made higher then the
heavens, who needs not daily as these high Priests to offer up sacrifices
first for his own sins, and then for the sin of the people; The most holy of
all the Priests had sins for which they behoved to offer Sacrifices, and so had
the holiest of the pople, but Christ was holy and blameless and had no sin, and
it behoved him to be so; As I said just now, his sacrifice could never have
been accepted for others if he had needed to offer up sacrifices for himself.

The Uses are these; Not to speak how it vindicats our Lord Jesus Christ from
all these aspersions cast upon him by wicked men, who called him a Glutton, a
Wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and Sinners, a Deceiver, etc. He was holy
and harmless, and ere long he will gloriously appear to be holy, when these who
pierced him shall see him and be confounded; I say, the Uses are these, in
reference to the Church and People of God; It serves 1 To show the
condescendency of love, and the contrivance of infinite wisdom for the behove
of sinners, Such a high Priest became us; Love condescended and wisdom
contrived that he should become man and suffer, the just for the unjust; Wisdom
set on work by grace provided for sinners such a High Priest as they stood in
need of; And indeed sinners have no want here, for they have a High Priest
becoming them, and this is an evidence of it, that he is holy, harmless,
undefiled, separate from sinners, etc. 2. It serves to be a great ground of
encouragement to sinners, to step to, and make use of Christ's Sacrifice, our
Lord had no sin, and needed not to offer a Sacrifice for himself; And if he
offered Sacrifice for atonement, wherefore did he so? It was either for
himself, and that could not be, for he was holy; or for nothing or for no end,
and to say so were blasphemy, or it must be for a real satisfaction for Elect
sinners, or such as should make use of him; And thus Faith has a sure ground
to lay hold on* and namely that his satisfaction was real; And that it was for
this end, to be made forthcoming for the behove of such as should believe on
him, And therefore look upon Christ's suffering, and upon his innocence who
suffered, and ye will find that ye have a suitable High Priest and atonement
made for you; O but that is a sweet word, 2 Cor. 5. ult. He has made him to be
sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in
him.

3ly. It Is ground of great consolation to them that betake themselves to
Christ, why? our Lords Sacrifice cannot but be accepted, for there was in him
no guile, nothing that might make his Sacrifice unsavory; and as it commends
the way of Grace to a sinner, so it is ground of encouragement to a sinner to
look to be accepted through him; for if the temptation should say, thou art a
sinner, and such and such a great sinner; that is nothing to purpose, for God
has accepted of Christ and of his Sacrifice, and if thou make use of his
Sacrifice, it cannot but be accepted for thee; here then is the consolation,
that we have such an High Priest* as became us, who needed not to offer for
himself, but only for the sins of the People and of his own People.

4ly. It serves notably for our imitation; He was holy, and in his holy walking
has left us a copy to write after and to walk by; and therefore in your
speaking of Christ's Holiness, or in your reading of it, consider that he is
thereby casting a copy to you, and bidding you purify your selves as he is
pure, to (...) holy as he who has called you is holy; learn of him to be meek
and lowly in heart, to be humble and heavenly-minded, and in whateve^ respect
his life and walk is proposed to us as a pattern, set your selves in his own
strength to imitate it, and be ye followers of him as dear children; whenever
ye read o^ his obedience to the death, of his holiness in all m^nner of
conversation, and of his fulfilli^g all righteousness, let it provoke you
singly and seriously to design and endeavor conformity to him therein in your
practice.

2ly. From the connection of these two, That he was accounted a sinner before
and at his death, and that after his death God did put that note of respect
upon him, that he was buried with the rich because he had done no violence etc.
but was holy and harmless in his life. Observe, That however Holiness may
suffer as long as holy persons live, yet at death and after death, there is
ever a testimony of the Lords respect put on it; or thus holy walkers are
always separated and differenced from others as their death it is ever otherwise
with them than it is with others when death comes, however it has been with
them in their life, He made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his
death, because he had done no violence, etc. This has been confirmed in the
experience of all that ever lived; The rich glutton Luke 16. has the better
life as to externals, and Lazarus had a poor ^ffl^cted life* but when death
comes, the rich glutton goes to Hell, and Lazarus goes to the bosom of Abraham:
This is laid down as a certain truth. Eccles. 8.12, 13. Th^ugh a sinner do evil
an hundred times, and his days be prolonged, yet surely I know that it shall be
well with him that fears God, but it shall not be well with the wicked, there
shall be a change at death; and it cannot be otherwise, whether we look 1. To
the holy Nature of God who has a complacency in Holiness, as it is said Psalm.
11. ult. The righteous Lord loves righteousness, his countenance does behold
the upright: Or whether 2. We look to the Word of God, which Isa. 3.10, 11.
bids say to the righteous, It shall be well with them, for they shall eat of
the fruit of their doings, (for blessed are the dead which die in the Lord,
they rest from their labors and their works do follow them,) but we unto the
wicked, it shall be ill with him, for the reward of his hands shall be given
him, the same connection that was betwixt Christ's life, though a suffering life
and his death, shall be betwixt the life of all his Members and their death. If
we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him.

The Uses are, 1. To let us see what is the true w^y to eternal well-being when
this short life shall be at an end* and it is the way of Holiness; and so it
serves to answer a great question, who shall be happy at their death? even they
that are holy in their life; whose hands have done no violence, and whose mouth
has had no guile, to wit, with the full bensil of their will, and without all
gracious reluctation, for absolute freedom from these in this life was proper
only to our Lord Jesus since Adams fall: Such may expect the Lords countenance
when death separats their soul and body, therefore take this as a mark for
trial observe and see what is your carriage, and judge accordingly; and seeing
the Lord has joined Holiness and Happiness together inseparably, presume not
to separate them.

2ly. Is it so that Holiness has a good and comfortable close of a man's life,
(which is the substance of the Doctrine,) it would commend to us the study of
Holiness as the most precious, advantageous, honorable, sick^r and safe course
that a man can follow; Say to the righteous it shall be well with him; it is
not* say to the honorable man* n^r say to the rich man, nor to the wise man,
etc. God has not cho^en many of these, as is clear 1 Cor. 1.26. bu^* say to
the righteous or holy man; it shall be we^l with him; and is her^ any thing
that should have so much influence on men, and take them so much up, as how to
be well in the close? Folk may have a fighting life of it here, and may suffer
much, and be under reproach for a time, as Christ was; but if thou be holy, ere
thy Body be laid in the Grave it shall be well with thy Soul: And as for all
who have chosen the way of Holiness, we are allowed to say this to you, that it
shall be well with you at death and after death, at Judgment and even for
evermore; To them (says the Apostle Romans 2.9.) who by patient continuance in
well-doingr seek for glory and honor and immortality, eternal life; O how many
great and good things are abiding all the honest-hearted Students of Holiness?
Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor heart conceived what they are.

3ly. It Is ground of expostulation with them that neglect and slight Holiness;
As it will be well with the Righteous or Holy, so they shall have a miserable
and desperate lot of it who either despise or neglect Holiness, Woe to the
wicked (says Isaiah 3.1^.) it shall be ill with him; Some of you may think
that ye are rich and honorable, are well clothed, fit in fine Houses, and
have richly covered Tables, when poor Bodies are kept at the door, and are
destitute of these things; and are ready to bless your selves as being well,
though ye care not for, nor seek after Holiness; but woe unto you, for ye must
die and go to the bottomle^s Pit, and there ye will not get so much as a drop
of water to cool your Tongues in these tormenting Flames; neither your Riches,
nor Honors, nor Pleasures, will hold off the heat and fury of the vengeance of
God, nor in the ^e^st ease you in your ex^ream pain; but as it is Romans 2.9*
Indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish (four sore words) will be upon
every soul of man that does evil; O d^ ye believe this? ^'s the truth of God
and a very plain truth, and we are persuaded none of you will dare downright to
deny it; Holiness will have a sweet and comfortable close* and the neglect of
it will have fearful eff^cts following on it; what is the reason then that
Holiness is so little thought of and followed? do ye believe that ye will die?
and think ye ever to come to Judgment, or to hear that word, Come ye blessed of
my Father inherit the kingdom prepared for you, for I was hungry and ye fed me,
naked and ye clothed me, etc. O what will become of many of you; when the Lord
Jesus will be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels i^flaming fire, to
render vengeance to all them who know not God, and who obey not the Gospel? and
will say to you, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the devil
and his angels, for when I was hungry ye fed me not, etc. this is, I grant, a
general truth, yet if it be not received, we know not what truth will be
received, and if it were received, the practice of Holiness would be more
studied; there would be less Sin and more Prayer, Reading, Meditation, more
seeking after Knowledge, and more watchfulness and tenderness in Folks
Conversation; always, in this the Lord shows the connection that is betwixt
Holiness and H^ppiness, and h^re ye have the copy and pattern of an examplary
walk.

3ly. From this, that the holi^ess and blam^nle^e^s of Christ here spoken of*
is marked in him as peculiar to him, for it fits him to be a High Pri^st, and
proves that only he could be the Priest that ^uited and became us an^ that no
other could do our turn, as the Apostle r^asons Heb 7 26, 27, 28. For the law
makes men priests that have infirmity, but the word of ^he oath which was
since the law makes the son who is consecrated for evermore; From this I say*
Obse^ve, That all men, even the most holy, except Christ (who was both God and
Man,) a e sinful and not one of them sinless while living here on earth, and
the reason is, bec^u^e (...) any were sinless, then this that is said here
would not be peculiar to our Lord Jesus Christ, that He di^ no violence*
neither was there deceit ^n his mouth; This being a singular character of our
High Pri^st that none of his Types could cl^^m to, it exclusively agrees to
him so as it agrees to none other; The Scripture is full to this purpose, in
asserting, that not only all m^n are sinn^rs as considered in their natur^l
condition, but that even B^lieve^ are sinful in part; for the same Apostle John
that says, 1 Epist 1.3. Truly, our fellowship is with the Father, and with his
Son Jesus Christ, says also verse. 8. If we say we have no si^, we deceive our
selves, and the truth is not in us; and verse 10. If we say that we have not
sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us; and 1 Kings 8.46. and
Eccles. 7.20. There is no man that does good and sins not, plainly
insinuating, that all have need of an Intercessou^: We shall not insist in
this, only from these words compared with the scope, making it peculiar to
Christ to be without sin, and implying, that none other are so, we would
consider the necessity of its being so, 1. For differencing and separating of
Jesus Christ from all others, by putting this d^gnity on him, of being holy,
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, this is his prerogative and badge
of honor above others. 2. It Is necessary for this end, to demonstrate the need
that there is of his offering himself a Sacrifice for sinners, and that it was
not for himself, but for sinners that he offered up himself, and that there is
a continual necessity of making use of that Sacrifice, for if there were not a
continuance of sin in part while Believers are out of Heaven, there would be no
need of this part of Christ's office; if we were holy and harmless our selves we
needed not such an High Priest.

Use 1. To establish us in the faith of this Truth, That among all men there is
none that were true men, except Christ, that is without sin; sin is still
abiding in them while in this world; of none of them all it can be said, that
they have done no violence, neither is there any deceit in their mouth; none of
them could ever say since Adam fell, the prince of this world comes and has
nothing in me; yea this is a special qualification of Christ Jesus for his
Priesthood; that he was without sin, and behoved to be so; I am not pleading
that sinners should take a liberty to sin because there is no perfection to be
win at in this life, God forbid; woe unto them that make such an use of this
truth; nor do I speak of it to allow any to dispense with* or to give way to
themselves to sin; for we show before, that Christ is here proposed as our
Pattern, and we are bidden purify our selves as he is pure: But this we say,
that none living here on the earth are without sin; the most perfect men that
are on this side Eternity, carry about with them a body of death, called five
or six times sin, Romans 7. that has actual lustings, and a power as a law of
sin to lead captive, and that makes the man guilty before God.

Use 2. For reproof to two sorts of enemies to this Truth, 1. These inveterate
enemies of the Sacrifice of our Lord Jesus Christ, to wit the Papists, that
black train that follows Antichrist, who plead for a perfection according to
the law as attainable in this life, saying down two grounds to prove this
perfection. 1. That the inward lustings, or first risings and mo^ions at least
of the body of Death, are no sins: And 2. Their exponing of the law, so as it
may suit to their own apprehension and opinion, yet so as they say, that every
Believer or godly Person wins not to this perfection to keep the law wholly,
but only some of their Grandees: This the Lord has mercifully banished out of
the Reformed Churches, as Inconsistent with the experience of the Saints, who
find a law in their members warring against the law of their mind, and leading
them captive to the law of sin that is in their members; inconsistent with the
Scriptures which clear, that none have attained nor do att^in perfection in
this life, but the contrary, that in many things we offend all; and
inconsistent with Grace, that leaves sinners still in Ch^ists common and debt
as standing in need of his imputed Righteousness; This perfection they place in
inherent Holiness and habitual Grace, but we insist not on it. 2ly. Another
sort of enemies reproved here, are the old Familists, who are owned by these
who are called Antinomians, several of which miserable persons are now going up
and down amongst us, who say that the People of God have no sin in them,
wherein they are worse then Papists, for Papists make it peculiar to some only,
but they make it common to all Believers; And Papists make their perfection to
consist in inherent holiness, but they make the nature of sin to be changed,
and say, that sin is no more so in a Believer, even though it be contrary to
the Law of God; We grant indeed that the people of God are free of sin in these
respects, 1. In this respect, that no sin can condemn them, they are not under
the Law but under Grace in that resp^ct, Romans 8.1. It Is said that There is no
condemnation to them who are in Christ. 2. In his respect that they cannot fall
into that sin which as unto death, as is clear 1 John 5.17, 18 And 3. in this
respect, that they cannon ^o sin ^s to ly or be under the ^^^gn and ^omi^ion of
sin, as is evident* Romans 6 14. The Believer delights in the L^w ^f God
according to the inner man R^m. 7.22. And is not in sin, neither does c^mmit
sin as the unbeliever does, for the seed of God abides in him, and is kept
from being involved in that which hi^ corrupt nature inclines the Believer to;
So then, what the Scriptu^e speaks of the Believers being free of sin, is to be
understood in one of these respects: But to ^ay 1. That a Believer cannot sin
at all, sad exp^rience and the practice of the Saints is a proof of the
contrary; Or 2. To say that sin in a Believer is no sin because of his faith in
Christ is as contr^^y to Scripture; For the Law of God is the same to the
Believer and the unbeliever, and sin is the same in both, Adultery is Adultery,
and Mur^her is Murder in David, as well as in any other man; Sure when Christ
bade his Disciples pray for forgivenness of sin daily, he taught them no such
Doctrine as to account their sins to be no sins; For if so, they should neither
repent of sin, nor seek the pardon of it, as some are not a shamed to say they
should not. That which we aim at, is to ^lear it to be Christ's prerogative only
to be free of sin, none other in this life can claim it; And to teach B^lievers
to carry about with them daily all along their mortal life that which is for
their good, even the sense ^f sin: I know it is now an up cast from some
pretended perfectionists, to the people of God* that they think and say that
they have sin, and a^e not perfect; And we are by these men called
Antichristian Priests and Jesuits, because we Preach that Doctrine; Bu^ let it
be soberly considered, whether it does better agree with Papists and Jesuits to
say that Believers are without sin, or to say that they have sin? They who say
that Believers or the Saints have no sin, do agree in this with the Papists,
who maintain a perfection of holiness, or a conformity to the Law in some in
this life, and who deny the lustings of the body of death to be sin; without
which opin^on, though most gross, they would not, nor could with the least
shadow of reason, main^ain their Doctrine of Ju^tification by Works: And yet
some now among us will needs call us Popish, because we say that we have sin
and that none of God's people are without sin in this life; T^is seems to be
very str^^ge; But that which has been the thought of some sharp-sighted and
sagacious men since the b^ginning of our confusions, to wit, that Popery is a
working as an underhand design, is by this and other things m^de to be more
and more apparent: Is there any thing more like Popery working in a mystery,
yea more Popish then to say that the motions of corruption in Believers are no
sins, tha^ a man or woman may attain to perfection in holiness here, and yet to
carry on this with that subtilty, as confidently to averr that it is Popery to
say the contrary? Nay, if the Sc^iptures they make use of in their Papers or
Pamphlets be well considered, we will find that not only a perfection in
Holin^^s and Good works is pleaded for, but a possibility of fulfilling the Law
and Covenant o^ Works, as namely, 1 Pet. 1.15. 1 John 3.3. and 5.5. and Matthew.
5. ult. Will ye (say they) call your selves Saints that are not purified even
as he is pure? And will ye c^ll your selves Believers that have not overcome
the world, etc? As if all that is commanded duty might be or were perfectly
reached in this life, and as if no di^tinction betwixt begun, yea considerably
advanced holiness and entire perfection, were to be ad^itted: That for which I
mark this, is to show that the design of Popery seems to be on foot, the Devil
in some inconsiderable persons venting these things, when the great Patrons and
Authors of them lie derned and hid; And it is observable which we have heard of
late, that some Ringleaders in this time have declared themselves expressly for
Popery: Though we have reason to bless God, that the people in this place are
kept free of these things; yet this truth is worthy the vindicating, and the
hazard and danger is to be guarded against by all of us, when this foul Spirit
is driving so hard, and prevailing with some to publish abroad this error in
Papers; And so seeking to draw people into the snare, Lay down but these two
Principles both now maintained, that they that have Faith have no sin, and that
they that want Grace should not pray, what would they turn to and resolve in?
Satan's design in this is doubtless to make all untender, and it is both sad
and strange that it is not seen and observed; What a terror and torrure would
it be to an exercised and tender Christian, and how would it put his Conscience
on the wrack, to say to him, What a Faith is this of yours that cannot keep you
altogether from sin, and that cannot quite overcome the world? God be blessed
that has given poor Believers other and better grounds in the Gospel by which
to judge of their Faith, so that they may own their Faith as found, though they
have a mixture of unbelief with it, and yet unbelief is always a sin, and may
say with that poor man, Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief.

4ly. Observe, That to the making up of a perfect holy walk there is a
necessity both of holiness in practice, and of foundness in judgment, that no
deceit or guilt be in the mouth, and that no violence be in the bands; And this
is needful to be taken notice of, because many have an aptitude to think, that
folks may be truly holy, be of what opinion, judgment and persuasion they
will; As if God had left the mind of man to be a bare empty Table or Board that
he might Write on it whatever he liked or pleased; But our Lord is vindicated
here from the scandal of corrupt Doctrine, as well as from scandals in his
practice; And therefore as we would say on the one hand to you who are sound in
your judgment, and hate error, that if ye be gross and untender in your
practice, the soundness of your judgment will not prove you to be holy; So
upon the other side, we would say, that though it were possible ye could be
sinless in your practice, if ye take a latitude and liberty as to your
judgment to be corrupt, and to vent what ye please, ye will never get Gods
approbation as being holy persons, therefore let both be joined together,
soundness in Judgment, and tenderness in Practice; God give the right use of
these things.

SERMON XXXV.
ISAIAH LIII.IX, X. Verse. 9. And he made his Grave with the Wicked, and with
the Rich in his death, because he had done no violence, neither was any deceit
in his mouth.

Verse. 10. Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, He has put him to grief:
When thou shall make his Soul an offering for sin, He shall see his seed, He
shall prolong his days, And the the ple^sure of the Lord shall prosper in his
hand.


WE were speaking somewhat the last day of our Lord Jesus His Innocence, which
is here compended and summed up in these two. 1. That there was no violence in
his hands. 2. That there was no deceit in his mouth; however he was accounted
of among Men, and by them numbered among transgressors, yet he was so in very
deed, and before God.

The Prophet proceeds, and answers an objection, How came He then to Suffer, if
He was so innocent? especially His Sufferings being ordered by God, Who is said
to give His Grave with the wicked? He answers the Objection, and removes the
Offense* by giving three Grounds for this v. 10. Yet it p^eased the Lord to
bruise Him, He has put Him to grief; This is the first Reason, and it is taken
from the Fountain whence His Sufferings proceeded, Gods good Pl^asure
graciously ordered it so; It was the good pleasure of Jehovah, that so it
should be. The second Reason, is taken from the Nature or End of His
Sufferings, in these Words when thou shall make His Soul an offering for sin;
Though he suffered before Men as a sinner, yet before God it was an Offering
for sin: To satisfy for, and to remove the sins of His Elect People; The word
may be either, When thou, or, when he, shall make His Soul an offering for sin:
But both come to one thing, which is this, That His sufferings were not such as
befell other Men, nay, nor such as befell innocent Men, but they were ordered
on an higher design, and for an hig^er End, even to be a Satisfaction for
Sinners, and to make way for their Freedom. A 3. Reason is this, as His
Sufferings flowed from God's good Pleasure, and were a satisfaction for the
sins of His Elect People; so it has notable and noble effects. And there are
Three mentioned here, 1. He shall see His seed, He shall have a numerous
Offspring, many that shall hold Eternal L^fe of Him; Men by their suffering of
death are incapacitate to increase their offspring, but this is a quickening
Suffering, and Death that has a numerous offspring. 2. He shall prolong His
days, Which seems to be another paradox; For Men's days are shortened by their
Sufferings, and Death; But though He be dead and buried, yet he shall Rise again
and Ascend, and sit down on the righthand of the Father, and live for ever, to
make Intercession for his People. A 3. Effect, which is the upshot of all, The
pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in His hand; God has designed Him for a
Work, which is the great Work of Redemption, even the bringing of many Sons to
glory; This is the Will of Him that sent Him, that He should give Eternal Life
to as many as should believe on Him: And this is called God's good pleasure
which shall thrive and prosper in His hand; He shall pull many Captives from
the Devil, and set many Prisoners free; He shall by His Sufferings overcome the
Devil, Death and the Grave, and all Enemies; and shall gather the Sons of God
together, from the four Corners of the Earth; and that Work shall not misgive,
nor be frustrated, but thrive in His hand: So then in this Text, we have much
of the Gospel compended in few Words.

We shall speak a little to one Observation, more from the close of the 9. v.
Where Christ Jesus His Sinlesness, and Innocence is holden out, in these two,
There was no violence in his hands; no sinful practice in Him; And there was
no deceit in his mouth, Which looks not only to His sinless carriage before
Men, and so says, that He was no Liar nor Dissembler in His Dealing, and
Converse with them, but also to H^s Doctrine; And so says, that there was no
Doctrinal deceit in Him; Which is, when Men lie of God to Men, which is a gross
sort of lying, and a deceiving of Souls, in making them to take that for Truth
which is no Truth: And in derogating from the Truth, and making them take that
for Error which is Truth? As the Apostle speaks of such, that they speak lies
in hypocrisy: These words, There was no deceit in his mouth, Look to both,
especially to the last, that is, the Doctrinal deceit of corrupt Teaching
(whereof he was free altogether) I say it looks especially to that, because he
was callumniated, traduced, and called a deceiver of people, That is (as if the
Prophet had said) most untrue of Him, There is no deceitful word in all His
Doctrine; though it was imputed to Him, yet he was most free of it; Thence
Observe, That exact Holiness and Blamlessnesse, takes in Holiness in a Man's
Conversation in respect of practice, and soundness in His judgment in respect
of Doctrine; for if our Lord be a Pattern of Holiness, that which was in Him as
our Pattern, is called for from us, even to be pure as He is pure; No violence
was in his hands, He was no Stealer, nor Robber, nor Oppressor, (to speak so
with reverence) And there was no deceit in his mouth; The Word and Worship of
God was not wronged by Him, and He is holden forth for an Example to us in both.

That which we would say further on this, shall be in a word of Use; Where we
may clear both the Branches of the Doctrine, to meet with two exceeding
prejudicial Tenets among Men.

1. There are some who if they be not Erroneous in their Opinions, and
Sectaries, they think they are well enough, and insult over the Infirmities of
Poor Folk, that fall into these Errors; And they will, (like these spoken of)
Whore, Drink, Steal, Lie, etc. And yet lean upon the Lord, and say, is not the
Lord among us, no evil shall come unto us; Such half and divide Godliness; They
will not be Papists, Puritans, nor Sectaries, but there is much unholinesse in
their Practice, much Self-seeking, Pride, Hypocrisy, Formality, Deceiving,
Cousening, Falsehood: And they cover all with this, That they are sound as to
their Profession; though only hearing, and not doing, professing and not
practicing; But they would consider, that Christ says not, Blessed are they
that hear only, but blessed are they that do the will of God; O! beware of this
great deceit; it is a piece of Christ's Innocence and Holiness, That no violence
was in his hands, There was no sinful thing in His practice, no sinful word
came from His mouth; Ye shall never be accounted followers of Christ, though ye
give your bodies to be burnt for the Truth, (as it is to be feared few of you
would do,) if your Conversation be not suitable, God shall never accept of your
Testimony, therefore divide not these things which God has put together; Let
Holiness be in your practice, otherwise Papists and Quakers, yea, the
grossest and most abominable Heretics, and ye will be utterly disclaimed.

2. The other Branch of the Use is, That suppose there were never so much
apprehended tenderness in folks walk, though they were much in Duty, and
though they would quite all they had to the Poor, yet if Deceit be in their
mouth, if they corrupt the Truth, and teach others so to do, there is a want of
the half of Holiness, yea, in some respect, of the best and chief half of it;
And the Reason is, 1. Because the Image of God consists as much in the Truth as
in the Practice, nay if Practice be not conform to Truth, it is no true
Holiness, and where Error is drunken in, there is in so far an utter
unsuitableness to the Holiness of Christ, as well as where prophanity appears
in the conversation, For there was no deceit in his mouth. 2. Because this Word
of God prescrives the Doctrine of Faith to be believed, as well as Duties to be
performed, and the right grounding of Faith is a main, if not the main thing
wherein the Image of God consists, to wit in Knowledge, and Error is as
inconsistent with Knowledge, as Ignorance is, yea, more; in so far as it leaves
a contrary impression of untruth on the Soul, which is worse then simple
Ignorance. 3. Because, when a Person miscarrieth, by turning aside from the
Truth to Error, he also miscarrieth in his Practice, at least in so far; The
right conceiving of Truth, being both the ground of our Faith, and the Rule of
our Practice: As for instance, let once the conceit and fancy come in, of
Folks being above Ordinances, no Conscience is thenceforth made of sanctifying
the Sabbath, or Lords day, nor of any other Duty of Worship, but Men become
almost, if not altogether Athiests. Yea, 4. The incoming of Error begets a sort
of presumptuous confidence, Therefore Christ says, He that breaks one of these
commandments, and teaches men so to do, he shall be called the least in the
kingdom of God; he not only breaks the Command himself, but he seeks to engadge
others to do so likewise, so that an Error from the Truth, is a sin against the
first Table, and so among the greatest Evils; And the teaching, and propogating
of Error, is a sin against the Second Table, because it hazards the Soul of our
Neighbor; whereas violence in the hands hurts only his Person or Estate; And
5ly. If we look to the rise of Error, or whence it comes, we will find it to be
a Fruit of the Flesh. Gal. 5.19. And that which flows from our corruption, and
is therefore ranked in with Witchcraft, Adultery, Furnication, Idolatry,
Hatred, Variance, etc. 6. If we look to the Scriptures account of it, and of
the Propogators of it, We will find that, 2 Cor. 11.13. They are called false
apostles, deceitful workers, ministers of satan, not common sins, transforming
themselves into the ministers of Christ, and no marvel, for satan himself is
transformed into an angel of light: For their work is to gather in Souls to the
Devil, to hale them, as in a Net to him, to be Disc^ples to him. Or, 7. If we
look to the Effects that follow upon Error, and upon the propogation of it, we
will find them to be dreadful; for as it is, 2 Pet. 2. 1. They draw upon
themselves swift destruction. And chap. 3.16. They wrest, or pervert the
Scriptures to their own destruction. In all these respects, Error in Judgment
is as evil, (if not worse) then profaneness in practice. And if we look
through the Churches of Christ, we will find that there has been more palpable
havoc, and destruction of Souls since Antichrist arose, by his gross Errors,
and damnable Delusions, then has readily been by sin in Practice; which Men do
not own and avouch, as they do these Delusions: Think therefore seriously on
this; whoever would be pure as Christ is pure, would study soundness in
Judgment, as well as tenderness in Practice; And yet how many are readily
mistaken in this? Who, if they meet with some that can speak a few good Words,
and make pretenses to a holy Walk, though the Second Command be baff^ed and
disgraced by them, and the Name of God torn? And though the Fourth Command be
made of none effect, or price by them, it is thought but little of, all is
covered with this, that they are good Folks, and of a tender walk; But, Oh! can
they be good, who abuse that wherein the Name and Image of God are most
tenderly concerned? and will God account that to be Holiness aggreeable to His
Law, that slights, depreclars, and vilifies the best part of His Law? Let me
therefore beseech you to take in, and to close Error with other sins, and to
look upon unsoundnesse in the Truths of God, as a Fruit of the Flesh; and
withal to look upon sound knowledge in the Mind and the form of sound words in
the Mouth, as being a Duty, that is called for from you, as well as other
Duties: We the rather take occasion to speak to this, because the Devil is
seeking to turn Men mere Athiests, Gallio's as to the Truths of God, to care
for none of these things; and as to weir out the esteem of Truth, so to make
People to look upon Error, as if there were no hurt by it; it is sad that there
is not more scarring at, and keeping distance from the company of such; if they
can but give a parcel of good Words, and make shows of respect to Piety: in
this lukewarm time, there is need to guard against this Temper, or rather
Distemper; and to look well that we half not, nor divide the Pattern and Copy
which God in his Word has cast to us, and set before us; we would study
Purity and Tenderne^^e in our Walk, and Growth in sound Knowledge; and would
walk humbly under the impression of our hazard: It Is sad when Folks are ill
girded and yet scarcely discern it: It seems to be a winnowing time, and some
are already taken off their feet, who thought not some Months, or Years since
to have carried in reference to the Truth, as they have done; It has been Gods
mercy to this place, that he has hedged us about hitherto; at which the Devll
has raged not a little; Be humbled, and have an eye to Him that can keep his
People, and can establish them in the Truth, and make them unbleamable in
holiness till the coming of the Lord.

We come now to the 10. verse; and from the first part of it, yet it pleased
the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief. These three things arise
clearly. 1. That though our Lord Jesus was most innocent in His own Person; yet
was He put to exceeding sore Trials, and sharp Sufferings, For 1: He was
bruised, to wit, like Corn betwixt the upper and neither Milstones, or l^ke
Grapes in the Wine press, which respects not so much his outward sufferings,
though great (for a bone of him was not broken,) as His inward Soul-sufferings,
and the inward pressures of Wrath that were on His Humane Soul. 2. He was put
to grief; was sore straightened and punished, and these expressions import so
much, my soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death, my soul is sore troubled
and what shall I say; and my God my God why have thou forsaken me? The
particulars of this grief were spoken to before; and we show in what respect He
was so humbled, and that He was most sinless, and without any the least carnal
mude or passion, under these expressions, in which the sense of grief vented it
self most in Him. Only if it be here asked, what is the reason, why the Prophet
does so much insist, in pointing out Christ's Sufferings, and the extremity of
them, that scarce almost is there one Verse, but he has in it some one or
other new aggravation of them? we conceive the reason of it is, 1. Because
there is nothing wherein the greatness of the Love of God, and the kindlinesse
of the Mediators condescending does appear in this; for the more He Suffered,
the more the Love of God shined; and His condescendency kythed the more; this
being the great instance, and demonstrative proof of the Love of God, God so
loved the world, that he gave His only begotten Son, As it is John 3.16. O!
manifold and vastly comprehensive So, what is unfolded in it, Eternity will but
suffice fully to unfold; and this being the great instance of the Mediators
condescendencie, and of His commending His Love to sinners; That while we were
yet enemies, he died for us. As it is, Romans 5. The Lord loves to have this the
subject of our thoughts, that we may be led thereby in to the Soul-ravishing,
and satisfying contemplation of the Love whence it came. 2. Because there is
not any one thing that lies nearer, or that is readily of greater concern to
Believers, then to be well acquainted with Christ's Sufferings, wherein the
Lord would have his People spiritually perqueir: and it is of their
concernment, in a twofold respect. 1. As it is the ground of their peace,
Therefore He is called our Peace, and a Propitiation; for by being acqu^in^ed
with Christ's Sufferings, Believers have a solid ground for their Faith,
whereby they discover access to peace with God, to Pardon of sin, and
Justification, the Mediator having undergone these sufferings for this end. 2.
As it is the ground of their Consolation; considering that they have a
suffering Mediator, that has paid the Price that was due by them; even such
an One that knows (...) what it was to be bruised with Wrath, and is therefore
very tender of, and compassionat toward Souls that are under challenges, and
apprehensions of Wrath; These are sweet words, which we have to this purpose. 1
John 2. 1. If any man sin, we have an advocat with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, who is the propitiation for our sins, who was content to Suffer and
Satisfy for them: O! consider then what ye are doing, when ye read of His
sufferings, for the very Marrow of the Gospel, and the Life of the Consolation
of the People of God lies here. 2. From these words. Yet it pleased the Lord to
bruise him, he has put him to grief; Observe, That the Lord Jehovah had the
main and principal hand, in all the Sufferings of this Innocent Mediator: It
was not the Jews, nor the Scribes and Pharisees, nor Pilat; but it pleased the
Lord to bruise him, and to put him to grief. As is clear, Act. 4.27, 28. Herod
and Pontius Pilat, the Gentiles and People of Israel were gathered together, to
do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be done. In all
that they did, they were but doing that which was carved out before, in the
E^ernal Counsel of God; and therefore Peter says Act. 2.23. Him being
delivered by the determinat counsel, and fore knowledge of God, ye have taken,
and by wicked hands have crucified and slain. The Lords hand was supreme in the
business; and we may gather the Supreme and Sovereign I^fluence of the Lords
hand, in these three respects, in Christ's Pufferings, 1. In respect of His
appointing them; It was concluded in the Counsel of God, what He should Suffer,
what should be the Price that Jehovah would have, and the S^crifice that he
would accept of from His hand. 2. In respect of the Ordering and Overruling of
His Sufferings, when it came to the execution of His Ancient Decree; He who
governs all the Counsels, Thoughts, and Actions of Men; did in a special
manner, govern and overruled the Sufferings of the Mediator, though wicked men
were following their own design; and were stirred and acted by the Devil, who
is said to have put it into the heart of Judas to betray Christ; yet God had
the ordering of all, who should betray Him, what death He should die, how He
should de pierced, and yet not a bone of Him broken. 3. In respect of His
having had a hand actively in them; and as he was the chief Party that pursued
Christ; it was He that was exacting the Elects Debt of Him; therefore the Lord
looks over Pilat and Herod to Him; and says to Pilat thou could have no
power over me except it were given thee from above; and to His Father, Father
take this cup from me; and my God my God wby have thou forsaken me? He was
pursued as standing Cautioner in our room; in which respect it is said, Romans 8.
He that spared not his own Son; He spared Him not when He cried, but would have
Him drinking out the Cup, and Zach. 13.7. Awake O sword against my shepherd,
and against the man that is my fellow, smite the shepherd. The Message comes
from Him, and He gives the Sword a charge, and orders it to smite Him: In all
which respects, it is said, The Lord bruised him, and he has put him to grief.
It was this, more then Sword, or Naills, or Speir, or Whipe, that made Him cry
out, another, and a higher hand brought his sinless Soul to more bitterness,
then all the Sufferings He endured from Men.

Use. This leads us in to the vendicating of the Sovereign and Holy Providence
of God, in that wherein Men have a most sinful hand, and are most unexcusable;
though Judas that bettayed, and Pilat that condemned the Innocent Son of God,
acted most sinfully; yet the Lord himself has an active overruling Hand, in
carring on His own design; and what Judas and Pilat, with other wicked Men did,
was so far from being by guess, that they were the executions of His Ancient
Decrees, and He is most Pure and Spotless, in venting and manifesting Grace,
Holiness and Justice, when men were venting their Corruptions, Impiety and
Injustice most: Therefore the Holy Providence of God mixeth n more as to any
sinless participation with men's sin, in their sinful and wicked actings, than
the Covenant of Redemption mixed it self with the sinfulness of them that
crucified Christ: Nay this is a principal Diamond in His Crown, that He cannot
only govern all the natural second Causes that are in the World, in their
several Courses and Actings, and order them to His own glory, but even Devils,
and wicked Men, and Hypocrites, their most corrupt and abominable Actions, and
make them infrustrably subservient to the promoving of His own holy ends and
purposes, and yet be free of their sin; for which they shall count to Him; And
as it was no excuse to Judas, nor to Pilat that they did what before was
decreed of God; so it shall be no excuse to any Man in a sinful course; that
God has a hand in every thing that comes to pass; who yet is just and holy in
all: It may also stay our hearts when the Devil, and his Instruments, as it
were, are running mad; that they can do no more then what God permits, ^ay some
way commissionateth them to do. The Devil could not so much as touch a tail of
one of Job's sheep, without leave ^sked and given: O! the deepth both of the
knowledge, and of the wisdom of God; how unsearchable are his ways, and his
judgments pasi finding out. 3. As we may see here the concurrence of the
Persons of the blessed Trinity, Father, Son and holy Ghost; the concurrence of
Jehovah with the Mediator, for carrying on the same design, the work of Man's
Redemption, (for it pleased them all;) So taking the Lord Jehovah essentially,
as comprehending all the three Persons, we may Observe, That the Lord is well
willed to, and has delight in prosecuting the work of Redemption, though even
to the bruising of the second Person of the Godhead, considered as became Man
and Mediator, not that He delighted in the Sufferings as such, of His Innocent
Son, for he affects not willingly the children of men; but considering the end,
and the effects that were to follow, to wit, the Seed that He should beget to
Eternal Life, and the Captives whom He was to redeem: In that respect, it was
not only against His will, but it pleased Him well, or as the word is in the
New Testament, It was his good pleasure, alluding, as ^^is like to this of the
Prophet; Hence, when Christ speaks of the work of Redemption: He calls it the
Fathers will and work; the Fathers will, when He says, I came not to do my own
will, but the will of him that sent me, The Fathers work, while He says, I
have finished the work thou gave me to do; And here it is called His
pleasure; for there was nothing without Himself to move Him to it; when He
might have suffered all fallen Mankind to lie still in their forlorn
condition; It pleased Him to give His Son of His own good will, to redeem
several of them.

Use, If we put these Doctrines together they afford us wonderful matter of
Consolation. 1. That we have an able Savior, that has given a sufficient
ransom for us, a price that cannot be overvalued. 2. A willing Mediator, that
gave himself, no man took His Life from Him, but He laid it down of Himself,
and took it up again. 3. A willing Jehovah, contriving and taking pleasure in
contriving the Redemption of Elect Sinners, through the Death of His own Son:
Which reproves, and gives check to the wonderfully strange mistakes that are
often found with some poor Souls concerning the way of Peace; as some will be
ready to say, if Christ were as willing to take me, as I am to take Him; as
willing to welcome me, as I am to come to Him: But is not this a proof of His
willingness, that He was content to be bruised, and put to grief about the
work of your Redemption? others have a secret apprehension, that if God were as
willing to receive and save them, as Christ is, they would have more
confidence; but says the Prophet here, that it pleased the father to bruise
him? in whose breast (to speak so) bred the plot of sinners Redemption? Jehovah
thought it good: He loved the salvation of sinners so well, that He was content
to seem in a manner regardlesse of His own Sons cries and tears, for a time, to
make way for performing the satisfaction that was due to Justice; and He did
this with good will, and pleasantly. We shall not insist more on particular
Uses; but is there, or can there be greater ground of Consolation, then this?
or is there any thing wanting here to complete the Consolation? Is there not an
well surnished Savior commissionate to give Life to whom He will? Who has
purchased it, that He may give it, and a well willing, loving, and
condescending God, willing to give His Son, and willing to accept of His Death
for a Ransom, and what would ye have more? The Party offended, is willing to
be in friendship with the offending Party, and to give and accept of the
Satisfaction; what can Tentation say, or what ground is for Jealousy to vent
it self here? He that did not spare his own Son, but willingly and freely gave
him to death for us all, how shall be not with him also freely give us all
things? As it is Romans 8. And if we were reconcilled to God by the death of his
Son, when we were enemies, shall we not much more be saved by his life, as it
is Romans 5.10. There is a great disproportion betwixt Christ, and other Gifts,
yea and the gift of Heaven it self; and shall a poor sinner have a suffering
Savior given, and may he not also expect pardon of Sin, Justification, Faith,
Repentance, and Admission to the Kingdom? There is here good and strong ground
of Consolation, to them that will build on it, let the Fathers, and Christ's
love to you be welcome in it is offers; that His end in bringing many Sons to
glory, be not frustrated by any of you, so far as you can, though it cannot
indeed be frustrated; For the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand,
and he shall see the travel of his soul and be satisfied.

SERMON XXXVI.
ISAIAH LIII.X. Verse 10. When thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, he
shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord
shall prosper in his hand.


CHrist and His Sufferings have been a most delightsome subject to be spoken
and heard of, before ever He suffered; and they would be to us now no less, but
much more so; even very glad tidings to hear, that ever the Son of God was made
an Offering for sin.

This Verse, as we hinted the last day, does set forth Christ's Sufferings, and
in these three, that the design of God in bruising the Innocent Lamb of God
might be the better taken up. 1. They are holden forth in the rise where they
bred, or in the fountain whence they flowed, the good pleasure of God. It
pleased the Lord to bruise him, to put him to grief. Which the Prophet marks,
1. To show that all the good that comes by Christ to sinners, is bred in the
Lords own bosom: It was concluded, and contrived there, and that with delight;
There being no constraint, or necessity on the Lord to give His Son, or to
provide Him to be a Cautioner for dyvour sinners, but is was His own good
pleasure to do so. 2. To show the concurrence of all the Persons of the
Trinity, in promoving the Work of Redemption of sinners; which was executed by
the Son the Mediator, to show, that the Love of the Son in giving His Life, is
no greater then the Love of the Father, in contriving and accepting of it for a
Ransom; there being naturally in the hearers of the Gospel this prejudice; that
the Father is more rigid, and less loving then the Son, but considering, that
it was the Father, Son, and Spirit that contrived Christ's Sufferings; that the
Sons Sufferings were the Product, and Consequent of this contrivance, it
removes this corrupt imagination* and prejudice, and shows, that there is no
place for it; It does also contribute notably to our ingadgement to God, to be
thoroughly persuaded of the Lords good pleasure, in the Sufferings of the
Mediator, as well as in the Willingness of the Mediator to Suffer; He having
performed the will of the Father in the lowest steps of His Humiliation. 2.
They are expressed, and holden forth in their Nature and End, they were to be an
offering for sin; and this follows well on the former verse, because it might
be said, How could* He that had no violence in his hands, nor guile in his
mouth, be brought so low? He has answered in part, by saying. It pleased the
Father to bruise him, and to put him to grief: But because that does not so
fully obviat, and answer the Objection; He answers further, that there was a
notably good end for it: Though He had no sin in Himself, nor are we to look on
His Sufferings, as for any sin in Him, yet we are to look upon them as a
Satisfaction to Justice, for the sins of others; even as the Bullocks, Lambs,
and Rams, and the Skipgoat, were not slain for their own sins, for they were
not capable of sin, yet they were some way Typical Offerings, and Satisfactions
for sin, in the room of others for whom they were offered; so our Lord Jesus is
the proper Offering, and Sacrifice for the sins of His Elect People; and His
Sufferings are so to be looked on by us, and this is the Scop. But to clear the
words a little more fully, there are different readings of them, as they are
set down here in the Text, and on the Margent. Here it is when his soul shall
make an offering for sin (On the Margent it is, when his soul shall make an
offering for sin.) The reason of the diversity is, because the same Word in the
Original, which signifies the Second Person Masculine, Thou, meaning the
Father; signifies the Third persons Foeminine: his soul shall make it self; but
one the matter, whether we apply it to the Father, or to Christ, both come to
one thing; It seems to do as well to apply it to Christ; the former Words
having set out God's concurrence, and good pleasure to the Work; these set out
the Mediators Willingness; as in the last Verse, it is said, that He poured
out his soul unto death; and properly Christ is the Priest that offered up
Himself; yet we say, there is no difference on the matter now, as to the scope,
the will of the Father, and of the Mediator, in this Work of Redemption being
both one; though (as we said) we incline to look on them, as relating to
Christ. 2. Offering for sin; in the Original signifies sin; so that the Words
are, when thou shall make his soul sin; The Words being ordinarily used in the
Old Testament, and thence borrowed in the New Testament, to signify a sin
offering, as Exodus 29.14 and Levit. 4.5. and 16. Chapters, where the sin
offering is appointed, it is the same Word that is here, intimating that, that
Sin-offering was designed to bear their sin. They shall lay their hands on the
Sin, or Sin-offering; because the Sacrificed Beast was Typically to have the
Peoples sins imputed to it, though properly, no man's fin is imputed to any, but
to Christ. This is also clear, if we compare, Psalm. 40.6. with Heb. 10.5, 6.
That which in the Psalm is rendered Sin-offering, in the Original is Sin, but
the Apostle, Heb. 10. has it sacrifice for sin; and it is the same Word which
he has, 2 Cor. 5. ult. He was made sin for us, that is an offering for sin; by
which we may see the unwarrantableness of some Men's accounting Christ to be
formally a Sinner, because He is called Sin; and because our Sin is said to be
laid on Him; which in Scripture Phrase, is as much as His being a Sacrifice for
sin, in the room of Sinners.

3. His soul may be taken either simply; for, He shall be an offering for sin,
the Soul being often taken for the whole Person; or it may be taken more
properly, to relate to His Sufferings, called the travel of his soul, Verse. 11.
however it is the Person, the Man Christ, Soul and Body, that is the
Sacrifice, and more especially His Soul as the Wrath of God was on it; and when
He suffered, His Soul did undergo that Wrath, as well as His Back, was given to
the Smiter, and His Cheecks to them that plucked off the Hair.

4. There are two Words further, which we would hint at, in the Exposition, for
clearing of Christ's being called an offering for sin. 1. We would put a
difference between the Offerings and Sacrifices which were for Sin under the
Law; and this Offering which is applied to Christ. The Apostle says, Heb. 10.
That it was impossible that the blood of bullocks, and of goats could take away
sin; They were not properly Sin Offerings, but as they were Types of that
Offering which was to come; and so when Christ is called an Offering, He is
differenced from all the Offerings that were offered before Him, by Priests on
Earth; In this, That His Offering, o^ Sacrifice takes away Sin, by virtue of it
self, according to the Covenant. But these Offerings of of those Priests that
were under the Law, (as is clear, Heb. 9.13.) Took not away sin by themselves,
but only in so far as Christ who was Typifyed by them was made use of; and from
this we may see it clear. 1. That it was by the Blood of Christ, that the
Fathers under the Law had their sin pardoned; and that the Pardon of sin was to
them an effect of this Offering, as well as unto us. 2. That all these
Sacrifices and Offerings under the Law, were Types of this one Offering, and
not that one Anniversarie Sacrifice, only which was offered once a Year, by the
High Priest; which we the rather hint at, because, both these are by Socinus,
that enemy of Christ's Satisfaction controverted; he aiming thereby to draw
Souls from lea^ning to this Offering. 2. What we speak of Christ's Sacrifice,
relates to that which He performed on Earth, though He be yet a Priest, and
lives for ever to make intercession for us; yet this Offering respects that
which He offered while He was here in the World, and especially that which He
offered on the Cross, as it is said, Ephesians. 5.2. He has loved us, and given
himself for us an offering and sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor.
and Heb. 10.12. This man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever
sat down on the right hand of God; and by His Sacrifice once offered up before,
He went into the most Holy; He has perfected for ever them that are
sanctified: which is also a Truth controverted by that same enemy Soncinus; the
clearing of it serves not only to open up the meaning of this place, but to let
us see the effecacy of Christ's Sufferings, and the nature of them, that in them
especially, His Offering, as it brings Pardon of sin, and Peace with God does
consist; so then the meaning of the place is in short, That though our Lord
Jesus had no sin, yet it pleased God in His Counsel, to appoint Him to Suffer,
and that His Sufferingt should be an Offering for the sin of others.

More particularly, If it be asked, what is meaned by this, an offering for
sin, we shall clear it from the Type; and 1. It is here supponed, that there is
sin on the Person, and that wrath due for sin is to be removed. 2. It is
supposed, that there is an inability in the Person to remove the sin, and yet a
necessity to have it removed, or else he must suffer. 3. There is supposed the
interveening, or coming of something in the place of that Person that is guilty
of sin, and liable to wrath. 4. There is supposed the acceptance of that which
interveeneth by God, the Party offended; and so it presupposes a Covenant,
whereby the Lord has condescended to accept of that offering. Take it in the
Sin-offering goat, the Scapegoat Levit. 16. A vive Type of Christ, when He is
brought into the Congregation. 1. The Priest must put his hands upon him; and
confess the sins and transgressions of the People over him, which signified
their acknowledgement of their sins, and a lyableness to suffering, because of
them. 2. It supposed their proposing of that Go^t, as a Sacrifice to bear their
sins, and to take them on him; Therefore it was said, The Priest shall put the
iniquities of the People upon him. 3. The one of these Goats was to be sent
away into the Wilderness, and the other was to be killed; and generally all the
Sin Offerings were to be killed: So that no Remission of sins was without
Blood, and they came in the room of the Sinners, bearing, as it were their sin,
and their punishment. And 4. It is to be an atonement, to wit, a Typical
Atonement; by this means the People were to have access to Ecclesiastical
Privileges; but they could not purify the Conscience, except Christ were made
use of; who was the true atonement then, as He is now, still for sin; and by
virtue of His Sacrifice according to the Covenant, they were to deall for the
pardon of the sins born by Him.

We come now to Observe somethings from the Words, and 1. It is supponed here,
that even the Elect, and consequently all others, are by their sin liable to
God's Judgment, and obnoxious to His wrath; there were no need of a
Sin-offering, if this were not. The name that Christ gets here, supposes that
there was Sin, and that there was wrath for Sin lying at the door of all Men;
since Man fell, and brake God's Command; all Men are before God like Isaac,
lying before his Father, ready to be killed, his Father having his hand
stretched out with the knif, ready to take away his Life: And our Lord Jesus is
as the Ram that was caught (...) the thicket of Thorns, whereby Elect Sinners
are fred, and Himself made the Sacrifice that was provided in their room and
place: Thus in the Name that our Lord Jesus gets, we have holden out to us, the
posture that all of us are in by nature, if Christ interveen not to take the
stroke off us, on Himself; laying Himself open to the stroke of Justice for
Sin: To clear it, consider these three things, which will hold out, what this
state and posture of ours is. 1. The natural sinfulness, and guilt that Men are
lying under, which makes them naked, and to be as that wretched Infant, (spoken
of, Ezekiel. 16.) Lying in their Blood, cast forth into the open field, to the
loathing of their persons. This makes God and them to be at feed, and lays
them open to the stroke of Justice. 2. Consider the interveening of the Law of
God, that threatens the Curse on sin wherever it is, and pronunces this
Sentence, that the wages of sin is death, and says to the Sinner, as it is
said to Cain, If thou sin, death lies at the door; and in this sense, Sinners
are not only like to Malefactors, taken and apprehended, but like to such when
sentenced to death; Therefore John 3.18. It Is said, He that believes not, is
condemned already. 3. Consider that Men in their natural state, who have broken
the Covenant of Works, have Justice some way pursuing them, to the executing of
the Sentence, which God in His Law has pronunced against them; and they are as
these shedders of Blood, before they betook themselves in to the City of
Refuge, having the avenger of Blood following hard at their heell's; in which
sense, John 3.36. It Is said, He that believes not, the wrath of God abids on
him; There is an actual appointment, or ordination of the Curse added to the
Laws Sentence, till by Christ it be removed, and this is in some sort gripping
Him, and taking Him as it were by the throat; By the First of these Man is
found guilty, and liable to Judgment; by the Second, he is Sentenced; but by
the Third, the Sentence stands over his head, ready to be executed, and
bespeaks him thus, therefore thou art cursed, therefore thou art a dead Man.

Soberly think upon this, and make these Uses of it, 1. See here the condition
of all Men by nature, and your own in particular, a very terrible and dreadful
condition; wherein they are like Men lying bound to be a Sacrifice to the wrath
of God, the Lords hand being streatched out, to lay on the stroke, and the
wrath of God abiding on them, do ye indeed belleve this to be your state and
posture; till application be made of Christ's Sacrifice, and till there be a
laying of your Sin over on Him by Faith, that ever till then ye are liable to
the Laws Sentence, and that the Cur^e and Wrath of God abides on you? and yet
this is the state and posture of all the Children of Adam, that have not got
Jesus Christ put in their room: It was Typical, if the People did not bring an
offering, as was prescribed, their Sin remained in them; but it is real here,
Sin and Wrath remain, where Christ is not made use of by Faith.

The 2. Use is, for Expostulation with many of you, that are still in Nature,
(and I wish there were fewer of you in this case to be spoken to) How comes it
to pass, when this is your condition by Nature, that ye are so secure, and
that ye have few, or no apprehensions at all of the Wrath of God; and of the
hazard of your immortal Souls? Ah! are there none such here, that apprehend
there hazard? were ye ever under it? and if so, how have ye been delivered out
of it? or who is come in your room? do ye think it nothing to be under Sin, and
the Curse of God, to have Wrath abiding in you, yea abiding on you? There are
many of you who are sleeping sound now, and that disdain to notice Challenges,
but as Solomon speaks of the Man that was sleeping on the top of a Mast, and
compleaning of that, and of them that deceived him; So shall it be with you,
that can lie still securely sleeping in sin, and that put by one day after
another, and do not make use of this Sacrifice: All that the Gospel aims at is
this, that ye would seek to change rooms with Christ, that the feed may be rem
ved, and that the quarrel that is betwixt God and you may not be continued and
kept up; especially, seeing there is a way laid down how to get your Debt
satisfied for; which if ye neglect, what will ye do, when your day is gone? are
there not many dying daily, and is there not a day of reckoning coming, when
the stroke that is hanging, and hovering over your head will light? and seeing
it is so, why do ye lie still, and slight Jesus Christ? If it were believed
what dreadful wrath is abiding many (whereof your secure senslesness, and
senseless security is a part) and what a terror it will waken in your
Consciences one day, ye would certainly think it good news to have the
Sufferings of Christ spoken of, and the Benefit of them offered to you now.

The 3. Use is, to stir up Sinners to thankfulness, especially, such of you as
are blessed with effectual counsel, to make the right use of this Sacrifice; O!
Consider how much ye are oblidged to God, and to Christ the Mediator; the
preaching of the Gospel is now thought little of, and is tastlesse to many; but
did ye know what is your state and posture by Nature, how near ye are to hell,
and how near the Curse and Wrath are unto you, even ready to grasp at you, to
tear and devour you, the Mediators interposing to Satisfy for you, would make
him more lovely to you; and ye that have gotten interest in Him secured, would
think your selves much, unspeakably much in His common to say so, and in the
Debt of His Grace: this was the posture that Grace found you in, even liable to
the stroke of Gods drawn Sword of Justice; and our Lord Jesus on the one side
stepped in, and said hold, Lord; let that be on me, and let them go free, and
upon the other side, there was Gods good pleasure, condescending to except of
His offer; and saying, Awake O sword, and smite the shepherd, and spare the
sheep, what obligation should this lay upon you, to love and be thankful to
God, and to the Mediator, who interposed to keep the stroke off you; I say upon
you who are sinners, and apprehensive of Wrath? This is Christ's offer, and if
ye be fl^d to Him for refuge, he has changed Rooms with you; ye are much (as I
said) in His Debt, He has fred you of your Debt, and purchased an absolution
to you, and there is no condemnation to you, as it is, Romans 8.1. Whereas before
ye were in a manner condemned already; But the truth is, our Lord Jesus is
undervalued, not only by them that apprehend not their hazard, and so make not
use of Him, but also in a great measure by them that do apprehend it; in so far
as they give way to Unbelief, and dar scarcely trust to His Sacrifice.

The 2. and next thing employed here, is, That though men be Naturally under
Sin, and obnoxious to the Wrath and Curse of God, by reason of Sin, yet there
is nothing that can take away that Sin, and free them from Wrath but Christ
Jesus His Offering up of Himself a Sacrifice for Sin; Therefore He is so made
the Offering for Sin here, as it is exclusive of all other things; no other
thing could do it; As it is Heb. 10.14. He by one offering has perfected for
ever these who are Sanctified. The Blood of Bulls and of Goats could not take
away Sin, neither is, as it is, ( Act. 4.12.) There any other name under heaven
given to sinners whereby they can be saved, but the name of Jesus: I shall not
speak here of the Nature of Christ's Offering and Sacrifice; but sure, though
all Men be under Sin, and Wrath by Nature, there is no other way to remove it,
except by this Sacrifice; Thousands of Rams, (as it is Micah 6.7.) and ten
thousand Rivers of Oil, the first Born of the Body, will not take away the sin
of the Soul; Christ's Offering up of Himself, in Gods account, is only the
Sin-offering, for the removing of Sin; and Wrath from Sinners: Is it needful
to prove this? we wish it were not, but the truth is, it is hardly believed by
Men, and Women; Consider therefore shortly these three things, and ye will find
it true, 1. The Certification and Peremptoriness of the Curse that follows Sin,
as we may see, Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continues not in all things
written in the Book of the Law to do them; whatever may be said of Gods
absolute Soveraignity, whereof we will not now speak* God has so Ordered His
Covenant, and revealled His Will in His Word, that the soul that sins shall
die, if a Sacrifice be not put in His Room. 2. Consider the ineffectualness of
all other things to satisfy Justice, though we would multiply Offerings, what
cares God for these? All the beasts on the mountains are his, he delights not
in the blood of bulls and goats, as it is Psalm 50. Thousands of Rams, and ten
thousand Rivers of Oil are rejected; whether we look to Pennances, (whereof
some foolishly talk,) what can these do to God? or whether we look to Men's
External Performances, of Holy Duties, or to their inward Convictions;
Challenges, and Mournings for Sin, there is no suitable value in these things,
to interpose betwixt them, and God's Wrath; suppone that Man after the fall
could perform Duties without Sin; therefore the Apostle, Heb. 10. says, that
it was impossible that the blood of bullocks, and of goats could take away sin;
There is no Suitableness nor Proportionablenesse, betwixt the Blood of a Beast,
and the Soul of a Sinner; far less betwixt it, and the Majesty of God that is
wronged by Sin; wherefore, when the Sufferings of a Sinner are lengthened to
twenty thousand Millions of Years in Hell, the Justice of God is never
satisfied, nor never will be to the full; what then can other things do. 3.
There is no other thing, that has a Promise made, or annexed to it, nor is
there any other mean laid down, for the removal of Sin and Wrath; but Christ
Offering Himself up a Sin-offering: I know some are ready to think, that though
there be no worth in the thing, or Duty; yet God of His free Grace will acccept
of it; but is there a Promise of God's accepting any other thing for a
Satisfaction for Sin, or for the removal of Wrath, but Christ's Sacrifice
alone? And will, or can Folks expect that, for which they have no Promise? The
Scripture is plain and peremptory in this, as namely, Acts 4.14 There is no
other name under heaven, whereby a sinner can be saved, but by the name of
Jesus, He is the door, Joh. 10. the way, the Truth, and the Life; John 14. The
promises are yea, and amen in him, 2 Cor. 1. There is greater necessity to be
through in this, though a common Truth, then Folks think of; And for Use, It
aims at these two, 1. Upon the one side, to cry down all beside, that pretends
to satisfy God; or to make a Sinner acceptable to Him; Prayer is no
Sin-offering; Repentance, Convictions, a blameless Life, etc. are no
Sin Offerings; these things are empty, and unsignificant, as to the
Justification of a Sinner, or the obtaining of his Pardon- 2. Upon the other
side, it points out the absolute necessity of making use of Christ's Sacrifice,
and of the betaking of our selves to it, for the satisfying of Gods Justice, if
there be a necessity of the pardon of Sin, and of the removing of Wrath; there
is then sure a necessity of closing with Christ, and His Sacrifice.

The 1. of these Uses speaks to two sorts of Persons, with whom the Word of God
has no weight, and who, in effect thinks to satisfy God with nothing. 1. a
profane, graceless, secure Company, who, because God keeps silence, are
disposed to think that He is like themselves, and that He will never pursue a
quarrel against them,; much like to that Man spoken of, Deuteronomy. 29.18, 19. Who
says in his heart he shall have peace though he walk in the imagination of his
own heart, adding drunknness to thirst. We have a Generation of this sort among
us, who tush at all threatenings, (alas for them, O! that God would be
graciously pleased to make a change on them, or if that may not be, that He
would rid us of them,) Who will needs live sensually, and as they list, who
will needs speak, and do as they please, and will not be controlled; and yet at
the first hand, will boldly and confidently assert their hope of Heaven, as if
they had never been Sinners; whence comes this? even from their supposing, that
there is another way to Heaven, then God has Chalked out; they think they may
be saved, though they never betake themselves to Christ for Union with Him? but
whether shall their Sentence or God's stand? There is a day coming, when ye
shall know; ye say ye shall have Peace, but God says, No, Why so? Because ye
never knew what it was to make use of Christ; ye had never so much as a Form,
nor any the least Gust of Religion, but were, and are still as senseless as the
Stones in the Wall: what do ye think will become of this? God urges as it wete,
the offers of Christ upon you, and ye still slight Him; He tells you, that
there is a necessity of Union with Him; else ye shall never see Heaven; and ye
lie still at a distance from Him, and yet will needs hope for Heaven; but alas!
it will not be so with you: either think on the right way, which is by putting
Christ in in your Room, and laying of Religion to the heart in sad earnest; or
dream not of coming to Heaven. A 2d Sort are they, who are not altogether so
profane as the others, but will condemn them, (as indeed the practice of many
is loathsome) they will, it may be Pray in their Families, and will not be
Drunk, neither will they Swear nor Lie, and they will walk blamelesly; and upon
these grounds, they promise Heaven to themselves, very confidently; and yet
they come not through the sense of their sinful and cursed State, by Nature,
to close with Christ by Faith, and to make use of His Sacrifice; such err on
the other hand. Oh! when shall we be at this, not to neglect the study of
Holiness, and yet not to rest on it, to the prejudice of this one Offering:
This were a a practice suitable to, and worthy of Professors of the Gospel; to
be seriously aiming at all Duties of Holiness that are called for; and yet to
be building all their expectation of any good from God, on the Sacrifice of
Christ alone; never coming to God without bring it along with them, and looking
through it to be accepted before Him; there n eds no more, and no other thing
that we can bring, will do our turn, nor be taken off our hand, if this be
neglected. The Lord Himself teach us this way.

SERMON XXXVII.
ISAIAH LIII.X. Verse. 10. When thou shall make his Soul an offering for sin, He
shall see his seed, He shall prolong his days, And the pleasure of the Lord
shall prosper in his hand.


WHat ever the Men of the World think of it, it is not an easy matter to get
the Justice of God Satisfied for Sin, and to get the Wrath and Curse that Men,
by Sin have drawn on themselves removed; Offerings of Bullocks, and Goats,
thousands of Rams, and ten thousand Rivers of Oil, will not do it; the
Redemption of the Soul is so precious, that it cease for ever that way, and
by all such Means: Therefore the Lord in His wisdom has found out the Means,
and in His Grace and Love has Condescended, that His own dear Son, His Fellow,
shall as a Lamb without Spot, be a Sin-offering, to take away the Sins of His
Elect World; and this is the great Consideration under which we should take up
the Death of Christ, as making Himself therein an Off^ring for Sin; and
interposing Himself to satisfy Divine Justice, that forgiveness might be made
forthcoming to us.

The Doctrine which we proposed to be spoken to, the last day was this, That
Jesus Christ is the only Sin-offering, by which Sin can be taken away, and God
so Satisfied, as to forbear the Punishment of the Sinner, and to admit him to
Peace, and Friendship with Him; If we would Enumerat all things imaginable, and
Invent Ways and Means without number to remove Sin, or to make a Sinners Peace
with God; there is no other Means but this, that will do it, As we have it Heb.
10. Christ Jesus by his once offering up of himself, perfects for ever these
who are sanctified; and Act. 4. There is no other name given under heaven,
whereby sinners can be saved, but the name of Jesus.

The Use is, To Commend, and to Demonstrat to us all, the necessity of the Use
making of this one Offering of Christ; if He be the one Offering to take away
Sin, and if no other will be accepted; then there is a necessity, that He, in
His Offering of Himself be made use of; If all be under Sin, and if by the Law,
Sin and Death, be knit inseperably together (as it is said, the wages of sin is
death) and if Freedom from Sin and Wrath, and Peace with God, be necessary;
then there is a necessity, that Sinners be serious in this matter, to get a
Title to, and Interest in this one Offering, and Sacrifice of Christ.

In the prosecuting of the Use, we shall speak a little to these four things.
1. To some Grounds. or Reasons, to show the Necessity of Sinners use making, of
Christ's Sacrifice, or Offering. 2. To this, what it is to make use of this
Offering. 3. We shall give a Word of Advertisement, as to some mistakes that
are about it. 4. We shall give some Differencing Characters, or Evidences, of a
Person that is making right Use of this Offering, for obtaining of Pardon, and
for making of this Peace with God.

For the First, That is, the Reasons to evince the necessity of it, The 1. of
them is, that which we hinted at just now, If Men were not lying under Sin, and
obnoxious to Wrath, and if there were any other Sin-offering, or any other Way,
or Mean, to escape the Curse and Wrath of God due for Sin; there were no such
necessity: But seeing that all Men are under. Sin and under the Curse of God and
His Wrath, because of it, and seeing there is no other thing that can take away
Sin; then there is an absolute necessity, seriously to make use of, and to have
an Interest in this Sin-offering. 2. Consider, that the great part of Men in
the World, and even of them that hears this Gospel, do not indeed make use of
this Offering, though they be some way under the Conviction that they are
Sinners, and that this is the only Sin offering to take away Sin, and we
suppose, if ye were all put to it, ye could not deny, but ye are Sinners, and
that nothing can take away Sin, but Christ's Offering up of Himself as a
Sacrifice to satisfy Justice; Though some be that grossly ignorant, that they
will speak of some other thing; yet generally these that own and maintain the
Truth of the Gospel, are under a Conviction, that no other thing can take away
Sin; and yet even amongst these, there are many that never make use of Christ,
and of His Sacrifice to take away their Sins, to remove Wrath, and make their
Peace with God: There were many Jews, who by the daily Sacrifices, which Typed
forth this one Offering of Christ, were taught, that there was no other way to
come by Pardon, and Peace with God, but there use making of it; and yet the
most part of them, in going about these Sacrifices, were slighters of this one
Sacrifice; Therefore the Apostle says of them, Romans ^0^.^3. That being
ignorant of Gods righteousness, they went about to establish their own
righteousness and did not submit themselves unto the righteousness of God; It
is as certain, that many that hear this Gospel, and profess Christ to be the
only Sin-offering; will be disowned of Him on this account; Therefore, many are
brought in, saylng, Luke 13. did we not hear thee preach in our streets, have
we not eaten and drunken in thy presence, to whom He will say, depart from me,
I never knew you, ye workers of iniquity; Because (as if He had said) what ever
ye profesied ye never made Peace with God, through and by me; and what is the
Reason, I pray, that so many perish un^er the Gospel who in Word acknowledge
this one Offering, and that it is it only, which takes away Sin, but because
that notwithstanding of that Conviction, and Acknowledgement, they are never
brought actua^ly to make use of Christ, and of this His Sacrifice and Offering;
and if ye think, and acknowledge, that there are many that go to Hell. tha have
the Knowledge and Conviction of this Truth, ye must also grant, that it is,
because they make not Conscience to make use of it, 3. Consider, that though
there be many of the hearers of the Gospel, who do not rest on Christ, yet it
is very hard to convince any of them that they are ready to slight Christ's
Sacrifice: I am sure that both the former will be granted. 1. That nothing but
Christ's Sacrifice can Satisfy Justice; 2. That many do not rest on it, and so
perish, but if we come to the 3. Sarcely shall we find one that will grant
(except it be a tender Body,) that they make not use of Him; they will easily
be convinced, that Adultery is a Sin, and that they are guilty of it, if they
be so indeed, that Drunkenness, and Sabbathbreaking are Sins; yea, possibly,
(which is more) that vaging of the Mind in Duties of Worship is a Sin, and that
they are guilty of it; but it is not so easy to convince them that they are
guilty of the Sin of not making use of Christ, and of His Sacrifice; nay they
are so puffed up with a good opinion of themselves, that they will laugh at such
a Challenge; And hence it is, that so few make use of Christ's Sacrifice, and
of His Righteousness, because so few are convinced, that they believe not on
Him; Therefore, when the Spirit comes, John 16. It Is said, that he shall
convince the world of sin; not because they did Whor^ Drink S^^^ar, etc. (...)
Convictio^s for these Sins will not be wanting; but because they believe not in
Christ; And hence it is, Luke 13.25. That these will not take Christ's first
answer, I know you not; what (as if they said) knows thou not us? we have eaten
and drunken in thy presence, we have professed Faith in thee, and our hope to
get Heaven by thy Righteousness; and yet He shall answer them again
peremptorly, depart from me, I know you not, Not that there will be much to do,
or any great difficulty to convince folk in that day, or any room left to
debate the business; but He would tell us by this, that many die in this
Delusion; And if it be a thing that Folks are so hardly convinced of, had they
not need to be seriously sollicitous, that they be not deceived, and
disappointed? 4. Consider how sad the disappointment will be to Sinners, on day,
when they shall be brought to acknowledge, that they knew that there was no
other Name given whereby Sinners could be saved, but the Name of Jesus, and yet
that they slighted and rejected Him; ye that never seriously minded compting
and reckoning with God, do ye think on this; and that the passing of the
Sentence will be upon this ground; to wit, whether ye have fled to Jesus
Christ, and made use of His Sacrifice, or not? will it not be a sad
disappointment, to meet with a doleful depart from me, on this ground; because
though there was some Conviction, that this was the only Sacrifice, and
Sin-offering, that takes away Sin; that yet it was not made use of, nor made
the ground of your Peace with God?

But to the 2. What is it then to make use of this Offering? I know no better
way then to explain it from the Typical Sacrifices, that were under the Law;
and we may take it up in these three. 1. It implies a through Conviction of
Folks lyablelenesse to the Justice of God for Sin, and in an utter inability in
our selves, and an utter emptiness, and impotencie in all other Means to
satisfy for Sin; thus they that brought the Sacrifice to the Priest, laid
their hands on the head of the Beast, by which they acknowledged, that Death
was due unto them. So then to have the lively sense of the due desert of Sin;
that is, to have the Sentence of Death carried about in our Bosom, to have the
through Conviction of the emptiness of all other Means of relief, is requisite
to the right use making of Christ's Offering. 2. It implies this, that there
be a look had to the Institution, and Ordinance of God, appointing this
Sacrifice to be the Mean of the Redemption of Sinners; Therefore in these
Sacrifices that were Offered for Sin, there was a respect had to Gods Covenant;
wherein were not only Promises relating to External Cleansing, and to Admission
to Church Priviledges; but Promises also, relating to inward Cleansing, and to
the Pardon of Sin, which was the great End of these Sacrifices; and the looking
to the Institution of this Sacrifice, is the Ground that leads us in to take up
the end of Christ's Sufferings, and is a warrant for our Faith, in the use
making thereof; being the only Sacrifice that expiats Sin, and holds off Wrath;
and if these two things be not carried along in the use making of this
Sacrifice, to wit, the Conviction of Sin, and of the lyableness to Wrath; and
Gods Institution and Appointment of this Sacrifice, to take away Sin, and to
avert Wrath, our Use making of it is, but Will Worship. 3. It implies this,
that when the Sinner is walking under the sense of his Sin, and of the
Emptiness, and Ineffectualnesse of all other things, to remove Sin and Wrath,
(as David has it, Psalm. 51.16. Thou desire not sacrifice, thou delightest
not in burnt offerings;) There must be a looking to the Worth of Christ, and of
His Sacrifice, that is appointed to take away Sin, and hold off Worth; and the
Soul's actual applying of it self to His Offering, and the applying of His
Offering to it Self; as we may see, in the 4, 5, 6. and 16. Chapters of
Leviticus, where there are several Sacrifices appointed to be Offered, for
several Sins, and particularly that of the Escape goat; on the head whereof, the
Priest for the People was to lay his hands: in which was employed, not only
their acknowledgement of Sin; and of their deserving of Death; and of Gods
appointment of that to be a Typical Offering for the Typical taking away of
Sin; but these two things ^urder were employed. 1. That they did take the Burden
of their Sins, which neither they themselves, nor any other could bear, an^
laid it on Christ; when Justice did put at them for their Debt, (to speak so)
they drew a Bill on Christ, as their Cautioner, to answer it; and as they did
put the Debt in His hand, to be paid by Him; so they Lippened and Trusted the
weight of their Souls to Him, and to no other: So that when God was pursuing
them for their Debt; saying, as it were, I will have Payment of you, or else ye
must Die; they brought the Sacrifice to the Priest, to please God Typically
with an Eye to Christ Typifyed thereby; Even so for Sinners, to make use of
Christ's Sufferings, is in the through Conviction of Sin, and of deserved Wrath;
to fly unto Jesus Christ, and to put Him in their Room; being Content and
Desirous, that He be their Cautioner, and undertake for them, and Satisfy for
their Debt; yea, putting Him Actually to it, to pay their Debt, So that they
have no other Answer to any Challenge for Sin, but this the Cautioner that I
have betaken my self to, and put in my Room, will pay this Debt, and answer for
it: The 2. Act of Faith, is, this, when they have betaken themselves to Him,
and to His Sacrifice, they Acqui^sce in, and Rest upon it alone, for obtaining
of the Sentence of Absolution; which was also employed in the People, their
laying their Hands by the Priest, on the Head of the Sacrifice; For as it
employed, their acknowledging that they could not Please, nor Satisfy Go^ of
themselves* nor by any other Way or Mean; so it Employed, that according to
God's Covenant, they expected His Absolving of them, because of that Sacrifice;
and that, though they were Desperate by themselves to Satisfy, yet that they
had Faith in God's Covenant, that the Sacrifice they Offered, would Typically
Satisfy Him; Even so the Believer draws the Conclusion from Christ's
Sacrifice, according to the Terms of the Covenant, that He has Absolution; and
rests on, and acquiesces in it; and this is called Trusting, or Confiding in
Christ; when not only he casts himself on Him; but has Confidence, that the
Bill which He has drawn on him will be Answered by Him, which is founded on
the Covenant; In which it is said, of all that come unto me, I will put none
away; As it is, John 6.37. Him that comes to me, I will in no ways cast out;
and Zach. 13. There is a fountain opened in the house of David, for sin, and
for uncleanness; On which ground, Believers expect the benefit of Washing, on
their performing of the Condition of the Covenant: And when David, Psalm. 51.7.
Prays, purge me, wash me, It holds out the Act of Faith, drawing the Bill on
Christ; And when he says, I shall be clean, and white as snow: It holds out
his Confident Resting on, and acquiescing in Christ for Cleansing; And this is
the reason, why some express ^aith, by cleaving to Christ; others, by
confident resting on him, or by assurance; and there may be a Truth in both;
because the one looks on Faith, according to the first Act of cleaving to Him;
And the other takes up Faith according to the other Act, of assured resting on
him, or confiding in him, and on, or in His Sacrifice offered up once for all:
In a Word, to make Use of this once Offering for Sin; is so to make Use of Him,
as to put Him in our Room, and our selves some way in His Room; Not to dare to
Count, and Reckon with Justice, nay, not to dare as it were, to Count with
Christ; but leaving Christ in the stour (to speak so,) and running away from
Reckoning with Justice; to hide our selves under Him, who can count to the
utmost Farthing; Even as when God commanded Abraham to offer up his Son Isaac,
and and when he was lifting his hand to slay him, there came a Voice from
Heaven, Abraham hold thy hand, and a Ram is provided, and Isaac is loosed, and
taken down from off the Altar, and the Ram is put in his stead and place; So
there is here a changing of Rooms with Christ, according to that sweetest Word,
2 Cor. 5. ult. He was made sin for us, who knew no sin, that we who had no
Righteousness, might be made the righteousness of God in him.

3. If it be so very difficult, and yet so absolutely necessary to make Use of
Christ; and especially in His Offering up of Himself, for the Sin of His
People; there is ground here for Warning, and Advertisement, to walk tenderly
in this Matter, that this Sacrifice be not flighted, that this One Offering be
not Neglected, as we would not have Sin lying at our Door. And here we shall
point at three sorts of Persons, who may be counted slighters and neglecters of
this Offering. The 1. Sort are these, who think to make their Peace with God,
without minding the necessity of the interveening of any thing betwixt Him and
them; and these go on several Grounds, or are of several Sorts. 1. Some are
utterly careless how their Peace be made, or whether it be made or not, they
hope for it, and think to come at it, but cannot give an account whether they
will come at it or not; and they are careless to know the way. 2. Others go
upon their presumption; They think God loves them, because they love
themselves; and though they know they have Sin, yet they think God will not be
so ill as to Reckon with them; They think they are sure that God loves them,
but they cannot give a ground for it. 3. Others think, God is merciful, and
therefore they conclude, that they will be Pardoned; They cannot conceive God
to be like Man in His Mercy; but to be far beyond Him (as indeed He is
infinitely, in some respect) and therefore, because, when Man is merciful, he
sometime seeks no Satisfaction; So neither will God think they; Not
considering, that though God be merciful, That yet He will not show mercy to
the prejudice of His Justice; but will needs have it Satisfied; Such think on
the Matter at least, that they would have gotten mercy, though Christ had never
died; It is true, if God had not been merciful, never a Sinner had gotten
mercy; yet that is not the ground of His showing mercy; Otherwise all the
World might expect mercy; For He is, and ever was Gracious and merciful in
Himself; and therefore there must be some other Ground and Way for obtaining of
Pardon; else it cannot be expected, because of the alone Simple, and Abstract
consideration of His Mercy; And yet many will needs expect it on this Ground,
without respect to the Mediators Purchase. A 2. Sort, are they that take a
Legal way for making of their Peace with God; Not, as if they thought to
appear before God without Sin, and Holy, as the Covenant of Works requires;
but if they Sin, they will make a mends; and it is either something Negative,
that they have not done, or something Positive, that they have done; or some
Internal Qualification, that they rest upon. 1. Something Negative, they have
not been so ill as other Folks, and if they go to Hell, they think few will go
to Heaven; They have done wrong to none; and if they were about to Die, they
think, and it may be say, that they will leave a good Name behind them, on the
account of their harmless Walk; like that Pharisee they can say, Lord I thank
thee, I am not like other men, nor like this Publican: They are no Drunkards,
no Oppressors, they neither Curse nor Swear; and when they see any profane
Persons, they are puffed up, with a good Opinion of themselves, because they are
not as profane as they. Or 2. They will come a further Length, and positively
do many Duties upon which they rest, and whereof they are ready to boast, with
that same Pharisee who vaunted, I fast twice a week, I give tithes of all I
possess; If any Duty be performed, or any good be done by them; their Fingers
are ready (to say so) to stick to it: But 3. and especially, if there be any
inward Work, as if there be any Liberty, or Motion of the affections in Prayer,
if there be at hearing the Word, some Convictions sharper at one time then at
another, if there be any sort of Repentance, Ruing, and Sadness for Sin, etc.
These they think will do their turn: It is most certain, and might be cleared,
both from the Word of God, and from Experience, that many hundreds of
Professors Dash, and Perish on this Stumbling Block, Isaiah 48.1.2. Where the
Lord is speaking of a People, that made mention of his name, and swear by him,
but not in truth, nor in righteousness; of whom He says, that they call and
count themselves of the holy city, and stay themselves upon the God of Israel;
and the Ground of it is, their resting on external Duties of Fasting and
Prayer, and the like: expectations of Happiness, grounded on some feckless
performances, cut the Throats of many Civil and Discreet Men, that are not
grossly profane. A 3d. Sort, do not altogether slight and neglect Christ
Himself, but they slight and neglect His Offering; as if they would in a manner
make use of Himself, but not of His Sacrifice, as Matthew. 19. and Mark 10. There
is a Man spoken of, that comes to Christ, would fain be at Heaven; and asks
good master, what shall I do, that I may inherit eternal life; and yet he was
going on the Grounds of his own Righteousness; this is exceeding subtle and
deceitful; And therefore ye would take the better Notice of it; and how it is
fallen into: A man may come to Christ, as God for Pardon of Sin; (and some
think though most Ignorantly, and Erroniously, that Christ the Son is more
compassionat, and ready to Pardon then the Father) and may seek Pardon from
Him; but not for His sake, or on His account; for there is a difference betwixt
making Christ the object of our Worship; and making use of Him as Mediator;
There are many that have prayed to Christ as God, and sought Pardon of Sin from
Him; who never prayed to obtain Pardon, by virtue of His Offering; Folk may
also desire help from Christ, to enable them to do Duties, that they may
thereby work out the work of their own Salvation; and be helped this way to
make their peace with God; who do not ground the making of their Peace with God
on His Offering alone; These things are exceeding frequent in Peoples Practice;
who will pray to Christ for such and such things, and yet not found their
expectation of them upon His Offering, or His Righteousness; If we would make
use Christ's Offering, Singly and Rightly we would eschew these, and all other
wrong ways.

4. It may be asked then, what are the Evidences, that may give a Person some
clearness, that he is making use of Christ's Righteousness aright, and that it
is not his own Righteousness; nor the making use of Christ only as He is God;
that sustains him, I answer, that this is indeed a Mystery; and will require
searching, and watching to observe our own Condition; And more things concur
then one or two, to make a full discovery of it; In speaking to this, as we
desire to strengthen the presumption of none; So we shall labor to shun the
weakening of the Faith of any Sound Believer. There are then these Six or Seven
Differencing Evidences, or Characters of a Person, that is rightly making use
of Christ's Offering; which Difference Him from others; And 1. one that truly
makes use of Christ's Offering has not only been brought to see his need of
It; but his Natural Propension, and Readiness to misken it, and rest upon
other things beside it, for the making of his Peace; Whereas another Man, who
does not rightly make use of it, though he may see his Sin, and so his need of
it; yet he sees not, neither will take with the Tendencie, Propensness and
Inclination of his Heart, to rest upon some other thing beside it; See this
difference in Paul, before and after Conversion, Phil. 3. Before he was
Converted, he studied, as he thought all the Righteousness of the Law; and no
doubt offered Sacrifices which employed the acknowledgement of Sin; and he
thought that all was well with him; Therefore he says, touching the
righteousness of the Law, he was blameless; and verse 6. These things that
were gain to me; Or these things that I placed my Righteousness in; I thought
the more Sacrifices that I offered, I had the more to buy my Peace by; He sees,
that in his studying of Holiness, he was seeking to make a Stock in himself:
But after his Conversion, he casts all these, as to leaning to them, or making
them any ground of his Peace with God, or of his Justification before Him; he
betakes himself only to Christ's Righteousness, and counts them to be but loss;
I would think it a good evidence for folks, not only to see the loosnesse of
their Hearts in Duty, and that to be a Sin; but to see when ought went well
with them, the inclination of their hearts ready to account that to be Gain,
and to rest upon it: There is such an Humor and Natural Inclination in all;
and it is a good Token, when it is discovered, and becomes a Binder, and the
ground of a Challenge; not only that they have sinned, in this and that, and
the other Duty; but that they have gone a whoring after their fecklesse
performances, to the prejudice of their esteem of Christ, and of His
Righteousness; Before the law came, (says Paul) Romans 7. I was alive, I
thought, I had a Stock to do my own turn; but when the commandment came, sin
revived, and I died. There are many that will be convinced of Sin in their
performances; that will not be convinced of this sinful Inclination, to put
these in Christ's Room; A 2d, Difference, or Evidence is this; One that aims to
make use of Christ's Offering and Righteousness; not only their Sins will be an
exercise to them; how to win over them to Christ, but it will be their exercise
also, how to win over their Graces, and Duties to Him; It will be an exercise
to them, not only to have such a Sin in their Duty taken away; but how to win
over the Duty it self, that they stumble not on it, to the prejudice of their
trusting to Christ; whereas another Man, when his Duties go well with him, it
is easy to him to win over them as he thinks, because he rests satisfied with
them. Paul, Phil. 3. Sees not only while he was in Nature, that he counted
something Gai^ beside Christ, but after Conversion, he finds an Inclination to
it; and therefore in opposition to this Inclination, he does with a doubtless
cry down all things, and counts them but Dung and Loss, for the Excellency of
the Knowledge of Christ; Taking in his Gracious Actions as well as others; For
the Words in the Text, and Context tell us, that he is speaking of Duties
performed by him even after Conversion, and that he found, a necessity to cast
away the Good as well as the Bad; in the point of Justification; as a Man that
is in a storm at Sea, has a greater reluctance to cast over Board Silks,
Satines, Velvets, and other such fine things then that which is more base, and
of less worth; So he found it more difficult, and was put to some harder
exercise, to be quite of his Duties, that they should not stick to him, then to
be rid of his Sins; is there any such exercise as this amongst Folks? to be put
to wrestling with their Duties; not as being angry at them as such; but how to
get them as it were cast over Board; to be Jealous of any good in them, or done
by them; That it prejudge not their esteem of Christ; To be bussie in well
doing all the Day, and in the evening to count all their doing but Loss; And to
renunce it utterly, as to any puffing up by it, or as to the making of their
peace with God thereby; A 3d Evidence is this, One that is Single in making use
of Christ's Sacrifice, will be exercised and disquieted, when his Duty is done,
till there be for acceptance, a Staying and Resting on Christ's Righteousness:
There are two sorts that utterly fail, and fall short here. 1. Some that are
content with Sin, and make lies their refuge. 2. Others that are satisfied with
Duty, if it go well with them, and promise themselves acceptance on that alone
Account neglecting Christ; but the Believer has (as I just now said) on
exercise of Faith, how to be quite of Sin; and another new exercise of it, how
to be fred from resting on Duty; and how to be singly ingadged unto, and to
rest upon Christ: is mind is not quiet in all his Duties, till he come hither,
even to be found in Christ, not having his own R^ghteousnesse, but His; It Is a
good token, when Folks are not only exercised to have Sin Mortified, and Duties
going with them, but also to have their Peace with God grounded on Christ, and
not on Duty; Hence it is, that a Christian will sometimes be taken up a whole
day in Duty, and yet have but little, or no Peace, because he would be over,
and through all Duties to resting on Christ, which he wins not at to his
Satisfaction. 4ly. One that is single in use making of Christ, and of His
Offering, has a fear of mistaking this Offering of Christ; and that some other
thing be put in His Room, and He miskent, or neglected: There will not be only
a fear, least he Sin, and come short in the suitable performance of such a
Duty; and least he fall under Wrath but also Fear and Jealousy, least in his
Unbelief, and Selfyness, he going wrong in the use making of Christ, and of His
Sacrifice; as is employed in the Word, Heb. 4.1. Where the Apostle having spoken
of many of the Israelites their Unbelief in the former Chapter, says, in the
beginning of this; Let us therefore fear, least a promise being left us of
entering into his rest, any of us should seem to come short of it, to wit,
through Unbelief; Be Holily Jealous (as if he had said) least, as it is Chap.
3.12, 13. There be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from
the living God; In a word, he will be suspecting the exercise of his Faith, as
much as any thing; a Natural Man will sometimes it may be, suspect his Duties,
but hardly will he be brought to suspect his Faith, otherwise he could not
have the peace that he has, such as it is: This may also be Confirmed, from
that poor man's prayer to Christ, Mark 9. Lord, I believe, help my unbelief. He
dare not well trust his own Faith. 5ly. They that are single in their use
making of Christ's Offering, not only see themselves Sinners, but they carry
along with them the discovery of the naughtiness of every thing that is best
in them; when they see that to which others lippen to so much, so very
unsuitable, and that they are far short of that which they should be at; they
dare not own, nor look on it to boast of it; but it is a burden to them, to see
so much Sin in it; It Is nothing to see Sin in some outward Actions, and in that
which is directly contrary to Gods Law; but it is much to see Sin in our best
things, as in our Faith in God; in our Love to Him; and in our ends in Holy
Duties; A Legal Man will confess it may be readily, that he Sins in every
thing; but he covers all with this, that he has a good heart to God, or a good
end: The Believer on the contrary, sees all his good so naughty, that it is
tasteless to him; He never gets any thing to rest on, or that can bear his
weight to confide in, till he come to Christ's Sacrifie:

6ly. Such as are aiming rightly to make use of Christ's Offering and
Sacrifice, esteem, and think exceeding much of it; Therefore they adventure
Heaven, and their Eternal Salvation on it; It Is that which cheers and delights
them most, that Christ has stepped in and ingadged to do that for them, which
neither themselves nor any other Person or thing could do; The life (says the
Apostle, Gal. 2.) that I now live in the flesh, is by the faith of the Son of
God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. And 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful
saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came to the world to
save sinners, of whom I am the chief. And John heartsomlie, Rev. 1.7. To him
that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, etc. But they that
endeavor not, neither aim rightly to make use of Christ's Sacrifice, think
little or nothing of it; They are not made glad, nor are their hearts lifted up
with Spiritual Joy, because of it: The good and glad news of a slain Savior,
are not the chief ground of their Consolation, as they are to the Believer:
This evidence is somewhat general, yet sure as well as the former. O! but it is
matter of much wonder, to the Believer, when he thinks how that when the Stroke
of Justice was ready to come on him; Christ should have interposed betwixt him
and that Fatal, and Deadly Blow; But others esteem not of it, and therefore
cannot make use of it. 7ly. They that are rightly making use of Christ's
Sacrifice, find it to be a difficult thing, and that which will cost them
wrestling to get it made use of aright: they breath after it, and yet win not
to that which they would be at in it; O! as David cries, Psalm. 51. purge me
with hysop, and I shall be clean, wash me, and I shall be white as snow. They
know not well what way to make use of it to their Satisfaction, they would make
so much use of it; or how to vent and exercise their Faith on it; and when it
comes to Actual Believing, and to the Acting of their Faith, they find it to be
like a smooth and slippery Stone, that they cannot easily hold their Feet on.
So Paul says, Phil. 3. I count all things but dung, that I may win Christ and
that I may be found in him: He cared not what he cast over board, that he might
win to that Land, even to Christ and His Righteousness: Like Sea men in great
hazard, who cast all over board, to win the Shore; It Is even so with the
Believer, He sees that there is such hazard to go wrong, and that It Is so
difficult to be right, even to make the heart submit to the way of Faith, and
to abide by it Singly, that he is content to suffer the loss of all things, if
he may be right here: But on the contrary, a Man that rests on his own
Righteousness, be a difficulty what will to him, Faith is no difficulty to
him: He may have fear to come short of Heaven sometimes; but he thinks that he
is always exercising his Faith: In a word, the Believer ordinarily believes
best, when he has the deepest, and most kindly impression of his Sin, as for
the Legal Man, he can believe well, as he thinks, when he has no challenge
for Sin; but when he is challenged for Sin, his Faith faills him. Now from all
that has been said, ye may see the necessity of making use of this Sacrifice:
And how warrily, and cautiously it should be done; that ye may steer a straight
Course between gross Prophanity, and Presumption, either of which will ruin
and destroy the Soul: The Lord Jesus Himself be your Steers-man, and Pilot,
that ye by His Skillful Conduct may Stem the Port, and hold off these Rocks,
on which thousands of Souls Split, and make Shipwreck.

SERMON XXXVIII.
ISAIAH LIII.X. Verse 10. When thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, be
shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord
shall prosper in his hand.


SIn was easily brought into the World, a little business brought in Sin, and
the Curse and Wrath of God with it; and without any great difficulty, Men can
continue in Sin, and lie under Gods Wrath and Curse; but the taking away of
Sin; and the Satisfying of the Justice of God for it, is no easy matter; (that
if we may so speak,) did put Heaven and Earth both to it; There was such a
contrivance of this way, and such a mean chosen, and made use of, that Sin
might be removed, and the Curse taken away, as the like was never heard of.

The Intimation and Manifestation of this Way, is in the first part of this
Verse, Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him; In Gods Council, and by His
Pleasure it was Contrived, and the Way found out; and the Mean is set down, in
these Words, When thou shall make his soul an offering for sin; The Mediator,
even he who was the Spotless Lamb of God, in whose Mouth was found no Guile,
was bruised, and put to sad Suffering, to get this Effectuat; That the Curse
might be removed from Sinners, He was made the Sin-offering.

We show that Jesus Christ is the only Sin-offering, by which Sin is taken
away; and that it is employed here; So that it is denied to all other Things, or
Means to have any Effecacie, Virtue, or Merit in them, as to the removing of
Sin, and the Curse brought on by it; this is, I say, so peculiarly applied to
Christ's Offering; that it is denied to every thing else; which shows 1. How
much Sinners are oblidged to Christ, who, when no other thing could do it,
interposed Himself. 2. The necessity of making use of this one Offering,
without which never Soul can be Perfected or Saved: He is the alone Foundation
of Sinners Peace, and of all the Consolation that they can have in the Promises
of God.

Now to proceed, and to hint at some few things more from the Words; wherein
the End and Nature of Christ's Sufferings are set forth: He in His Suffering,
and Offering up of Himself; did step into the Room of the Sinful Elect, that
by Justice exacting of Him the Debt that was due by them; they might escape,
and be set free; Hence Observe. 1. That when there was no other Thing, nor
Mean, that could sufficiently satisfy Divine Justice, or be a Sacrifice for
Sin; Our Lord stepped to, and undertook, and became the Sacrifice to take away
Sin; according to that often cited Psalm. 40.7* 8. Sacrifice, and offering thou
did not desire, in burnt offering thou had no pleasure: He is not speaking
of what God required in the Law, as Typical; for He required Sacrifices and
Offerings in that respect; but not to be a Propitiation for the Sins of the
Elect World, because they could not do it; and then follows, Lo I come, or I am
here: mine ear have thou bored, It is Heb. 10: A body have thou given unto me:
which sets out His being put in a Capacity to be a Sacrifice; I delight to do
thy will, O my God. Here there are these Four Things employed. 1. A lyableness
in the Elect to the Justice of God for Sin; and as to all other Means and Ways
of Relief, but by this One Sacrifice, a Disperatness and Impossibility; and
considering the Sentence, which God had Pronunced; The day thou eats, thou
shall surely die: And cursed is every one that continues not in all things
written in the Law to do them; No Sacrifice can be accepted but this only;
Thousands of Rams, and ten thousands of Rivers of Oil have no access; He did
not in that respect, require these, neither would He capitulat on these Terms.
2. That when no other Sacrifice could do the turn, Christ Jesus came in, and
was content to interpose, and to be the Sacrifice for Sin, Lo, says He, I
come, I am here ready to Satisfy for my Elect People; For this is an Old
Design, and He had undertaken from Eternity to carry it on. 3. There is employed
here a great Willingness, a Delightsome, and Heartsome Condescending in the
Mediator, to be the Sacrifice, He steps in affectionatly, in the Room of the
Elect, as the Sacrifice for them, to receive the Stroke of Justice, that they
may escape and go free. I delight to do thy will, O my God: This is Gods Will,
as to the Work of Redemption, as it is, John 6.38. I came down from heaven, not
to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me. And John 17.4. I have
finished the work thou gave me to do; That will and this work is all one; And
Heb, 10. It Is said by which (or by this) will we are sanctified. 4. The Fathers
admitting and accepting of Him, to Interpose in the Room of them, for whom He
Offered Himself, is employed here; for otherwise His Offering up of Himself,
could not have been a Sacrifice Satisfactory to Justice, if the Lord Jehovah
had not been content so far, to ^el^xe His Threatening, and Curse, in reference
to the Party Offending? as to admit o^ a cautioner, in the Room of the Dyvour
Sinners, to Satisfy for them; of which Satisfaction He accepted: All these
things put together, make Christ's Interposing Himself as a Sacrifice, and
Surity complete; I delight to do thy will, supposes not only God's pleasure,
that He should Interpose, but His accepting of His Interposing: And this is,
(to speak so) the Flooring, and Founda ion of the Work of Redemption; The S
ntence stands over the Elect's Head, Cursed are the Guilty, Christ comes in and
I^terposes Cheerfu ly to take on the Debt, and says, here I am, Let the Curse
fall on me, and let Satisfaction be taken from Me; And this being Offered
according to God's Will, it is accepted, and Christ's Satisfaction becomes an
Offering in their Room.

Use. See here a desperate Condition wherein, by Nature, we are all lying; it
sets us well, in speaking of Grace, to take a view of what we were: And it
shows how much Sinners are in Christ's Debt and Common, that Interposed for us,
in this condition. Could we suitably make inquiry what case we were in, under
the hand of Justice, and it is Stroke ready to light on us; And could we behold
our Lord Jesus Christ Interposing for us, and the Sword of Justice awaking
against Him, and smiting Him for us; and the Lord Jehovah accepting of His
Interposing, and making His Soul an Offering for Sin; And Him Willingly; and
Delightsomly Offering up Himself in our Room; we would see our obligation to
God, who was pleased to contrive, admit, and accept of this Way, and Mean of
our Redemption; And could we consider, what a^vantages we have by this
Redemption; and what it cost Christ to obtain it; we would see our selves much,
unspeakably much in His Debt: The day is coming, when it will be thought a
favor, and when the Sweet Effects of it shall be made fully forthcoming to
them, that now Cordially close with it; And when the Fruit of Dispising it
shall be found to be bitter like Gall, and Wormwood.

2. From it is being said, when thou shall make; Or, when His Soul shall make it
self, or He Himself shall make Himself an offering for sin; Observe, That as
Christ undertook, and by undertaking, Interposed to come in Sinners Room, to
Satisfy for their Sins; So His Death and S^fferings are really the performing
of that und^r^aking; And His Death an^ Sufferings are so to be looked on, and
considered by us. as an Offering for Sin; or thus, Christ's Death is the
Sin-^ff ^ing, that Satisfi^d* the Justice of God, in the Room of ^lect Sinners;
This is the Sum, or Compend of all that is spoken of His Sufferings; If then it
be asked, what meaned they all? Here it is, He was made a Sin-offering; we
shall clear it a little in these three, or four Parts, or Branches. 1. Christ
is properly a Sin-offering, or a Sacrifice for Sin; He is properly the
Propitiatory Sacrifice for Sin; That Satisfice the Justice of God for the Sins
of the Elect. 2. This Sacrifice was especially Offered by ^im, in His Death,
and Sufferings, It Is His Suffering, and Humiliation that is most properly this
Sacrifice, for i^'s that which is related here. 3. That by Christ's Offering up
of Himself, He was not only outwardly Pi^ched, but His Soul was deeply
affected, and troubled; In Satisfyin^ the Sin-revenging Justice of God, both
His Soul and Body were Straightened, and Stressed. 4 By His Suffering, there is a
Sufficient Satisfaction given to Justice, for the Sins of His People, a
Propitiation, or Propitiatory Sacrifice, that makes God Propititious to Elect
Sinners; as in Satisfying the Justice of God for Sin; all other things are
denied to have a hand; So there is a sufficient Efficacy, and Worth in this
^acrifice to do the turn: and by God it is accepted as such, And so there is a
fair way m^de to them, for whom He Off^rs this Sacrifice to escape Sin, and the
Wrath and Curse of God; and to be set free.

As for the First of these, to wit, That our Lord Jesus, in His Dying* and
Suffering, was Properly the Propitiatory Sacrifice; or is Properly a
Propitiatory Sacrifice for the taking away of Sin? To clear it alittle, we
would consider. 1. That Sacrifices are sundry ways taken in Scripture. 1.
Sometimes they are taken improperly for Duties; as Alms, Prayers, Praises, etc.
Psalm. 51. The sacrifice of a broken heart thou will not despise? So also Heb.
13.15, 16. 2. They are taken more properly for such Sacrifices as were Offered
under the Law; as of Bullocks, Lambs Rams, and Goats; yet none of these was the
true Propitiatory Sacrifice, as is clear, Heb. 10.4. It was impossible that the
blood of bulls, and goats could take away sin. But Christ's Sacrifice is
properly the Propitiatory Sacrifice; It being by this Sacrifice, that Believers
under the Old Testament became part^kers of Redemption, and obtained Remission
of Sins, as well as Believers do now under the New; If it be then asked? What
is necessary to a Sacrifice properly so taken? I answer these four things, (all
which we will find to be in Christ's Sacrifice) 1. That there be some thing, or
matter set a part to be Offered to God, in the Room of some other thing, as it
was in the Typical Sacrifices. 2. That there be some appointed to offer the
Sacrifice; that there be some set a part for that very thing. 3. That there be
a Killing, or Destroying of the thing that is Offered in a Sacrifice; which
especially, in the Sin-offering was necessary; to wit, that it should be
Kil^ed, or Destroyed; as we see in Exodus 29. and Leviticus frequently; This had
a Signification, and the Lord would thereby point out Man's great guilt, and the
necessity of a Mediator, in Order to the obtaining of Pardon; for there could
be no Remission, or Pardon of Sin without Blood; as it is, Heb. 9.22. Therefore
the Sinner behoved either to die himself, or to have another to die for him,
and in his Room. 4. The Sacrifice behoved to be Offered according to the manner
prescribed by God, as to all the Rites and Ceremonies enjoined. Now we may see
all ^^^se in Christ's Sacrifice; For 1. He Himself is the Sacrifice, Heb. 7.26.
Heb. 9.26. Heb. 10.10. And ^requently elsewhere, in that Epistle, and 1. Pet.
2.24. Who his own self bare our sins, in his own body on the tree; And when He
had Offered up Himself as a Sacrifice, he sat down on the right hand of majesty
on high; He is the alone Sacrifice, that comes properly in the Room of Elect
Sinners. 2. As there behoved to be One, to Offer the Sacrifice, so Christ Jesus
is the Priest, that Offered up the Sacrifice of Himself: He is not only the
Sacrifice, but the Priest; And in this He differed from other Priests, Heb.
7.26. Such an high Priest became us, who is holy, harmless, seperat from
sinners, and made higher then the heavens; and then follows, who needs not
daily, as these high priests, to offer up sacrifices; first for their own sins,
and then for the sins of the people; for this he did once, when he offered up
himself. There are three things ordinarily Attributed to Christ, as to His
Sacrifice, to wit, That He was the Sacrifice, the Altar, and the Priest; 1. He
was the Sacrifice, in respect of His Humane Nature, which we are not so to look
upon, as Abstracting, and Dividing it from His Divine Nature; For though He
Suffered in the Flesh, yet it was the same Person, that was God that Suffered.
2, He was the Altar, by which His Sacrifice received a special Efficacy,
Virtue, Value, and Commendation; As it is said, The Altar sanctifies the
offering: So Christ Jesus, according to His Godhead, was the Altar, which did
put an special excellency on His Sufferings, and made them to be of such Worth
and Value; Therefore, Heb. 9.14. It Is said, that he through the eternal spirit
offered up himself without spot unto God; It was the Suffering of the Person
that was God, that made the Sacrifice to be accepted. 3. He was the Priest, and
that according to both His Naturs, each Nature concurring, and that jointly, as
in one Person, to the making of the S^crifice Offered up to God acceptable. 3.
We have in Him a real destruction, but do not mistake the Word; It is not so
to be understood, as if He were annihilated, or had been utterly destroyed, and
undone; but the meaning is this, That He was Killed, or put to Death, and His
Soul seperat from His Body: in which respect, He ceased to be what He was
before for a time; having been really Slain; Dead and Buried. And 4. All this
was according to God's prescription, and appointment, in the Covenant of
Redemption; This commandment, (says He, John 10.18.) have I received of my
Father, to wit, that I should lay down my life for my sheep; And most
emphatically, He says, John 14.13. as my Father gave me commandment, even so;
(mark, even so, most exactly, in conformity to the Commandment) do I: It was
all, as to every circumstance ordered according to the good pleasure of God,
who was pleased thus to bruise Him and to put Him to Grief.

The 1. Use of it serves, To teach us, how to Conceive, and Consider of
Christ's Death, and Sufferings rightly, to wit, even as a Sacrifice designed by
God, to come in the Room of Elect Sinners; and how to look upon His Death; not
as the ordinary Death of ordinary or mere Men; who by necessity of Nature Die;
but to look on it, as being appointed of God, to be a Sacrifice properly so
taken, for the Sins of His People.

2dly. This serves to clear some Truths, concerning our Lord Jesus His
Sacrifice; For we must consider it, as satisfying to Justice, and Meritoriously
procuring the escaping from Wrath, and Salvation of them for whom He
Interposed: It is from the gross Ignorance, or from the wicked denial of this
ground, that the damnable denyers of Christ's Satisfaction, do also deny the
Propriety of His Sacrifice on Earth, and bound it to Heaven; whereas, it is
bounded to His Death; though by virtue of this One Offering, He continues to
interceed for us in Heaven.

3dly. It teaches Sinners what is the native Use which they should make of this
Sacrifice; They should look upon it, as the only Sacrifice to prevent Eternal
Death, and the Curse of God; an^ so it demonstrats to us, that either Jes^s
Christ must be received by Faith, and His Sacrifice rested on; or we must
resolve to meet with Wrath, and the Curse of God our selves in our own Persons.

4ly. It serves to clear us anent the Way and Tract of Grace; to wit, how it
came to pass, that our Lord, who was innocent, and without Sin, was so
bruised, and put to grief: He came to be a Propiti^tion for the Sins of His
People, and sisted Himself in our Room, as our Cautioner, as a Sin-offering for
us: It would doubtless gnash many Questions, and Doubts, that arise in the
Hearts of Believers, if it were well understood: They may say, we should have
been in such and such a sad condition; this and that terrible thing would have
come on us, if He had not Interposed; never enough can these words be spoken
and thought of, that we have, 2 Cor. 5. ult. He was made sin for us, who knew
no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.

5ly. It serves for notable Consolation to Believers, who have betaken
themselves to Christ, and have many Challenges for Sin to buckle with; That His
Death was to be properly a Sacrifice for Sin; and was so accepted of God in
their Room: So that ye see the right uptaking of Christ's Death, is a matter of
no little moment; Christ crucified, being the very Substance of the Gospel: It
helps much, to keep alive the Impression of our Sinfulness, and of the Goodness
of God; and gives us Direction how to escape Wrath, by putting Him in our Room:
There is nothing, wherein Folks more readily miscarry, in making of their Peace
with God, then in not making the right use of Christ, and of His Sacrifice, and
Death: Some praying for Pardon of Sin from Him, and not for Him, or for His
sake, when they know not what they are saying, as we hinted at before; Some
praying for strength from Him for Duty, that they may do for themselves, not
considering that we are Justified by His Interposing in our Room, and by
Faith's closing with Him, under that consideration, as fisting Himself at the
Bar of Justice; and as being content to be a Sin-offering: and the Lord
accepting of Him in the Room of Elect Sinners: This being well considered,
gives to Faith much clearness how to take Him up, when the Soul honestly aims
to partake of the benefit of His Sufferings.

2ly. For clearing this a little further, we would know, That there are (as
Divines observe) Four or Five ways, how the Death of Christ is to be
considered; or how Christ, in procuring by His Death Redemption, Peace, and
Pardon to Sinners is holden forth in Scripture. 1. He purchases Redemption, and
Pardon of Sin, Meritoriously, or He Merits it by His Death; this Respects the
Value of Christ's Sufferings, and Satisfaction: So that if we consider Christ
in Himself, and the Elect in themselves; His Death, and these Sufferings, are
more; then if all the Elect had Suffered Eternally in Hell. 2: His Death is
considered, as a Satisfaction; And this looks to the Wrong, that Men by Sin
have done to God: That the finit and feckless Creature durst be so malapert as
to break God's Command; It required a Satisfaction equivalent to the Wrong
done; though the Word Satisfaction, be not in Scripture, yet the thing is:
Christ Jesus, for the Restoring of God to His Honor, That was, as to the
Manifestation of it, wronged by Man's Sin; comes in to perform the will of God,
and to Satisfy, for the wrong done Him by Man; that it may be made known, that
God is Holy and Just, who will needs avenge Sin on His own Son, the Holy and
Innocent Cautioner; when He Interposes in the Room of the Sinner, which
vindicats the Spotless Justice, and Soveraignity of God as much, as, if not
more, then if He had exacted the satisfaction off the Sinners themselves: As it
is, Romans 3.16. To declare his righteousness, that he might be just, and the
justifier of him that believes in Jesus. 3 Christ's Death is considered as a
Redemption of Man, from Sin, the Law, and the Curse, because liable to a Debt
which he cannot of himself pay; and His Death was in this respect a paying of
the Debt, that Man was owing, and a loosing of the Captive and Imprisoned
Sinner; even as when a Piece of Land is morgaged, and a Person comes in, and
pays that for which it was Morgaged: So Jesus Christ comes in, and as it were,
asks, what are these Men owing? and what is due to them? It Is answered, they
are Sinners, Death, and the Curse are due to them; well, says He, I will take
their Debt on my Self, I will pay their Ransom, by undergoing all that was due
to them. He has redeemed us from the curse of the law, (says the Apostle,
Gal. 3.13.) being made a curse for us, that the blessing of Abraham might come
on us Gentiles: And so Christ's Death in this respect is to be looked on, as a
laying down of the same Price, that Justice would have exacted of Men: His
Death is the paying of our Ransom, and Satisfying of the account that was over
our head. 4. His Death is considered, as it furthered the Work of the
Redemption of Elect Sinners, by a powerful annulling of the Obligation that was
against us, and by a powerful overcoming of all enemies that kept us Captive:
He grapled and yocked with the Devil, in that wherein he seemed to be
strongest, and overcame him; He tore the Obligation that stood over Sinners
heads, as it is, Coll. 2.14, 15. Blotting out the hand writting of ordinances
that was against us, and that was contrary to us; he took it out of the way,
nailing it to his cross, and having spoiled principalities and powers, he made
a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it: In this respect, though His
Death be one of the lowest steps of His Humiliation; yet considering Him, as in
it, prevailling over the Devil, and other Enemies, He is to be looked on, as
powerfully Working, and efficaciously perfecting our Salvation: In the former
respect, He pays God the Debt that was due by Sinners; in the Latter Respect,
considering the Devil, and Spiritual Enemies, as so many Jaylours, keeping
Sinners Prisoners, He, by His Death, wrings, as it were the Keys out of their
hands* and sets the Prisoners Free. 5. Christ's Death is considered (as it is
in the Text, As an Offering and Sacrifice for Sin; In this respect, it looks to
God as displeased with Man; and our Lord Jesus Interposes to pacify Him, and
to make Him well pleased; and that by the means of His Death, God's Peace,
Favor and Friendship may be recovered to poor sinful Men: All these
Considerations of the Death of Christ, are but one, and the same upon the
matter; Yet thus diversified, they serve to show, how unexpressibly much
Sinners are oblidged to Christ; what great advantages they have by Him: And
what a desperate, condition they are in, who are without Him; having nothing to
satisfy Justice, nor to pay their Debt with.

2dly. We said, that this Sacrifice was especially Offered by Him, in His
Death; Therefore He is said to Offer this Sacrifice on the Cross. He himself,
as Peter has it, 1, 2.24. bare our sins in his body, on the tree: Heb. 9. at
the close: And Heb. 10.14. It is said, that he once offered up himself to bear
the sins of many, and by his once offering he has perfected for ever, these
who are sanctified: So that this Offering is to be applied to that which He
suffered on Earth, before He ascended; and it is in this respect, that He is a
Propitiatory Sacrifice: though, as I said the Virtue thereof is still
communicated by Him, now when He is in Heaven.

Use, This serves to remove two Errors, about Christ's Sacrifice. The 1. is
that, which bounds and limits Christ's Offering, and Priesthood to His going
to Heaven, thereby to enervat the Efficacy of His Sufferings, and Death; quit
contrary to this Scripture, wherein the Prophet explicating His Sufferings on
Earth, calls them an offering for sin. The 2. is that Blasphemous Conceit,
and Fancy of the Papists, who account their abominable Mass, a Propitiatory
Sacrifice, for taking away the Sins of the Quick, and o^ the Dead; which as it
is most horrid Blasphemy; So it is most expressly against this Text: for if
Christ's Sacrifice, for the taking away of Sin, be peculiarly applied to His
Humiliation, and Death; which brought with it such a change, as made Him not to
be for a time what He was before: Then certainly there can be nothing of that
now, which can bear that Name; there being no other thing, to which the
properties of a real Sacrifice can agree, but this only. 3. I said, that
Christ's Offering up of Himself in a Sacrifice, was in His Soul as well as in
Hi^ Body; and that He was therein, obnoxio^s to the Wrath of God: That is, as
He stood Cautioner for the Elect, and had the Cup of Wrath ^u in His hand, He
Suffered not only in His Body, but also, and Mainly in His Soul, which the Jews
could not reach; and He is here holden out, as a Sin-offering in His Soul, yea,
considering, that it was the Wrath of God, and His Curse due to the Elect, that
He had to deal with, His Soul was more capable to be affected with it then His
Body; Hence He says, when no hand of Man touched Him, John 12.27. Now is my
Soul troubled, and what shall I say? and Matthew. 26.38. and Luke 22.44. Now is
my soul exceeding sorrowful, even unto death; and being in an agony he prayed,
etc. That which looked like strong Armies mustered, and drawn up against Him,
was not the Soldiers that came to take Him, nor the Bodily Death, which was
quickly to follow; but it was the Fathers coming with His awakned Sword, to
exact of Him the Debt due, by the Elect: And to be avenged on Him for their
wrongs, and His being to step in into their Room, and to be smitten with that
awaked, and furbished Sword, and to Offer Himself the Sacrifice, as He had long
before ingadged: Here O! here was the heat and strength of the Battle.

Use, This shows, 1. What a Dear Price Christ paid for Sinners. 2. The
severity of the Justice of God, in exacting the Elects Debt of the Cautioner.
3. How much we are oblidged to the Cautioner, who, so willingly undertook the
Debt, and was so ready to pay it, though it cost Him not only External and
Bodily Sufferings; but Soul-suffering, and put Him to encounter with Gods Curse
and Wrath: We are persuaded, could we conceive, and speak aright of these
Sufferings, that there is a great Mystery here: And really it is a wonder, that
we are not more affected wi^h it, even to consider, that such miserable
Creatures, should be pursued by Justice, that can do nothing to avert the
Stroke of it; And that such a great and g^orious Person, as the Son of God,
should Interpose Himself; And that the Father should spare the poor sinful
Enemies, and make a way for them to escape, by the Diverting of His Justice
from pursuing them, and by making it take hold of the Son of His Bosom,
Exacting the Debt severely from Him, O! what a wonder is this? That the Lord
should pass by the Enemy, and satisfy Himself of His own Son; Yea, that God
should take on Himself the place of a Mid-man, and Satisfy Himself: That God
should be in Christ reconciling the world to himself. This, this is the Wonder:
Herein Infinite Wisdom, Pure and Spotless Justice, Holiness and Faithfulness,
Grace and Mercy, to the Admiration of Men and Angels appear, and shine forth
most Radiantly; It can hardly be known, in which of these the Glory of God
shines most, in this Great and Glorious Work of Redemption. But of them all, we
may say to you Elect, and believing Sinners, what could our Lord Jesus do more
for your Salvation? I say, what, could He do more, then to Offer up Himself, a
Propitiatory Sacrifice for your Sins? In the Gospel, He calls upon you to
make use of it, that by Virtue of His Sacrifice, your Peace may be made with
God; as it is, 1 John 2.1, 2. If any man sin, we have an advocat with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and then follows. He is the propitiation
for our sins: This may give abundant ground to Sinners, to go upon, in their
Application to God, for Pardon and Peace, even this, that He has made Himself
a Sacrifice, for seting of them free; For whom He Offered Himself a Sacrifice:
O! Sinners admire Him, employ; and make use of His Moyen, and Court in Heaven;
Improve, and Welcome these glad Tidings, and let it never be said, nor heard
of, that He was Offered up a Sacrifice, and that ye would not admit of the
benefit of it; that ye would not accept of Him, to be a Days-man, and Tryster
betwixt God and you, to remove all grounds of quarrel; O! for Christ's sake,
and as ye love your Souls, step to, and seek Grace to make the right of use His
Sacrifice, in order to the obtaining of the Pardon of your Sin, and the making
of your Peace with God: Let Himself powerfully persuade you to, and prevail
with you, in this incomparably greatness of all concerns.

SERMON XXXIX.
ISAIAH LIII.X. Verse. 10. When thou shall make his Soul an offering for sin, He
shall see his seed, He shall prolong his days, And the ple^sure of the Lord
shall prosper in his hand.


WHere there is any Light and Knowledge of a Godhead amongst Men; There is
this impression on them, that it is a dreadful thing, to have a Contraversie
lying over betwixt God and them unremoved: And upon this ground it is, that as
naturally the Conscience does challenge, for the provoking of God, so Men,
according to the Light they have, are set on, to seek after this, and that, and
the other Mean and Way, to get God appeased, and the Conscience quieted; and
it is like that this has descended to Men from Noah, that the most part of them
have thought on the Mean of Sacrifices, by them to make their Peace with God;
So the Lord taught the Family of Adam, after the Fail; and Noah renewed it,
after his coming out of the Ark; and it is probable (as I said) somewhat of
this has abiden with, and stuck to Men, even when they Degenerated, and
Apostatized from God, and offered Sacrifices to Devils, though not
intentionally, but unto God in their account: And indeed it is no marvel that
Flesh and Blood be here at a stand; and made to say, wherewithal shall we come
before God? But we have this advantage by the Gospel; That in it, the Lord has
showed to us, what it is that satisfies Justice, and takes away Sin, and the
Curse; and that it is even this in the Text: Thou shall make his foul an
offering for sin: There is no other thing that a Sinner can bring with him,
that can be accepted, or that can make him to be accepted of God.

We have hinted at some things from the Words already, and show, that Christ's
Sacrifice is called an offering for sin, as excluding all others; and as
expressing the Nature and Ends of it: We shall now speak to one thing more,
which is the 4th, employed in this expression; And it is this, That though
Atonement and Satisfaction to God can be made by no other Sacrifice, or
Offering, yet there is an Atonement and Satisfaction, that may be made by
Christ's Offering: Hence He is called an offering for sin: not only because it
excluds all others, but also because he is accepted for that very end, as a
Propitiation for the Sins of them, for whom He Suffered, and Offered Himself in
a Sacrifice; as this is denied to all other things (as we just now said) so it
is Applied, and Appropriated to Him, and His Offering, as, Heb. 10. v. 10. By
the which will we are sanctified, through the offering of the body of Jesus
Christ, once for all. v. 12. This man after he had offered one sacrifice for
sins, for ever sat down on the right hand of God. And v. 14. For by one
offering he has perfected for ever, them that are sanctified: This is the
great thing that the Apostle aims at, in that Dispute, not only to cast the
Leviticall Offerings, as to the removing of Sin and the Curse, and making of
Sinners Peace with God; but to commend this one offering, as able to save to
the uttermost, all that come unto God through it: And according to this, we
have that great Question answered to poor Sinners; wherewithal shall we come
before the Lord, and bow our selves before the most high God? He has showed,
O! man, what is meet, and what the Lord requires of thee. That there is
nothing but this one Sacrifice of Christ, that will do the turn; and this wiil
do it most infallibly, and most fully, as to the procuring of Pardon of Sin,
and the making of their Peace with God; So that by the right making use of this
Sacrifice, a Sinner may most really expect ^emission of Sins, and Peace with
God, and His Friendship, as if Sin had never been; For otherwise Christ could
not be called the Sin-offering, or an offering for sin, If He were not accepted
in Room of the Sinner that comes to Him.

To clear it a little, There are Four things, in and about this Sacrifice, to
make out this, and to prove, That a Sinner, that makes use of this Sacrifice,
may expect the Pardon of Sin, and Peace with God. The 1. Is the excellency of
His Offering. He offered himself, As it is, Heb. 7.27. and Heb. 10.10.12.14.
The Offering up of Himself, and of His Blessed Body on the Tree, was another
sort of Sacrifice then all these Bulls, Rams, and Goats, Offered under the Law,
that were but Types of Him. The 2. Is the excellency of the Person, that
Offered up this Offering* which is in effect the excellency of the Priest: As
the Sacrifice was excellent, beyond all other Sacrifices, so also, is the
Priest above all other Priests, Heb. 7.26. Such an high Priest became us, who
is holy, harmless, undefiled, seperat from sinners: A Priest, who is the Son,
and is set over the House, as the Heir; and though the Humane Nature was the
Sacrifice, yet (as was said before) not as abstracted from the Divine Nature,
the Person being but One, and so the Priest Offering commends the Sacrifice
Offered, and makes, that it cannot but be accepted. The 3d. is, His Willing
condescending, to be the Sin-offering, to Interpose Himself, and to become this
Sacrifice, out of respect to the Honor of God, that His Justice might be
Vindicated and Satisfied: And that thereby access might be made, for showing
Mercy to the Heirs of Salvation; which exceedingly commends this Sacrifice;
according to that of John 10.17. Therefore does my Father love me, because I
lay down my life, that I might take it again; No man takes my life from me,
but I lay it down of my self, and take it again; It commends His Sacrifice,
that He was not constrained to it, but did it most Willingly, and with Delight:
It Is true, if we look to Him, as the Eternal Son of God, and the second Person
of the blessed Trinity, He could not but be Loved of the Father, as well before
His Incarnation, as after; but that He says, Therefore does my Father love me,
It is to be understood, an account of His Voluntary condescending, as Mediator,
to do His Fathers will; and out of respect to His Honor ingadging, and
according to His ingadgement, satisfying His Justice for the Elect; And this
cannot but commend His Offering, That such a glorious Person, who was Holy,
Harmless, and Undefiled, should out of tenderness to the Honor of God, and
that the wrong done to it by Sinners, might be repaired; and out of love to the
Elect, should condescend to stoup so low, as to make Himself a Sin-offering:
This regard for the Honor of God, and Willing condescendencie to Suffer for
the Repairing of it, is abundantly Valuable, and (though it be a great Word)
above the disrespect that Sinners evidenced to the Honor of God, by their
sinning. The 4th, is the Covenant, which is the ground of this Offering, and
that whereby it is regulated, and the Terms of it: It was not an undertaking,
as a piece of Will Worship, but according to the deliberat Counsel, and
Foreknowledge of God; wherein it was Determined, that the Son should become
Cautioner, and be made liable for the Debt of the Elect, and be an Offering for
their Sin, by which Freedom from Sin and Wrath should accresce to Elect
Sinners; and all this being concluded in the Covenant of Redemption, His
Offering could not but be accepted for us: The Lord having condescended on the
Articles of that Covenant for this very end.

This Doctrine is of mighty great and notable concernment to Sinners; and were
there any such Wakening and Rouring amongst us, that Souls were put to say, and
cry, What shall we do to be saved? The opening up of the Truth, to wit, That
Christ is a Sin-offering for Sinners, and that by His Offering the Atonement is
made; would be much more acceptable and refreshfull; And therefore let this be
the 1. Use. That though there be nothing imaginable, that can be brought before
God, which will be acceptable to Him, as a satisfaction to His Justice; yet
here there is a Ransom found by the Offering whereof to God, a Soul that is
lying under challenges for Sin, and apprehensions of Wrath may expect
absolution; This is in effect, that which Elihu says, Job 33. If there be an
interpreter, one of a thousand to show unto man his righteousness, then he is
gracious unto him, and says, deliver him from going down to the pit, I have
found a ransom; here is the Ransom, our Lord Jesus Christ stepping in, in
Sinners Room, and Offering Himself up a Sacrifice, to satisfy the Justice of
God; So that a Sinner in making use of that, may come to be in good terms with
God; and are not these glad Tidings of great joy, that an Offering is provided,
a Ransom paid, and a way found out, how Sinners liable to the Curse may
expect Freedom, It Is no small matter, that God has given this Subject to us
to speak of, and to you to hear of; that the Torturing Anxiety of a Soul driven
almost to Despair, may have this for an answer; even the Blood of Jesus, that
blood of sprinkling that purges the conscience from dead works; which, as it
satisfies Justice, so it quiets the Conscience of the Sinner, that flies unto
it and makes right use of it; It would become Sinners well, to think more of
these Glad Tidings, and to study to have them always Fresh: There are many
Parts of the World, wherein Men are Sacrificing Beasts; some Lambs, some Rams,
some other Beasts, And some, it may be the Firstborn of their Bodies, for the
Sin of their Souls; (and which is lamentable, Sacrificing these things to the
Devil, on the matter at least, and not to God) and yet all that does not their
turn; And not having hard of this Offering, they cannot make use of it; neither
can their Conscienee ever be quiet: But our Lord Jesus has sent these blessed
News to us, and has showed us what is the Sin-offering, the Atonement, and
Propitiatory Sacrifice; We need not send our Children through the fire, nor
bring any other Offering to God, to appease His Wrath; He has given us His
Son, and has accepted Him for a Sin-offering, and has told us, that this
shall be as sufficient and satisfying, as if we had made the satisfaction our
selves; here, O! here is the wonder, even a wonder of wonders.

Use, 2. See here the way how we come to Life by Christ; It Is imported in this
Doctrine, to be by Christ's being made an Offering for us; It Is not by our
praying to Him, as God, nor by our Holy Living, nor by His working Holiness in
us; (though these ought and will be, in some measure, where He is made use of
aright) but by His Offering up Himself in a Sacrifice for us; and by Gods
imputing it to us* and considering that Christ Jesus in the Offering in our
Room; And that thereby God is pacified, and Sin and Wrath removed; There can no
other way be conceived, how we are made partakers of it, but by imputation;
This will be the more clear, if we consider, that the same way, that our Sins
became Christ's, the same way His Righteousness becomes ours; or the same way
that Justice laid Clame to Him for our Debt; the same way lay we Claim to His
Righteousness: Now it is Blasphemous to think, that our Sin became His any
other way; but that Legally he entering Himself as our Cautioner, our Sin was
reckoned on His Score; even so His Righteousness becomes ours, by being imputed
to us: So the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 5. ult. He was made sin for us, who knew no
sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him; And have His
Righteousness derived to us: It were good that we would learn how to win to
this Righteousness, even by presenting Him to Justice, as Cautioner for our
Debt, and by taking hold of His Righteousness to ground our plea upon, when we
come to reckon with God for our Sins: And we think that there is here a clear
ground, for refuting of that way of Justification, by any thing inherent in our
selves: For if it be by His Offering, that we are Justified, then it is by
nothing in our selves. Now this Name that Christ's Sufferings get, bears out,
that it is that which satisfies God, and absolves us, as the alone Meritorious
and Procuring Cause; And therefore there is no other thing, that we can derive
our Justification from, but His Righteousness only.

Use 3. Seeing by Christ's Offering there is a Ransom and Atonement to be had;
And seeing it is offered in the Gospel, we pray you, in the Name of the Lord,
take hold of, and improve this Offering; let every Body that hears tell that
Christ is the Sin-offering, endeavor to get Him to be their Sin-offering;
There are none that know, and find that they have Sinned, but they would think
of an amends; and here it is: and there is ground to exhort you to make use of
it, and to encourage you in it; because this is the very End of His Suffering,
and He is fully furnished completely to accomplish it; If there were no access
to Life by this Offering, He would not be called a Sin-offering, in opposition
to all other Offerings; There is ground therefore to declare this to you, that
by Christ Jesus Life, and Reconciliation is attainable, and that it is actually
attained by accepting of this Offering: Such as accept of it, and rest upon it,
shall find Acceptance with God, and Freedom from Sin and Wrath, by virtue
thereof; It Is a common Question, What shall we do? we do all we dow, or may;
but if we were studying a long time to tell you; This is it, even to make use
of Christ's Offering, This, and this only will do your turn completely, and no
other thing will do it.

The 4th Use, Is of strong Consolation to all who betake themselves to Christ,
He is the Sin-offering, that procures the taking away of Sin and Wrath, and
that procures Friendship with God; and there is no imputation of Sin, nor
condemnation to them who are in him, Romans 8.1. And hence is that triumph v. 34.
who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that justifies
who is he that will condemn? It is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen
again, etc. If Justice were coming to execute the Sentence, what can it say to
the Believer? Jesus Christ has stepped in betwixt Wrath and Him; and as to
Gods acceptance, He alone is accounted the Sin-offering; and as these who
under the Law Offered the Typical Sacrifices, had access to the Ordinances, and
were Sanctified, as to the purifying of the Flesh: So much more is this
Offering able to purify the Conscience, and to purge it from dead works; and
to give fair access to the Promises of Life, and to the Favor of God, to all
them who make use of it, as if they had never Sinned. I know much of the weight
of this Consolation will lie on this, whether Christ's Offering be made use of;
And some will say, How shall we make use of Christ's Offering? And others will
ask, how shall we know, if we have made right use of it? And would to God, that
Souls were beatten off from their Pride and Security, and brought under the
conviction of a necessity of use making of Christ, He would discover both to
them: But before we answer the Question, there are two things we would
presuppose. 1. We presuppose that the Soul is made sensible of it is need of
Christ's Sacrifice, from the apprehension it has of a Quarrel bebetwixt God
and it, and from the fear of His Wrath because of Sin; else the asking of such
a Question is to no purpose; For as we hinted before, the Offering of a
Sacrifice implies the Confession of Guilt: So the making use of Christ's
Sacrifice presupposes sense of Sin; Err a Soul can make use of His Offering, it
must know, it is due was utter Consumption, 2. We presuppose, That the Soul is
desirous to be at God, and to have peace with Him, To which End Christ is the
Midse; and there will be no respect had to the Midse, except there be a respect
had to the End, as it is, Heb. 11.6. He that comes to God, must believe that he
is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him diligently; where there is
employed in the Comer, a desire to be at God, and an expectation of some
Benefit, to be had from Him, or as the Word is, Heb. 7.27. He is able to save
to the uttermost, all that come to God by him; Which implies the Sinners being
sensible of his lost condition; his desire to be at God; and then Christ's
Offering comes in, as the Mids, to bring about, and to come by that End. But
these being presupposed, The great thing wherein the Answer of the Question
lies, How to make use of Christ's Offering for the attaining of that End, of
Pardon of Sin, and Peace with God, seem^ to be holden out in that Word, Heb.
7.25. He is able to save to the uttermost, them that come unto God by him; And
therein we may consider Sinners desire to be at God, and the use making of
Christ, in reference to that End, in these Three. 1. To have the Breach made up
with God, in respect of their State. 2. For quieting the Conscience, in respect
of Particular Challenges. 3. For the making up of their defects, in Grace, as
well as for the removing of Sin: And as use making of Christ in these Three,
points out the way of a Sinners coming to Christ; So a Sinners going on in this
way, evidenceth his right use making of Him; which will serve to Answer both
the Questions, to wit, how to make use of Christ's Offering? and how to know
that we are making use of it a right?

For the First, to wit, Going to God by Christ. 1. It is opposed to stepping in
to God, at the first hand. 2. It is opposed to the use making of any other
thing in our coming to God, for making up the Breach. 3. It implies the Sinners
betaking of himself to Christ, as the Mid-man, by whom he expects to come to
Friendship with God; There are some Scriptural Similitudes, whereof, if we
could rightly conceive, and apply them to this Purpose, they might serve much
to clear it: There is a Distance, which, like a Gulf is fixed betwixt God and
Man, a Soul then comes to God by Christ, as one goes over a Gulf by a Bridge;
Hinted at by the Apostle, Heb. 10.19, 20. Having therefore boldness to enter
into the holiest, by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living way, which he has
consecrated to us through the vail, which is his flesh, We take the force of
the Similitude to lie in this, That as one that has a Vail betwixt him and
another, whom he desires to approach to; must go through the Vailere he win to
that other; So here Christ's Flesh being the Vail* He, by His Death has rent
it; that Sinners might step through that Rent, or Breach to God; That is, when
all was before shut up, and closs betwixt God and Sinners; Christ was content,
that a Rent should be made in His Body, through which they might come to God;
Coming to God by Christ in this Sense, is to walk, as 't were, on Christ's
Sufferings as a Bridge, and to have no other Place, or Ground to Stand, or Walk
on to God, but this: Again, John 10. Christ calls Himself the Door, I am the
door, and John 14. To the same purpose, He is called the way: To tell us, That,
as none can come in to a House, but by the Door, nor can come to the end of
their journey, but by the way that leads to it; So Heaven being shut up, and
closed upon Sinners, any that would have entry into it, must betake themselves
to Christ by Faith; For by Faith in Him, the Door is opened, and the Way Paved
to Heaven; It is a good token, when the way to Heaven looks on the Sinner, as a
hard Wall, or like a sinking Moss or Boge; and Faith in Christ, gives him some
little hold, whereby he wi^s over the Wall, and leads him to some little
Hillocks, or hard Bits, or Spots of Ground, whereby he steps through the Moss,
or Boge to Christ; Or, when the Sinner lays his Reckoning to make use of
Christ's Satisfaction; for payment of his Debt: So that if he were to appear at
the Bar of Justice, his answer would not be; that if he had done a Fault, he
had made, or would make a Mends; nor that he Prayed, and Repented, and sought
Mercy; but this, that he took with his Guilt, and made use of Christ's
Sacrifice; So Paul speaking, when renewed, in opposition to what he was, while
a Pharisee, says, Philip. 3. That he counts all things to be but loss and
dung, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ, that he may be found in
him, not having his own righteousness, which is according to the law, but that
which is through the faith of Christ: When he, even he thinks on the Day of
Judgment, and where he will hide himself in that Day, when it shall be asked,
(and every other shall be asked the Question) Where art thou? his Desire, and
Resolution is, to give this Answer; I am in Christ, Lord; I have no
righteousness of my own to lippen, or to trust to; I will never make mention of
my painfulness in my Ministry, of the tenderness of my Walk, nor of any thing
else of that Kind; But I will betake my self to Christ's Righteousness, and
will say, Lord, here is much Debt on my Score; but there is a Righteousness to
which I am fled by Faith; And on this I will ground all my Answers: This
Righteousness is in Christ, as the Purchaser thereof; And it is ours by Faith,
when we betake our selves to it, to make it the ground of our Claim; even as
if a number of Men were Pursued for Debt before a Judge, and one should come
in, and say; I have paid so much; And another should say, give me down a Part,
and I will pay the rest; And a Third should say, give me a Day and Time, and I
will Satisfy; And a Fourth poor Body should come in, and say, I have indeed
nothing my self to pay m^ Debt with; but I betake my self to the R^sponsall
Cautioner, who has paid all for such as betake themselves to H^^: This is
Faith's Answering, and Arguing: It will neither shift the Debt, nor ye^ admit
of the final Sentence of Condemnation, though readily acknowledged to be
deserved; But it Interposes Christ's Satisfaction, as that which will be
acceptable, though the Sinner can do nothing of himself; In a word, this way of
pleading, is upon the one side, an utter denying of the Man's self; And of all
that is, or can be in him, for attaining of Righteousness; And upon the other
side a crediting of himself to Christ, for the attaining of that which he has
not in himself; It Is not only Faith (if it were possible to seperat these two)
to deny our own Righteousness, but by the exercise of it, there must be a
stepping over on Christ, and on His Righteousness unto God.

The 2d. thing, wherein the exercise of Faith, in the use making of Christ's
Sacrifice consists; is, in reference to particular Challenges; For even when a
Soul has fled to Christ, and made use of His Sacrifice for Pardon of Sin, and
for Peace with God; it will not be free from Challenges, and from new Accounts;
And therefore the exercise of Faith is to be continued in the use making of
this Offering, in reference to these particulars, as well as in reference to
the making of our Peace with God at first: In which respect, Faith is called a
Shield, Ephesians. 6.16. When new Guilt is contracted, and drawn on, and when
Tentation says to the Believer, Is this the Goodness of your Purposes, and
Resolutions, which have been like Flax before the Fire? No sooner was thou
Essayed, and Assaulted, but thou did greatly Succumb; and wast much Foiled,
and Prevailed over: The Soul runs to the same Targe, Buckler, or Shield; and
though every one of these Challenges, be like a fiery Dart, that would set the
Conscience on a Flame; yet by Faith the Dart is kept off, or the Venom of it
Sucked so out, that it burns not, and it makes the Soul to say, though I cannot
satisfy for the Debt, yet there is in Christ's Righteousness whereto I betake
my self, which can do it; And if we look to that, which intertains Tormenting
Exercises, that speak evil of the Grace of God (for humbling Exercises are
called for, and are Profitable) we will find it to be this; to wit, When Souls
come to Dispute, and Debate with Challenges, and do not Interpose the Targe or
Shield of Faith, taking hold of Christ's Righteousness, betwixt them and these
Challenges; for sometimes a Soul will betake it self to Christ's Righteousness
for Peace at first, and will look upon it self, as bound to keep, and maintain
it is own Peace; and yet will, on the matter, think that it is but a sort of
B^ffilling, or Profaning of Christ's Righteousness, (to say so) to be making
daily use of it, for answering of new Challenges; And such will be ready to
say, should not a Believer be Holy? And we say, that he should, and that it
were to abuse the Spiritual Armor, to take one Piece of it, and not another,
yea, or not all the rest; but this we say, likewise, that when one makes use of
the Sword of the Spirit, he may warrantably make use of the Shield of Faith
also; Failling in this, that is, when Christ's Righteousness is not made use
of, in reference to particular Challenges, mightily indisposeth many serious
poor Souls, for use making of the rest of the Weapons of their Spiritual
Warefare; And therefore, as ye would exercise Faith in general, for
reconciiling you to God, as to your State, so ye would exercise Faith on
Christ's Offering for doing away of particular Quarrels; and for silencing of
particular Challenges; which is to be daily washing at the Fountain. In short,
as to the other Question, This may be a mark of a Person, that is making right
use of Christ's Offering for his Peace, if he be daily making use of Christ's
Offering for his Peace, if he be daily making use of His Offering, for
quenching and silencing of particular Challenges.

The 3d. Thing, wherein this exercise of Faith: in the use making of Christ's
Sacrifice consists, is, in reference to the defects of our Grace; we have
indeed much need of Christ, and He has much forthcoming in Him, for the
helping of Grace; for the amending of weak Faith, and Love, and other Graces;
as well as for obtaining Pardon of Sin, and of Peace with God; and for
answering of Challenges; And yet oftimes, these who are making use of Christ in
the former two respects, are in hazard, and ready to think, that they should
Believe more, Love more, and exercise other Graces more, of themselves; But we
are to make use of Him, for helping defects of Grace, as well as for these
other things; By this, I mean not only the use making of Christ meritoriously;
and so that we should look on Faith, Love, Repentance, and every other Grace,
as purchased by Him, as well as Peace with God; and and that we should make use
of Christ's Offering, for attaining of these; But I also mean, that we should
make use of Christ, as a Priest, to make His own Offering effectual, for
attaining all the Benefits of His Purchase: Considering, that he is able to
save to the uttermost, all these that come unto God by him: The Apostle goes
on this ground, Heb. 10.19, 20. Seeing we have such an high Priest, and such an
Offering, Let us draw near with full assurance of faith, etc. And if ye ask
what this is? It is of largely extended use; It is even to make use of Christ,
as a Priest, not only as the object of Faith, and as the Procurer and Worker of
Faith, but also for the confirming of weak Faith; It Is a looking to Him, to get
the weak Faith, that we dare scarcely lippen to, made strong, and a lippening,
or trusting of our weak Faith to Him, to carry us through, when we dare not
well lean to it; In the first respect, we do by Faith lippen, and trust to
Christ's Righteousness: in this last respect, we lippen, or trust our Faith to
Him; And look to Him, not only for Pardon, but we lippen to Him for making
Faith, to keep it is grips of Him; and as it was with that poor man spoken of,
Mark 9. Who, upon the one side, betakes himself to Christ, If thou can do any
thing, have compassion on us, and help us: And on the other side, being holily
impatient, finding his Faith like to fail and misgive, when Christ says to
him, If thou can believe; all things are possible to him that believes; he
cries out, in that his holy impatiencie, Lord, I believe help thou my unbelief:
he acknowledges his unbelief, as well as his Faith; and trusts Christ with the
mending of his Faith, and holding together the Sheards of it (so to speak,)
when it was like to crack, and fall asunder: Our doing thus, evidenceth a more
full denying of our selves, when we dare not trust our own believing, but as it
is committed to Christ, and when there is a Crediting of Him, and Leaning to
Him, both for the Benefit we expect, and for the Application of it; That Word
of the Apostle, Phil. 3.12. Is apposit, and excellent to this purpose; That I
may apprehend that for which I am apprehended of Christ Jesus. As is also that
of Pet. 1 Epist- 1 Chap. v. 10. Who are kept through faith by the power of
God. So then in answer to both the Questions. 1. How to make use of Christ's
Sacrifice? And 2. How to know, if we have made, or do make use of it a right?
We say in short, as to the First, That there must First be a Leaning to His
Merit, for the Buying, or Procuring of our Peace, and a betaking of our selves
to it for that end. 2. When Tentations recure, and when new Challenges arise,
there must be a constant daily betaking of our selves to Faith, in his
Sacrifice, as to a Shield, or as to a Storehouse; which He Himself calls an
abiding in him, John 15.3. There must be an use making of Christ, as a Priest,
not only to remove daily Contracted Guiltiness, but also to heall the
Infirmity and Weakness of our Graces; especially of Faith and Love; giving Him
Credit to bring our Faith and Love to perfection; It is a sweet Word, which we
have, Psalm. 103. He heals all thy diseases. As to the 2d: Question, we say,
that Person may look on himself, as making right use of Christ's Righteousness,
that is, daily making use of Him, in these forenamed Respects, who, if he were
to appear before God, it is Christ's Righteousness only that he would build
on; He is also daily making use of Him, to answer Challenges as they recurre;
and dare not lippen to his own Faith, but as it is committed to Him;
Considering, that as Faith is in Himself, it is daily in hazard to be
extinguished; And we may add, that he so makes use of Christ; as that he dare
not go to God without Him; as the Word is, Heb. 7.25. Them that come to God by
him; he comes unto God by Christ, in Prayer, in Praises, and in every other
Duty of Worship: The Apostle, to this Purpose, says, Heb. 13.15. By him
therefore, let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God. The believing Soul is
never right till it is all be put in His hand: Though all these be not distinct,
and explicit in the Persons use making of Christ's Sacrifice; yet he expects,
that the Application of the Benefits which Christ has purchased to him, shall
be made forthcoming to him, by virtue of that same Purchase; And that He who is
the Author, will also be, the finisher of his faith: The sum and upshot of all,
is, to show that as we have much Good, by and in Christ, if we could make use
of it; So He calls us to be Cheerful, and Comforted, in the use making of
it, and not to Minish our own Consolation, when he has condescended Graciously
thus to Extend, and Enlarge it, with so Richly Liberal, and Bountiful a Hand.

SERMON XL.
ISAIAH LIII.X. Verse 10. He shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days,
and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand.


IT may be thought, and that very justly, that there must be some great and
glorious Design driven in the contryvance of the Work of Redemption; That was
executed by such a Mean, as is the Suffering of the Son of God; And that there
must be some Noble and Notable thing following on it, that moved the Father to
send his Son, and the Son to come for this Work. This part of the Text answers,
and tells us, what is the Design, He shall see his seed, he shall prolong his
days, etc. He shall communicate Life to many that were Dead, and shall beget a
Generation, that shall have Life deryved from Him, as a Seed have from their
Parents: And so this is a third Answer, for removing of that stumbling
Objection, proposed in the beginning of the Verse; to wit, How it came to
pass, that the Innocent Son of God, who had done no violence, and who had no
guile in his mouth, was put to such Sufferings? We show that there were three
Grounds laid down, in Answer to this. 1. It pleased the Lord to bruise him, It
was the Fathers good pleasure. The 2d. is, from the Nature of His Sufferings,
which were to be a Sin-offering, or an Offering for Sin, not for His own, but
for the Sins of the Elect. The 3d. Is, That His Sufferings should have notable
Fruits, and Effects following them, set down in Three Expressions; which are
partly Prophesies; telling, what should be the Effects of the Sufferings of the
Mediator; partly Promises made to the Mediator; telling what should be His
Reward and Hyre (to speak so) for His Sufferings. 1. He shall see his seed;
that is, many shall get good of His Sufferings; 2. He shall prolong his days,
That is, He shall outlive these His Troubles and Sufferings, and shall have a
glorious Out-gate, and Reign. 3. The pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his
hand. That is, The Work that was given Him to do, and to finish shall thrive
well; and no part of it shall faill, or miscarry. In the First Promise made to
Him, or in the first Effect that should follow on His Sufferings, in these
Words, He shall see his seed; We have these Three. 1. A Relation employed
betwixt Christ and Believers; They are His seed; such as in the next verse, are
said to be justifiea by Him; It is in short, many shall get Pardon of Sin, and
Justification by His Death; In this respect, it is said, Psalm. 45. penult verse,
In stead of thy fathers, shall be thy children, whom thou may make princes
in all the earth. 2. A Prophecy, and foretelling of the event, that should
follow Christ's Sufferings, and so it holds out this; That our Lord Jesus
should not only have a Seed, but a numerous Seed, that should be made sure to
Him, And it seems to be in allusion to that which is spoken of Abraham, and of
others in the Old Testament, of whom it is said, that they should have Seed;
That is, that many should descend of them; But there is more here; For, whereas
others, while they are Living, or in their Lifetime beget a Seed, which
begetting, is interrupted by Death; The Death of our Lord Jesus begets His
Seed, or His Seed are begotten by His Death. 3. Considering the Words as a
Promise, they hold out this, That though our Lord Jesus Suffer, and Die, yet He
sha l not only have a Seed, but He shall see His Seed. He shall outlive His
Sufferings, and Death; And shall be delighted In seeing of them, who shall get
the good of His Sufferings; As it is said of Job, that he saw his children, or
s^ed of the third and fourth generation; That is, he lived long, and saw many
that came of him; even so though our Lord came to Death, and to the G ave; yet
He should not only have a numerous Seed, many Children, but He should live, and
see them; and that not only for three, or four, or for ten Generations; But for
very many Generations: And His dying, should neither mar His begetting, nor the
seeing of them: And this seeing of his Seed, is opposed to such Parents as are
Dead; and who, though their Children, and Posterity be in want, yet they know
it not. From the First of these, Observe, That Believers are our Lord Jesus His
Seed; they are come of Him; whatever their Meannesse and Lowness be, in the
World; and though they could not clame Kindred to any of externally honest Rank
and Quality; yet they are His Seed: To this purpose, the Apostle bespeaks the
believing Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28. Ye see your calling brethren, how that
not many mighty, not many wise men, after the flesh, not many noble are called;
but God has chosen the foolish things of this world, to confound the wise,
etc. that no flesh should glory in his presence: Though ye be not of any high
Rank or Quality in the World; yet of him are ye in Christ Jesus* who of God is
made to us, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption: In this
respect Christ is called the everlasting father, Isa: 9.6. For He is the Father
of all Believers; that ever had, or shall have Life; who are, Psalm. 45. penult
verse caled, His Children.

To clear this a little, ye shall take it in these Four or Five respects, or
Considerations, in which believers are said to be Christ's Seed, or be descended
of Him. 1. In this respect, that as Believers they have their being of Him, as
Children descended from off their Parents, as to their Natural being; So
Believers, as they have a Spiritual Being, descend from Him; and hold their
Being of Him; without whom they had never been Believers: And in this respect
they are His Seed. 1. Because He Meritoriously Purchased Life to them; which is
the thing here mainly understood; as following immediately an the back of His
Sufferings. 2. Because they have Life from Him efficiently, as He works it in
them, and by the Gospel begets them; Therefore He is said 1. Tim. 1.10. To have
brought life and immortality to light, through the gospel, which was not known
in many parts of the World, till Christ brought it forth; In this respect,
Believers are Christ's Seed; we are not born Believers of our Parents, nor have
the Faith which we have, of the Ordinances, nor of Ministers, as efficient
Causes thereof; But it is from our Lord Jesus, who is Believers Father, Thus
Believers have an Affinity, and near Relation to Christ, even to be His
Children: And any that would lay claim to Faith, or Spiritual Life, would see
well, that it be this way kindly, and (as we use to say) leill come, from Jesus
Christ, and that they be in His Debt, and Common for it. 2ly, They are His
Seed, in respect of the likeness that is betwixt Him and them, or in respect of
the Qualifications that are in them; as they are said, 2 Pet. 1.4. By the
exceeding great and precious promises, to be made partakers of the divine
nature; They have of the same Spirit, for the kind that He, as Mediator, has
in Him; And it is in this respect, that Cant. 7.1. The Believer is called the
Princess daughter, which especially looks to the Spiritual Generous, and Noble
Qualifications, that are deryved from Christ, to the Believer; Hence, Believers
are said to have the Spirit of Sons, when all others, though they be the
greatest in the World; have but the Spirit of Servants, and their Generosity,
is nothing to that of Believers; who are made partakers of the divine nature;
We have not, says the Apostle, received the spirit of fear, but of faith and
love, and of a sound mind; Ah! there are many that claim Kindred and Relation
to Christ, that are very unlike Him. 3ly. They are called Christ's Seed, in
respect of the care that He has of them. Never Mother was more tender of the
Sucking Child, then He is of His Believing Children; Therefore, says the
Lord, Isa. 49.15. A mother may forget her sucking child; but I will not forget
thee: Hence, is that Phrase, even as to visible Professors in the Church, who
refuse to listen to the call of the Gospel; which is much more eminently
verified in Believers; Matthew. 23. How often would I have gathered thee as a hen
does her chickens under her wings? So tender and respective is He to His
Children; as the Mother is, tender to the Sucking Child, or as the Hen is of
her newly hatched, and young Chickens; for they are, in some respect, come out
of His own Bowels; His Blood was shed to Purchase them; So it is said, Isa.
40.11. He gathered the lambs with his arm, he carries them in his bosom, And
gently leads those that are with young. And, O! what Massy Consolation have
such Words as these, in them; And what confidence may Believing Sinners have to
come to this Mediator; That is a Mother, a Father, a Brother, and a Parent,
that has begotten us out of His own Bowels; and in some respect, (as we are
Believers) has as a Mother conceived us in His own Womb. 4ly. They are called
His Seed, in respect of the Portion which they get from Him; The Apostle says,
that Parents provide for their Children; It Is indeed eminently so here,
Believers come under His Care, oversight, and Tutory; And as a Man provides for
His Household, His Children, and Servants Meat in due season (And the Apostle
says, he is worse then an infidel that provides not for them of his own house)
even so our Lord Jesus, as He gives Believers their Spiritual Life, so He
entertains that Life; provides for them, and trains them up, and on, till he
enter them in to the Possession of Eternal Life; they are made by Him Princes,
Psalm. 45.16. Entitled to a Kingdom; yea, all His Children are Kings, and sit
with him on his throne, Rev. 2. last Verse, and are made partakers of His
Glory; and (to speak so) they Fair as He Fairs, they Dwell as He Dwells, and
behold His Glory; O! is not this much; That the poor Dyvour, that has nor a
Penny left him, nor to leave to another, should be thus Dignified, as to have a
claim to Christ's Kingdom, to be an Heir, and a joint Heir with Him, who is the
Heir of all things? For so we come to be Retoured, (to speak so) and so be
served Heirs to all things; As it is, Rev. 21.7. He that overcomes shall
inherit all things; And it goes on this ground, Heb. 1.2. That the Mediator, is
appointed heir of all things; with whom, being joint heirs; we are Heirs too,
and are made to Inherit all things. 5ly. They are called His Seed, because of
the manner of their coming to the Possession of that, which through Him they
have a Claim to; For they have Claim to nothing, but by being Heirs to, and
with Him; And by believing in Him; They are Heirs of the promise, in some
respect, as Isaac was: So then briefly to recapitulat all these, would ye know
the way that Believers are Christ's Seed. 1. He begets them, and they have
their Spiritual Life of Him. 2. He is tender of them, as of His own Children.
3. They are furnished with Qualifications, and Dispositions suitable to Him. 4.
They have a rich Portion from Him, and are well provided for. 5. What good they
get, is for His sake, who is their Father; Here we may allude to that Word,
Romans 11. They are beloved for the Fathers sake, by a Right and Title to Him;
they come to have a Good and Goodly Portion; They claim not their Portion;
because of this or that thing in themselves; but by their being served Heirs to
Christ, being come of Him, they come to get a Right to what is His.

Use, As all Relations betwixt Christ and Bellevers, speak out much
Consolation; So does this, if we were in Case to apply it; This one Word has
in it, and holds forth a good Condition, and is a very broad Chartour.

See here then. 1. What we are in Christ's Common and Debt, who are Believers;
It Is much to be made a Friend, to be fred from the Curse of God, and to have
all our Debt paid; But this is more to be His Seed, to be His own Children; to
have our Life of Him, to have our Provision and Portion from Him; It Is really a
wonder, that we wonder not more at this, and other Relations, that are betwixt
Him and Believers; as namely, he is the Believers Father, and takes them to be
His Sons and Daughters; He is the Believers Brother, and is not ashamed to call
them brethren; He is the Believers Husband, and they are His Spouse; He is
their Bridegroom, and they are His Bride; Such Relations as these are pitched
upon, and made choice of, to fill (If I may speak so) the Faith of the
Believer, and that the Believer may feed sweetly and delicately on them, till
the time come that the Vail of Similitudes betaken away; and they be brought to
see Him as He is, even Face to Face; and that thereby they may be helped to win
to read their advantages and privileges, which they have in Him: What can be
the reason then that so few think, and esteem suitably of the Excellent, and
Desirable Condition of Believers, and that words of this kind relish not? Here
is the Reason, He of whom they hold all these Privileges, and by whom they are
put into this Notable, and Non-such Condition, is not suitably Esteemed of, and
accounted Precious; Therefore, Believers in Him, are thought the less of. Our
hearts should melt in love to Him, and in sorrow for offending Him, at the
Reading and Hearing of such expressions, wherewith the Scriptures of God are
stuffed full.

2ly, Are there any that would have a Good and Happy Condition summed up, and
compended; Here it is; even to have our Lord Jesus to be a Father; and to be
His Seed; to come in as Sons and Daughters to Him: I appeal to you all, if any
Condition can be put in the Balance with this; Is there any Honor and Dignity
like it, or comparable with it? Who can claim to be come of such a Parent as is
He, who is King of kings, and Lord of lords, the Prince of the kings of the
earth; The Father of Glory, His eldest and only begotten Son, by an Eternal and
unspeakable Generation, who, in all things has the preheminency; What is your
Pedegrie, who will say, and boast, that ye are of such a Laird's or Lord's
House, and of such an Ancient Family and Stock; yea, though ye were of Blood
Royal, what is it to this? what will become of Men's Gentility or Nobility of
Birth, yea, of Royalty of Birth, in that Day, when Christ shall set His Throne
in the Clouds? To have this Relation to Christ, will be more Valuable, and
Honorable in that Day, then to have been great Commanders, Lairds, Lords,
Marquesses Dukes, Princes, and King's; who will all in that Day stand upon the
same Level, with the Poorest Peasants, and when all Honors and Dignities,
which are now so much thought of, and thirsted after, will be laid in the Dust.
Therefore learn to think of this, as the Noblest Birth and Descent, which is
through Faith in Christ Jesus; And Covet, and be holily Abitious, to have the
Qualifications of His Children: Look to the Qualifications, Parts, Induements,
and A^complishments that use to accompany, or ^ol^ow any Houses of the Braven
of Natural Men; Are there any of them comparab^e to the Qualifications of
B^lievers? Is there a Stock or Race of People in all the World, so truly
Generous and Noble as Believers are, who are come of Christ, and are made
valiant, through the exercise of Faith in Him, against all occurring
difficulties; Regardlesse of worldly things; And taken up with, and bussied
about high and noble Projects and Designs; even to have Heaven, and Glory, and
God Himself; who undervalue, and holily disdain the things of the World, which
earthworms so much seek after; Their Qualifications kyth especially in this,
that their designs are Heavenly, their minds elevated to, and set on the best
things, and that they have a truly magnanimous and a valerous way of
prosecuting them; by studying the mortification of Sin, and conformity to God,
when others cannot endure to cast out with, and abandon a lust; They holily
scorn, and account it below them to have their Peace standing, or falling with
the ebbing and flowing of Creature Comforts, which the Men of the World place
their happiness n; Their study is to be Pure, as Christ is Pure; O! is there
any Por^ion like theirs? many or you think but little of it now, but ye will
think more of it in that Day, when the Earth, and all things in it shall be
burnt up with Fire; What will the Earth-portion signify then? Ye that now have
your variety of Fine and Delicat Meats with your Ale and Wine at every Meal,
who shall be found out of Christ, shall not get a Drop of cold Water to cool
your Tongue, under ^our exquisit and Hell ish Torments; when the Poor Body that
believed, and had a hard Life of it here, shall be in Abraham's Bosom, and with
Christ at His Table, yea, and on His Throne with Him; And it is upon the
account of their having a Title to Christ, that they come to all that Glory,
and Happiness: O! is there any Right and Title like the Believers; which is
founded on Christ's Right and Title, which is, or may be called the Original
Right of the Believer, who is kept by the power of God, through faith unto
salvation. If these be the true and faithful sayings of God, what is the
reason that Men think so little of them? Why is an Interest in Christ to
undervalued? Believe ye, that such and so much good is to be gotten, by being
Christ's Seed and Children? If ye say that ye believe it, how comes it to pass
that so few have it for their Design, and that your Designs are so much for
this and that in a present World; and that this is so much slighted, and that
there is so much boasting, and glorying in other things, and so little holy
Boasting, and Glorying in this?

There are two or three Marks, which we may gather from the Words, that may
help to show, when this Claim is warrantably made, and which may evidence the
groundlessness of the Claim of many. And 1. Christ's Seed have another
Original, then that which they bring with them into the World; There is in them
a change o^ the ground of their hope; And that on a new account; Folk comes
into the World sinful, Chi dren of sinful Parents; but when they come to be
Believers they get a new Life, which Men cannot give; and this new Life has
new Actings and Fruits; Ah! How many dream of a Right to Christ; who know no
other Birth or Being, but that which is Natural? 2. They who are Christ's Seed
carry al^^g with them the impression of an Obligation, to and an
acknowledgement of Him, in whatever good they have gotten; they think
themselves much oblidged to Christ, and they acknowledge Him for their Life, As
it is, Malachi 1. If I be a father, where is my honor? and if a Master, where
is my fear? a son honors his fathe, etc. A natively and Genuinly disposed
Child, acknowledges his Father, As his Father, and reverenceth, and loves his
Father as his Father, But there are many that pretend to a Being from Christ,
who think not themselves in His Debt, and Common for it, and, who know not what
is is to walk under the Conviction of their Obligation to Christ, for their
supposed spiritual Life and Being. 3. They who are Christ's Seed, have in them
a likeness to Him, as they did once bear the image of the earthly; so now they
bear the image of the heavenly Adam: Not that they come up in all things to be
exactly like to the Pattern, but it is their aim, and other things that
disconform them to Him are deformed, loathsome, and ugly in their sight; Their
old Inclination is burdensome to them; And is the continual ground of an inward
Contest and Wrestling; and in a manner, they are troubled at the very heart,
how to keep down what is opposite to Christ; And when their Corruption
Over-masters them, they are the more discomposed, and disquieted; They discern
something in them, that is not like to Christ, and they abhor that, though it
be never so near and dear to them, their very Self; they see something also
like to Christ in them; And they Cherish, and make much of it; they would fain
be at more of it, and to have His Image more deeply impressed on their Spirits,
which they reckon their greatest, yea, their only Beauty.

The 3. Use, is for Direction to Believers; if ye be Christ's Seed, ye must be
other sort of Folks in your Designs, and in your Deportment and carriage;
King's Children ought not to carry as others; It would be highly unsuitable;
yea, even abominable to see them walk so trivially, and lightly as every Base,
Ill-bred Beggars Child does; It Is no less Incongruous, and Unbecoming, that
Believers should be taken with this and that Vanity, that mere Worldlings are
taken with, and hunt after.

The 4th Use, Speaks a Word of Consolation to Believers; And holds forth the
greatness of the Privilege of being Christ's Seed; It will be much to persuade
a Poor Sinner, duly sensible of Sin, to believe this; And that the Lord is in
earnest, when He speaks thus; That such an one, who has betaken Himself to
Christ for Life, and humbly Claims Right to nothing, but by Verture of Christ's
Right (the main thing, that our Union with Him is bottomed upon) who is content
to be in Christ's Common for Life, and goes not about to establish his own
Righteousness, but leans to His Righteousness, for Life, and Salvation,
should be His Seed, and have all the Privileges of Sons derived to Him; And
yet it is the Lord's faithful Word; Neither has Eye seen, nor Ear heard, nor
has it entered into the Heart of Man to conceive, what good things are laid up
for such a Person; and that are stuffed up in these Expressions of our Relation
to Christ Jesus.

Use 5. It may be also a quieting and comforting Word to some Believers, who
are in Affliction, Poverty, and Straits in the World; That our Lord Jesus is a
Kindly Affectionat Parent; more kindly and tender hearted, then the tenderest
Father or Mother; and indeed it may sufficiently quiet them, that they have
such a kindly Overseer, and Provisor, who is also a Cordial Sympathizer with
them, what ever their Condition be, He will not deny His Offspring, and Seed,
whom He laid down His Life to Purchase.

The 6th Use. May be for Incitement and Provocation to all that would be Happy,
to place it here; Interest in Christ Jesus, by Believing on Him, brings us to
have Interest in the enjoying of Him, and all that is His; and can there be any
more sought after, or wished for? Are there any, but would think it a good
Life, to be here? And who are they, of whom He speaks so? It is not of some
sort of strange and uncouth Folk, that were once in the World, but are now all
out of it; And of whom there are none now in it; It is not such as want Sin,
and derive their Life from their own Works; but it is such as are, 1. As
considered in themselves dead in Sins and Trespasses, and without Spiritual
Life and Being; And who know that all the pains that they can take, will not
acquire it; And who it may be, are quite Dead to their own apprehension and
sense oftentimes; And who have Judged themselves, and have the Sentence of
Death in themselves. 2. It Is such as look to Him for the obtaining of Life, and
who acknowledge Him for any Life, or Liveliness they have; And who expect it,
and bruike it, by virtue of His Purchase; which is that on which all their
Plea, for Life is founded.

Now I know, that all this will not readily clear some; There are so many
things that look counterfit like; But I am now speaking to them, who have some
sticklings of Spiritual Life, which yet are not so Lively, as they, can discern
them to be the Stirrings and Sticklings of Life; And they have a Body of Death
in them, which is ready to extinguish that Life; and often they think it is
extinguished already; They have Convictions of their own Deadness, and that
things are wrong in their Condition, and are quite out of all Hopes of
Righteousness, from and by themselves, or from any thing that they have done,
or can do; And they have some confused looks to Christ; but they cannot Rid
their Feet in the Matter of their Faith; and Duties go not so with them as they
expected, and would have them. To such I shall speak a Word or two and close. 1.
I would a^^, whence comes that Stickling of Life or Feeling of that Body of
Death? What is the Original of it? will Nature discover the Corruption of
Nature, and bring Folks to be out of Love with Corrupt Nature? Certainly, where
this is, it is not like Nature, but is the Life of Christ; especially, when it
puts Folks to discern, and take up their own Deadness; to quit their own
Righteousness* and to be content to lay their Mouth in the Dust and to betake
themselves to the Righteousness of Christ, if they could win to be distinct in
it; This looks to be from Christ, whose Spirit convinces the World of sin, and
of the sin of unbelief in particular; And of righteousness, as being only to be
had in Christ; and of judgment, that is, of the reasonableness, that He
should have a Dominion over them, and that they should walk in Holiness: Yet,
notwithstanding of all this, they are hanging in a kind of Suspense and hover;
and know not whether to look on themselves as Believers or not; They wot well
that it is not right with them; that they are lost in themselves, and that no
other way will do their turn, but Faith in the Righteousness of a Mediator:
The thing whereat they Stick and halt, is, that they know not how to through,
and maintain the consent that they have given; and they cannot think, that
their Faith is true Faith, because they know not how to follow forth the
exercise of it; though they have renunced their own Righteousness, And laid
their Reckoning, to be in Christ's Debt and Common, for Right usnesse and
Life; if ever they come by them; All their difficulty, is, how to through their
Believing. Now it is not to the founding of Life, that we are here speaking,
but to the exercise of Life, and to the finding out of Life; And we say, that
such an exercise suppons Life to be, though it be not descernable in it is
exercise, to the Soul it self; There are many Poor Creatures born and brought
forth into the World, that can neither Talk nor Walk, but must be carried and
kept Tenderly, and that are some way, as if they were not brought out of the
Womb: So is it with many Believers, and it were good to be in Christ's Common,
as for Life, so for bringing Life to exercise, and by diligence and waiting on
Him, in the use of His own appointed Means, to seek to come to some
Distinctnesse in Neating, and Exercising of any Life, that He has given; And
it is no small encouragement to this; That Christ shall see his seed, That He
must have Saints and Believers in Him; which should make Poor Souls, that have
no Life in themselves, with the more confidence to commit themselves to Him,
upon this very ground, that the Father has ingadged to Christ, that He shall
have many such for His Seed; The which Promise is performed to Him, in the
gathering in of Poor confused, and Mind-perplexed Sinners, to be in His Debt,
for Life, and to hold their Life of Him for ever; It will sure be no small part
of the ground of Saints praise in Heaven, that He not only bought Life for
them, but that He made Application of Life to them; And trained them on, till
He got them fitted to speak to His Pr^ise; Wherein the Body of Death makes many
a sad stop, and makes poor Believers to Stammer, as it were, while they are
here. But it is good News that Jesus Christ has bought Life, and brought it to
Light; And that by this Gospel, He is making Application of it, and declaring
that He is content to bestow it freely, on all them that will be in His Common
for it.

SERMON XLI.
ISAIAH LIII. X. Verse. 10. He shall see his seed, He shall prolong his days,
And the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand.


IT was once a Riddle, how, out of the strong could come forth Meat, and how,
out of the Eater could come forth Sweet; It Is here most clearly Unridled, and
that in a most Wonderful and Comfortable Manner; Our Lord Jesus, the strong
Lion of the Tribe of Judah, it put to grief and bruised, and his soul is made
an offering for sin, and here is the Sweet Meat that comes out of it. He shall
see his seed, he shall prolong his days, etc. The substance of the Words is,
That by His Death many shall be brought to Life; It Is the same Death that has
given us the hope we have of Life; And all the ground that we have to speak of
it to you; which had never been, had He not been bruised, and put to grief.

We show, that here is holden forth the Lord's great design in the Contrivance
of the Work of Redemption; And that these Words are a further answer to the
Stumbling Objection proposed before; to wit, How the innocent Son of God could
Suffer? It pleased the Father to bruise him; when he should make his soul an
offering for sin, etc. Which Justifies God, in that proceeding and serves to
weep away that Reproach, that might seem to stick to Him; In sum, it is this;
If we consider the notable and noble Fruits, and Comfortable Effects, that
followed on His Sufferings, and Death; there is no ground to stumble at God's
giving His Son, or at the Sons Condescending as Mediator, to Suffer, to be
Despised, and put to Death; And this is the first Fruit, and Eff ct thereof,
that He shall see his seed; Whereby is meaned, that by His Death the Elect, who
are given to Him do by Faith in Him rec^ive a new Life from Him, and are taken
in under a most sweet and kindly Relation to Him by their being begotten again,
to a lively hope, through His Resurrection from the Dead.

We spoke to ^^is Point. That Believers are Christ's Seed; which shows the
great Privilege, that they are admitted to, and their great Obligation to
Christ on that account; they are oblidged to Him, for their Spiritual Life and
Being; as Children are oblidged to their Natural Parents, for their Natural
Life and Being; And Infinitely more oblidged, in as much, as the one Life is
Infinitely Preferable to the other.

There are three things more to be Observed, from the Words, And 1. Considering
them as they stand in Dependence on the Former; That God's Design, in sending
His Son into the World, and the Mediators D^sign, in coming so low; is to have
a Seed begotten to the Hope of Eternal Life, and to have ^oor Souls dead in
themselves, shareing of Life in and through Him; even to have many partaking of
Life through His Death. 2. Considering the Words, as foretelling the event of
Christ's Death, and Sufferings, We have this Observation from them, That Our
Lord's Death shall certainly procure Life to many; Or thus, it cannot be, but
His Death must have tru^^, to the saving of Souls from Death, and to the making
of them partakers of Life. 3. Looking on the Words, as a Promise made to the
Mediator; We Observe from them, That the Seeing of a Seed, is exceeding much
thought of, by Jesus Christ; It pleased Him wondrous will; Therefore this
Promis^ of a Seed is m^de to Him, to encourage Him to lay down His Life.

We shall speak a Word to each of these; And shall leave the consideration of
the Words, as they hold out, not only our Lord's out-living his Sufferings, but
His seeing a Seed on the back of them, to the Second Effect that follows; He
shall prolong his days.

For the First Doctrine, we suppose, It will be clear, if we consider how the
seeing of his seed is Subjoyned to, and Depends upon the former Words, anent
His making His soul an offering for sin which holds out this, That the great
Design of God, and of Christ the Mediator its His Sufferings, is, to beget a
People to ^ternal Life, And to make way, that Sinners Natural D^ad in Sin, may
partake of Spiritual and H^avenly Life, and may be begotten to the Hope of
Eternal Life, through Him: And what other Design, I pray, could there be then
this? For the Lord had nothing to procure to Himself; To speak simply, there
could be no addition made to the Glory of God thereby; Therefore, it is said
John 6.39, 40. This is the Fathers will that has sent me, that of all that be
has given me, I should loss nothing, but should raise it up at the last day:
And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one who sees the Son, and
believes on him may have everlasting life; and I will raise him up at the last
day. 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance;
and what is it? That Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners: and that
John 10.10. I came that they might have life, and that they might have it more
abundantly.

There are two things that we would speak a Word to, for clearing of the
Doctrine, And then make Use of it. The 1. is, How this can be God's Design in
Christ's Humiliation, to beget many Sons to Life? 2. How Christ's Death
Contributs to this Design? For the First, When we speak of God's Design h^re,
we mean not His last and ultimat Design, but His immediate Design in the Gospel,
which is subservient to that His last and ultimat Design; to wit, The
Glorif^ing of His Grace and Justice, in giving the Mediator, to Satisfy
Justice for Dyvour Sinners, who are not able to Satisfy for themselves; and He
having chosen this, as the Midst, to that highest end, we may well say, that
this is His immediate Design in the Gospel; that thereby the Glory of His Grace
and Justice might be manifested. For the 2d. Which is, How Christ's Sufferings
contribute to this end? It may be soon cleared, if we consider, that there is a
twofold Let in the way of Sinners, partaking of Life, which Christ's Suff rings
do remove. The 1. Let, is a stand^ng Quarrel, betwixt God and the Elect, they
having Sinned, and having nothing to pay their Debt; This our Lord Jesus, by
His Death removes; He pays the Debt, and tears the Obligation, called, the
hand writing that was against them, nailling it to his Cross, Col. 2. And in
this respect, His Death is called a ransom for many; And in the Words before,
He is said to have made his Soul an offering for sin, On the same account; to
wit, That the Principal Deb^or might be set free. The 2d. Let, is Man's utter
unfitness to walk with God: For though the Debt were taken away, yet they have
no Life; But Jesus Christ, by His Death, has laid down a ground, how a Sinner
may be reconciled to God, and may partake of Grace here; And so be in case to
walk with God, even while sojourning in the World, in some good measure; and of
the Life of Glory hereafter; His Sufferings are not only a Ransom for their
Debt; but also a Bridge (to speak so) to step over the Gulf of the distance
that is betwixt God: and them, unto Glory, whither He, as the Forerunner is
gone before them; In this sense, we have our Graces, as the Fruits of Chri^t's
Suff^rings; the Life of Grace, Faith, Love, Perseverance, etc. We have also
Protection, Preservation, and Guiding in the way, till we be brought through to
Eternal Life: As that Word is, John 6.39, 40. cited before, That of all whom
the Father has given me, I should loss nothing: In the First respect, Christ
is surity for our Debt; In the Second respect He is surity for our Duty, In the
First Respect, we are admitted into Covenant with God; In the Second, we are
entertained in it, by Him, who lives for ever, to make Intercession for us.

Use 1. See here, Believers, what ye are in the Fathers Debt, for sending His
Son; And what ye are in the Sons Debt, for coming to die for you; Ye behoved to
have born the Curse your selves, if He had not born it, but He took it on H
mself, that ye might be Freed from it; Thus it stood with you, ye deserved to
be shut out for ever from God, to have the Sword of His Justice awakened
against you: And he gave his back to the smitters, and his cheecks to them that
plucked of the hair; And was content that the Sword of Justice should awake
against Him, and smite Him, that He might, by His strips heal them, and by His
Death, procure Life to them; Yea, it stood thus with you, and it could not be
otherwise; The Justice of God being provoked, and the Elect being under the
Curse, as it is, Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one, that continues not in all
things written in the Law to do them: Ezekiel. 18.4. The soul that sins shall die.
Either they behoved to die, or the Cautioner; and our Lord was content to be a
Sin-offering, thereby to set Sinners free: To be lifted up on the cross, that
he might draw all men after him, to pay their D bt, which all the Creatures
could never have paid: And therefore, we would as^ you, if ye think Heaven and
Glory to be of Worth, and if ye think it to be a great mercy, to be free from
the Wrath to come, and from the Damned State and Condition of Reprobat Angels,
and of Reprobat Men and Women in Hell, And to be admitte^ to enter with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob into the Kingdom of God, and into these H^avenly
Mansions? Are ye not much in Chris^'s Debt, that procured this for you, and at
such a Rate, that thereby Life might be communicate-to you, who were Naturally
Dead, in Trespasses and Sins? whatever the rest of the World think of it, if
any of you be Born again, as you ought, in a special manner, to think much of
it, so ye will do, in some measure; for ye are as much in Christ's Common as
all that is worth; who was content, that Poor Sinners should partake of Him,
and of the Life that is in Him; to taste of H^mself, and who has said, Because
I live, ye shall live also. In a^most wonderful way, His Death is the Price, by
which Life is Communicated to Us: And it would become B^^^^vers well, to be
often reckoning, what they are in His Debt. It Is an of God's great Ends in the
Work of Redemption, even to have Sinners esteeming highly of, and much Ravished
with His Grace, and with His Love, brightly shinning in the way thereof; yet
less Conscience is made of this, then of many other Duties, by Believers; We
will send an Ear to a Practical Point of Doctrine, and will some way aim to
mind it; If we be bidden pray, we will pray; if we be commanded to Mortify
Sin, we will endeavor it, and so in other Duties: But who minds this as a
Duty, when we are called of God, to Admire, and Praise His Grace, and Love,
and Humbly to Glory in Him, so, as seriously to set our selves to fall about
it? And yet this were a most Native, Proper, and Kindly Exercise for Believers;
even like the Work of those, who say, Salvation to our God, that sits upon the
throne, and unto the Lamb, Rev. 7.10. To him who loved us, and washed us from
our sins in his own blood, etc. Rev. 1.5. To be taken up, with such sweet
Soliloquies in our selves about this Subject, and with such Songs of Praise to
Him, who has given us so noble a Being, and Life which is convoyed to us, by
His Blood, is sure a suitable Use of this Point; For if our Life be of much
Worth, He must be of Infinitely much more Worth in Himself, and should be so to
us, who purchased it at such a Dear Price.

The 2d. Use, is to exhort you whom we suppose to be renewed, (as some of you
now hearing me are, and O! that all of you were) that when ever ye think of
enjoying of Heaven, and Glory, ye would think also, whence it came to be thus
with you; O! think on that Rock, out of which ye are hewn, as ye are
Believers, and are entitled to Life; And this will lay the Natural Pride,
which, Alas! too often Believers have going along with their Hope of Life; as
if they were something better by Nature then others, because they have hope to
come to Heaven; but think this also with your selves, that there are no thanks
to you, but to Him, who loved you, and washed you from your sins, in his own
blood; which should make you walk softly, and with a stopp^d mouth; and in this
Case, every thought of your Title unto, and of your Hope of Heaven, would be
both singularly pleasant, and profitable to you.

Use 3. See here, that which makes the Glad Tidings of Christ's Death
wonderfully Comfortable; It Is much that Christ came, and Suffered; but if ye
add this, that His Design in Suffering, was to beget Sinners to a New and
Spiritual Life, t^ raise and quicken them that were Dead in in Sins, and
Trespasses, to pay their Debt, and to Cancel their Obligation; It makes it to
be much more wonderful; Alas we have great want of Spiritual Affections, that
are not more Affected with this; even with this; That the Father should send
His Son and that the Son should come into the World, and wherefore? That He
might have a Seed; that poor Bodies that were Dead* and without Life might be
quickened; and that such as had no hope of Heaven might have it; That in such a
way an entry into Heaven should be made to Sinners; this is the wonder; do ye
Believers, indeed believe this, that the Lord's Design, in all the Work of
Redemption, was to bring Dead Sinners to Life? This is it that makes Christ get
the Name of a Savior, That the Shepherd being smitten, God might turn his hand
on the little Ones. And therefore, as a 4th. Use, See here a good ground,
whereupon to Preach to you by the Death of Christ, the Offer of Life, and the
Remission of Sin, as the Apostle has it, Act. 13.39, 40. Be it known therefore
to you men and brethren, that through this man is preached unto you, the
forgivenness of sins, And by him, all that believe are justified from all
things, from which ye could not he justified by the law of Moses; And there is
never a Text, that speaks of the end of Christ's Sufferings, but readily, it
some way lays a ground, how a Sinner may get Life; And it is, as it were a
Proclamation to Sinners, to make the right use of what is offered to them: If
our Lord Jesus had not Suffered, there had not been a warrant for us to speak
of Life to you; There had been no Treaty with Sinners, no Door opened, for
access to Heaven, no ground for any to call God Father: But on the Contraire,
Christ having Suffered, and Satisfied Justice, it giv^s us Ground to make this
Proc^amation to you: Be it known unto you, that through this man is preached
unto you forgivenness of sins: And these two, put together. 1. That there is a
sufficient Price laid down, for the Satisfying of the Justice of God, for the
Debt of Elect Sinners. 2. That this is the Lords D^signe, in laying of the
Pr^ce down, even to Procure, and to Communicate Life to them, according to that
of John 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that
whosoever believes on him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. And
that of John 12.32. And if I be lifted up, I will draw all men after me: This
demonstrats, that there is a Sufficient-Warrand, to make use of Christ, for
pardon of Sin, and for obtaining of Life, through Him; For readily the
Exception is One of Two; Either 1. That the Price will not ^o the Turn; and
that cannot be said; for the Death of Christ is a Price Sufficient: or, 2. That
Sinners know nor what is the Lor^'s Purpose in it, This Text holds out that,
and tells us, I^ is, that he may have a seed. This is the Sum of the Covenant
of Redemption; sa^eth the Father, Son if thou will lay down thy Life, Thou
shall see a seed, that shall have Life, through thy Sufferings; and the Lord
would never have given His Son to die, if He had not minded the Salvation of
Sinners, and to beget, and promove Life in them, through His Suffer^ngs; And to
what end is the Gospel Preached, by which Life and immortality are brought to
light; But that what He has bought, may be app^yed to Sinners?

And therefore, as a 5th. Use, We beseech you to concur with Christ, in the
Design of His laying down of His Life; Is it not, think ye, great Ingratitude
to Him, and great Cruelty to your selves, that when the Lord has Designed such
a thing, by the laying down of His Life; That ye should, as far as ye can,
stand in the way of it? Now His Design is, to have many in His Common for
Life; that He may have a Seed, and to have Poor Sinners, that are Dead, and
Lifelesse in themselves, taking with their Sin, and coming to Him, to get
Justice Satisfied, and a Right to Life, by His Offering: And is this a
Prejudicial Design, or Unprofitable to Sinner^? Why then should ye stand in
the way of that? When Our Lord has Designed Sinners good, and has been
content to lay down His Life, to make Life possible to you, when all His
D^signe in dying, is, to have Sinners saved, by their betaking themselves to
Him, and that, by their betaking themselv^s to Him, the Second Adam, They may
get a R^ght to Life Transferred to them? ^s i^ not Fol^y and Madness, for
Sinne^s, to obstruct what they can this His Design? The Apostle makes use of
this Argument. 2 Cor. 5.^8, 19. He has given us the word of reconciliation,
that God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their
trespasses unto them; we therefore, as ambassadors for Christ, as though God
did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ st^ad; be ye reconciled to God:
And what is the reason? For he was made sin for us, who knew no sin: And or
this and, That we might be made the righteousness of God in him: And is not
^his the sam^ Argum^nt that ^s in the Text? Our Lord was made (...)
Sin-off^ring; that H^ might see a Seed. And (...) ^o, then we would int^eat you
if the Bl^e^i^g Bowels of Christ, can have any we^ght with you, and if you
would do Him a Pleasure, not to mar His Design, as f^r as ye can (for He will
infrustrably accomplish His Design.) And that is, to have Souls brought in, to
make Sinners Peace with God, and that they may make use of His Sufferings for
that End: Need we use Arguments, to persuade you to this? Which is so much for
your own good and welfare, even to save your Souls; To come, and be Reconciled
to God; to make use of Christ for Life, to prevent the Wrath that is to come,
and to make Heaven sure to your selves; Which is impossible for you, honestly
to aim at, but God shall have the Glory of His G ce and Wisdom from you; And
if this be not your aim and endeavor* God will not have the Glory of His
Grace in you; Though Passively, He shall have the Glory of H s Justice, in pun
shing you, E^ernally in Hell; but that is not His great, and proper Design, in
the sending of His Son; For H^ could have had H s G^ ry that way, though He had
never sent Him into the World: And therefore, in His Name, and in His stead, we
do again, and again seriously beseech, and solmnly obtest you, to give Our Lord
Jesus Satis^action in this Particular; ye that are going to Hell, or are in
hazard of it, come to Christ Jesus the Prince of Life, The Purchaser, and Giver
of Life, and get Life from Him; Come as Dead-Sinners in your selves, and by the
Law, to get a new Gift of Life, by His Right; And we propose this Suit, and
Request in His Name, who tells us, that He laid down His Life, to get a Seed;
This Gospel comes to every one of your Doors, and says to you, will ye be
oblidged to Christ for Life? will ye be His Children? If the Heart be honest,
and ye can sincerely say, content Lord, and will creep in under His Wings, that
ye may be found in Him; and may be covered with His Righteousness; There is
good ground to expect a closed Bargain: For our Lord purposly Died, that He
might have a Seed; and is calling upon you for this very End; and will not go
back of His Word, if ye be content to Bargain with Him; And therefore I would
again say unto you, shift not His call; It is His Design, to have a Seed; and
it should be yours, to seek to be of that Seed: O! let Him have His Errand
among you; The Offer comes (as I just now said) to every one of your Doors, and
your answer will be, and must be, either yea, or nay, either that ye are
content to be His Children, that His Grace may be Glorified in you; Or that ye
are not content, and that ye will not come to him, that ye may have life; As it
is, John 5. That ye scorn to be His Seed, and Children; But, Ah! the day comes,
when ye would be glad of such an Offer, and will not get it.

But to come a little nearer in the Application of this Use, 1. Are there not
many of you without Life, Yea, hundreds of you? Not one among many, is renewed;
If ye think your selves to be Dead, this Word of Life, and Salvation is sent
unto you, and sure ye have need of it. 2. There is Life in Christ to be had, a
Fair Purchase made, and a way laid down, to bring Sinners to have a Right to
Life; And are not these two, think ye, well met and trysted? on what ground
then is it bottomed? upon one of these two or rather on both of them, employed
in this phrase, of being Christ's Seed. 1. It implies, That there be a coming
to Christ, as void of Life; and an actual trusting to Him for the attaining of
Life, That Sinners pricked with the fear, or feelling of the Wrath of God,
acknowledge Christ, as the Father of their Life, and Credit Him with the
Application of Life to them. 2. It implies, not only the Credi^ing Him with the
Application of Life; but that we commit our selves to be alone, i^ His Debt and
Common for it, which is employed in that Word, John 5. Ye will not come unto me,
that ye might have Life; The use making of Christ, for the attaining of Life,
is employed in the Word coming, And that is for slain and dead Souls to go to
Christ, for Absolution, and Life, called, Heb. 7.25. A coming to God by Christ;
and again, It is not, ye will not come unto me that ye may buy or procure Life,
or Work it to your selves; But ye will not come to me, that ye may have it: ye
will not be in my Common for it: The first Word expresses, where we get our
Life, and that is in Christ's Sufferings; The Second Word, how we get it, even
as the Child gets Life from the Parent, we get it fully and freely conferred on
us by Him: So that the Similitude says this much, come to Christ, who has
procured your Life; and trust your getting of Life to Him, on the Terms of
Grace: And since this is all that Christ seeks of you, Not to make your
Performances the ground of your Pleading for Life, but His Purchase; and that
having need on your side, and fullness on His side, ye should come and have;
What hinders your closing of a Bargain? This is the very thing your Salvation
will stand, or fall on; even on your yielding to come to Him, and to be in His
Common for Life, and on your leaning to His Righteousness, or not; and
according at ye Act Faith, or not on Him, in this respect; So will the Sentence
of your Absolution, or Condemnation pass in the Great Day: And therefore, let
me beseech you yet again, above any thing, to make this sure; And when I speak
of making it sure, it is not only to have a Glance of the thing in your minds:
as many may have, to whose Door Christ comes, when yet they will not go out of
doors to Him: Nor is it only to have a Conviction in your Judgment and
Conscience, of the Reasonableness of it, as many of you have, so many
Convictions of Sin, and of the necessity of Faith, in your Judgment, a^ will
make you Inexcusable; ye are Convinced, that such a thing should be; And there
it holds: The Lord draws you by His Word, to give assent to the Reasonableness
of the Offer; but ye smuther the Conviction: Ye come Aggrippa his length, in
assenting to the Truth; but come no further; ye laid your account, it may be,
that ye could not save your selves, and that your Salvation was only in Christ,
and ye took that for Faith: But believe me, there must be something more ^hen
that, even a laying of your selves over on Him, and a making of Application to
Him, to fi l the empty Room in the Heart: I remember of a dying Person, that
had a good Word to this purpose, who, when it was asked at him, how his Faith
did now differ from that which he had in his health? Answered, when I was in
health, I was convinced that I should believe, but now, my Soul act^ally casts
it self on Christ. The many Convictions that Men have, that they should
believe, will stick to them, and go with them to He^l; and make them the more
inexcusable, that they held there, and went no further.

6ly. And lastly, It serves to be a ground of Expostulation, with many hearers
of the Gospel, who have heard of this noble Design, and yet make no use of it;
O! Hypocrites, Formalists, and Profane Persons, what a Reckoning will ye have
to make, when this shall be found on your Score; ye were dead in Sin, and the
Lord contrived a Design to save lost Sinners, in sending His Son to be an
offering for sin, and the Son came and laid down His Life; and ye were called
and invited to come to Him, and to have Life in Him; The glad Tidings of
Redemption were Preached, and made Offer of to you; and ye would not be content
to close with Christ, but would, so far as ye could, thuart with Him, in His
Design, though it cost Him His Heart-blood, to bring it about: What will come
of this? or what will ye Answer Him for it? ye will say, it may be, that ye
were content to concur with Christ, and stood not in the way of it; but it will
be replied; why then did ye live and die in your Sin, and bring your Soul to
this dreadful hazard and loss? your Conscience and God will bear (...) upon
you, and ye will not get it shifted; that your destruction was of your selves,
because ye would not be saved; And will that, think ye, be a Suitable and
Satisfying Answer? That though Christ would have saved my Soul, I would not be
saved by Him, and then to go to Hell for that? What a tormenting thing will it
be in the Conscience, that Life was Offered to me, on Condition of believing in
Christ, but I Refused* or Scorned to take it on that Condition? Think on it,
what ye will think to be sent to Hell, because ye would not be saved freely by
Christ, And to perish, because ye would not be Christ's Seed; Because ye would
not take with your guilt, that ye might have Life from Him; What, do ye all
think that ye have Life, are there none sensible of their need of Life from
Christ? Alas! that we should be put so often to repeat these Words; we may
almost speak to stones, with as great hope of Success, as to many Consciences
among you, that are habitually obdured, and blinded with Presumpt^on, by the
god of this World, who has put out your Eyes: But the day comes, when ye will
find your selves greatly mistaken; I shall insist no further; only, seeing that
ye are Naturally Dead in Sins and Trespasses; and seeing that Christ's Design
in dying, is, to have a Seed, As ye would not prejudge your selves of Life, As
ye would not be found to be dispisers of His Sufferings, and such as have trod
the Blood of the Covenant under foot; study to make sure eternal life to your
selves, by betaking your selves to Him for it; or lay your reckoning to be
reputed guilty of this horrible crime with all the aggravations of it.

SERMON XLII.
ISAIAH LIII.X. Verse 10. He shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days,
and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand.


THere is not one reading of these Words, but it might put us to this wondering
Question; For what is it, that th^s great Design of all Christ's Sufferings
has been driven, and what has been the great End of this Covenant of
Redemption, that has such Sharp, Sore and Sade Sufferings following thereon,
to the Mediator, who ingadged in it? This World was made with little noise, (to
say so,) There was no ingadgment on God, for bringing about of that Work,
though very great, as there is in bringing about this; This th^n certainly must
be a quite other thing that has an Offering and ^uch an Offering, as had in it
the bruising and d^ing of the Person, that was the Son of God, interposed for
the obtaining of it. But this answers the Question, He shall see his seed, etc.
Which, in sum ^s this; His Life shall procure Life to ma^y dead Sinners, and
they shall get it certainly applied to th m; And the Work of the Mini^^ry (to
speak so) and of the Mediatory Office of Christ shall thrive well in His hand;
So that there is not one Soul, that is Designed to Life, and Glory; but it
shall be brought to the Possession of it, in due time.

There are two things, which we hinted at the last Day, that we shall now speak
a Word to, and the first of them is this.

That it is an agreed upon, and a concluded Article, in the Covenant of
Redemption; that our Lord Jesus shall, and must have a Seed: This is a most
certain and infallible Truth; It is an effect laid down here, as a necessary
consequent of His Offering up of his Soul for sin: It Is a determined thing, if
we look, 1. To the certainty of the event; Our Lord Jesus Christ must have a
Seed to wit, Believers in Him; That is concluded on, and promised to Him. 2. If
we look to the Seed that He shall have; They are particularly determined upon,
to wit, how many Children He shall have; and who they shall be: That was both a
Promise in the Covenant, and a Prophecy, as we have it, Psalm 22. Where the
Psalmist speaking before of Christ; Sa^es, verse 30. A seed shall serve him, it
shall be accounted to the Lord for a generation: And this is laid down as a
solid Conclusi n, John 6.37. All that the Father has given me, shall come unto
me; Which suppons, both a determinat number given, and the certainty of their
coming: Become of the rest of the World what may, they shall undoubtedly come:
And indeed, if we look to the nature of this Transaction, we will find it to be
a Promi^e, and a Promise of God to the Mediator, that can neither be altered,
nor unaccomplished; yea, it is a Covenanted Promise, made on a Condition, to
wit, the laying down of His Life; as the stipulation on His Side; And that
which he has for so d^ing, from the Father, on His side, is this, That He
shall see his Seed; And when this is, not only a Promise, but such a Promi e,
as is grounded on a Transaction; bearing a Con^ition, which the Son has
performed; As He Himself says, John 17.4. I have finished the work which thou
gave me to do; There is a Justice, and Faithfulness, in the Performance of
this Promise on the Fathers side to Him; That he shall have a Seed. 3. It Is
clear also, if we consider the End of this Transaction, which is, to glorify
the Grace of God, by Christ's Purchase, in the Salvation of Elect Sinners; In
respect of this End, it cannot fail, but Christ must have a Seed, that that End
may be attained: So then, our Lord Jesus must have, and certainly shall have,
many that shall partake of Eternal Life by Him.

The 1. Use of it serves, to let us see the unwarrantablenesse of that
Doctrine, that leaves the Fruit of Christ's Death, as to the seeing of a Seed,
to an uncertainty, laying the weight of it, on ma^s Free Will; a thing, that is
very taking with Natural Men; and with conceaty Carnal Reason: But if it were
left to M^ns option, to receive Christ, or not, then the ^x cution of the Work
of Redemption, and the performance of such a Promise, as ^his is, behoved to
have the certainty of it su^jected to Man's Will, and should be made eff^ctuall,
or not, as He ple^sed; But it is God's great mercy to us, that we know it is not
so; And that there is an ^quity here, (to speak with Reverence of the Majesty
of God,) that seeing our Lord Jesus has done His Part, the Promise should be
made effectual ^o Him, and that He should have a Seed.

Use 2. It lays a ground, serving greatly to quiet us in the Reelling of
Times, when the World is going through other, and turned up-side down; and when
we are disposed to wonder, what will become of the Church, that is now sorely
Assaulted, and made to Stagger, what by the Old Enemy Antichrist, who is
bestirring himself, mightily, what through abounding Security, and Formality,
whereby Satan is seeking to draw away many: Some to Error, and some to
Prophanity; but though Antichrist, and the Devil, with all their Emissaries,
and Agents, had said the Contraire, Our Lord Jesus shall have a Seed; It may be
they are not the Plurality of a Kingdom, or Nation, of a City, or of a
Congregation, but they shall be so many, as shall serve to the making out of
the Promise; Our Lord makes use of this; John 6.37. and 44. Where, when a
number are running away f om Him; He says, Murmr not at this, No man can come
to me, except the Father that sent me, draw him, and all that the Father has
given me, shall come unto me, I will get as many (as if He had said) as are
appointed to receive my Word from my self; or from my Servants speaking in my
Name; as for others, I look not for them: It is true, we would beware of having
any sinful Accession to the marring of the Progress of the Gospel, and be
suitably affected with any such thing in others; but withal we would reverence
the Lords Soveraignity, who knows how to have a care of His Church, in the
worst of times; And let this quiet our ^earts, amidst all the Reellings and
Confusions of these times, that our Lord shall h^ve a Seed, and that He shall
not want one of all these that are given Him of His Father, but shall raise
them up at the Last Day.

Use 3. Seeing this is the Lord's Design; It would commend to the Hearers of the
Gospel, a study to Concure in this D^sign, (if we may speak so) in their
Public and Private Stations, in reference to themselves, and in reference to
others; As it is the Lords Design, that Christ shall have a Seed, So we would
make it our's: We may most s^fely Side, and Strick in here, with the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, whose Design runs on this; and (to speak so) they have,
must have, and shall have a Poor and Cold Game of it, who thuarts with the
Lord, in this His Design, who ever they be, and in whatever Station, or
Capacity, Public or Private; As it is no Wisdom, so it will be no Advantage, to
strugle, or strive with God: But here is matter of great encouragement, to any
that would have the Gospel prospering, Religion Coun^enanced, Error Suppressed,
the power of Godliness promoted, and Prophanity born down; That our Lord Jesus
Christ does concur with them in the same Design; I know not any other Design,
that a Man can strick in, without fear, to come short in it, but this; and
whosoever strick in with this* it shall not misgive them, for Christ shall have
a Seed; and though we cann^t, nor ought not absolutely and peremptorly, to
Design particular Persons; yet in the General, we ought to concur, to have the
Promise m^de to Christ, of a Seed performed to Him; And indeed it is no small
Privilege, and Prerogative, that we are admitted by Prayer, or otherwise to
concure with Him, in this Design; according to that memorable Word of Promise,
concerning this matter, Psalm. ^2.15. Prayer also shall be made for him
continually, and daily shall he be praised.

Use 4. There is here great encouragement to Sinners, that are in their own
apprehension, void of Life, and have some sense of their deadness, and would
fain be at Christ for Life, and have Him for their Father; such I say, are by
this Doctrine, encouraged to stop to; For it is a thing Determined an^ Promised;
and since it is so, we may, and ought to essay, and endeavor, that He may have
a Seed, and may be sure, it will not displease Him, that we ^ndeavour to offer
our selves to be of His Seed; It Is a Foolish, and yet often a Pu^ling an^
Perplexing Doubt, that comes in the way of Serious Souls, when they offer to
come to Christ, that they know not, but they may be presuming; If there be any
Acquaintance with God's, and Christ's D^sign, manifested in the Gospel; There
is no ground for such a Doubt; and such a Soul may as well question, Whether
will God and the Mediator be pleased, that the Promise made to Him of a Seed be
performed? Certainly it will be displeasing to neither of them, but well
pleasing to both; And therefore, the Sin^er would be strengthened on this
ground, and take it for granted, in it is addresses to God, that such a thing is
Designed; to wit, that Christ shall have a Seed.

Use 5. It shows, what must be the condition, that others stand in, who do not
come and make Offer of themselves to be Christ's Seed; They do, in so far as
they can, thuart with God's Design; And this will come on their Account; That
if Christ should never have a Seed, they would not, for their parts, betake
themselves to Him, nor be of His Seed; but as far as they could, would stand in
the way of the performance of this Promise to Him: And this will be ground of a
sad Challenge from God; I D^signed, that Christ my Son should have a Seed, and
I engadged by Promise, to give it to Him; and ye Scorned and Disdained (to
speak so, with reverence, in such a Subject) to satisfy God that far, as to
yield to Christ, to be of His Seed, that, that Promise might have it is
accomplishment in you. 1. From the Words complexly considered, Observe, that
Christ's having and obtaining of a Seed; His getting of Souls to believe in
Him; is a thing most Welcome, and Acceptable, both to Jehovah, that makes the
Promise, and to the Mediator, to w^om it is Promised; There is nothing that
pleases God, and the Mediator better, then for lost Sinners to bet ke
themselv^s to Christ, and His Righteousness, for Life; It Is ^he Satisfaction
that He has f^r the ^ravell of His S^n; It Is the Recompense here Promi^ed to
Him; It Is (to sp^ak after the manner of M^n,) as if the Son were saying, What
shall I get, if I lay down my Life for Sinners? Here the Father Promises. Thou
sh^lt see thy Seed, That is, many shall believe, and ^e Justified through thy
Death; And this is so acceptable to the Mediator, That He says, Lo, I come, in
the volume of thy book it is written of me, I delight to do thy will, O my God;
And Heb. 10. the Apostle sa^es, By ^his will we are sanctified; He sought no
more but this, for all His Sufferings, and Soul travel; and that it is no less
acceptable to Jehovah, that makes the Promise, is as clear: Therefore, in the
last part of the verse, It is said, The pleasure, (the Will, or the Delight) of
the Lord, shall prosper in his hand; That is, the ingadgeing of Souls to
believe, (which is Gods delight, as well as the Mediators) shall Thrive,
Succeed, and Prosper Well, It Is this, that John 17. Christ call^ the finishing
of the work, which the Father gave him to a^; What is that, Thine they were,
and thou gave them me; It Is even His s^epping in betwixt Justice and them, to
make way for their Reconciliation through His Blood; And this is very
delightsome, and well pleasing to Jehovah. It is true, this delightsomenesse,
is not to be so understood as if there were such Affections, and Passions in
the Lord, as there are in us; But it is Attributed to Him in these Respects. 1.
It Is called Pleasing and Delightsome to Him, as it agrees with His Revealed
Will, and Command; And so, it c^nnot be conceived, but to be pleasing to God,
as that which He commands, calls for, and approves; in which respect, the
Holiness of them that will never be Holy, and the Faith of them, that will
never b^lieve, is, or may be called Pleasing to God. 2. It is called Pleasing
to the Lord, in respect of the End, and as it is a Midse to the Glorifying of
His Grace, and the performance of His Promise to the Mediator; For by this, His
Grace comes to be Glorified, and He has access, to perform what He has
Promised to the Mediator. 3. It Is pleasant to Him, Because in this, the Lord
has a special Complacency; And has Evidenced in His Word, Comparatively a
greater delight in Sinners clo^ing with Christ, and in their accepting of Life
through Him, then in many other things: Therefore it is, that He calls for
this so pressingly; And when Christ is not thus made use of, He declares
Himself to be grieved; and that there is a sort of dispit done to Him; whereas,
upon the other side, He takes it (dare I ^p ak it with reverence) as a
courtisie, and honor put upon Him; when a Soul gives up it self to Christ; and
dare hazar^ the weight of it is Immortal Soul on His Word, in this respect,
Abraham is said, Romans 4. To give glory to God; When he Trusted himself, his
Soul, and all his Concerns to Him; And we will find, that believing is
accounted to be an honoring of the ^ather, and of the Son, if we compare the
24. and 25. Verses of John 5. together.

The 1. Use, Serves, To let you see, That not only do the Father, and our Lord
Jesus Christ call Sinners to believe, do warrant them to believe, and lay down
grounds, whereupon they may found their Faith; But they also declare, that it
is well pleasing to them; And that they shall be very welcome that come; The
carriage of the Father of the Prodigal, Luke 15. Is but a little shadow of that
welcome, that a Sinner, in returning to God, by Faith in Jesus Christ may
expect; though indeed that Parable shows plainly, how h^arty a welcome
returning Sinners may expect, It was meet (says he) that we should mak^ merry
and be glad, for this thy brother was dead, and is alive, and was lo^^, but is
found again.

Use 2. It serves to ban^sh away that unworthy apprehension, that is in the
minds of too many, that there is greater Rigidi^y and Austerity in God the
Father, then there is in the Mediator toward poor Sinners; If we look to God,
as God, His Grace abounds in the Person of the F there, as it does in the Person
of the Son; And if we look to the Son as God, He is the same Just God, that
will not acquit the Guilty, more then the Father will do; So that there is no
ground for this apprehension, which Fosters a sort of Blasphemous Conception of
the blessed Trini y; as if they were of different Natures and Dispositions,
most unbecoming Christians: H^nce is i^, that many who are ignorant of God,
w^^^ speak of Christ, as b^ing easier to be dealt withal then the Father is; a
most Derogatory Conceit to the Divine Majesty, and un^orthy of Christians;
Indeed, if we abstract God from the Mediator, there is no dealling with Him;
but if we look on God, and come to Him, in the Mediator, there we find Him
easy to be dealt with; Therefore, that which is called the Satisfaction of the
Mediator, Verse 11. Is called here, the pleasure of the Lord; Because He
delights in the performing of His Promise to the Mediator, in reference to His
having of a Seed: It is from this also, that some Folks will pray to Christ, as
if He were a different Thing, or Being from God; And they would first make
their Peace with Christ, and then by His Moyon, bring themselves in good Terms
with God; The Mediator, indeed considered as Mediator, is different from God
who, without Him, or out of Him is a Consuming Fire; But considered as God, He
has the same Properties, and gives Pardon on the same Terms; And in this
Respect, we are to make use of His own Righteousness, for obtaining of Pardon
from Himself; there being but one God: There is occasion too frequently to meet
with this Error: And I know not how many inconveniences it has following upon
it; Some think that they are always sure of Christ's Friendship, but they
doubt of Gods; As if the Father had not the same delight to save Sinners, that
Christ the Son has: And another abuse follows on the form^r, that there is no
more use made of Christ, but by a Word of Prayer to Him, without exercising
Faith on His Godhead; If there ere no more to Rectify this gross mis^ake,
This one Text might do it; If ye make use of Christ's Righteousness, ye may
expect Friendship from the Father, and from the Son; And if ye do it not, ye
have no ground to expect Friendship from either of them.

Use 3. There is here Ground of Glad Tidings to Sinners, And that which makes
the Covenant of Redemption, to be diservedly called the Gospel, and that made
the Angels to Sing Glory be to God in the highest, peace on earth, and good
will to men; That there is such a Covenant laid down, for bringing Life to Dead
Sinners; And that the Father, and the Mediator are Delighted, Comforted, (to
say so) Satisfied, and well pleased with Sinners, making Use of the Mediator
for Life: Is there then any Sinner here, whose Conscience lays open to Him,
His hazard, applies the Curse to Him, and passes Sentence on himself, and has
some desire to be at Christ; and yet wots not if He will hold out the Golden
Scepter? Behold this Text does hold it out to such, and bids them come in
boldly, for Christ makes them welcome; yea, the Lord Jehovah makes them
welcome; It Is the Fathers, and Christ's delight, that thou come foreward. If
there be a Doctrine in all the Scripture Sweet, it is this; and without th^s, no
Preaching, nor point of Truth would be Sweet; I say, without this; to wit, That
God has not only provided a Price, and makes Offer of it, but is well content,
that it be made use of; yea, and is delighted, that a Sinner dead in himself,
Trust, and Concredit himself to the Mediator, for obtaining of Life through
Him: And can there be any Question of this? For, 1. If it had not been the Lord
Jehovah His delight, why then did He make such a Covenant? Why did He (as it
were) part and su^der with the Son of H^s Love? Why did He accept of a
Cautioner? And why Tansferred He on His own Son, and exacted of Him the Debt,
that was due by ^lect Sinners; and made the Sword of His Justice to awake
against Him? If He had not had a great delight in the Salvation of Sinners,
would He have taken that way, to Smite the only Son of His Love, to spare them?
And if it had not been the Sons Pleasure, would He, with such delight have
undertaken, and done the Fat^ers will, in Reference to their Salvation? Lo I
come, (says He) I delight to do thy will, O my God; It was the Fathers will,
and He had a delight in it; And it was the Sons will and delight, and He came,
and according to His undertaking, laid down His Life. 2. Wherefore else, are
all the Promises, and Encouragements that are given to Sinners to believe? as
that of Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden
etc. And that, 2 Cor. 5.20. W^ere both are put together, We are ambassadors
for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead,
be ye reconciled to God; Ministers press you you, in the Name of God, and by
virtue of a warrant from Him, to be Reconciled; and they have Christ's warrant,
in a more peculiar manner, as the great Prophet of His Church, to tell you,
it is a thing the Lord Jehovah, and the Mediator have Pleasure in, even in this,
that ye should be reconciled. 3. Wherefore are the many expostulations with
Sinners, that they will not come unto Christ, for Life, That they will not be
gathered, that, when he streatches out his hands all the day long, they will
not behold him? etc. Do not all these Confirm this Truth, that there is nothing
He is better pleased with, then with a Sinners coming to Christ for Life? Let
me therefore beseech you, by the Love that ye pretend to Jesus Christ, and in
His Name, and in the Name of Jehovah obtest you, be ye Reconciled to God in
Christ, let Him have Satisfaction; Let this pleasure be done to the Lord, even
to receive Life from Him: This is no hard, nor hurtful, no unreasonable, nor
rigid Request, I am sure; all that He requires of you, is, that ye would come
to Him, and get Life: O! if we could but suitably apprehend this, to be that
which the Lord aims at, in this Preached Gospel; that we might, (to speak so
with Reverence) put an Obligation on the Majesty of God, in making sure in this
His own way, the Salvation of our own Souls; and that we could not do Him a
better turn (But I pray take the Expressions Right, for we cannot set forth His
Love, but in our own Language, which comes infinitely far short of the thing)
we could not find in our hearts, to refuse to grant such a loving, and highly
rational a requist; As it is sure then upon the one side, that we cannot do
that which will please Him better; So it is as sure on the other side, that we
cannot do that which will displease Him more, then to slight His Counsel in
this; Though we would give our Bodies to be burnt and all our Goods to the
Poor; He will not count it a pleasure done Him, if this be not done; We would
look upon this, as low Condescendencie, and great Grace in the Lord, that He
seeks no more of us, but the making sure Eternal Life to our selves, as that
which will be most pleasing to Him; It Is even as if a Son should say to his
Father, Father, what will please thee? And as the Father should say to his Son;
Son have a care of thy self, and that will please me; Because, by our so doing,
He reaches His great End; to wit, the glorifying of His Grace and Love, which
Sinners, by their unbelief, do what in them lies to mar and obstruct: If we
could speak seriously to you, in this matter, it might be a Text to speak on
every day: Always seeing He has purchased Redemption to Sinners at a dear Rate,
And all that He requires of you, is to close with Him, and to seek after the
Application of His Purchase; We again earnestly pray you, be ye reconciled to
God, and take heed that ye receive not this Grace in vain; What can ye do that
will be pleasing to God, or profitable to your selves without this? Or, what
Fruit of the Gospel can be brought forth, when this Fruit is not brought forth,
If Jesus Christ, in His Offices get not employment, and if His Offering be not
fled to for making of your Peace; We may, in Consideration of this great and
grave Subject, go from the Congregation partly Refreshed, that there is such a
Doctrine to be spoken of; though we cannot, Alas! speak of it suitably, And
partly afraid, least we be found, as far as we can, thuarting with, and running
Cross unto God's good Will, and Design in it, notwithstanding, all the Favor
and Grace He has made Offer of to us; It were good that we carried serious
Meditation on this Subject, along with us.

SERMON XLIII.
ISAIAH LIII.XI. Verse 11. He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall
be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many: for he
shall bear their iniquities.


THis is a great Work that the Mediator has to do; a great Price that He has
to lay down for the satisfying of Divine Justice, and for redeeming of the lost
Elect: Now, what shall He have for all the travel of His Soul; Here it is
answered, and the Terms of the Covenant of Redemption again compended; as for
the Effects and Fruits of His Death, spoken of in the close of the former
Verse, He shall prolong his days, That being spoken to, on the matter: from
Verse 8. And the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. Being spoken
to, by another lately, in your hearing, and in part by us, John 17.4. And from
verse 10. Now read over again; we shall forbear further speaking to them, and
come to that which follows in the 11. Verse.

In this Verse then, There are these three. 1. An offer and promise made to the
Mediator; That if He will accept of the proposal, and lay down His Life for
Redeeming of the lost Elect; it shall not be fruitless, He shall see of the
travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied. 2. The way how this satisfaction
shall be brought about; By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify
many. That is, by Faith in Him, His Purchase shall be applied to all these for
whom He should suffer, who thereby should be justified. 3. The ground of this,
which also shows the way, how He shall justify many; For he shall bear their
iniquities, That is, by His undertaking, and paying of their Debt, He should
meritoriously procure their Absolution, and the setting of them free. In the
first part, we have these three things employed. 1. A supposed condition, or
restipulation on the Mediator's side; That His Soul shall be put to travel,
which expresses both the Nature of His Sufferings, that they shall not only be
Bodily, but also, and mainly, Soul-sufferings, and Conflicts with the Wrath of
God; which the Elect's sins deserved, as the main and principal thing
Articled, and that wherein the Price of their Redemption lay; And the
Greatness, and Extremity of His Sufferings, here called Travel, from the
similitude of a Woman in Travel, and the Travel of his Soul; This being the
way foretold, how Christ should be used; He should Travel in His Sufferings,
to procure Life to His People. 2. A Promise made to Him; That He shall see the
travel of his soul, That is, He shall not bring forth wind, but shall have a
large Off spring, which in the 2d. part of the verse, is called a Justifying of
many by his knowledge; This is the Fruit He shall have of His Soul-travel. 3.
The extent of this, which is His being Satisfied, and quiet; Which looks to two
things. 1. To the certain and infallible success of His Sufferings; Not one of
the Elect shall be amissing; None that He has bought Life to shall want it, He
shall get as many Justified and Saved, as He conditioned for. 2. To the great
delight, and complacencie that our Lord has, in performing the Work of
Redemption, and in Sinners getting the benefit of it; He shall think all well
bestowed when they come to get the Application thereof, and by Faith in Him to
be Justified. From the first of these, Observe That the Mediator, in performing
the Work of Redemption, and in satisfying the Justice of God, for the Debt of
Elect Sinners; was not only put to External and Bodily, but also and mainly,
to Inward, Spiritual, and Soul-sufferings; Or the Redeeming of lost Sinners
cost our Lord Jesus much Soul-travell and Suffering; we have hinted at His
Sufferings often before, but this place especially, speaks out His
Soul-sufferings, and the Inward Anguish, and Agony that He was brought under;
We shall therefore speak alittle to this, it being most useful, and extensive
in the Fruits and Benefits of it to the People of God; And shall 1. confirm it
by some places in the Gospel, where we have the fulfilling of this Prophecy
clearly holden out to us; And 2dly. By a fourfold Reason: Only take this for an
advertisement, that when we speak of the Soul-sufferings of Our Lord, we do no
mean of any Sufferings after Death (as Papists falsely calumniat us) but of
these Sufferings, especially that were about the time of His Passion, when He
got the full Cup of the Fathers Wrath put in His hand toward His approaching
to the Cross, and when He was upon it, when He was araigned, and when He was
exacted upon, for the Elect's Debt: The first passage to confirm it, is that of
John 12.27. Now is my soul troubled, and what shall I say? Father save me from
this hour; Here His Soul-suff^rings begin clearly to show themselves when there
was no Cross, nor Suffering in His Body, yet He is put to such a pinch,
considered as Man, that He is, in a manner, non-plussed, and put to say, what
shall I say; the horror of that which was begun, and was further coming on Him,
being beyond all expression, whereupon follows that prayer, Father, save me
from this hour; His Sinle^s Humane Nature scarring some way to enter on it. The
2d. passage is that of John 13.21. where it is said, That He began to be
troubled in spirit and testified, etc. But let us come forward, and put Matthew
Mark, and Luke together, and we shall see what an inexpressible and
unconceivable, hight and heap of sorrows, His Soul-trouble and travel will
amount to; Matthew says, Chap. 26.37, 38. That He began to be sorrowful, and
very heavy; And in the next words, my soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto
death; and what made Him so sorrowful? The next words, Father, if it be
possible let this cup pass from me, show that it was the Cup of His Fathers
Wrathful Justice put in His hand; Mark says, Chap. 14.33. Thar when He came
to the Garden, He began to be sore amazed, and very heavy: A wonderful
expression to be used of the Son of God; that the Person that was God should be
amazed, yet being considered as Man he was so; Luke says, Chap. 22.44. That
being in an agony, he prayed more earnestly; There is a sore Exercise and sad
Soul-travell indeed, when the Sword of Gods Justice awaked against the Man that
was Gods fellow; and when He has the Curse that was due to all the Elect, to
encounter and meet with; This was such a Combat, the like whereof was never in
the World, And the effect of it is; His sweat as great drops of blood falling
down to the ground; when there was no hand of Man stirring Him, nor any Man to
trouble Him by Him; but God as a severe, and holily rigid exactor, putting Him
to pay the Debt, which He had undertaken to pay, according to His Obligation;
The inward pressour of His Soul presses great drops of Blood from His Body:
And if we will yet look a little forward, to Math. 27.46. we will find Him
brought to that extremity on the Cross, that He cries, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? Which though it say that there was still Faith in the
Mediator, in adhering to the Father as His God; yet it sets out that great
horror which He had inwardly to wrestle with; when there was some restraint on
the sensibly comforting influence of the Godhead: Now when all the Evangelists
concur so massilie, emphatically, and significantly to express this, wealing
out, and pitching upon such weighty Words to set it forth by; We may see it to
be designedly holden forth, as a special Truth, that the Faith of the People
of God may be strongly confirmed therein.

To confirm it yet further, put these four together. 1. The estate that the
Elect are naturally lying in for whom Christ undertakes, they are naturally
under Sin; liable to the curse of God, for the transgressing of His Law; which
had said, The soul that sins shall die, and curs^d is every one that continues
not in all things written in the book of the law to do them. 2. Add to this the
supposition of Christ's undertaking to be the Elects Cautioner, and to satisfy
for their Debt; whereby he steps into their room, takes on their Debt; And (as
the word is 2 Cor. 5. ult. Becomes sin for them.) Is content to be liable to,
and to be pursued by Justice for their Debt, and though here there be a
relaxation in respect of the Persons of the Elect for whom the Cautioner stands
good, yet in respect of the Curse and Death due to them, there is no
relaxation; but the same thing due to them is laid on Him; as it is, Gal. 3. He
has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us. In every
thing He was put to pay the equivalent, for making up the Satisfaction due to
Justice, and these two being put together, that Elect Sinners were obnoxious to
Wrath, and that our Lord came in their Room, He behoved to be put to sad and
sore Soul-suffering. 3. Consider God's end in the Work of Redemption, which is
to point out the inconceivableness of His wonderfully condescending Grace and
Mercy, in exacting of satisfaction from the Cautioner, and in setting the
Sinner free; that His Grace may be so Glorified, as their shall be a proof
given of His Justice, and Soveraignity going along with it, and Infinite Wisdom
being set on Work to glorifi^ infinite Grace and Justice; there is a nec^ssity
for the promoving of this end, that the Mediator shall thus satisfy, and the
more full the Satisfaction be, the more conspicuously do the Grace and Justice
of God shine forth, and are Glorified, according to that word, Rom 3.26 To
declare his righteousn^ss that he might be just, and the justifier of him that
shall believe in Jesus: This is the end of Christ's being made a Propitiation,
that God may be manifested to be Spotless and Pure in His Justice, as well as
Free and Rich in His Mercy and Grace; who, having given a Law to Man, will not
acquit the transgression thereof, without a condign Satisfaction. 4 Consider
that it is indeed a great thing to satisfy Justice for Sin; that it is more to
satisfy Justice for all the Sins of one Person, which all the Angels in
Heaven, and Men on Earth cannot do; and therefore the punishment of the Damned
in Hell is drawn out to Eternities length, and yet there is never a Complete
Equivalent Satisfaction made to Justice; but it is most of all to satisfy
Justice, for all the Sins of all the Elect; who, though they be few in
comparison of the Reprobat World, yet simply considered they are many; yea,
even innumerable; And our Lord having taken all their Sins on Him, He is
peremptorly required to satisfy for them all; And if this withal be added,
that He is to satisfy for all the Sins of all the Elect at once, in a very
short time, and has the Curse and Wrath of God due to them, Mustered and
Marshaled in Batallie against Him, and as it were in a great Body, in a most
formidable manner, marching up toward Him, and seriously charging Him; and all
the Wrath which they should have drunken through all Eternity (which yet would
never have been drunk out, nor made the less) put in one Cup, and propined to
Him; as the Word is, Psalm. 110. He shall drink of the brook in the way: The
Wrath of God running like an impetuous River, must be drunk up at once, and
made dry by Him: These being put together, do clearly, and convincingly show,
that it could not but be an inexpressible and inconceivable Soul-travell and
Suffering, that our Lord Jesus was put to.

The Use of this Doctrine is large, and the 1. Use is this, That ye would take
it for a most certain Truth, which the Scriptures does so Frequently and
Significantly hold forth; That our Lord Jesus, in performing the Work of
Redemption, had much sad Soul-travell and sorrow; The Faith of this is very
useful to demonstrat the great love of God, and of the Mediator; For doubtless
the more Suffering be undergone by the Mediator, the more love Kythes therein
to the El^ct. 2. It serves to hold out the Soveraignity and Justice of God, and
the horribleness of Sin. 3. In respect of God's People, it is useful, that they
may be through, and clear in the Reality and Worth of Christ's Satisfaction; He
having no other End in it, but to satisfy Justice for their Sin. 4. It Is
useful to show the Vanity and Emptiness of Men's Supposed, and Fancied Merits,
and of any thing that can be alleged to be in Man's Suffering, or doing for
the satisfying of Divine Justice; seeing it drew so deep on Christ the
Cautioner; And here two gross Errors come to be Refuted, and Reprobated; One
of the Socinians* who seek quite to overturn Christ's Satisfaction; And another
of the Papists, that minish His Satisfaction; and Extenuat and Derogat from the
great Privilege of the Pardon of Sin, as if any thing could procure it, but
this Satisfaction of Christ by His Soul-travell; both which are abundantly
refuted by this Text.

But to speak a word more particularly to the First, For clearing of which ye
will ask; What could there be to affect the Holy Humane Soul of our Lord? Or
what was that wherein His Soul-sufferings did consist? But before we speak to
this, we would premit this Word of Advertisement in the entry, That there are
two sorts of Punishments, or Penal Effects of Sin; The 1. Sort are such as are
simply Penal and Satisfying, as proceeding from some extrinsick cause; The 2d.
sort are sinful; One Sin in the Righteous Judgment of God drawing on another;
And this proceeds not simply from the nature of Justice, but from the nature of
a mere sinful Creature* and so from an intrinsic cause of a Sinful Principle
in the Creature: Now when we speak of the Soul-sufferings of Christ, which He
was put to in Satisfying for the Sins of the Elect; We mean of the former, that
is, Sufferings that are simply Penal; For there was no intrinsic Principle of
Corrupt Nature, nor ground of Chal^enge in Him; as there is in Sinful
Creatures; And therefore we are to conceive of His Soul-sufferings, as of some
thing inflicted from without; and are not to conceive of them as we do of
Sinful Creatures, or that have Sin in them, whereof he was altogether free.

Having premitted this, we shall speak a little to these two. 1. To that
wherein this Soul-suffering did not consist. 2. To that wherein it did consist.
For the former wherein it was not. 1. We are not to suppose, or imagine any
actual separation betwixt His Godhead, and His Man-head; as if there had been
an interruption of the Personal Union; not so for the Union of the two Natures
in one Person remains still, He was God and Man still, though, (as was hinted
before) there was a Suspension of such a Measure, at least of the sensibly
Comforting Influence of the Divine Nature, from the Humane, as had wont to be
let out thereto; And yet there was even then a sustaining Power flowing from
the Godhead that Supported Him, so, that He was not swallowed up of that which
would have quite, and for ever swallowed up all Creatures, as is evident in
this crying, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Which shows, that
though the Union, and Relation stood firm, yet a comfortable Influence was much
restrained. 2. There was no sinful Fretting, no Impatiencie, nor carnal
Anxiety in our Lord, all along His Sufferings; for He did most willingly
undergo them, and h^d a kindly submission in them all; As is evident by these
Words But for this cause came I into this hour, And not my will but thy will be
done. 3. There was not in H m any distrust of Gods Love, nor any unbelief of
His Approbation before God, neither any the least D^ffidence, as to the
Out-gate; For in the Sadest and Sharpest of all His Conflicts, He was clear
about His Fathers Love to Him; that the Relation stood firm, and that there
would be a Comfortable Out-gate, as His Prayer before shows, wherein He styles
God, Father, And these hardest like Words uttered by Him on the Cross, My God,
my God why have thou forsaken me* do also show, wherein twice over He
confidently as^^rts His Interest, My God, my God, Though He was most terribly
Assaulted, yet the Tentation did not prevaill over Him. 4. Neither are we to
conceive, that there was any inward Confusion, Challenge, or Gnawing of
Conscience in Him, such as is in Desperate Sinners cast under the Wrath of God,
Because there was no inward cause of it, nor any thing that could breed it;
yea, even in that wherein He was Cautioner, He was clear, that He was doing the
Fathers will, and finishing the Work that was committed to Him; and that even
under the greatest Apprehensions of Wrath; Therefore all such things are to be
guarded against, in our Thoughts, least otherwise, we reflect upon our
Innocent and Spotless Mediator. But 2. To speak a Word to that wherein it does
consist? 1. It did consist (as we hinted before) in the God-head's Suspending
it is Comfortable Influence for a time from the Humane Nature; Though our Lord
had no Culpable Anxiety, yet He had a Sinlesse Fear, considering Him as Man;
and that the infinite God was Angry, and Executing Angryly the Sentence of the
Law against Him, (Though He was not angry at Him considered as in Himself, but
as He stood in the room of the Elect, as their Cautioner, of whom He was to
exact the Payment of their Debt) and could not but be in a wonderful amazment,
as the Word is, Mark 14.33. He was sore amazed, And Heb. 5.7. It Is said, when
he had offe^ed up prayers, and supplications with strong cries and tears, unto
him that was able to save him from death, he was heard in that which he feared.
Which looks to His wrestling in the Garden, 2. He had an inexpressible sense of
grief; not only from the petty outward Afflictions that He was under; (which
may be called petty comparatively, though they were very great in themselves)
but also from the Torrent of Wrath flowing in, on His Soul; That Cup behoved to
have a most bitter Relish, and an inconceivable Anguish with it, when He was a
drinking of it, as appeared in His Agony. O! ^s He was Pained and Pinched in
His Soul? The Soul being especially sensible of the Wrath of Go^. 3 It
consisted in a sort of wonderful Horror, which no question, the marching up
(to say so) of so many mighty Squadrons of the highly provoked Wrath of God;
and making so Furious and Formidable an Assault on the Innocent Humane Nature
of Christ (that considered simply in it is self, was a finit Creature) behoved
necessarily to be attended with; Hence He prays, Father, if it be possible let
this cup depart from me; Intimating, that there was a Sinless Loathness, and a
holy Abhorrence to middle with it, and to adventure upon it. Though we have not
Hearts rightly to conceive, nor Tongues suitable to express those most
exquisite Sufferings, yet these things show, that our Lord Jesus was
exceedingly put to it in His Holy Humane Soul.

The 2, Use Serves to stir us up to wonder at the Love of God the Father, that
gave His own Son, and exacted the Elect's Debt of Him; and made the Sword of
His Justice to awake against Him; And to wonder at the Love of the Son, that
ingadged to be surety for them; And humbled Himself so Low to lift them up; It
was wonderful that He should stoup to become M^n, and to be a poor Man, and to
die; but more, that He should come this length, as to be in an Agony of Soul,
and to be so tossed with a Tempest of Terrible Wrath, though He was not capable
of Tossing as mere Creatures are: This being well considered, would highten
exceedingly the praise of Grace in the Church; and very much warm the Hearts of
Sinners to Him: And for pressing this Use a little and for provocking to Holy
Wondering at this Love; consider these Four, 1. Who it was that suffered t^us?
Even He that was without guile, He that was Gods delight, His Fathe^s Fellow*
the express image of his person, He that made all things, and who will one Day
be Judge of all; I^'s even He that thus Suffered. 2. Wh^t He Suffered, even the
Wrath of God, and the Wrath of God in such a Degree and Measure as was
equivalent to all that the Elect should have Suffered Eternally in H^ll; which
presses forth from Him these expressions which we hinted at before. 3. For
whom all this was, which makes it appear to be yet more wonderful; It was for
a number of lost straying sheep, That were turned every one to his own way, as
it is verse 6. For Dyvours and debauched Bankerupts, that were Enemies to, and
in Tops with Him; Some of them Spitting in His Face, some of them upon the
Consultation of taking away His Life, as may be gather^d from Acts 2. Yea, take
the best of them, for whom He suffered; even those whom He took to the Garden
with Him, to be Witnesses of His Agony; and we will find them sleeping, when He
is in the hight of it, and is thereby cast into a Top Sweat of Blood; and out
of Case to Watch, and bear Burden with Him, but for an hour; It had been much
for Him to have Suffered for Righteous Persons; but as it is, Romans 5. God
commends his love to us in this, that while we were yet sinners, Christ died
for us. 5. The manner how He Suffered, to wit, most Willingly and Patiently;
though He easily could h^ve commanded more then twelve legions of Angels to
rescue Him, yet He would not; but would needs be Apprehended by a number of
Poor Worms; that will with many more, one day craul at His Foot-stooll; That
being the Over-word of every Article of the Covenant of Redemption on the
Mediators part, both as to the undertaking, and the performance, I delight to
do thy will, O my God: And now, for what End are all these things spoken? Is it
think ye only, that we should speak, and that ye should hear of them, and no
more? Surely no, It Is a wonder that this which concerns us so nearly, is not
more affecti^g to us: Are there any here that have any hope of benefit from
Christ's Sufferings; or that have win comfortably to apply them? do not ye
behold a depth of Love here, that cannot be sounded? Is it suitable, think ye,
that Sinners, who have the hope of Heaven through Christ's Sufferings, should
be so little moved at the Hearing and Reading of them? He suffers much by
Sinners, when His Love shining forth in His Sufferings is not taken notice of;
I would pose you, when was your heart suitably aff^cted with thinking on them?
Or; when did ye make it an Errand to God, purposely to bless Him for this,
that He sent His Son to Suffer, and that the Mediator came and Suffered such
things for you Sinners? This is a Part, and a considerable Part of your Duty;
And Gratitude should constrain you to it, and you should not Minch, nor Derogat
from the Ju^^ Esteem of His Love, though, through your own Fault, ye be not
sure of your Interest in it, yet His condescending Grace is not the less.

Use 3. Behold here, as upon the one side, the exceeding severity of Justice,
and terribleness of Wrath; So upon the other side; The exceeding
Abominableness, and Desperatness of Sin; Would ye know what Sin is, what Wrath
is, how Just and Severe the Law is? Read all these here; even in what is
exacted by Justice, off the Cautioner for the Elect's Sins, the most part of
Men and Women, alace! do not believe how evil and bitter a thing Sin is; and
therefore they Dally and Play with it; They know not what Wrath is, and
therefore they dar hazard on it; they know not how strict the Law is, and
therefore they promise themselves Peace, Though they walk in the imagination of
their own hearts; and add drunkenness to thirst; But, O! secure Sinners, what
mean ye? Have ye, or can ye have any hops, that God will deall more gently with
you, then He dealt with His own Son, when He was but Cautioner, and the Sinner
only by imputation? Ye are finit Creatures, and drink in Sin, as the ox drinks
water, and havean inward Sinful Principle, and an evil Conscience, filled with
just grounds of many Challenges, consider with your selves, what a desperate
condition, under inevitable and intolerable Wrath ye have to look for; who
have no ground to look otherwise on God then as an Enemy; when Wrath was so
ho^rible to Innocent Jesus Christ, who had no Sin* no Challenge, no Doubt of an
Interest in God, what will it be to you? Certainly the Day is coming, when many
of you will think ye have greatly beguiled and cheated your selves, in thinking
that Justice would be so easily satisfied as ye did: O! then ye will be made to
know to your coast, the Nature of Wrath, and Justice; and the Nature of Sin;
who would never suffer these things to Light before: The Case of the Rich
Glutton in Hell may persuade many, that the Law is strick, and that Sin is an
ill and bitter thing, and that Wrath is sore to bide: Therefore let me entreat
you, as ye would eschew the Wrath of God, and the Lash of His revenging
Justice, bewar of Sin, dally not with it, as ye would not have it aggravated by
this Circumstance, above many, that ye hazarded to commit it, upon the
consideration of God's Goodness; that in Reason should have led you to
Repentance.

Use 4. See here the absolute necessity that lies on Sinners, who hear this
Gospel, to receive Christ by Faith; and to improve His Satisfaction for
obtaining of Life through Him; For one of these two must be resolved on, either
to come to this Reckoning with Justice your selves, or to endeavor the removal
of Wrath, by the Satisfaction of Christ; their being no other way to come to
freedom from Guilt, and from the Wrath that Guilt draws on: That Christ Jesus
Suffered thus, as Sinners Cautioner, it says, that where ever Sin is, God will
exact satisfaction; and where He exacts, He does it Severely, though most
Justly; and if He exact it Severely of the Cautioner, what will He do with the
Dyvour Debtor, especially, when He has slighted the Cautioner, and despised
the Grace offered through Him? And therefore not only, in respect of the
ommand, but of the Consequent that will follow the Disobedience of it: Be
txhorted, if ye mind not to take your hazard of Wrath, to endeavor, in God's
way to get your Interest in this Satisfaction which the Cautioner has made
well secured: There is here a solid ground for Faith, to expect that this
Satisfaction will do the turn, of all them who will make use of it; And a most
pressing Motive to ingadge them that are lying under Sin, to embrace, to close
with, and to rest upon this Offered Salvation; That, this Grace be not received
in vain; Is there not a Testimony in your Consciences of the Former, and why do
ye not make use of the Latter? Will ye but once be prevailed with, to put your
selves to it thus, What if I be made to Reckon for my own Sins? What horrid
Wrath will I meet with, when the Mediator had such sore Soul-travel; even when
there was a Covenant Relation standing still, not doubted of, betwixt ^he
Father and Him; when formidable Wrath shall be seen palp^bly pursuing me, the
Sinner, having no Covenant Relation to support me? We would not put it ^o your
choice; Not whether ye will count or not; for that must be, and shall be,
whether ye Choose or Refuse; It Is appointed for all men once to die, and after
to come to judgment; And we must all appear before the judgment seat of
Christ; But that which we would put to your Choice, is the ways of coming to
this Judgment, and Reckoning, and there are but two ways; either ye must step
to, at your own hand, or ye must betake you to Christ's Righteousness, as being
thoroughly convinced of the necessity of it; and that it will do your turn: The
Day of the Lord will discover, that many have spoken of their Faith, and
Repentance, that never really exercised the same. I shall now say no more, Only
remember, that it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God;
who, when His Wrath is kindled but a little, can cause the stoutest and
proudest of His Enemies to perish, in the midst of all their Designs and
Projects; They will all then be found to be happy who have put their trust in
Him.

SERMON XLIV.
ISAIAH LIII.XI. Verse. 11. He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall
be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; for he
shall bear their iniquities.


ALL Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine,
for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of
God may be made perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works; and that His
People may be made wise unto salvation; Yet these Scriptures wherein our Lord
Jesus is holden forth more clearly, are eminently useful: He being the
Foundation and Ground of all; To whom the Law and the Prophets bear witness;
and they are only profitable to us, in the Estate wherein we are, in so far as
they relate to to Him, and point Him out to us; And we may further say, that
these Scriptures, wherein His Sufferings, and Death are holden forth, in the
Richness and Fruitfulness of them are singularly so; that being the very Life
of the Covenant, and the very Door, by, and through which, we step from Death
to Life; And whatever they be to others, sure they have a special Sweetness
in them to sensible Sinners; And therefore the Sum of the Gospel, and of Saving
Knowledge is by the Apostle, 2 Cor. 2.2. Compended in the knowledge of Christ,
and of him crucified, which unfolds His very Heart and Bowels to us.

The Prophet has been pointing out this, in several Verses, and has hinted
at the effects of His Sufferings, in the former verse: And now in these Words,
he puts a new Title on them, calling them the travel of Christ's soul; Not only
to set out the exceeding greatness of them, but with respect to the foregoing
Words; wherein it is said, He shall see his seed; Which is repeated here, when
it is said; He shall be satisfied; So that as a Mother is in Travel, for
bringing forth of a Child; So says he, shall Christ be put to Soul-travell,
for bringing Life and Immortality to the Seed given to Him, to be saved by Him;
And seeing He is put to Travel, He must needs bring forth, and see his seed:
Here we may allude that of Isaiah 66.9. Shall I bring to the birth, and not
cause to bring forth? says the Lord; shall I cause to bring forth, and shut
the womb? says thy God.

We have spoken of the Nature and Greatness of these Sufferings; Now ere we
proceed to any more Observations, we would speak a Word further to the Use of
this; It being indeed an Eater, out of which comes Meat; and a Strong, out of
which comes Sweet; These pangs having calmed and quieted the Pangs and Showers
(to speak so) of many Traveling Souls, and brought forth a Birth at last.

And therefore, beside what I spoke to in the Use, the last day, I would add
this, That we would endeavor to have the solid Faith, not only of His
Sufferings, but of the Greatness of His Sufferings imprinted deeply on our
hearts; That (I say) the Sufferings of a Dying, Blood-sweating Christ,
Wrestling and Struggling, even to His being in an Agony, with the Wrath of God,
and putting up strong Cries with Tears, may be born in on our hearts; and that
we may thoroughly be persuaded of the greatness of the Work of Redemption, and
that it was a most Dear and Coastly Bargain to Christ; For it was not Gold nor
Silver, it was not Kingdoms nor visible Worlds, nor Angels that were given as
a Price for Elect Sinners; but it was the precious Blood of the Son of God;
Nay, it was the bitter and sharp Soul-travell, S^dness, Sorrow, and Agony of
our Lord Jesus; which (to speak comparatively) was beyond the shedding of His
Blood; And what a Price do ye think this to be? That He, that made all, and
preserved all in their Being, and was before all things, should come thus low,
as to be a Man, and a m^an sorrowful suffering, and dying Man; yea* to be a
cursed Man, and to go out of ^his Life, as being under a Curse, yet being
always the beloved Son of the Father; And being even then, when at His lowest,
the Prince of the kings of the earth, and shining forth gloriously, in the
Power* and Riches, and Freeness of His Love and Grace; sure this wonderful low
stooping, and humbling of Himself, Preaches out the Love that straightened, and
constrained Him to run upon that which was His own Death; there being no hands
that could have taken away His Life, had He not willingly laid it down, which
He did with delight; Could we make use of this, there is much here to be said
for our use.

We shall draw what we would say on it, to these four heads. 1. To something
for Instruction. 2. To something for Consolation. 3. To something for
Exhortation. 4. To something for Reproof, and Expostulation.

I say, 1. It serves for Instruction, and ye would from it be Instructed in
several things. 1. How to think aright of the great Severity of the Justice of
God, and of the Horror of Wrath, and of the dreadful Consequ nts of Sin,
which it will most certainly have following on it; May it not make your Souls
to tremble to think upon, and consider that our Lord Jesus was brought to such
a pass, as to be in such an Agony, to be so exceeding sorrowful, and even
amazed; To be so troubled in Soul, that he was thereby made to sweat great
drops of blood, and to be wrestling with somewhat, that His holy Humane Nature
had a scarring at: O! the desert and wages of Sin is dreadful, when the Law
pursues its Controversy, and when Justice exacts what a broken Covenant
deserves; Alace! The most of men believe not this, but its here that may
convince us* wh^^ an evil thing Sin is, and what a dreadful thing it is to
fall into the hands of an angry God; O! that ye would think upon it, that ye
may beware of Sin, by all means, and may always be minding that Word which our
Savior has, If these things be done in the green tree, what shall be done in
the dry? If it was so done with Him? who in the Action (if I may so call it)
was performing His Fathers will, and giving an admirable proof of His respect
to the Honor of God, What will He do to the dry Sticks, the Damned Reprobat,
who have slighted the offer of His Grace, despised the Sufferings of a
Mediator, and disdained to be reclaimed? Hear it, and tremble, and be
persuaded, that the Horror that Sin shall bring upon the Sinner, when God comes
to reckon with him, is inexpressible. 2. Be Instructed, and see here, how great
the difficulty is of making peace with God, when once His Law is broken; A
thing that is little believed by most, who are disposed to think that they will
get God sooner pleased and pacifi^d, th^n they will get their Neig^bour, or
Master pacified and pleased; which says That either they they think nothing,
or but very little of His Wrath, or that they will soon get it put by, that a
word will do that; Hence it is, that they think, that an equivalent Price is
not necessary for Satisfying the Justice of God, and for prev^n^ing of His
Wrath; but if it be so easy a thing to pacify God, and to satisfy His Justice,
Why did Our Lord undertake the Debt? Why did He become so low and pay so dear a
Price, to procure a Discharge of it? Why was His Soul put to such travel, when
no Shame, nor R^proach, nor Pain on His blessed Body could do it, but H^s Soul
in the sore travel thereof, behov^d to be made a Sacrifice for Sin? Sinners
grossly ignorant mistakes of the Justice of God, appear palpably in this; There
was never a Person that was called to it, and did undertake to remove God's
Wrath from others, but our Lord Jesus; And ye see here what it cost Him; And
what do ye imagine will be the lot of others, who shall lie under it eternally.
3. See here the Worth and Weight of a Soul, and the great moment of the
Salvation of a Soul; Immortal Souls are of much worth, and though Men often
sell them at an cheap and easy Rate, yet our Lord Jesus bought Souls dear;
It Is true, Souls considered in themselves, are not worthy of the Price laid
down for them; But being considered with respect to the end for which they are
designed; to wit, the glorifying of the Riches of the Grace and Mercy of God,
and their enjoying of Him, They are of much worth; Ah! that men should sell
that Soul so very cheap, when our Lord bought Souls so very dear. 4. See here,
the Solidity, Fullness, and Satisfactoriness of the Price that Jesus Christ gave
to Justice, for the Souls of His People? It cannot sure but be a fully
satisfying Price, that such a Person should Suffer, and Suffer so much; Even to
be put to Soul-travel; for which there could be no Reason, neither could it
have any other End, but the satisfying of Divine Justice, for the Sins of the
Elect; And considering these, His Sufferings in the Degrees of them, which was
so very high; And in the use of them, in Gods Purpose and Decree, and in the
End of them, which was to satisfy the Justice of God, and to make His Grace
Glorious, It cannot but be a most Solid, Full, and Satisfying Price; So that a
Soul may have here a sufficient ground to build its Salvation upon; And the
more low-that the Mediator was brought by His Sufferings, the more solid and
sicker is the ground of our Faith, yea, this is the End why He came so low. 5.
See here how greatly we are in Christ's Debt, That when Justice was provoked,
and Sinners had losed themselves; and when nothing else could be admitted, but
all other Sacrifices were rejected, He was graciously pleased to yield Himself
to be the Sacrifice, by His extreme, and most exquisit Sufferings; most
pleasantly and heartsomly, saying, Lo, I come in the volum of thy book, it is
written of me, I delight to do thy will, O my God; By the which will, says
the Apostle Heb. 10. We are sanctified; And by it we have access to Eternal
Life; It had been much, if He had made a New World for Believers to dwell in,
nay it had been much if He had provided Angels to Mollify, and Mitigat their
Sufferings, and to give them drops of water to cool their Tongues in Hell; But
that He His own blessed self, should decline no Soul-travel beside Bodily
Sufferings, to redeem them from the Curse; How much, how unspeakably much are
they oblidged to Jesus Christ? If we were suitably sensible of our hazard, and
clear, as to our Interest in these Sufferings, it could not be, but our Souls
would leap someway within us, as the Babe did in Elizabeth's womb, on this
consideration, that a Cautioner, and Savior has come, and paid the Price
that was due by us, to the Justice of God; This is a greater obligation then
His making of the World, for an habitation to Sinners, Nay a greater obligation
then His giving of Heaven to us, if abstracted from Christ: O! So well as it
would become us, in reading of these Words, to stand and pause, and to say, Is
it so indeed, that Christ gave Himself thus for Sinners, and for me? This is it
which opens the door of Access to God, and makes a Bridge over the Gulf, that
is betwixt God and Sinners; He was smitten, that by His Strokes, and Strips
health might be brought to us; He was content to undergo sore Soul-travel, that
thereby Life might be brought to us.

That which we mainly aim at in this Branch of the Use, is, That ye would look
to the Mercy purchased by this Soul-travel, as your great obligation; And at
what a Rate you have the Offer of Grace, and access to Heaven; When He made the
World, Heaven, and Earth, Sun, Moon, Stars, etc. He spoke the Word, and it was
done, their needed no more, but let such a thing be and it was, but the work of
Redemption was of another sort, and brought about at a high and dearer Rate;
Therefore among all the things which the Gospel holds out, put a special Price
on these things that are the fruits of Christ's Soul-travel; and consider what a
flight it will be, and what guilt it will involve you in, that He should
purchase Redemption so dear, and make offer of it so freely, and ye should care
little or nothing for it. 6. Be Instructed anent the absolute necessity of
being in Christ's Debt, for the Use making and Application of His purchase; is
there any man that can merit it, or render Him a recompense for it? If not; And
if there be a necessity of making H^aven and Salvation, then sure there is a
n^cessity of being in Christ's Debt, and of making use of His purchase, for the
attaining of that which He has purchased; And men are not hardly dealt with,
nor ill come to, when this blessed necessity is imposed upon them, not to
satisfy for themselves (For what can they bring that will be an equivalent
Price;) but to acquiesce in His Satisfaction made to Justice for them, and the
rather, that they cannot bind Him to make application of it: Folk are very
readily given to one of these two, either to misken, and pass by the Mediator,
and so to presume to make a new bargain for their Peace, by offering to drink
themselves for themselves, of that Cup which Christ drank of, for that only was
the Price of Souls; Or if they esteem of Christ's Satisfaction, they think to
oblidge Him, and to procure from Him the Application of His Purchase, by their
Prayers and good Living: But what is there in this, more then is in the former?
What Price is there that can be given to Him, that is equivalent to His
Sufferings? It must therefore of necessity come to this, That as it was freely
purchased, so it is freely applied; and it were very suitable for Sinners to
carry the Faith of this along with them in their bosom; If He procured Heaven
to us by His Soul-suffering and Travel, we cannot procure it to our selves, and
therefore a necessity lies on all that would be at Heaven, to be in Christ's
common for it; And this is the up-shot of all, that Dyvour Sinners may know,
that they are in His common: As for His Purchase, so for the Applic^tion of it.

Use 2. This Doctrine yields much Consolation, and it is the Fountain and Rise
of it; His Soul travel bought it all, and makes way to the bringing of us to
the possession of it: And in many respects, our Consolation depends on it; We
shall look upon it as the rise thereof more generally, in these respects. 1.
That to a poor Sinner lying under the Curse, there is a possibility of getting
it put by, and kept off, that Heaven is not desperate, and that the fear of
coming before the Tribunal of Justice is not absolute; for our Lord has
satisfied Justice; the Price that He laid down was not for naught, but levelled
at this very Scope, as the Apostle has it, 2 Cor. 5. ult. He was made sin for
us, that knew no sin, that we Sinners might be made the righteousness of God
in, or through him? and what strong Consolation is this; for a Sinner under the
Curse of God, to have this word spoken to him, though thou cannot satisfy
Justice for thy self, yet there is a way laid down to satisfy it for thee; the
Mediator having the Price that was required proposed to Him, did not stick at
the Terms, but held the Bargain, and has accordingly actually performed it. 2.
It is a Consolation in this respect, That not only is there a Complete
Satisfaction given to Justice, but a willing Savior, ready to make that
Satisfaction forthcoming, and to make it forthcoming freely; can there be a
greater proof of our Lord Jesus His Love to Sinners then this? That when they
were considered with all their Debt lying on their heads, He undertook this
Soul-travel for them, to procure them Salvation from Wrath and Justice; This is
more then His giving them His Word for it, though that had been enough; it is
more then the giving them His Oath, thus to commend His Love, As it is, John
15.13. Greater love has no man then this, that a man should lay down his life
for his f^iend; but, says the Apostle, Romans 5.8.10. God commends his love to
us, that while we were yea sinners, yea enemies Christ died for us; This good
Shepherd laid down His Life for His Sheep. 3. It Is a Consolation in this
respect, That there is also a willingness to the Lord Jehovah, the provoked
Party, to accept of this Satisfaction, and to absolve the Elect on account of
this Satisfaction; For what I pray was all this Soul-travel that the Lord
underwent? But Jehovah His transferring of the Debt of the Elect on Him,
according to the transaction that had past in the Covenant of Redemption; He
would never have made the Sword of His Justice to awake against the man that
was His Fellow, if He had not been content to accept of His Satisfaction for
them that should make use of it; for we have not only the Mediator, and His
Satisfaction to look upon in this Soul-travel, but also the contrivance of the
Covenant, called in the former words, The pleasure of the Lord; who, while we
were enemies gave His Son, and was content to want Him for a time (to speak so)
and to be a distinct party to pursue Him; Is not this then a good Bargain, when
we have a willing Mediator, and Merchant, content to give the Price and
Satisfaction, and a gracious and willing God, content to accept of this
Satisfaction, and both of them content to make the Application of it to us
freely, As it is, Revel. 3.18. Here is matter of strong Consolation, the ground
whereof will not fall, to wit, The mediators Soul-travel, and the Lord Jehovah
will not cast the Bargain; When the poor Sinner says, I have nothing to pay,
but there is a Price in Christ's Satisfaction offered in the Gospel, and the
Judge says, admits it for the Sinner that lays claim to it, as if the Sinner
had never Sinned, or had actually paid the Price himself.

But 4. Look a little further, and we will find more Consolation, though this
be much; consider a Sinner in a tempted condition, and under Sad-soul-exercise,
that wots not what to do with Unbelief, with the Devil, and with the Wrath of
God, all which are like to overwhelm and swallow them up, and the heart is like
to sink, here is the native and kindly Fountain for such a Soul to drink at;
That our Lord Jesus suffered more, and that it was another sort of Cup that He
drank of, and drank out; And for these Ends 1. To take away the Sting and
Bitterness of thy Cup. 2. To procure, and Meritoriously to Purchase a Freedom
and Out-gate from these Temptations to thee. 3. Also, that He might be made a
Sympathizing High Priest, and the more compassionat toward the Person that
should be so Tempted, according to that, Heb 2. ult. For that he himself has
suffered, being tempted, he is able also to succor these that are tempted; He
was Tempted, that He might have kindly sympathy with Tempted Souls, and
therefore when such are ready to fall a swoon, He dates and dandles them, as it
were on His Knee, and when they are in hazard to turn their backs in the
Conflict, He comes up with fresh strength, and recruits them; So, Heb. 4.15. We
have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin; We
have such an High Priest, as was not only mocked, and scorned of Men, and some
way deserted of God, but who was tempted, though not from Sin within (for He
was without Sin) yet to Sin, for He was assaulted by the Devil, and tempted to
unbelief, and other gross Sins, As is clear, Matthew. 4. though, (as He says
Himself) The prince of this world had nothing in him; And He was not only
tempted to Sin, but as if He had actually Sinned, He met with Wrath from all,
there is a sweet and strong Sympathy flowing from such bowels, as one Brother
has toward another, yea, inconceivablie beyond the tenderest bowels, that the
most warmly loving Brethren in all the World have one toward another; And
therefore he knows well what Apprehensions, Temptations riding thick (to speak
so) will attempt to beat in upon poor Souls, and can from experience Sympathy
with them; It is not so to be understood, as if there were any additionall
degree made to His Kindness, Skill, and Grace, as He is God, These being
infinite in Him, as so confedred, yet He being Man, as well as God, or having a
humane Nature, He has from His Personal experience a Sympathy, and that in a
humane way, though infinitely above what we can conceive, with His own under
their Temptations, and sad Soul-exercises: And seeing the Scripture holds out
such a thing as this, That our High Priest is a Man that has bowels of
Sympathy, it may sufficiently warrant a Believer to expect much good, this, and
other ways from Christ, He having Grace infinite in Him, as God, and a tender
heart as Man to befriend them, and to communicate, and let out of that Grace
unto them: And this is great ground of Consolation to Believers, under any
Cross and piece of hard exercise, to know that we have a Mediator, who knows in
experience, though not the sinfulness that accompanies these hard exercises in
us, yet what these fears are, of being shut out from God, and how dreadful a
thing it is to be at controversy with Him; and is like to these, who having
come through a sad Trial, and Piece of Exercise themselves, are thereby the
more ready to Sympathize with others under it. 5. and lastly. The consideration
of this may comfort Believers even in their outward afflictions; it had been
another sort of Crosses that they would have been made to meet with, if He had
not taken this Cup of Wrath and dunken it for them; and therefore they would be
comforted, and bless God, who has taken this Soul-travel from off them, and
made way for a Retreat and Shelter for them in Him; and it should even shame
Believers, who are ready to think so much of any little Bit of inward Exercise,
or of outward Affliction, seeing our blessed Lord Jesus endured so much, not
only outwardly, and Bodily Affliction, but also so much inward Trouble, and
Soul-travel, that thereby their Burden might be made light, and their yoke
easy.

Use 3. For Exhortation, seeing our Lord Jesus was put to such sore Soul-travel,
sure it lays a great obligation on them, for whom he Suffered, to endeavor to
make some Suitable and Grateful Return; seeing therefore we are so much in His
Common, and Debt, we should give Him a friendly meeting in these Four, which
this calls for, 1. It calls for Love to Him, that vented such Love to us. 2.
It calls for Faith, That seeing He gave such a Price for us we should trust
our Souls to Him. 3. It calls for Holiness and Obedience, even living to Him,
and to the Glorifying of Him that has bought us; This Argument will sure weigh
with you, who, on solid grounds lay claim to His Purchase. 4. It calls for
Thankfulness, and Praise, in magnifying His Grace and Love, that has so Loved
us; And are not all these very suitable and becoming, that Sinners should Love
Him, and that these who Love Him not, should be Anathema Marenatha, accursed to
the coming of the Lord; that Sinners should believe on Him, and be obedient to
Him, and thankful?

1. If ye believe this Truth, this Comfortable, and Soul-ravishing Truth, let
me exhort you, and be exhorted and prevailed with t^ love Our Lord Jesus
Christ, and to give Him that answerable respect, meeting and welcome that
becomes; If we may plead for any thing from you, sure we may plead for this; If
it be true that He ingadged in such a Bargain, in which, if He had not ingadged
Himself, we had inevitably gone to the pit; and if He has actually paid the
P^^e which He undertook to pay, let your Consciences speak, if it should not
melt the hearts of such to whom the benefit of this is offered, with Love to
Him? And if ye have the Faith of the Doctrine, can ye deny, but this obligation
lies upon you? Look in on your Consciences and Hearts, and see if ye be able
to shift it; and if ye had suitable Palaces for intertaining Him in, if ye be
not bound to open to Him, and give Him patent entry to them, and if your Eyes
were Fountains Tears, if it would not become you to wash His Feet with them,
and to wipe them with the Hair of your Heads? Would to God that you were under
the suitable impression of this, and that ye were by the Gospel, and the
Privileges ye have by it constrained to love the Lord Jesus Christ, It may be
some of you think, if this be all that is called for, He shall not want it, We
assure you it is called for, My Son (says He) give me thine heart; But we are
afraid, that though ye will confess, that this is your duty, and that ye should
have Love to Him, yet the most part of you want it: For when we speak of Love
to Christ, it is not a Pretext or Apprehension of Love, that will be taken for
Love, but such Love as has these Qualifications. 1. If Christ be Loved, He
will be esteemed of, as the most excellent Thing, or Person, the most excellent
Bargain, the most Kind Friend, the most Loving Husband, and as the most Full,
Complete, and absolute Sufficiency, or Sufficient One; As He is spoken of, and
esteemed of by the Spouse, Can. 5. His countenance is like Lebanon, excellent
as the Cedars, his mouth is most sweet, he is altogether lovely; The heart is
brought to esteem of Him, and to prefer Him beyond all that it can set the eye
upon; It were indeed somewhat, if ye were brought under Conviction, and through
Persuasion of this, that Jesus Christ is the incomparable best thing that a
Sinner can have a Title to; But, alace! He is despised, and rejected of Men,
though He be the chiefest of ten thousands; And Men play the fool egregiously,
in preferring other things to Him, who is infinitely worthy of the Preference
u^^^, and of the Preheminency above them all. A 2d. Evidence of Love is, the
hearts longing and panting after the enjoyment of Him, and after the enjoyment
of Him, as the most excellent Object, quite surpassing all other Objects; And
when the thirst and longing of the Soul is so carried out after Him, as it
cannot be satisfied without Him, which is to be Sick of love for Him, as it is
Can. 2:5. and 5. v. 8. To be in a manner swooning and f^inting because of His
absence, and even greening (to speak so) for His presence, to have the bent of
the Souls Designs, and Desires toward making ^f that Glorious Conquest,
whereof the Apostle speaks, Philip. 3. Even to count all things to be but loss
and dung, and to cast all things as it were over Board, to win to him, and to
be found in him; To count of Him, as the pearl of price, and as the treasure
hid in the field; For the sake of which, ye would strip your selves to the
Skin, and sell all that ye have to buy it. 3. This Love to Christ Jesus has in
it a Satisfying Delight in Him, and the Souls blessing of it self in Him, it is
contenting it self with Him? and it is rejoicing in that Sweetness which it
finds to be in Him, as being the only Attractive Object, that has such a
Loveliness in it, as breeds Satisfaction; Which Satisfaction begets a Kindly
Warmness in the Heart to Him again, even till the Soul be put in a Holy Low, or
Flame of Love to Him; more of this Love would make Christ and the Gospel much
more Sweet, and would make every one of these words, that expresses His Love
in His Sufferings to be like Marrow and Fatness, and would also make the
Promises to be like Breasts full of Consolation; It would withal cause, that
there would not be such mistakes of Christ, nor such gaddings and whorings from
Him, and such preferrings of Idols to Him, as alace! there are; Where this Love
is not, there can be no other thing that will be acceptable: We shall say no
more for the time, but only this, That we do appeal to your Consciences, if
there be not here an excellent and non-such Object of Love, and if there be not
here much reason to be in Love with that Object? A very Heathen will return
Love for Love, and should not we much more do so in this case? God Himself
kindle this Love in us, and make us know more the great advantages of it.

SERMON XLV.
ISAIAH LIII.XI. Verse 11. He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall
be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many: for he
shall bear their iniquities.


THe Work of Redemption is a business that was very gravely and very seriously
contrived and prosecuted, in respect of God, and of the Mediator, there was
much earnestness in it as to them; and yet notwithstanding (which is a wonder)
Men whom it concerns so much, whose Salvation depends on it, and to whom the
benefit of it redounds, are but very little serious in their thoughts of it;
Our Lord Jesus was in Travel, Soul-travel, sore Soul-travel to bring about this
Work; and that the Gospel might be Preached to Sinners, that they might have
thereby a ground to their Faith, to expect Life and Remission of Sins through
Him; Is it not then sad, that we should speak and hear of it, and be in a
manner, like the stone in the wall, no more, or little more affected with it,
than if it were a matter that did not at all concern us? The Reading and
Hearing of these Words will doubtless be a great Conviction to secure Sinners,
that our Lord Jesus was at such pains, and put to such sore Soul-travel, and
Suffering, and that yet such Sinners were never stirred, nor made serious, to
have the Application of this Purchased Redemption made to them.

The Scope of these Words is to show the great inward Soul-travels, Conflicts,
and Straits that our blessed Lord Jesus had and was put to, in throughing of
the Work of Redemption, and in paying the Price due to the Justice of God, for
the Sins of the Elect; It Is a wonder that ever we should have it to speak of,
and that ye should hear of this Subject, which is the very Text, (to say so)
and Sum of the Gospel; And therefore, before we leave it, we shall speak a
little more to the Use of it; and truly if we make not use of this Doctrine, we
will make use of none; though I confess it is a great practique how to draw it
to Use, and to conform ourselves in our practice to the Use of it.

We proposed somethings the last day which we could not then prosecute; As 1.
something for Exhortation. 2. Something for Reproof, and Expostulation, which
rising clearly from the Doctrine drawn from the Words, we may now insist a
little in them.

1. For Exhortation, Considering Christ's Sufferings and the extremity of them,
and that they were undergone for Sinners, we would exhort you to love Him as ye
ought; There is ground and warrant here to require it of you, seeing that Love
in His bosom came to such an hight, that He was content to lay down His Life,
yea, seeing He was in such a hot flame of Love, that the Cup of Wrath did not
quench it, but His Love drank and dried it up, Greater love then this has no
man; It is a most wonderful Love considered with all the circumstances,
whereby it is hightened; And there is ground here to excite and stir you up, to
give Him a kindly meeting, and to welcome His Love with Love; It will sure be a
great shame, if our Lords Love stood at nothing, so that He might do the
Fathers will, and finish the Work committed to Him, which was the perfyting of
the Work of Sinners Redemption, the Redeeming of His lost Sheep; It every
triffle, or any triffle, shall quench Love in our hearts to Him; O! What a
shame will it be in the Day of Judgment to many, when this Man shall be
brought forth loving this Idol, and another Man loving that Idol more then
Christ, this Man loving his Lust, that Man his Ease, and another Man h^s Wealth
or Honor, and preferring them to Christ, and when it shall be found, that they
would not quit nor part with their right Eye, nor their right Hand (which are
not worth the name of Members, being called so, because they are Members of the
Body of Death) out of Love to Him: Think Folks what they will, that native
impression of the obligation that lies upon them to love Christ, is wanting,
and that Divine, and Soul-ravishing Influence, that His Love should have on
hearts; It is true, ye all think, that ye love Him, unless it be some of them
who indeed love Him; but if ye could reflect upon your selv^s, ye would find
that ye have little or no love at all to Him indeed: And therefore, for
undeceiving of you, beside what we said the last day, take two or three
Characters of kindly love to Christ, 1. This Love is never satisfied with any
degree, or measure that it has attained, so as to sit down on it; It has
these two things in it, A desire to be further on in Love, and a weightedness
that it cannot win at growth in Him; The loving Soul is disposed to think, that
it is Love to Christ is not worthy to be called Love, and it breaths after it,
even to have it self warmed therewith to Him, and to be brought to a further
nearness to Him, as we may see through the Song of Solomon, And particularly
Chap. 7. at the close. There will I give thee my loves; And Chap. 8. O that
thou were as my brother that sucked the breasts of my mother; Kindly Love to
Him puts the Soul to long for an opportunity to vent it is Love toward Him. 2.
Where this Love is, the Soul will be as serious in praying for it, that it may
attain it, as if it wanted it, and it will be as much affected for the want of
the lively exercise of it, and will be as much challenged for coming short in
it, as it will be for any other Sin; There is no benefit that it seeks more
after, then to have the heart circumcised to love Him, and O! but it will be
accounted a great benefit, to get love to Christ; And as it is one of the things
that it seeks in Prayer, so it is one of the things that it eyeth in Repentance;
It Is much affected with the want of it, confesses it to Him, and aggredges the
Sin thereof against it self, from this ground, that it loves nor Christ as it
should: I know not if there be much of this among us many will be sorry if they
fall in drunkenness, or in any other gross Sin, but O! how few repent of their
want of Love to Christ, and that He gets not His own room in the heart. 3.
Where this Love is, it is ever Su^picious and Jealous lest the heart cliver an^
cleave to some other thing, and give it room to the pr^judice of Christ: It Is a
sad thing, when folks let their affections go our at random, and are not
afraid, lest they out-shoot themselves in loving the World, their Pleasures,
their Credit, etc. But rather they are like the whore in the Proverbs, who
says come and let us take our fill of loves, Love to Christ, has a Weanedness
from these things, and a Jealousy least they usurp a room in the heart, that is
not due to them; Because, as John says, There is not a consistency betwixt the
love of God, and the love of the world in the heart, and therefore it is the
watchful care of a poor B^liever, to keep out inordinat love of the World, and
of these things that the heart is given to go a whoreing after; H^nce David
prays, Psalm. 1^9. Incline my heart to thy law, and not to covetousness, and
Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity; There is in too many a sort of
r^oted confidence, that they love Christ, and they never suspect themselves of
the cont^are, when yet some other thing has his room.

2dly. There is ground here to exhort you to believe on Him, as the Prince of
Life, and a Savior that is well fitted and qualified to give Repentance, and
Remission of Sins; And this is the very native Use that flows from this
Doctrine, even to lay a solid ground of Faith to a Soul lying under the sense
of Sin, to step forward to God^ Bar, with confidence, Considering Jesus Christ
Crucified, and put to Soul-travel for Elect Sinners, who should betake
themselves to Him; Which if it had not been, there had not been any ground for
Faith; And the lower He came in His Sufferings, we have the more native and
broad ground of Faith, and the stronger motive to draw us to take hold of Him,
and to found and fix our Faith on His Satisfaction. To clear this Branch of the
Use a little. 1. Consider here a ground for Faith, in a fourfold respect, And
2. The force of the motives that arise from these grounds, pressing a sensible
Sinner to exercise Faith on them, or on Him by them; And 3. The necessity that
we are under, so to do.

For the First, 1. In general, There is ground here to bring the heart to be
through in the Historical Faith, of what is spoken concerning the Truths of
the Covenant; For, does not this Soul-travel of Our Lord, say, That Men are
lying Naturally in a sinful Condition, and obnoxious to Wrath? That there is a
Covenant past betwixt the Father and the Son, for delivering of Elect Sinners
out of that Condition, and that by the Sufferings of the Mediator; And that by
our betaking of our selves to Him, we may be fred from Sin and Wrath?
Otherwise, why did the Mediator come thus low; except it had been true, that
man was under a Debt that he could not p^y; And why ^id the Father send His
Son, except He had been really minded, that He should offer Himself up a
propitiatory Sacrifice to God for Man's Sin? And His accepting of the
Satisfaction, tells plainly, that He was content, that the Cautioners Payment
should stand for the Principal Debtors: All this supposes a Covenant, which is
as real, as if we had seen, and had been Ear-witnesses of the reading over of
the Covenant in all the Articles of it; we wish that many were come this
length, as to be confirmed in the Historical Faith of the General Truths of
the Gospel, summed up in Christ's Suffering^; And there cannot be any serious
R^ading, or Hearing of Christ's Sufferings, but the^e must also be some
considering of their Ri^e and End; if it be otherwise, we do but superficially
run over them. 2. As this shows the Lords Seriousness in pressing the offer of
Redemption on Sinners, so it calls you to be Serious in accepting of it,
According to that in John 12. When I am lifted up, I will draw all men after
m^; Where Christ's lifting up is made an Attractive to draw lost Sinners after
Him; And can their be a greater ground of Faith, or a stronger motive to
persuade a Sinner to be reconciled to God, and to rest upon Christ's
Satisfaction, in order to that, then this, That Jesus Christ has purposly laid
down His Life, and undergone Suffering, even to such an extremity, to bring it
about. 3. When we say that Christ's Soul-travel calls for Faith; It requires
this, and gives ground for it, That they that betake themselves to Christ for
Justification before God, may confidently commit themselves to His guiding in
all other things; For will He not be tender of them in these, when out of
respect to them, when there was not a Covenant betwixt Him and them (though
they were mentioned in the Covenant of Redemption) He laid down His Life, and
Suffered such things for them? May we not from this Reason, as the Apostle
does, Romans 8. He that spared not his own son, but gave him to the death for
us, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? Can there be a
greater ground for Sinners that fear to give Him credit, to trust Him with all
things that concern them, then this? That He suffered so much for them. 4.
Having betaken our selves (...) Him, it serves to confirm our Faith, and to
bring us to the quieting of our selves in resting on Him, and acquiescing in
Him; For what more could we require for ou^ settlement and quieting then this,
That H^ has come so low, and condescended so fa^^ for the behove of poor
Sinners? Therefore in all these respects, let me exhort you, and in His Name,
Who was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him,
Obtest you, not to keep at distance from Him, but take with your Sin, by Faith
to fl e unto Him and to the efficacy of His Blood; O! Yield your selves by
Faith to Him for use making of Him for your Ju^tification: And a little more
particularly, let me here speak a word to two so^ts of Persons. 1. To them that
are yet strangers to God. 2. To them that are looking toward Christ; And 1.
For you that are strangers to God, whose hearts were never yet ^ffected with
the Conviction of the necessity of believing, who can lie down and rise up
without serious thoughts of your Souls estate, or of the necessity of making
sure your Peace with God; I beseech you, lay to heart your Condition, and bewar
of trampling the Blood of the Covenant under your Feet, let not the Grace that
is offered to you in this Gospel be heard and received in vain, but by the
acknowledgement of Sin, and of Gods Justice to which ye are liable for the
same, timously betake your selves to Christ's Suffering for a shelter from the
Wrath of God, that will be as a Storm against the Wall: Thus we press as the
great Use of this Doctrine upon you, that ye improve the Cup of Wrath that the
Medi^tor has Drunken, for your exempting from the Curse that is due to you,
and that Cup that ye deserved to have D^unken Eternally. 2. For you, who under
the Conviction of Sin, are looking toward Christ, let me entreat you not to
stay on this side of the City of refuge, but step forward and improve this
Soul-travel of the Lord for your Spiritual Ease, Setlement, Quiet and Comfort,
as well as from keeping you from Wrath, otherwise it will bring bitterness in
the End; If ye make not use of Christ's Sufferings, if ye betake not you^
selves to Him, and do not trust Him for Justification and Life, ye will make
your selves guilty o^ His Blood, and will be found traders of it under Foot.

And therefore, let me here speak a Word to the Second thing proposed. That is
the Grounds, or Reasons, or Motives, that should press you to make Use of these
Sufferings, and of the Grounds of Faith, that they hold out unto you; And 1. In
General, let me ask, Is there not need that ye should do so? Is there not
Guilt, and hazard of Wrath, because of Guilt? and if ^o, Why stand ye at a
distance from the Savior? If it were Sinless, Saints and Angels that were
exhorted to make Use of H m, it would be the le^s wonder, that there were so
little thinking of a Mediator, but when it is Sinners that are called upon, and
Sinners in such eminent haz^rd, it is indeed a wonder that there i^ not greater
flocking unto Him, and pressing on Him; If there had no^ been need, would the
Father have so pursued the Son? or do ye think that it was for a Complement
that He laid down His Life? Which sure He would not have done, if Salvation
could have been had another way. 2dly. And more particularly, As ye would
consider the mavelous Grounds that He has laid down for Faith to rest upon,
so ye would consider the many Motives that ye have to press you to rest on
these Grounds, which we shall draw to these Four. 1. The Fullness and
Sufficiency of the Ground that is given to Faith in Christ's Sufferings, which
the deeper they draw on His Soul, Faith has the Fuller and Better Ground to
make Use of them. 2. The Power and Ability that are Conspicuously in Him, to
make Application of His Purchase; He has encountered Wrath and has overcome;
He is Absolved and Justified before God, and is exalted to be a prince and a
savior, to give repentance to Israel and remission of sins; And having
Satisfied Justice, and defeated the Devil, and being thus exalted He can bring
through, and land fate, such Sinners as betake themselves to Him; And these
two, to wit, A sufficient Price paid for the Debt of the Elect; And a
sufficient Prince and Savior able to save to the uttermost all that come unto
God through Him, and who is Exalted, and sits at God's Right Hand, to make
Intercession for us, as they are a solid Ground for Faith to rest on, so, a
strong Motive to press believing. 3. The great Faithfulness of God, that
Brightly Shines, and Wonderfully appears here, who, according to the Covenant,
sends His Son, and pursues the Quarrel against Him, and in so doing, keeps the
Promise made to Abraham; And the great Faithfulness of the Meadiator, in
coming and perform^ng all that He undertook for the Elect; Both of them are so
faithful in performing all that was Covenanted to the least io^a thereof, as
is eviden^, by what our Lord says, I have finish^d the work which thou gave
me to do; Seeing therefore there is such exact Faithfulness in Keeping, and
Fulfilling of all that passed in the Covenant of Redemption, and of all that
was Promised to the Fathers; And seeing the Mediator has said, that of all that
come unto him, he will cast out none, nor put them away, is there not here a
strong Motive to believing? Will not the Lord Jesus be as Faithful, in keeping
the Promise made to Comers unto Him, as the Father and He have been in
performing of what was Covenanted concerning their Redemption? The 4th. Is the
great Love of God, and of the Mediator, that eminently shined here, in their
willingness to make the Application; As He is Faithful, so is He willing to be
employed, and what greater evidence of Love would we have, then this, That Our
Lord Jesus has delighted so much in the Salvation of Sinners, that He laid
down His Life, and endured much more Soul travel for this very End? We beheld
(says John, Chap. 1.14) his glory, the glory as of the only begotten Son, of
the Fatherfull of grace and truth; In His Humiliation, He was G orious in both
these, Glorious in His Truth, making His Faithfulness to shine, in exact
keeping of what was Aggreed upon, and Promised: Glorious in His Grace to poor
Sinners, in making Application of His Purchase, Freely and Fully; yea, the more
that He was obscured by His Humiliation, the more did His Grace sh^ne forth;
how much more Glori^us will He be in these when He is now exalted. 3dly. If
these two persuade you not to believe on Him, To wit the Grounds that He has
given for bel^eving and the powerfully pressing Mo^ives to make Use of these
Grounds; consider the absolute necessity that ye lie under of making use of
these Grounds, without which ye will never be able to shift the Wrath of God;
Is there any that can give God a Recompense? The redemption of the Soul is
precious, and ceases for ever, as to you; Or, if any could have been able, Why
did the M^di^tor come thus low? And where should have been the Glory of Grace
and Truth, that has shined so Radiantly in His Sufferings? And therefore from
all these be ex^orted, to give Him the Credit of your S^lvation, by making Use
of His Righteousnes^, and by founding your Plea before God on His Sufferings as
ever ye would have your Souls saved; Otherwise ye can expect nothing, but to
fall under the Rigor of Justice, and to be made to satisfy for your own Debt,
to the uttermost farthing, and when will that be? Dar^ the most innocent
amongst you step in to satisfy Justice for themselves? if not, is there not a
necessity to make Use of His Sufferings for that End? Which He ha^h made
attainable, by His Tearing of the Vail of His own Flesh, that Sinners may step
in with humble boldness to the Holy of Holies; This is the End of all our
Preaching, and of your Hearing, which, when it is not simply Aimed at, and
Endeavored to be Reached, we are Useless in both.

And therefore, 2dly. May we not expostulat with you, that are hearers of this
Gospel, and yet continue Strangers to Christ, that can hear of His Sufferings,
and of His having been in an Agony for this very End, that Sinners might have a
warrant to their Faith, and yet have never to this very hour Actually fled unto
Him to find shelter? I know that many will not take with this, and therefore in
more close Application of this Use (seeing here lies the great Treasure of the
Gospel, which, if it be not, what can be improven to any purpose?) We shall
speak a Word to two Sorts. 1. To the Generality of Hearers, who are S^rangers
to the right Use-making of Christ's Righteousness; And though ye may think
this to be a hard Charge, and cannot well endure to be expostulated with as
Unbelievers, yet let me ask you. 1. Do ye think that all of you will go to
Heaven? If not, but that it is a Truth, that the most part of the Hearers of
the Gospel will Perish; Then, sure all are not Believers; for all Believers
will go to Heaven, and not one of them shall Perish, and though ye will not now
believe this, The Day is coming, when ye shall, if Grace prevent not, see and
find it; When Believers will be taken in with Christ, and others shut out; Many
of you may think that this Doctrine is needless, The more needless that many of
you think it to be, it is so much the more needful, and useful to be insisted
on with you. 2. If ye say ye have Faith, I ask you, whence came it, and how got
you it? I know, many of you will say, We believed always, since we had
understanding to know Good by Ill; yet, when ye are put to tell what it is, ye
know not how to answer, nor can ye give the least Satisfying Account of it; And
yet ye question not, but it will be well with you, and never once feared to go
to Hell; And is that Faith think ye? Alace no, It Is a plain Counterfit, and a
very Cheat: Others are ready to say, we believed not always, yet we believe
sometimes, to wit, when we do some Duties, and abstain from gross Evils; But
when Challenges come, for the Neglect of Duties, and for the Commission of
Sins, we want it, and have nothing of it; And when Death comes, such are forced
to say, we fear we have been beguiling our selves; Whence comes this? But even
from this Ground, that they would never suffer it to light, but they had Faith,
which yet will never be accounted to be Faith, because it has not Christ's
Righteousness for the Ground of it, and therefore, when any Challenge is
awakened it is a seeking, and quite gone; whereas True Faith will in some
measure stand it out against a Challenge, and will abide the T^yal of a
Challenge, on the account of Christ's Righteousness fled to. 3. We ask you this
Question, Are ye sure of your Faith? Ye will say, we hope so and believe so,
and this is all ye can say which in effect comes to this, we Groundlesly
presumed so; And it is observable, That if ye be put to a Second Question, What
ground have ye for your Faith? ye have none at all; If ye be asked, whether ye
be certain, that ye are Believers, ye will answer, no body is certain, God
knows that; Is not this strange? And has it not in it an utter inconsistancy?
That Men and Women should confidently assert, and maintain their Faith, and yet
when they are put to prove it, they will tell you, that they are uncertain, and
that none can be certain of it; Therefore, think it not strange, that we
expostulat with you, that ye have been so long hearing of Christ, and that yet
ye have little, or rather, no Faith at all in the Use-making of His
Righteousness: But to make this the more convincingly clear, We shall give you
four Characters, whereby True Faith may be tried, and known, which will serve
also to discover the Unsoundness of the Faith of many. 1. It may be tried by
the Ground that it leans upon; solid Faith has for the Ground of it Christ's
Righteousness, and Satisfaction, His Sufferings, the Price that He paid to
Justice for Sinners Debt; That He who knew no sin might become sin for us, As
it is 2 Cor. 5. ult. Ye that say ye hope to come to Heaven, and will assert
strongly, that ye believe, Try it, I beseech you by this, What is it that
warrands you to believe, or, whereon is your Faith founded? Is it Christ's
Righteousness that gives your Faith a Ground? ye will say, yes, And who do
otherwise? Are there any, but they expect Life through Christ? But deceive not
your selves; There are many that have some sort of respect to Christ, who do
not at all rightly respect His Sufferings; many will look upon Christ as a
Sovereign, and as one that can pardon them their Sins, and will pray to Him
for Pardon of them, who yet never seriously lay the weight of their obtaining
Pardon on His Death, but expect Pardon immediately, without an interveening
Satisfaction; Yea, they never look upon that as needful: Others again, look
only to Christ's ability to save, and will pray to Him as to an able Savior;
And here also by such; His Righteousness and Merit is shut out, as if it were
superfluous, and unnecessary: A third sort look to His mercy, and think that He
is very K^nd and Gracious, and that as one Man forgives another, so will He
forgive them; And do not Respect His Righteousness, nor found their Faith and
Expectation of Pardon upon Him, as upon one that has Satisfied Justice by the
travel of His Soul, that Pardon might come to them, who come to Him: But where
true Faith is, the Soul begins to look on it self, as arraigned bebefore the
Tribunal of Justice, and libelled as unable to pay its own Debt, Judges it
self, and has not only some piece of exercise to be fred from a Challenge
(which is all the Faith that many have) but has serious exercise, how to have
the Challenge answered, by betaking it self to Christ's Satisfaction; from these
Grounds that a Satisfaction is given, that this Satisfaction is made Offer of
in the Gospel, and that the Soul is content to make use of it, and thereupon it
draws the Conclusion anent Pardon: It has interveening betwixt the
Consideration of its Guilt, and its Application of Pardon, both the Covenant of
Redemption on Gods side, and the Covenant of Reconciliation on the Sinners
side, which the Soul does eye, as that which gives it warrant to lay hold on
Christ's Suffering; which the other who presums, does not; The Believing Soul
says, If this Satisfaction had not been, I could never have expected mercy. 2.
In the solid Faith of a Believer, there is, as an Use-making of Christ
Crucified allenarly, as the meritorious Cause of Justification and Life, So he
is exercised in this to be allenarly settled on Him as such; As for
presumptuous Souls, as they find it easy to believe, so they find it easy to
believe, and to rest on Him only; but as the true Believer has it for one
Piece of Exercise to Him, how to win to Christ, so it is a Second Piece of
Exercise to Him, to get Him rested on only, and to get Him as Crucified, made
the Ground of his Faith, As the Apostle insinuates, when He says, 1 Cor. 2.2.
I determined to know nothing among you, but Christ Jesus, and him crucified,
Where we have three Grounds of S^ving Faith, or Knowledge. 1. Jesus Christ. 2.
Him as Crucified. and 3. A determining to know no other thing, but Him to rest
upon for Life and Salvation; It Is in this Respect that the Apostle, Philip. 3.
Does count all things to be but loss and dung and cast, as it were, all over
board, that he may w^n Christ, and be found in Him: Many find it no difficult
business to rest on Christ only, and to keep out other things from being joined
with Him, and never once suspect themselves in this by any thing; But the
Believer, (as I just now said) has here an Exercise and Difficulty to get
Christ alone rested on, so that nothing else be in the least rested on; Because
he knows nothing else to be a sure Foundation, and because he knows that it is
natural to him to rest on other things beside Christ. 3. The true Believer is
taken up, not only to have a sure Ground to build on, but also to have his own
Gripping at, and Building on that Ground made sure; It Is his exercise to have
it out of question, that his Faith is true Faith, and not Presumption or
Guessing; To have the Grace of Faith Actually and Really taking hold of, or
apprehending Christ; Whereas another that presumes, and has only an Opinion,
or Conjecture in place of Faith; As he is in his own Opinion easily brought to
Christ, so he finds it easy to exercise believing on Him; he will, it may be,
grant, that he cannot Sanctify the Sabbath Day, and yet he can believe, as if
Believing, were less difficult then to Sanctify the Sabbath; So, many will
grant, that they cannot Pray, and therefore do decline Worshipping of God, in
their Families, who yet will confidently say that they can believe, and that
they do believe always, as if believing were less difficult, then to Pray for
a quarter, or half a quarter of an hour; But where solid Faith is, the exercise
of it is a difficult thing, and the Person that has it, has a holy Jealousy
of it; And the experience of many others, and of himself, sometime telling him,
that he may be mistaken, he is often trying it, and does not, nay, he dar not
trust much to it, and is put often with that Man spoken of, Mark 9. To cry, and
sometimes with tears, Lord I believe, help my unbelief; He dar not trust much
to his own Grip, and therefore has recourse to Christ to get it sickered, and
to have Him taking and keeping the Grip of his Grip, as it was with the
Apostle, Phil. 3.12.4. When Believers have betaken themselves to Christ, they
have a new Exercise, to know that it is so indeed; It Is not only an Exercise to
them how to Ground their Faith right, how to quite all other things, and to
betake themselves to Christ only, and to cast their burden on Him; But it is an
exercise to them to clear that it is Christ indeed, that they rest on, or to be
clear, that they have rested on Him: It Is no good token, when folk are soon
Sati^fi^d with their Believing, and never put it to the Try^l; And this is it
that m^kes many go on guessing, till they come to Death, which makes a devorce
betwixt them and their fancied Faith, and discovers it to be but a Delusion;
Whereas it is Believers Work, to try whether they have, and to know that they
have believed, which they win not soon to know; and the Reason is, because the
sense of Sin, the apprehension of Wrath, and their love to God, and to Christ
the Mediator, with their desire to enjoy Him, suffer them not to be quiet till
they be sicker: We may see all the Four together, Philip. 3.7, 8, 9, 10. Where
the Apostle speaking of his case, when he was a converted Christian, in
opposition to what it was when he was a Pharisee, and thought himself to be
very well, and a strong Believer, says, What things were gain to me, I
counted loss for Christ, yea, doubtless I count all things to be but loss for
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have
suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but d^ng that I may win
Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, etc. The o^j^ct
he would be at, is Christ, The manner how, is, Not having mine own
righteousness, The me^n through which, is, Faith in Him; This is it that brings
him to Union with Him; And then he would know experimental^y, that he does know
Him savingly, as a Believer in Him, By finding the power of his resurrection by
having fellowship in his sufferings, And by being made comformable unto his
death Whereby he would prove, and make out, to his own Quieting and
Consolation, that he is indeed a Believer: The B^liever is never right till he
be in Christ, and its his Exercise to be quit rid of all other things, and to
rest upon him alone; neither does he rest here, but he must be clear, that he
is in Him, and that he has fellowship in His Sufferings and Conformity to His
Death: This we would recommend to you as your main study, as ever ye would
comfortab y evidence to your selves, your believing in Him.

SERMON XLVI.
ISAIAH LIII.XI. Verse. 11. He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall
be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; for he
shall bear their iniquities.


THE Bargain of Redemption is a great Bargain, and we may say, that it is a
good Bargain, wherein the greatest things that ever were imagined are
transacted; The sum whereof is in these two. 1. What shall be the Satisfaction,
that must be given to the infinite Justice of God, or what shall be the amends
that must be made to God for the Satisfying of His Justice, for the Sins of all
the Elect? and that is compended in these Words, The travel of Christ's soul,
That is the condition, or these a^e the Terms, on which only the Lord Jehovah
will Tryst, (to speak so) and He will Tryst on no other Terms. 2. What shall be
the Satisfaction that the Mediator shall have for all His Sufferings, and
Soul-travel? And this is summed up in these Words, He shall see of the travel
of his soul, and shall be satisfied, Upon which two stands the Covenant of
Redemption; And hence it is, That all things relating to the Salvation of the
Elect, are to sicker and fi^m, that there is no possibility of the misgiving,
or failing of whatever is here trans^cted upon.

We have spoken somewhat of the Price, which the Son, the Mediator was to give,
and of the Soul-travel which He underwent in the paying of it: We shall now
speak of the Words as they hold out the Promises made to the Mediator, and it is
two fold. 1. He shall see of the travel of his soul, Which Words being an
Explication of the former, and looking also to these which follow, there is a
Word to be supplied, which will ^^k in both, and it is fruit, He shall see the
f^uit of the travel of his soul, That is, He cannot but have a Seed, and a
numerous offspring, because of His Soul-travel, in bringing them Forth; and so
the Promise in this respect shows the certainty of the eff ct, that is, that He
shall most certainly bring forth in H s traveling. The 2. Promise is, That He
shall see the Fruit of His Soul-travel; or His Seed; It Is much to have a Seed,
but it is more to see it; it is not only this. That Christ shall have a numerous
Is^ue, but that He shall Outlive Death, to see and over-see, and be a a Tu^or
to them, though by His Death He Purchase Life to them.

We shall from the first Promise take two Observations, The 1. is this, That
our Lord Jesus, by His Suffering and Soul travel, shall c^rtainly attain the
Fruit He aims at in it; His Death and Sufferings shall not be Fruitless, but
shall certainly have the intended Fruit; Whatever we take the Fruit to be,
whether we take it our of the former Words, it is a Seed that he shall see, or
have; Or whether we take it out of the following Words, It Is the Justifying of
many; Both these come to the same thing, and it shall certainly come to pass,
and be made effectual in the Up-shot of it; As the Lord Himself says, John
12.24. Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abides alone,
but if it die, it brings forth much fru^t, Where He compares His own Death,
to the sowing of Seed, which, when sown does rot? and then springs up, and has
Fruit, so (as if He had s id) my Death shall be a Seed, or Seed-time, whereon
abundant Fruit shall follow for the Good and Salvation of many: This Doctrine
supposes, 1. That our Lord Jesus had a respect in the laying down of His Life,
to the Salvation of H^s own Elect People, or thus, that our Lord Jesus, in the
laying down of His Life, had a design and purpose to save the Elect; as often
He says, I lay down my life for my sheep; And here, they are called a Seed,
and Fruit, and such as are Justified in due time. 2. That this purpose should
by His Sufferings be certainly made effectual; this being the Fathers Promise
to Him, He shall see His seed, or the travel of his soul, and shall be
satisfied. It cannot be frustrated; And we may further confirm it from these
Grounds. 1 Because it is a Covenanted, and Transacted business betwixt the
Father and the Son, and is here Promised; If therefore there cannot be a
failling of the Transaction and Bargain it must certainly have the full effect.
2 Because the Mediator has faithfully ^ulfilled His part of the Covenant; And
if He ha^h been so faithful on His side; Then Jehovah on the other side of the
Covenant, who has in it promised Satisfaction to Him, for the travel of His
Soul, cannot but perform His part also; The Mediator performed His Part, even
till it come to these sweet Words uttered by Him on the Cross, It is finished;
And therefore as I said, the other part, That he shall see the fruit of his
Soul-travel, must also be performed. 3. It Is also clear from the End and
Design of the Covenant of Redemption, betwixt the Father and the Son, and of
Christ's laying down His Life, which was to bring about Life unto, and to make
it forthcoming for all them that the Father had given Him, and to, and for no
more, nor to, and for no fewer; Therefore He says, All that the Father has
given me shall come unto me, And, I give them eternal life, and will raise them
up at the last day; Now, this being the End of the Covenant, and of Christ's
Death, and the mean whereby the Glory of Grace is manifested, that Life might
not only be Purchased to the Elect, but also actually conferred on them,
according to the Fathers and the Mediators design in the Covenant; Christ
Jesus cannot but have the Promise made good unto Him, there being an
engadgement of, and on the Godhead (to speak after the manner of Men) as to
the Reality, Certainty and Success of the performance, and for making out this
Promise to the Mediator.

The 1. Use Serves for Instructing and Clearing of us, in several things
contraverted by unsound men; For, if this be a Truth, That our Lords Sufferings
and Soul-travel cannot but have Fruit, and the Fruit that He aimed at therein,
then, 1. There is a definit particular, and certain number Elected, to partake
of the Benefit of Christ's Sufferings; because there is only such a particular
number that is given to Christ, to be Redeemed by Him, and that do actually
partake of the Benefit of His Sufferings, which cannot fail. 2. That Christ's
Sufferings are not intended as a Price and Satisfaction for the Sins of all and
every one; for so He should not see the Fruit of the Travel of His Soul, but
should in a great part miss and loss it, if He had intended, that the Travel of
His Soul should have been undergone for Judas, as well as for Peter. 3. There
is here a Ground, for the Certainty, and Efficacy of the Grace of God in
converting Elect Sinners, for Christ Jesus cannot loss these who are committed
to Him to be Redeemed, more then He can loss the Fruit of His Suffering, then
sure Faith is not left pendelous on Man's Free Will, but is put out of question,
as to all His own, through His undertaking, As He says, That no man can come
to me, except the Father draw him, so He says, These that are given me, shall
and must come to me; There is a Put, or Powerful Draught of the Spirit of God,
which is nothing else, but the efficacy of His Grace, by which this is made
infrustrably sure, and not left contingent. 4. See here the Truth of the
Perseverence of Elect, and Regenerat Saints, who are appointed to be the Fruit
of His Soul-travel, and a Satisfaction to Him for the same; For, if they should
fail, and not persevere to the End, The Promise here made to the Mediator
should be cast loose, and not be necessarily performed, and fulfilled. 5. See
here how the Salvation of Elect Sinners depends on the ingadgement betwixt God
and the M^diator; Their Redemption depends on H^s paying of the Price, and
their attaining the benefit of it depends on God's ingadgement to the Mediator;
Therefore we are said, 1 Pet. 1. To be kept by the power of God through faith
unto salvation: It serves withal to clear the Soveraignity of God, and the
Freeness of His Grace, when Sinners cannot pretend to have any hand in the
Work, to mar the Beauty and Efficacy of Grace that shine therein.

Use 2. There is here, 1. something for the encouragement of such as would fain
believe in Christ. And 2. Somewhat for Comfort to, and for Confirmation of
them, who have betaken themselves by Faith to Christ. 3. It serves withal, to
encourage them, who would be at believing, and find difficulty in the way,
while they are breathing after Him: It Is certainly promised, that He shall have
a seed, and shall see of the fruit of the travel of his soul, such therefore
may expect, that they shall come speed, who would fain be at that which is the
fulfilling of Gods ingadgement to the Mediator; for it was Transacted in the
Covenant of Redemption, that His Suffering should be for the good of Elect
Sinners, and that the Father should make Application of His Purchase made
thereby to them; I say, 2dly. It serves to Comfort, Encourage and Confirm such
as are fled to Christ, and find their own difficulty, how to win through, for
they have a good Cautioner to make out their Faith, and what concerns their
Salvation; Gods Promise to the Mediator shall not be for naught, nor in vain,
but shall have it is accomplishment; if poor sinners were le^t to their own
guiding, the bargain should never take effect, nor be made out; but it may
encourage, and comfort the poor Believer, though it should also humble him,
that the business is put in another and better hand then his own; This has
strengthened the wavering hearts of many Believers before, that both sides of
the Covenant, as to their forthcoming, and performance, depend on the Father,
and on the Mediator; the Mediator undertaking the payment of their Debt, and
the Lord Jehovah undertaking to draw them in to the Mediator, and by His Power
to bear them through, till they get all that the Mediator has Purchased for
them, conferred on them.

2dly, Observe, That all the benefits and advantages that any have ever gotten,
or shall get, that lead to Life Eternal, and which concur to promove the Work
of their Salvation, are the Fruits of Christ's Purch^se, by His Soul travel; is
a Sinner brought to B^lieve? I 's a Fruit of His Suffering; i^ a Si^ne^
Glorified? It Is the Fruit of the same; And therefore, when in the one wo^d it
is said, He shall see his seed, It Is said in the next word, He shall see of the
fruit of the travel of his soul; To show, that a Souls ingadging to Christ by
Faith, whereb^ the Person becomes one of His Seed, flows from His Suffering,
and is a F^u^t of the Travel of His Soul, As it is, 2 Cor. 5. ult. He was made
sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God
through him, or in Him; Where our righ^eousness, and what conduces to our
Ju^^ification, is derived from His being made Sin or a Sin-off^ring for us; And
Gal. 3.13. It' said, that Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law,
being made a curse for us, that the blessing of Abraham might come on us
gentiles; Whatever is comprehended under that B^essing as taking in both the l
nd and Me^ns by which we come by it, flows from His being a curse for us, and
from His being brought under sad Suffering, and sore Soul-travel for us: In
this Doctrine, ye would consider something for clearing of it, or rather take
the Doctrine it self several ways, and it will help to clear it elf. 1. Then,
when we speak of the Fruit of Ch ists Sufferings, we mean, not only that our
Justification, the Pardon of ou^ Sins, and our entry into He^ven, are Fru^ts of
it; But that our Believing, Repen^ance, Hol^ness, and every thing that leads
thereunto, are Fruits of it also; Therefore it is promised to Christ Psalm.
110.3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power: And that these that
are given to Christ shall come, is a Promise ^s well as it is a Promise, that
these that come shall be Justified, and the one fo^lows upon Christ's Engaging,
and performing of the Engagement as well as the other. 2. If we take the
Doctrine thus, That there is nothing tha^ a Sinner gets that leads to Life and
Salv^tion, but it is a F^uit of Christ's Purchase; We get neither Repentance,
nor Faith, nor Holiness, nor any other such thing, but on the account of
Christ's Satisfaction. Or 3dly. Take it thus, Whatever is needful for
completing of them that are Ch^ists Seed, whom He has Purchased, whatever
they want, or stand in need of, whether Righteousness, Holiness, Repentance,
Faith, H^pe, etc. All are purchased by Him, and are the Fruits of His Death,
and Sou^-travel; This rises clearly from the Words, He shall see of the fruit
of the travel of his soul, That is He shall see Sinners believing on Him, and
repenting for sin, as well as H^ shall see them Glorified: which will be clear,
if we consider these two Reasons. 1. The nature of the Covenant, wherein all
the Promises concerning Sinners Salvation are comprehended; there being but one
Covenant of Redemption, and that being a Promise of this Covenant, to
circumcise the heart to love God, and to writ his law in it, as well as to
pardon Sin; and all the Promises of the Covenant depending on Christ's
S^ipulation, and these things in the Promises flowing from the Covenant betwixt
God and the Mediator, Sinners can have no Right to any thing that is Promised,
but by a. Covenant, neither can they have any access to them, but through
Christ's Suffering 2. It Is clear from the End of the Covenant that whatever
Sinners have need of, they must be in Christ's common for it; now, if we had
Faith, or Repentance, or any other Grace from our selves, or on our own
account, we should not be in His Debt, and Common for all that we need, as
indeed we are, according to that, 1 Cor. 30, 31. He is made of God unto us,
wisdom, to be our Guide, and Teacher, righteousness, to be our Justifier, and
the meritorious Cause of it, sanctification, To be the Worker and the Procurer
of it; and in a Word, complete Redemption; and this is subjoyned as the Reason
of all, That he that glories, or rejoices, may glory, or rejoice in the Lord;
that is, Whether there be a looking to Faith, or Repentance, or any other
Grace, there may be no cause to be Vain or Proud of it, but that knowing these
to be from Christ, and Fruits of His Purchase, all the praise of them may be to
Him alone.

The Use of this is large, it speaks something more generally to them that are
Strangers to Christ, and who think that they would be at Him; and something to
them that are in Him; and something to both: And the 1. thing that it speaks is
this (which we have often heard of, but cannot hear of it too often,) Even the
great and glad Tidings, and very good News, which we have to speak of through
Jesus Christ, That Redemption is Purchased by Him to poor Sinners, and that
through Him there is access to Life, and Peace, and Reconciliation with God,
from which through Sin we had fallen, and run our selves, under a Forefaulture
of, and from which we had been barred up Eternally except He had Suffered;
There was a will of Separation, and Partition standing betwixt God and us,
which by His Sufferings was demolished and broken down, and thereby a door of
access to God struck up, even through the vail of his flesh; These should be
refreshing and fresh News to us every day, as indeed they would be, if we
rightly knew, and believed the benefit of God's Friendship, and what were our
hazard, in lying still in nature, and what was the Price that Christ laid down
to Purchase for Sinners Friendship with God, and delivery from His Curse; that
it behoved to cost Him sore Soul-travel, ere any special Grace could be
bestowed on Sinners; and that this same Gospel that is Preached to you, is a
Fruit of the Travel of His Soul; and that in making the Covenant of Redemption,
this same was a part of the Indenture (to speak so) That these good News might
be Published in this same place, and these glad Tidings spoken of among you:
And therefore 2. Put a greater Price on the Means that may further your
Salvation; on Repentance, Faith, Holiness, Peace with God, etc. For they are
the Fruits of a very dear Purchase, and the Results of a great and sore
Conflict, which the Mediator had with the Justice of God, ere there could be
access for a Sinner to any of them; There was not so much paid to get the
World Created, as was paid to buy Faith, Repentance, Access to God, and an
Entry to Heaven, to Runaway Sinners: Nothing was paid for the one, but a
mighty great Price for the other: And therefore, 3. We would expostulat with
many of you, How it comes to pass, that ye think so little of these things
that Christ has Purchased, that ye think so little of Faith in Him; and that
so many of you take a counterfit for it; try not if you have it; trouble not
your selves though ye want it; and that other things of little value are much
esteemed of, and over-valued by you. Is there any thing comparable to that,
which Christ has put such a Price on, that He gave His own Life for it, and
that God has put such a Price on, that He promised it to Christ, as a part of
the Satisfaction for the Travel of His Soul? And yet its lightly valued by
many, yea, by most Men and Women; The day will come, when ye will think Faith
to be of more value, and will think the Pardon of Sin, and an interest in
Christ's Blood, to be valuable above the whole World, though ye had it, when ye
shall be brought to reckon with God for the slighting thereof. And therefore
4ly. Seeing this is a Truth, that every thing that leads to Life Eternal, is a
Fruit of Christ's Purchase, take the right way to attain it; The exhortation
implies these two, 1. That ye make a right choice of, and put a just value on
these things, that ye should choose and value. 2. That ye take the right way
for attaining of these things. 1. Then, Would ye know what is to be valued and
chosen? It Is certainly these things, that God and the Mediator esteem of, and
that the Congregation of the Firstborn esteem of; The things that Christ has
Purchased, and which are the Fruits of the Travel of His Soul, are most
excellent; and therefore, Mind, Study, and Seek after these things, that may
lead your Souls in to Life Eternal; seek after Faith, and Repentance, to have
your peace made with God, to have the heart purified, to be of a meek and quiet
Spirit, Which in the sight of God are of great price, as the Apostle Peter
speaks; to have Pardon of Sin, and Holiness, for adorning the Gospel of God,
and to have Glory, that ye may see God and enjoy Him; these things are the best
things, this is undoubtedly the better part which will never be taken from
them; Whose choice through Grace it is; God will give great Estates, Countries
and Kingdoms in the World, to Men, to whom He will not give so much Faith as is
like a grain of mustard seed, nor a dram of true Holiness; because He thinks
much less of the one then of the other, and because the one is not so like God,
nor will it have such abiding Fruit as the other.

2dly. What way may folk win to make this choice, and to attain these best and
most valuable things? no other way, but that which this Doctrine holds out; If
all things that lead to Life and Salvation be Fruits of Christ's Purchase, then
sure it is by virtue of Christ's Purchase alone, that ye must come by them,
Pardon of Sin comes by the Blood of Sprinkling, Peace with God, Grace and more
Grace, the exercise of Grace, and growth in Holiness, Faith in all its
exercises and advances, and every other Grace, come by His Sufferings, as also
does Glory; because He has purchased these Graces of the Spirit, as well as
Pardon of Sin, and Heaven: often Christ is misken^, and passed by here; many
think that they shall obtain Pardon of Sin, and go to Heaven without Him;
others, though they will not own that, yet fail in the second, and would make
use of Him for Pardon of Sin, and for paying of their Debt, if they could
Repent and Believe in Him; but till they find these in themselves, they scar to
come unto Him whereas the Sinner that is convinced of Sin and of His hazard,
would lay down this as the first step of his way in coming to Christ, any
Repentance and Believing, and the making of the heart willing to close with,
and to cleave to Him, is the Fruit of Christ's Purchase, and I must be in His
Common for it, for there is no other possible way to get it; The first airth
(to speak so) that a wakened and sensible Sinner should look unto, for Pardon
and Peace, for Repentance, Faith, and all things, would be to Christ, and His
Sufferings, whence all these come; Sinners at first are disposed to take too
far a look, and so mistake in the order of things, Therefore, when the sense of
Sin pinches them, and they set about to believe, and find that their hearts are
very averse from believing, and can hardly be brought to it, then they are
fainted, when they consider, and find that, if it stood but on this, even to
consent to take Christ, they cannot do it, but then, and in that case, the Lord
minds, that they should be much in His Common for Faith, and Repentance, and
for a soft and tender Heart, and that they should seek these from Him, as well
as Pardon of Sin, considering, that all this is Christ's Purchase; and that
there is a possibility to win to it this way, when they can win to it no other
way; If ye would take this way, even to eye and look to Christ as the Author,
and Finisher of Faith, and be in His Common for it, through His Grace it should
go better with you; This is it which the Apostle has, Heb. 12. Where he calls
to Lay aside every weight, and the sin that easily besets, and to run the race
with patience that is set before us; and if it should be said, how shall that
be done, even by Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of ou^ faith; And
then follows, who, for the joy that was set before him endured the cross, and
^ispis^d the shame; Thus leading Folk into His Suff^rings, as the solid
Foundation of th ir Faith.

Use 2. See here ground for quashing the natural pride that is amongst M^n an^
Women as to Spiritual things; How so? Where is the ground for this, here it is,
because all is Christ's Purchase; Which may also give a check to these, who,
because they have nothing in themselves, think not that they shall come speed
upon this ground; as i^ does to these others, who have gotten something, and
are proud of it: To clear it a little, we would consider, that there is a pride
in Folks, ere they come to Christ, they cannot well endure to be in Christ's
Debt for every thing; They will take Pardon of Sin from Him, but they would
have Faith and Repentance of themselves, as some Money in their Purse to bring
with them to Him, that they may buy it; But, where will you, I pray, get Faith,
or Repentance, if not from Him? Are they not Hi^ Gifts, and Fruits of H s
Purchase? which, if it were well considered, there would be no access to the
proud reasonings of U^belief; D^t ye say, but these things are the Fruits of
Christ's Sufferings, and His Gifts? and if so, must ye not be in His Common for
them? And as it silenceth the Reasonings of Unbelief, so it stops the mouth of
the Sinner, and humb^es him much more, then if he had these things in or from
himself, and were only to be in His Common for Righteousness and J^stification.
2. We would consider, That there is often some Pride, and Conceit in them that
have Faith, disposing them to think themselves to be better then other Folks;
But, if ye have Faith, whence is it? or who has made you to differ? Is it not
a Fruit of Christ's Purchase? and will ye be Vain, or Conceity of that which is
the Purchase of another? This is a Spiritual poor Pride, that stinks in the
Nostrils of the Holy Lord, so to abuse His goodness, as to be proud, because He
has Bought and Bestowed that which ye could never have procured, nor attained
your selves; If then Folk have nothing, it is good to mind this, That Christ
has purchased, what Sinners stand in need of, and that it may be had in and
from Him; And if Fo^k have any thing, they should not be proud or conceity of
it, but mind that what they have, is a Fruit of Christ's Purchase, and that
therefore there is no ground to be proud of it.

The 3. Use Serves to show, what great Obligation lies on S nners, that get any
special good from God, I 's Christ that has purchased a^l and therefore they
ought to improve all that they have gotten for Him who has bought all; As it
is 1 Cor. 6.20. Ye are not your own, ye are bought with a price, therefore
glorify God in your bodies, and in your spirits which are Gods; Whatever ye
have of Faith, o^ Repentance of Holiness, or of ability to serve and honor God
in your Station, it is bought with a Price, and a dear Price and therefore
Glorify God in the right Use-making, and manadging of it: We would think it no
little Progress and Advancement in R ligion, if ye were brought to walk under
the suitable impression o^ your engagement to Christ, as holding all that ye
have, and that serves for your through-bearing of Him; For, what do we, or can
we do? It Is Christ that buys all, and that confers all; we can do nothing of
our selves but abuse His Purchase, And were it not, that the sickerness and
sta^i^ity of our Covenanting depends on the first Covenant, even the Covenant
of Redemption, transacted betwixt these two Responsal Parties, Jehovah, and the
Mediator, we would quit mar, and break all the Bargain betwixt God and us, and
cast all loose every day, if not every moment.

The other Promise is, that He shall see his seed, and as we hinted before,
It Is one thing to have a seed another thing to see a seed; The former Promise
looks to His having of a Seed, and this to His seeing of that Seed; Whence
Observe, That not only is there a Seed Promised to Christ, but also the Seeing
of a Seed, not only Fruits, but the Improving and Manadging of these Fruits; Or
thus, That not only is there a Seed P^omised to Christ, but the overseeing of
that Seed is also Promised; He shall have no other Tutor (to speak so) to leave
His Children to but Himself; He shall Die, and shall by His Death beget a Seed,
and yet by His Death He shall become the overseer of that same Seed, that by
His Death is begotten: There is much of the Dignity of Chri^^'s Office, and of
the comfort of Believers here, That Jesus Christ is not only the procurer of
our Life, but the overseer of i^; Hence is that Conclusion of the Apostle, Heb.
7.25. Wherefore he is able to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by
him, forasmuch as he lives for ever to make intercession for them; He has not
only Purchased Life, and many good things to Believers, but He is living to
make the Application of His P^rchase to them; And therefore is able to save to
the uttermost, all that come unto God by Him: Indeed, if He had been prevailed
over by Death, there might have been great hazard and Doubt, if not utter
Despair of ^ver attaining His Purchase, and a great crack (to say so) or breach
in our Consolation, but when He is Executor of His own Testament, and b^ His
Spirit makes the Application, what is, or can be wanting? We shall say no more,
but that here it is clear, that we have a living Mediator as Himself says,
Revel. 1.18. I was dead, and am alive, and live for evermore; And therefore
Sinners stepforward to His Sufferings, and seek the Application of His
Purcha^e, since He lives to make it, it will, no doubt, be great ground of
Challenge against you, who slight His Sufferin s, and keep at a distance from
Him, since He is alive and since, what is much accounted of by Him, even the
Fruit of His Sufferings, is by you set at naught who Neglect, R^fuse, or
Despise Him, and the ^en^fi^ of His Sufferings; O! what an aggr^v^tion of your
Guilt will this be? when He is looking on, to s^e what comes of the Fruit of
His Sufferings, and Soul-travel; To be found thus to sl^ght, and in a manner to
affront Him? He knows and takes notice of the breathings of Faith, where they
are; and is well pleased with them, and with the least mintings at it; He knows
also, who despise Him, and refuse to believe in H m, and has all put on
record. God give us wisdom, to make the right chose.

SERMON XLVII.
ISAIAH LIII. XI. Verse 11. He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall
be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many: for he
shall bear their i^iquities.


AS it is a most wonderful Work that Our Lord Jesus has in hand, and a mighty
great Bargain, that cost Him the Travel of His Soul; So it may be thought, that
it must be a very great Price that Our Lord Jesus has to expect, as His
Satisfaction for all that sore Labor and Travel; This is it that the Text
holds forth, He shall see of the fruit of the travel of his soul; Which in Sum
is this, He shall see poor Sinners getting good of Him, Justified by His Grace,
and admitted to friendship with God, and that to His Satisfaction, as the Words
following clear, He shall be satisfied, to wit, as to that Fruit, and shall
acquiesce in it, as His Satisfaction for all the Travel of His Soul.

We told you, that there were three things in these Words, 1. The Price that is
called for from the Mediator, in performing the Work of Redemption, and making
Reconciliation betwixt God and Sinners, to wit, The travel of his soul, The sad
and sorely pinching Straits, and Pressures that He was put to, and brought
under, not only in His Body, but also in His Soul. 2. The Promise made to Him
upon His undertaking, and paying of the Price, He shall see of the travel of
his soul, That is, the Fruits and Effects of His Soul travel; It shall not be
for naught, but shall certainly have Fruit, He shall have a numerous Seed and
Issue. 3. There is here holden forth the Mediators acquiescence in the Bargain
so proposed, That He undertaking the Condition of laying down His Life, on
these same Terms, that He shall see a Seed, He requires no other Satisfaction,
and therefore He accepts of it, and acquiesces in it, as the Result of this
Design, and shall be satisfied.

Having spoken of the former Two, We come now to speak of the Third, And we may
consider it, in these three Respects. 1. As it looks to Christ's Design, Who
is like to one that is running a Race, and has the Prize before him, and in
his eye; and this is employed here, That He has something before Him, in laying
down of His Life, which He shall not miss, but shall reach and be Satisfied in
it; so many are given Him, for whom He enters Cautioner, on Condition, that His
Righteousness shall be made furthcoming to them, and that none of them shall be
without, or want it. 2. As it looks both to the number, and certainty of the
Effects, and Fruits in respect of them that are given to Him; He shall be
satisfied, He shall have, though not all Men and Women, yet a sufficient
number, even as many as shall satisfy and content Him, And whatever was
intended by Him, in the laying down of His Life, He shall want nothing of it,
but shall be satisfied in it; and thus the Words are to be Actively understood,
to wit, of Gods Actual performing of that which shall be Satisfying to the
Mediator. 3. It may be looked on as the Effect and Consequent following upon
the former Promise; and so it is to be understood Passively for the delight
that He takes in the Fruit of His Sufferings, and in the seeing of Sinners
getting the good of them; and the so meaning is, That He shall be fully
contented, and thoroughly well Satisfied with, yea, even delighted, and (to
speak so) comforted in this, for all the Travel of His Soul, when many shall be
brought to believe in Him, and to get good of Him.

To clear it further, We may take the Words as alluding to several Similitudes,
As, 1. To that of hungry and thirsty Persons, who are said to be satisfied,
when their hunger and thirst are removed, by meat and drink; which implies,
That Jesus Christ in His pursuing and performing the Work of Redemption, had a
Holy Hunger and Thirst, and this His Hunger and Thirst Is Satisfied in their
Salvation, and what leads to it; As Himself says. John 4.32. (Where He makes
use of this same Similitude) I have meat to eat that ye know not of. 2. It may
allude to a Man's taking pains in planting of an Vineyard, or Orchard, to whom
it is a Satisfaction when all the Trees grow, thrive well, and bear Fruit; and
so the meaning is, That Our Lord Jesus shall be at vast Expense, and great
Labor and Pains, in making Sinners to become Trees of righteousness, but that
all these for whom He Suffered, and was at all this Expense and Pain shall hold
so well, and be so Fruitful at length, that He shall be fully Satisfied in
them, and think all well bestowed; Or, 3. We may take it in allusion to a Woman
in Travel, who is said, John 16.21. To have sorrow, while her pains are upon
her, but so soon as she is delivered, she no more remembers her sorrow, for joy
that a man child is born; And this Similitude is here especially alluded unto,
therefore Our Lords Sufferings are called Travel, because of the Pains that He
was put unto in them, and because the End of them was to bring forth Children,
before called His seed; As if the Prophet had said, Our Lord Jesus shall be put
to great Sorrow in Suffering, but He shall bring forth; And as a Woman has Joy
in the Man-child brought forth, so shall He have more comfort and delight in
the bringing forth of Believers, then He had sorrow in the procuring of Life to
them, though that was very great.

From the Words thus considered and explained, take these two Observations, 1.
That Our Lord Jesus is exceedingly delighted, satisfied, and well-pleased with
poor Sinners, making use, and getting good of His Sufferings; It Is a thing most
Satisfying, and Well-pleasing to Him. 2. That seeing Our Lord Jesus is so
well-pleased with Sinners making use of Him, there is all equity and reason for
it, that He should have this Satisfaction; and this follows not only on the
former, but clearly rises from the Words; For this Satisfaction is allowed Him
for His Soul-travel; and as it is Just, that they that Labor should partake of
their Labor, and that the Hirling should have his hire, so, it is not only
Satisfying to Christ, that Sinners get good of Him, but it is Just, He having
Purchased it at so dear a Rate.

For the First of these, That Our Lord Jesus is exceedingly delighted and
satisfied with Sinners making use, and getting good of Him; If there were no
other Scripture to confirm it, this same is sufficicient; Would ye then know
what Christ aims at in His Sufferings, what will content and satisfy Him, as a
Recompense for all His Soul-travel? It Is even this, To see the of fruit of the
travel of his soul, To have Sinners getting good of Him, and saved by Him, and
there is nothing but this that will Satisfye Him; It were a great matter to
have the Faith of this Settled, and Rooted in our Hearts; if we could rightly
take up what He has Suffered, how low He has condescended to come, even to be
a Man, and a Man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, To be reproached and
mocked, to take on Him the Curse, and to be in Pain and Soul-travel; And then
if we could rightly take up what He aimed at, and designed in all this, and
what He accounted to be a recompense to Him for it all; even this, That when
His Gospel is Preached, such and such poor Sinners under hazard of Wrath and
Challenges for Sin, should, through closing with Him, be brought to answer all
their Challenges by this; Our Lord Jesus has satisfied Justice for Sinners;
and when poor Sinners are under the sense of a hard heart, that they should
cast their Eye on the same ground for a remedy of that Spiritual Malady, and
Plague, even His Sufferings, which have purchased the mollifying of the heart,
as well as Justification, and Pardon of Sin; And when a Sinner is disconsolat,
and dejected, because of Sin, and Divine Displeasure that He should be Cheered
and Comforted in His Sufferings; This, even this is refreshing, and is
delightsome to Him: We say, it were much to get this thoroughly believed; That
Sinners are not half so fain to come in under His Sufferings for shelter and
refreshing, as Our Lord Jesus is, (to speak with reverence) to see them
Sheltered, Refreshed, and Thriving; The very mentioning of this ought to be as
marrow to the bones.

But for further clearing of it, we would speak a Word. 1. To what this Delight,
and Satisfaction is, 2. To some grounds to confirm the truth of it, that Our
Lord Jesus is indeed delighted to see poor Sinners coming to Him, and getting
good of Him

For the First, of these, We did, when we was speaking of these Words, v. 10.
The pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand, Show, how it was a
delightsome thing to Jehovah; And now speaking of it from this 11. v. in
reference to the Mediator, we shall take it up in these particulars. 1. There
is in Our Lord Jesus, not only a delight in Sinners getting good of Him, as it
is a thing He calls for, and is agreeable to His revealed will, and as being
required of them as their Duty, in which respect it is acceptable to God, and
cannot but be acceptable and well-pleasing to Him; neither, 2. Is this delight
only in respect of the End of His Sufferings, which were undergone to make a
way for, and to strick open a Door to the Throne of Grace, through the Vail
which is His Flesh; that poor Sinners might come to a Fountain and wash, and
have access to God through Him; Which being the End He had before Him in His
Death, cannot but be acceptable to God, because it was His End in the giving of
His Son to Die; and so it is delightsome to the Mediator; but also 3dly. It is
so in these two respects further; Sinners coming to Him, resting on Him, and
getting good of Him, is His delight. 1. In respect of the Honor that is done
unto Him; when a Sinner believes on Him, He counts it the putting of the Crown
on His Head, As it is Cant. 3 11. see also to this purpose, John 5.23, 24. And
though there could have been a possibility of honoring of God before, yet
there is no Honoring of the Mediator, till Folk make use of His Sufferings by
Faith; And it is on this ground that Christ complains when He is not made use
of; and therefore, when Sinners give Him credit, by committing the saving of
their Souls to Him, and by making use of His Offices for that End, and for His
performing in them that wherefore they were appointed, it cannot but be
acceptable and well-pleasing to Him. 2. In respect of that Sympathy that Our
Lord Jesus has with His own Members; For though the Mediator be now glorified
in H aven, yet He has a hum^ne Heart, and affection still, though
inconceivably glorious, and so a kindly Sympathy with them, and is some way
affected with both their good and their ill; And considering Him thus, He has
a delight in the good and welfare of His People, and their being delighted
in, and satisfied with Him, proves a Delight and Satisfaction to Him.

For the next thing, to wit, the clearing and confirming of it; It might be
cleared and confirmed from many Grounds, but we shall only touch on some, that
may make it out most convincingly, that it is most delightsome to Jesus Christ,
to see Sinners making use of Him, and getting good of His Sufferings; And this
His Delight may be drawn from Eternity, and carried on to Eternity, 1. In the
making of the Covenant of Redemption, it was delightsome to Him to enter in it,
As is clear Psalm. 40. I delight to do thy will, O my God; The Bargain was no
sooner proposed (if we may speak so to that which is Eternal) But heartily it
was closed with by Him; And this is confirmed, Prove 8.32. Where the Substantial
Wisdom of the Father is brought in, saying, Then I was by him as one brought up
with him, and I was daily his delight, rejoicing in the habitable parts of his
earth, and my delights were with the Sons ^f men; Our Lord Jesus, before the
World began, was delighted in the forethought that such a thing was a coming,
that in such and such parts of the World, such and such poor Sinners should be
called by His Grace, and get the good of His Suffufferings; As a Man in a long
Journey, or Voyage, may be delighted in the Forefight of the End of it, before
He come at it. 2. Look foreward to H^s ^xecuting of His Office of Mediator, an^
to His going about the work of R^demp^^on, and we will find that He does it
with delight, Therefore, John 4. When H^ is sitting on the Well side, and is
weary with H^s Journey, and has neither to eat nor to drink, He falls a
Preaching ^o a poor sinful Woman, and when the Disciples would fain have
refreshed Him with that which they had bought, He says to them, I have meat to
eat that ye know not of, And when they begin to wonder what that could be, He
says further to them, It is my meat to do my Fathers will, and to finish his
work, And what was that, a poor whotish Woman is spoken to, by Him, and brought
by His speaking to acknowledge Him to be the Messiah, and to accept of Him as
such; And by that blessed Work, His Hunger and Thirst were Satisfied: So Luke
22.15. He says to His Disciples, with desire have I desired to eat this
passover with you, before I suffer: And Luke 12.50. I have a baptism to be
baptized with, and how am I straightened till it be accomplished? Though he
drinking of that Cup was terrible to Him, and though mockings and reproaches
were not pleasant in themselves, yet the love that He had to Sinners good,
mastered all the bitterness that was in these, and made them sweet. 3. There is
nothing that He more complains of, nothing angers and grieves Him more, then
when He is not made use of, Ye will not (says He, John 5.) come to me, that ye
may have life, To show, that the best inter^ainment that they could give Him,
was, to come and get Life from Him; And it is told us, that He was angry and
grieved for the peoples unbelief, and hardness of heart; Yea, He weeps over
them because of this, Luke 19. All which prove the great delight that He had,
and has still, in Sinners getting good of Him; And frequently in the Song, as
Chap. 2, and 6. He is said to feed among the lillies; There is all His
intertainment that He gets in the World, He feasts only on the Fruits of His
own Spirit in them that welcome Him: I shall name but one place more, and that
is, Psalm. 147.10.11. He delights not in the strength of a horse, nor in the
legs of a man, but in them that fear him; The following Words clear it more,
what it is that delights Him, In them that hope in his mercy, that is, in them
that draw into Him by believing, He delights in these, Beyond all the World.

Use, 1. It were a desirable thing to be believing this; Are there any so
profane, but are ready to think, that if they knew what would please God, or
Christ, they would do it? The Question is here answered, that this is pleasing,
and only pleasing to Him; If this be wanting, there is nothing that will please
Him, even that ye make use of Christ's Sufferings, and employ Him in His
Offices, for getting the good that may be had by them; This is it that ye are
c^lled to, and which delights Him; and if this be not, though ye would give
Him thousands of rams, and ten thousands of rivers of oil, yea, the first born
of your body for the sin of your souls, it will not satisfy Him, nor be
accepted; because this alone is the Satisfaction that He will have for His
Soul-travel.

I shall a little explain this, and then prosecute the Use of it; Ye will ask
then, What is the Fruit of Christ's Soul-travel that satisfies Him? I answer,
That we take in under it not only, 1. That ye should aim to be at Heaven,
neither 2. ^his, That ye be serious in the Duties of Holiness, as if these were
Well-pleasing to God, without respect to Christ's Sufferings; but it is the
Use-making and improving of Christ's Sufferings for attaining of these; When
Folk by this midse, by this New and Living Way step forward to Heaven, and seek
to be Seri^us in the study of Holiness; when they that could not walk in the
way of Holiness, do now walk in it, leaning on their beloved, and study to
live by Faith in Him, T^is is it mainly wherein His Delight and Satisfaction
does lie, even when a poor Sinner is brought to make Use of Him for Peace and
Reconciliation with God, for through bearing in all called for Duties, for his
Consolation, and for his Admission to Heaven in the close: And therefore they
do not only fail here, who are Profane, living securely, never minding Heaven,
their Peace with God, nor the study of Holiness: Neither only these, who cast
the Law and its Reproofs behind their backs, (th^se are loathsome to God and to
Jesus Christ,) but by this, These are also reproved, that do not improve the
Sufferings of Christ for Peace and Reconciliation with God, for Righteousness,
and for Strength, for Comfort, and encouragement, and who hope not in H^^
Mercy; The Reason is, because, though it were possible they could make
progress in H^liness, and attain to Comfort and Peace that ^ay, yet it would
not be thus, The Fruit of the Trav^l of Christ's Soul, He being pa^^ by, and ^o
could not be Satisfaction to Him: Bu^ where a poor Sinner sees that he ca^no^
come to God of himself, cannot make his Peace, nor can He walk in the way of
Holiness, so, as to please God, and so flies to Christ for refuge, and make use
of His Purchase; there lies Christ's delight, to see such a Sinner come and
hide himself under the sh^ddow of His Sufferings; and in this respect, the more
hardly a Sinner is put at, it is the more satisfaction to Him, that He in His
Death and Sufferings be made use of, because this way, the Sinners Life is more
entirely the benefit of His Sufferings; and that such a Person has any
Strength, Comfort or Peace, and is admitted to Heaven, It is allenarly through
the Travel of His Soul, which is His great Satisfaction.

And therefore, we would, 2dly commend to you, That as you would do Christ a
favor, (to speak so with reverence; And, O! what a motive is this for vile
Sinners, the dust of His Feet, to be put in a capacity to do Him a pleasure)
Endeavor this especially, that as to you, Christ may see the Fruit of the
Travel of His Soul, and be satisfied, and that all His kindness offered to you
may not be Fruitless; This is the great hing of the Gospel, as to that which
is pressed upon you, and this is the wonderful motive that is given to press
it, That it is delightsome to Christ, and therefore ye should believe on Him: It
were encouragement enough that it is profitable to your selves; But if ye had
hearts of stone this should move you to it, That Our Lord Jesus seeks no more
Satisfaction from you for all His Soul-travel, but that ye make use of His
Sufferings, that ye do not receive this Offer of His Grace in vain, nor be
Fruitless under it: In a word, we have here laid before us (and think upon it)
the most Wonderful, Inconceivable, and Inexpressible Suit and Request of Him
who is the Creator, to us poor sinful creatures, and what is it? I have been
(says He on the matter) in sore Travel and Pain for you, now I pray you let it
not be for naught, let me see the Fruit of it; And (to speak it with reverence
of the Majesty of God) It would say this to you, let not Our Lord Jesus rue of
His Sufferings; for as many as hear of this Offer, and do not credit Him with
their Souls, they do what they can, to make Him repent that ever He became Man,
and Suffered so much, when He is thus shifted, and unkindly requited by them,
to whom He makes the Offer; and this is very home and urgent, pressing of the
necessity of making use of Him, when such an Argument is made use of, for thus
it stands with you, and His Offer speaks this; Either make use of Christ, and
of His Soul-travel, for saving of your Souls, that so He may be satisfied; or,
if ye slight Him, ye not only destroy, and cause to perish your own Souls, but
ye refuse to Satisfy Chirst for His Soul-travel, and do what in you lies to
mar, and defeat the End and Design of His Sufferings; and is not this a great
and strongly pushing dilemma? The result of your receiving, or rejecting of
Christ will be this, if ye receive Him, ye satisfy Him, if ye reject Him, ye
say ye are not content that He should be satisfied; and what can be expected to
come of it, when Christ Suffered so much, and when all that was craved of you,
was to make use of Him, and when it was told that, that would satisfy Him, and
yet that was refused? What a horrible challenge will this be in the Great Day?
And therefore to press this Use a little, we shall show you here, 1. What it
is that we exhort you to, And 2. What is the force of this Motive, 1. We would
commend to you in general, that ye would endeavor the Salvation of your own
Souls, This is it, He cries to you, Prove. 1.22. How long ye simple ones will ye
love simplicity, and ye scorners delight in scorning, turn ye at my reproof,
etc. He aims at this, that ye should get your Souls saved from Wrath, and this
should not be prejudicial, nor at the long run unsatisfying to your selves, and
it will be very satisfying to Him. 2. It is not only to aim at Salvation
simply, but to aim at it by Him, to aim at Pardon of Sin, and Justification
through His Righteousness and Satisfaction; And that ye would bring no other
Argument before God to plead upon, for your Peace with Him, but this; and that
ye would aim at Holiness, as a Fruit of His Death, He having purchased a
peculiar people to himself to be zealous of good works, As it is, Tit. 2.14.
And that ye would aim to do holy Duties, by His strengthening of you; and that
ye would live by Faith in Him, which is your victory over the world, and the
very Soul of the practice of all holy Duties; And 3. That ye aim to have a
Comfortable, Refreshfull, and Cheerful Life in Him, and by what is in Him, as
if it were your own, it being legally yours by Faith in Him; To be stoping your
own mouth, as having nothing in your selves to boast of, and, (as I just now
said) to be chearing and delighting your selves from that which is in Him, And
as it is Psalm. 147. Even to be hoping in his mercy; In a word, It is to be
studying peace with God through Him, to be studying Holiness in His strength,
and to be studying a Comfortable and Cheerful walk through the grounds of joy
that are given you in Him, which is very reasonable; would ye then do Him a
favor, and have Him Delighted and Satisfied, do but this, give Him your Souls
to be saved by Him, in His own way; come to Him sensible of Sin, and founding
your Peace on Him, though weak in your selves, yet strong in Him, On whom as
the mighty one God has laid help; And studying holiness in His strength;
drawing virtue from Him, only to moritify your lusts; That it may be known that
Christ has died, and is Risen again, because Grace shines in such a Person;
And be Comforted in Him, He that glories, let him glory in the Lord, having
given up with Creature Comforts, and Confidences, with your own Gifts, Parts,
Duties, etc. And having betaken your selves to the Peace, Strength and
Consolation that are in a Mediator, and which run through the Covenant of
Grace, and flow forth from Him, as the Fountain from whom all the Grace, and
Comfort that come to us are derived. 2dly. For the force of the Motive,
consider seriously, if this be not a pinching strait that ye are put to; if
this be it wherein Our Lords Satisfaction lies, and wherein the Salvation and
Edification of your own Souls consist; we pose you, if it be any great
difficult, or unreasonable thing, that is called for from you? and if the
Motive whereon it is pressed be not most just and reasonable? that these who
have, or profess to have the Faith of this, that it will be Satisfaction to Him
for all His Soul-travel, that Sinners make use of Him, should yield it to Him;
And whether in the Day of the Lord it will not be a most heinous, shameful,
and abominable Guilt, that when the business of your own Salvation stood on
this, even on your Satisfying of Christ by yielding, ye refused, disdained and
scorned it, and would not make use of Him for your Peace, and would no^ in His
strength study Holiness, though your own Souls should never be saved, nor He
satisfied or His Soul-travel; This, of all other Challenges will be the
sharpest, and most bitting; and upon the other hand, it may be most comforting
to a poor body that is sensible of Sin, and afraid of Wrath; is there or can
there be hazard to do Christ a pleasure by believing on Him? It Is a thing
delightsome to Him, and therefore, let this be one great Motive to press
believing in Christ, among the rest, which, though it be cross, and thwarting
to the unbelieving heart, and may look like presumption to look a Promise in
the Face, and to offer to make application of it to the poor Sinners self; Yet
seeing it is a thing so pleasing to Christ, that it satisfies Him for all His
Sufferings, essay it upon this very account, remembering always, that He
delights in them that hope in his mercy; and to him be praise, for ever.

SERMON XLVIII.
ISAIAH LIII.XI. Verse. 11. He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall be
satis^^^d: by his kn^wledge shall my righteous servant justify ma y; for he
shall bear their iniquities.


It Is a great Work that Our Lord Jesus h^th undertaken, in Satifying the
Ju^tice of God for the Sins of the El^ct, and He has at a dear Ra^e; and with
great Expense, and Travel performed it; Now, it is but reason that He should
again be satisfied, that so Jehovah's Satisfaction, and the Mediator's
Satisfaction may go together, and that is the thing that is promised here in
these Words; What this Satisfaction is which is promised to Him, as the great
thing in which He delights, and by which He is satisfied, in the undertaking,
and performing of the Work of Redemption, it is also set down here, He shall see
of the fruit of the travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied, Which in a Word
is this, He shall see many who had perished, if He had not Suffered, getting
good of His Sufferings, and to be benefited by them; Who, by His taking on Him
the Curse, and by His undergoing this Soul travel, shall be fred from the
Curse, and made to partake of the Benefits, Privileges, and Comforts that He
has bought by so great and precious a Price.

We proposed this, as the main Doctrine from the Words the last day, That it is
great Satisfaction to Our Lord Jesus, to see Sinners making use of, and getting
good of H^s Sufferings; Or thus, That Sinners making use of Christ's Sufferings
for their good, is His Satisfaction, for all the Soul-travel, and Sufferings
that He endured; He shall see of the Fruit of the travel of his soul, and shall
be satisfied; I shall insist no further in clearing and confirming this, but
come closs to the Use of it; And if any Point of Doctrine have Use, this may
have, and has it, to the Glading and making Joyful and Fain the Hearts of
lost Sinners; That Our Lord Jesus should Suffer so much, and seek no more
Satisfaction ^or it all, but to see Sinners improving His Sufferings for their
good, to have a Seed brought forth by His Soul-travel, and to have them getting
Life by His Death, and the Blessing by His bearing of the Curse, and yet this
is it, that this Doctrine bears forth.

We may draw the 1. Use to these Four, from, and by which we may learn, and
know in some measure, how to answer this Question; seeing we have heard so much
of Christ's Suffering^, and Soul travel, what shall we give to Christ for all
that, how shall we satisfy Him? ^f there w re any affected suitably with
thankfulness from the hearing of Christ's being brought so low, by His sad
Sufferings; This would be, and could not but be their Question; H^re is an
Answer to it, That Our Lord Jesus seeks no more as a Satisfaction for all His
Sufferings, but that ye improve them for your good; This will Delight and
Satisfy Him, ye cannot do Him a greater pleasure, nothing will be ^ore
acceptable, nay, nothing will be acceptable to Him, nor taken off your h^nd but
thi^, even to see you coming in to Him, and making use of His Sufferings for
your own good, That as to your particular, His Sufferings may not be in vain,
and for naught, but that, ye improve them, and so improve them, as ye may not
Live and Die in the Case that ye would have been in for ever, had He not
Suffered, That is, under the dominion of Sin and Satan, under the W^ath and
Curie of God in an anxious heartless Life, without God, and without Hope in the
World; It is even this, in a Word, That hearing of His sad Sufferings, and of
the Design of them, ye may betake your selves to Him for Pardon of Sin, for
Sanctification in both the Parts of it, and for Consolation and that in the
end, ye may get your Souls ^aved, on the account of His Sufferings and by
virtue thereof: 1. then, ye would seek to be reconciled to God, as the Apo^^le,
2 Cor. 5.20, 21. exhorts, We as ambassadors for christ and in his stead,
beseech you to be reconciled to God; And the Argument whereby it is pressed, is
the same that the Doctrine holds forth, For he was made sin for us who knew no
sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him; Hence it follows
also, Chap. 6.1. We beseech you, receive not this grace of God in vain: Are
there any of you, who are convinced, that Christ should be Satisfied, and that
He should not be at all this Travel and Pains for naught? And that think ye
would fain Satisfy Him, if it were in your power? Behold, Our Lord has told
you what will satifie Him; It is not thousands of Rams, nor ten thousand Rivers
of Oil, but that His Sufferings be so improven by you, as the native F^ui^s of
them may follow and be found in you; That, considering the woeful case ye are
in by Nature, ye may make use of His Satisfaction to Divine Justice, as as the
alone Atonement, and may by Faith, take hold of it as the Ground of your Peace;
if this be not, Christ will be to you as if He had never Suffered. 2dly. It
calls for Holiness, and Mortification of Sin; This is much pressed, Romans 6.
from v. 2, to 14. And by this same Argument, to wit, That seeing Christ died for
Believers, we should die with Him, That being it wherein the Power of His Death
kythes, even in the Mortification of our Lusts, which He came to destroy: But
when Folks live as they had wont to do in their Prophanity, and Looseness, th^re
is nothing of the Fruit of the Travel of His Soul to be seen in them. 3 Christ
Traveled for the Consolation o^ His People; And this is another Fruit of His
Death and Suff^rings, that these who have betaken themselves to Christ may
comfort themselves on ^his Ground, That once and that ere long, they will get
the M^stery over a body of Death, and will get both Satan, and it bruised
under their Feet through Him; Who was delivered for our offenses, and rose
again for our justification and, who has blotted out the hand writing of
ordinances that was against us, nailing it to his cross; And that through the
vail, which is his flesh, there might a way be made. Patent to us unto the most
holy, And that with confidence we might approach to God, and in His Sufferings
dr^wn all our Challenges: And indeed Believers are behind, and greatly at a
loss, who have betaken themselves to Christ, and yet live as Anxiously and
Uncomfortably, as if they had not a slain Mediator to comfort themselves in,
who by His Sufferings, Soul-travel, and Death, has made a Purchase of so great
things for them. And in a Word, The up-shot of His Sufferings, is, to get the
S^uls of Believers in Him, carried unto Heaven, and kept there perfect, till
the Body be ra^s^d; and in a perfect ^ate be Re^un^^ed to the Soul, at the
Great D^y, according to that of the Apostle. Ephesians. 5.26, 27: He gave himself for
his church, that he might sanctify and cle^nse it, and present her to himself
a glorious church without spot and wrinkle, or any such thing; And when Souls
are not taking the right way to heaven, he has nothing of the Travel of his
Soul from such, more then if he had not undergone it, or not Suffered at all.

Use. 2. If this be Christ's Satisfaction for all the Travel of his Soul, that
he see Sinners getting good of his Sufferings, Then, if any Motive be weighty
to move People to give Him their So^ls to save, this must sure have weight with
them, even that thereby he may have Satisfaction for all his Soul-travel; And
therefore we would exhort you on this ground, to give Him your Souls to be
saved by Him, in order to His Satisfaction: And what is spoken in common, take
it as spoken to every one of you in particular, Men and Women, Old and Young,
Rich and Poor; If ye would do Christ a favor, and pleasure, give Him
employment for Pardon of Sin, for Peace with God, for Sanctification, for
Consolation, and for Access to Heaven; Or, if ye would know what motive we
would use to persuade you to make Use of this Gospel for all these, take this
for one, and a main one, That it will Satisfy, and even (to speak so with
Reverence) comfort Christ for all the Travel of His Soul, and for all the hard
Labor that He endured; even as it Satisfies a wooer for all his Pains and
Patience, in waiting on after many refusals and slights, when he gains the
Woman's Consent, and when the Match is made up; So it will Satisfy Him, when He
sees Souls, by virtue of His Sufferings, brought to believe on Him, and to lay
the weight of their Salvation upon Him, for then He sees it was not for naught
that He laid down His Life; And truly if this Motive prevail not, I know not
what Motive will prevail.

But to make it the more clear and convincing, consider these things, 1. What
it is that Christ seeks, when He seeks Satisfaction for the Travel of His Soul,
He even seeks your benefit, and good; If He had sought that which would have
been painful to you, ye would, I suppose, have judged your selves obliged
readily to have gone about it, had it been (as we use to speak) to have gone
through the fire for Him; But now, when this is all that He seeks, that by
making use of His Sufferings ye may be Justified, made Holy, comforted in your
Life, and brought to Heaven at your Death, should it not much more engage you
to give Him this Satisfaction? 2. Who seeks this Satisfaction, and to whom is
it to be given? Is it not to Our Lord Jesus Christ? There is very great weight
in this Part of the Argument, that by believing on Him, and making use of His
Sufferings, we not only satisfy and save our selves, but make Glad the heart
of Our Lord Jesus Christ, who being considered as God, needs no Satisfaction,
neither is capable of any Additional Satisfaction from Creatures. He being
infinitely happy, and fully Satisfied in the enjoyment of His own All
sufficient Self; Nothing from without can be added unto Him; yet He having
condescended to become Man, and Mediator betwixt God and Man, to reconcile lost
Sinners to God, He is graciously pleased to account it Satisfaction to Him for
all His Soul-travel, to have Sinners making use of Him for their good; and if
their be any weight in the Satisfaction of one that is Great and Good, and good
to us, This has weight in it, that our doing so, will satisfy Him, that is
Matchlesly Great and Good, and superlatively so to Sinners. 3. Consider the
Ground on which this Satisfaction is pleaded for, and it will add yet more
weight to this Argument; it is Satisfaction to Him for His Soul-travel; And can
any find in their hearts to think, but He should be Satisfied on this account?
Is there not reason for it? Who (as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 9.7.) goes a
warefare on his own charges? who plants a vineyard and eats not of the fruit
thereof? or, who feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of the flock? Ah!
Should Our Lord Jesus bestow all this Labor and Pains for nothing? And
further, 4ly. Whose Satisfaction is it that is sought? (This consideration is
somewhat diversified from the 2. And would not therefore be looked on as any
Tautology,) is it not His who is Lord of all, and who will one day be Judge?
When, if we had all the World would give it to please Him; And who will
pronunce the Sweetest or the Sadest Sentence upon us, according as we have
Satisfied Him in this, or not; Considering that it is He who desires this
satisfaction from us, should there not be an holy Diligence, Eggerness, and
Zeal to get that performed, that will Please and Satisfy Him? Especially when
the improving of His Sufferings may do it? But 5ly. From whom requires He this
Satisfaction? Is it not from them, who like sheep have gone astray? From these
who have many iniquities lying on them, and are lying under the Curse of God by
Nature? From these, who must either be healed by His Strips, or else they will
never be healed, but will die of their Wounds? may not this make the Argument
yet the more strong, that He is not seeking this Satisfaction of strangers, but
of His own People, nor of Righteous Folks, but of Sinners, who are lying under
the Curse, and whose happiness lies in giving Him this Satisfaction? And when
it is thus with you, That either your Sins must be taken away by Him, or else
ye must lie under them for ever; That either He must bear the Curse for you, or
ye must bear it your selves; If these things be obvious, as indeed they are, O!
give Him the Satisfaction that He calls for, and let Him not be put to say, as
it is, Isai. 49.4. I have labored in vain, and spent my strength for naught,
and in vain.

3dly. To press this yet a little more (Although it should be sad to us, that
there should be need to press that so much on us, which is so profitable to us,
and Satisfying to Him) even that we would make use of Him, for our Spiritual
Good and Advantage; These considerations will add weight to the Argument. 1.
What esteem Christ has of it; He thinks it as it were to be Payment, and a
sort of Compensation for all His Labor and Sufferings; The Price was not Gold
nor Silver, nor any such thing, which He gave for Sinners, but it was His
Precious Blood, His own Life, who was the Prince of Life, and the Prince of the
kings of the Earth; And O! what a vast and infinite disproportion is there
betwixt His Life, and all our Lives; and yet He accounts it a sufficient
Reward, if we will but give Him our Souls to be saved by Him, in His own way,
and will make Use of His Death and Sufferings for that End; And if it were
possible, that we could think little of our own Salvation, and much of Christ's
Satisfaction for His Soul-travel, ought we not to think much of our own
Salvation, in reference to His Satisfaction; And now, when he has joined these
together, so that we cannot please, nor satisfy Him, except we give Him our
Souls to save, and cannot satisfy Him but that in doing so, our Souls shall be
saved; Should it not induce us to make Use of Him for that End? If He had
commanded us to run here and there, and to undergo some long and very toilsome
Voyage, or some hard piece of Labor, or to bestow of our Means and Substance,
yea, all of it to please Him, it had been very reasonable on His part to have
demanded it, and most unreasonable on ours to have refused it, But our Lord
lays weight on none of these things, as separated from the laying the weight
of our Souls on His Righteousness; The Reason is, because the making use of His
Righteousness, and the improving of His Sufferings for our Justification and
Salvation, shows, that He in His Sufferings is esteemed of, and He seeks no
more but that. 2. Consider how good reason ye have to satisfy Christ, and
yield to Him, and to improve His Sufferings for your own Salvation; Is there
any that dar say the contrary? Will not Historical Faith say that there is good
reason for it? if there be any Love to Him, or to your own Souls, will it not
plead for this? If ever ye think to be Pardoned, is there any other name given
whereby ye can expect it? Is there any Holiness, or Comfort but from Him, any
hope of Heaven, but through Him? and will not this bind the Conscience of any
that is not desperate, to judge, That He from whom all this comes should be
Satisfied? 3. Consider at what a rate He has Purchased these benefits of the
Pardon of Sin, of Peace with God, of Sanctification, of the hope of Heaven,
etc. And how He has brought them about; Did He not engage in the Covenant of
Redemption, and has He not performed all that He engaged for? in taking on our
Nature, in being in an Agony, in Sweating drops of Blood, in being Buffeted,
Mocked, Reproached, and in Dying, to procure Life and Peace to Sinners? If we
could rightly discern His Sufferings, and the benefits that we have by them, it
would say, that there is good reason, that He should have a kindly meeting, who
has done, and Suffered so much to obtain these to us. 4. Consider the
cheerful way of His Suffering, and of His laying down of the Price, how
well-pleased He was to undergo all for His People, so that He says, John 10.
No man takes my life from me, but I lay it down of my self, and take it up
again; Psalm. 40. I delight to do thy will, O my God; And, Luke 12. I have a
baptizme to be baptized with, and how am I straightened till it be accomplished?
And, Luke 22. With desire have I desired to eat this passover before I suffer:
He opened not his mouth, in order to His delivery so well did He love the
Salvation of Sinners: Now, What if a mere and ordinary M^n had done something
to the hazard of His Life, for you, would it not plead with the most Carnal
Persons, having the least measure of Natural, or Moral Inginuity to give Him a
meeting; Very Heathens will love these that love them, much more ought ye to
satisfy Him in what He requires, who h^th done so much for Sinners. 5.
Consider what He seeks as a Satisfaction, (hinted at before) If it were a great
matter, or which were to your prejudice, there might be some shadow of a ground
to Refuse, but when it is no more but to make use of His Sufferings, for your
own good, how can it be refused? It Is in this Case, as if the Patients health
would sati^fie the Physician, as if a Poor Man's receiving of a Sum of Money
would satisfy the Rich Friend, who is pleased to bestow it; Or, ^s if one that
is naked would satisfy another, by putting on the Clothes laid to his hand by
him; What reason is there to refuse such Offers? And yet this that Christ calls
for, is, even as if the Physician should say to his dying Pa^ient, I will be
sati^fied greatly, if thou will take this Potion that is for thy Recovery,
^ealth, and Cure, and I will not be content if thou take it not, though the
Ingredients stand my self very dear, besides that, it is for thy good, and will
Recover thee; Or, as if the Father should say to the Child, I will not be
content, if thou put not on such a fine Suit, that stood me so much Money; In a
word, That which makes the Divour Sinner happy, is, that which satisfies Him.
6. Consider, if Jesus Christ get not this Satisfaction, what will come of it,
if ye please Him not in this, He will be highly displeased, no other thing will
Satifie Him, though ye should Pray and Weep an hundred years, and do many good
Works, if He get not this Fruit of His Soul-sufferings, To wit, that ye improve
them for your Souls good and Salvation, He will be continually displeased;
Therefore it is said, Psalm. 2. Kiss the Son, least he be angry; And that is
not^ing else, but to make Use of Him in His Offices; and it says, that there
is no way to please Him, and to eshew His anger but this; And indeed if ye
anger Him, ye anger Him that can be your best Friend, and your greatest Foe. 7.
Consider further, how Our Lord Jesus seeks, and presses for this Satisfaction
from you; He ^ends for^^ His Friends, and Ambassadors to woo ^n His Name, and
to beseech you ^o be reconciled, and to tell you that it will not be thousands
of Rams, nor your fir^^-born, that will do the business but that ye must humble
your selves, and walk with God, which necessarly suppo^eth the Use-making of
Christ; If there had been no pleading with you in His Name, there had not been
such Sin, in not imp oving H s Satisfaction; But when He pleads so much and so
often for this, and entreats every one in particular to Satisfy Him, saying,
as it were, let Me see of the Travel of My Soul, (...) Me have this much
Satisfaction for all M Sufferings, that ye will make Use of My Righteousness;
and when He is so very serious, in Beseeching and Intr^a^i g, it should, no
doubt, make us the more willing, to grant Him what He seeks. 8. Ye would look
upon this, not only as a discourse in the general to Si^n^rs, but ye would also
look on it, as addressed to every one of you in particular; And therefore
remember, that ye will all be called to give an account of this matter, and it
will be sked you. What became of such and suc^ an offer of Grace, and whether
ye gave Him ^he Satisfaction that He called for, or not; According to that
Word, Act. 17.31. e has appointed a day wherein he will judge the world in
righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained, Whereof he has given
assurance to all men, in that he has raised him from the dead; He would have
Judged the World though Christ had not come; But He will have a day wherein He
will call all the hearers of the Gospel to an account, especially as to this,
To wit, What welcome they have given to Christ: And seeing such a day is coming,
when Folk will be called to an account, what Use they made of Him, with what
face will many come before Him, when it shall be told them, That He craved no
more Satisfaction from them, for all that He Suffered, but that they would have
improved His Sufferings for their own good, and that yet they would not give
Him that much? Does not this say, that their is need, that we should look well
what Fruit there is of His Sufferings, that there may be more then if He had
not Suffered at all. 9. Consider the great weight that will be laid on this
Sin, of refusing to believe, and to Satisfy Him in this, to wit, in improving
of His Sufferings, above all other Sins; This is a Sin that will be found to be
against Equity, Thankfulness, and Ingenuity, that when He had done and
Suffered so much, He was so ill requited; Yea, it will be found to be a wilful
and malicious Sin, That, when your Good and His Satisfaction were joined
together, ye would rather choice to destroy your selves, then to Satisfy Him,
in saving your selves, through Use-making of His Sufferings: There are two
remarkable Words to this purpose, Heb. 6.10. In the 6. Chap. it is said of such,
That they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open
shame; That is, they do displease and anger Him, and do what in them lies to
cast reproach upon Him, as if He were no Savior at all, or an insufficient
Savior; to put Him to Suffer over again, in His wanting of Satisfaction for
His Sufferings; As it is a great pain for a Mother to be in Travel, but it is
another, and in some respect, a greater pain, if the Child die in the bringing
forth: In the 10. Chap. v. 28. It Is called, A trading under foot the son of
God, and an accounting the blood of the Covenant to be an unholy thing, And in
the 26. v. Before it is said, There remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a
certain fearful looking for of judgment; And it is upon this very account; As
we did at another occasion, make use of these two Scriptures to a like purpose,
and did thus Caution our Application of them against mistakes) For what greater
indignity can be put on Him, then, when His Satisfaction depends on the
improving of His Sufferings, yet people will not do it? As nothing pleases Him
better then to improve His Sufferings, so, on the contrary, There is no Sin
that does displease Him more, then when they are not improven: And if ye will
not now believe this to be a Truth, yet, when the Lord shall call you to count
for it, ye will find it to be a most certain and sad Truth; That He called you
to believe, and that ye would lie still in your Unbelief, Ignorance, and
Prophanity; That ye destroyed your own Souls, and made His Sufferings as
useless, as to you, as if there had never a door been opened to Sinners, to
Heaven, by them. Is there any of you that will be able to answer to this
challenge? If not, Then let Him have this Satisfaction, by improving of His
Sufferings, that He may find (to say so) that His Death has not been for
naught, as to you: Study to have Him great in your esteem, and to have your
Souls saved by the virtue and efficacy of His Sufferings, otherwise the
challenge will be unanswerable; Considering, that He declared, that this would
satisfy Him, and ye knew that it would have pleased Him, and removed the
quarrel, and saved your selves; And that withal, by this means, a comfortable
sentence at Judgment might have been procured to you; And that yet ye
disdained to do it: And therefore, since it stands so with you, be entreated to
make earnest, and greater earnest of believing, and of the great work of
getting your own Souls saved, which He has thought so much of; else it had
been better for you, that ye had never had a delightsome hour in the World; And
sad will the encounter be, that ye will have with Him, and with your own
Conscience in that Day, when it shall have this to tell you, that ye cannot now
expect any Good, or Favor from the Judge; Because, when He would have saved
you, ye would not have it so, but would needs run on your own damnation; And
therefore we say again, either give Him Satisfaction, by improving of His
Sufferings, and by making Earnest of the business of your Salvation, Or,
resolve to meet with a most terrible Pursuer of the Quarrel against you; The
Wrath of God is dreadful, but much more the Vengeance of the Mediator, who,
because ye would not give Him His will in your Salvation, He shall have it in
your Ruin, and Destruction.

4. There is here a sweet Word of Consolation to poor Souls, that fallen would
have Sin taken away, and are afraid to presume; Our Lord will never be angry,
that ye make use of His Sufferings for your own good; Nay, He accounts it a
Satisfaction to Him, that ye improve them; That when ye find your selves
Arrested for Sin, ye put it on His Score, and draw a Bill on Him to pay your
Debt; That when you find your selves under that, which to you looks like the
dominion of Sin, ye look to His Cross, for Virtue to Crucify, Kill, and Subdue
it: If therefore (as I have often said) ye would do Him a Favor, or Pleasure,
make use of Him; Be assured, that the more weight ye lay on Him, ye do Him the
greater pleasure; And this is all the amends that He seeks for all the wr^ngs
ye have done to Him, and all the Satisfaction that He seeks, for all the good
turns He has done to you, That ye come to Him thus to make use of Him; And it
is good Reason, even all the Reason in the World, that He get this amends made
to Him, and this Satisfaction granted to Him.

SERMON XLIX.
ISAIAH LIII.XI. Verse 11. He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall
be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many: for he
shall bear their iniquities.


THere are two things of great Concernment for Men to know, for sinful Men to
know (if any thing be of Concernment) The one is, how the Justice of God that
is provoked may be Satisfied, or what it is, by which provoked Justice is
Satisfied: And the other is, What the way is, how we come to get that
Satisfaction applied to us, or, what is the way to get the Benefit of it made
ours? And both of them are Answered in this v. clearly and shortly; The first
is holden out in the first part of the v. To be the travel of Christ's soul,
Which has a special look to the Covenant of Redemption, and to the Condition
on which it is Accomplished and Performed, That is, His Soul-travel, under
which all His Sufferings are comprehended; The other is, in the Latter Part of
the verse; By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, for he
shall bear their iniquities; This holds forth in short, the Gospel, nay, how a
Sinner may be brought to get the Benefit of Christ's Satisfaction; These two
being the Sum of the Gospel, To wit, Christ's Purchase, and the Application of
it to Sinners.

In this last part of the verse, We have these Five things to be considered,
which express this, 1. The great benefit that flows from Christ's Sufferings,
and it is Justification, Which in a word is this much, To be Absolved,
Acquitted, and set Free from the Guilt of Sin, and from the Curse of God,
Justifying here being opposed to Condemning; So that when its said, They shall
be justified, The meaning is, that these that were before obnoxious to the
Curse, and that were by the Law to be Condemned (according to that Word, Gal.
3.10. Cursed is every one that abids not in all things written in the law to do
them) Shall now, through the benefit of Christ's Sufferings, be declared Free,
and set at Liberty, even as a Debtor is set Free by the interveening of a
Responsall Cautioner 2. The Parties made partakers of the Benefit, And they are
called, Many; though they are few, being compared with the World, yet in
themselves they are many; They shall come, or many shall come; From the east,
and from the west, and from the south, and from the north, and shall sit down
with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven; And comparing this Word
with the last Words of the v. It says, That they are as many as these are
whose iniquities He bare, and the payment of whose Debt He undertook; It is not
to be taken Universally for all, but for some singular Selected Persons, whose
iniquities He bare. 3. The Fountain from which, or from whom this Benefit flows
to many; It Is the Lords righteous servant, he shall justify many; Where the
effect is attributed alone to Him. 4. The way how Christ Justifies; its not
simply, by forgiving (as He indeed has power to forgive Sins,) But
meritoriously, To wit, by His Satisfying for them, Therefore it is added, For
he shall bear their iniquities; He shall take on their Sins, and pay their
Debt; And therefore, when they come before the Tribunal of God, the Guilt of
their Sins is taken off them through His Merit: 5. The great Midse, or Mean, by
which this Benefit is derived to these many, it is by his knowledge, Which is
not to be taken Subjectively, for the Knowledge that He has. But Objectively,
That is, He, by making Himself known by believing; Or, it is by his knowledge,
not Actively, but Pasively taken, not His Knowledge, whereby He does Know, but
that whereby He is Known; It Is in a word, by Faith, According to that, Philip.
3.8, 9, 10. I account all things (says the Apostle there) loss, for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, etc. And he expones what
that is in the next Words, That I may be found in him, not having my own
righteousness, which is according to the law, but the righteousness of God,
which is by the faith of him: These may afterward be more fully cleared, as we
come to speak to them more particularly.

There is here then a brief Compend of the Gospel, and of the way of Sinners
Reconciliation with God; So that if ye would know, 1. How a Sinner is
Justified, or wherein it consists? here it is, It consists not in the infusing
of Grace, nor in the Sanctifying, or making of a Profane Person Holy, Though
that does accompany always, and follow Justification; But in the absolving of
a Sinner from the Guilt of Sin, or in acquiting the Guilty. 2. Would ye know
the Ground on which this goes, or how it comes to pass, That the Just God can
Justify an ungodly Sinner? It is because of Christ's Righteousness? and of His
Satisfying of Justice, or paying of the Sinners Debt. 3: Would ye know, how it
comes, that this Man, and not another, comes to get Christ's Satisfaction made
his, and has his Debt thereby taken off? It is by His Knowledge, and by Faith
in Him, ( called knowledge; here, Because it necessarily presupposes the
Knowledge of Him;) It is by acknowledging of Him in His Offices, and by
submitting, and betaking of our selves to Him by Faith; Because it is Articled
in the Covenant of Redemption, That His Righteousness shall be made
forthcoming to all them that by Faith betake themselves to Him for shelter; So
that hereby the ungodly are declared Righteous, because, through the Cautioners
Payment, and Satisfaction, their Sin is not imputed to them, and they are
declared Free, because of His paying of their Debt for them. 4. Would ye know
the Reason of this, how it comes, that Faith Justifies in it is resting on
Christ? It is not because of any worth in it self, nor because of any account
that is made of it is Worth, but because it rests on Christ's Righteousness,
and takes hold of the Benefit of Christ's Purchase; Therefore it is added,
Because he shall bear their iniquities, because by Faith they take hold of His
Sufferings, and Satisfaction, whereby their Sin is taken away, and God becomes
well-pleased with them for His sake: This then is a most material place of
Scripture, and we had need in entering upon it, to have an Eye to this Righteous
servant, That He would be pleased to make the Meaning of it known to us, and to
give us the right understanding of this great Mystery.

First, In general Observe here, in what Estate Men are Naturally, and as
Abstracted from Christ; They are unjustified, and lying under God's Curse,
obnoxious to His Wrath, This is supposed, Consider Men then in their Natural
Estate, this is it, They are even obnoxious to the Wrath and Curse of God,
which is ready to ceize upon them, for their breach of Gods Covenant, and for
provoking of Him by Sin; if Men thought seriously on this, how could they
sleep, or have peace; not knowing when they may be Arrested, and put in Prison,
till they pay the uttermost Farthing, which will never be; O! that ye knew and
believed this, who are ready to defy any that will offer to charge you with
one penny of Debt, and who walk up and down without all fear of your hazard;
Lay your Natural Estate to heart, and ye will have quite other thoughts of your
selves.

2dly. Observe, The way how freedom from this Debt of Sin, and lyableness to
the Curses derived; And to this, many things concur, each of which has it is
own place. 1. The Mediator and His Satisfaction, This is the Ground of the
Freedom. 2. The Covenant of Redemption, and the Promise made to the Mediator in
it, He shall see his seed, etc. He shall see of the travel of his soul, and
shall be satisfied, By his knowledge shall many be justified, etc. Wherein it
is Articled, That these for whom He Suffered shall be Pardoned and set free;
And it is this that gives Sinners access to expect the Benefit of Christ's
Sufferings; otherwise, though Christ had Suffered, they had not been the
better of His Sufferings, if this Covenant had not been, which gives them
warrant to lay hold on the same; Ere Faith can Act on Christ's Sufferings, it
must have this Ground laid down, That it has a warrant by Virtue of this
Covenant to lay hold on them. 3. The knowledge and offer of this Mysterious
Contrivance of Grace, is also necessary, and does concur to bring about the
Freedom; This must be manifested, that there is such a Savior, such a
Satisfaction, and such a Covenant, wherein the Ground is laid down, and a
Warrant given, by Virtue of this Covenant to make Use of Christ's Satisfaction,
and to come by the Benefit of it; This is employed in that Word, His knowledge;
So, Romans 10. It Is said, How shall they believe in him of whom they have not
heard, which says plainly, That there can not be Faith, except knowledge
preceed; I observe this the rather, because many think to come to Heaven
without Knowledge, and so continue still in their Ignorance; But ere their can
be sound Faith, there must necessarly be some measure of Knowledge of these
things, that are necessary to be known; As, that we are Sinners, and that we
are lost in our selves; That Jesus Christ is the alone Propitiation for Sin,
and that according to the Covenant of Grace, they that believe on Him shall be
Absolved, and set Free. 4. There is a concurring of Faith* for taking hold of
this Benefit of Offered-salvation through Christ; how Faith concurres with
Christ's Satisfaction, in order to the making of our Peace with God, We shall
not now stand to speak particularly, only in general, it is by His Knowledge
that it Justifies; For, though He have sufficient Righteousness, and though
the Covenant give warrant to take hold of it, yet, if there be not an actual
taking hold of it, It will not profit us; Therefore, Romans 3.22. and 9.30. It is
called, The righteousness which is by faith in him; And Romans 4.5. The Apostle
says, To him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the
ungodly, his faith is counted to him for righteousness. It is not Faith without
it is Object Christ, nor the Object Christ without Faith; But it is Faith taking
hold of Him as it is Object, by which we have access to plead for Absolution;
without Christ, our Faith will do us no good, and without Faith Christ will not
profit us; For without Faith we have no Title to Christ: And each of these
would be put in their own Room and Place; Christ in His Room, and Faith in it is
Room, as the condition on which His Purchase is made offer of to us.

More particularly, Let me, First, consider the Title that Christ gets in these
Words, He is called the Lords Servant, and His Righteous servant.

1. As for Servant, It looks to Him as Mediator, as this whole Chapter with
Chapter 42.1. and 52.13. do abundantly clear; Christ Jesus then as Mediator, is
the Lords Servant, or He, in performing the Office of Mediator, is His Fathers
Servant, so the Lord calls Him, Psalm. 89.19. When He says, I have laid help
upon one that is mighty, I have found David my servant, etc. For He is there
speaking of Jesus Christ, with whom the Covenant of Grace, as with the head of
the Confederated Party, is principally made: It imports these Four, which may
be as so many Reasons of this Designation. 1. An Humiliation, and Inferiority,
in respect of God, as it is said, Phil. 2. He humbled himself, and became of no
reputation; In which respect, He Himself says, that the Father is greater then
he; And that He is sent, That He came not to do his own will, but the will of
him that sent him; This holds forth a great Wonder, in the dispensation of
Grace, That the Fathers Fellow and Equal, He that was Lord and Master of all,
should become a Servant in the Work of Redemption, for the saving of Souls;
This must suit be a great Work, wherein the Son becomes a Servant, As it must
be a greater Wonder, that Grace so far condescended, as to make Him, who is the
Prince of Life, to become a Servant; And we would look at it, as a much
greater, and far more momentuous business, then we use to do, to get a Soul
saved. 2. It imports His Prerogative, as being Singularly and Eminently Gods
Servant; He is called, Heb. 13.20. The great shepherd, So may He be called the
great Steward, and Deputy over all the Lord's House; So then, He is a Singular
Choice, and Non-such Servant; Behold, says Jehovah, Isa. 42.1. My servant whom
I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delights; Though all be Gods Servants,
yet in this respect, He is Singularly, and Solly a Servant, as He is Great Lord
Deputy, made head over all things to the Church, who was before all things,
and is preferred to all things; This is very Comfortable to Believers, to
consider, that though Our Lord Jesus be a Servant, yet He is a Choice and
Singular Servant, Administrator, and Steward for their Good, it being for them
that He becomes a Servant. 3. It imports the particular Task, or Work that is
laid on Him, and the Commission that He has gotten, to follow forth, and
prosecute that Work, which is the main Reason of this Designation of a Servant,
Because He is entrusted with carrying on the Great Work of the Redemption of
Elect Sinners; Therefore He says, I came not to do my own will, but the will
of him that sent me, and to finish his work; And I have finished the work which
thou gave me to do; Because He is particularly entrusted with the bringing
about of that Work, He has gotten so many given Him to Redeem, and Save, to
whom He is appointed a Shepherd, a Head, and Overseer, or Bishop, Therefore He
calls Himself the good shepherd; And is called by the Apostle; the Shepherd and
Bishop (or Overseer) of Souls; And of all that are given Him He loses none,
but makes account of them all: And this is yet more Comfortable, when we
consider that Christ is not a Servant simply, but a Servant Commissionat to
gather in Souls, to bring home the lost Sheep of the House of Israel; This is
His Office, and Service, even to satisfy for the Sins of such, to destroy the
power that the Devil has over them, and so subdue Sin in them. 4. It imports
this, that the Work which He performs in the Redeeming of Souls is so
acceptable to God, and does so mightily concur, and Co-operat to the promoving
of His Design, that the Lord owns every thing that He performs, as performed by
His Great Ambassador; and by Him, who has the Trust of all the affairs of His
House committed to Him, So that Our Lord Jesus, in performing the Work of
Redemption, cannot but be acceptable to Jehovah, because it is a performing of
that with which He has entrusted Him. Therefore, John 4. He says, that it is
his meat to do his fathers will, and to finish His Work; And to this purpose,
He says to His supposed Father, and to His Mother, Luke 2.49. wist ye not that
I must be about my fathers business? It Is His Bussiness, because it is so on
the matter, it is so accounted of, and comes to be so, in the end, and
therefore, in the 10. v. of this Chap. it is said, The pleasure of the Lord
shall prosper in his hand.

2. As for His being the Lord's righteous servant; He is not only a Servant,
but an excellent Servant; not Righteous simply, as He is God only, nor
Righteous, simply as He is Man; But Righteous in the Administration of His
Offices, and in the Discharge of the Great Trust committed to Him. Whence
Observe, That Our Lord Jesus, in performing of the Office, and Work of
Mediation and Redemption, is most Trusty, and Faithful: There is not any the
least Fault or Failling in His performing of it; He is the Lord's Servant, that
never wronged His Master, who never miscarried in His Commission, nor
Mismanaged it in the least; Says He, I have finished the work which thou
gave me to do. If we look a little to the qualifications, that shine eminently
in the Administration of His Offices, they will make out this; For He
Administrats them. 1. Wonderfully Wisely. 2. Very Tenderly. 3. Most Diligently,
and Effectually. 4. With all Faithfulness: Thus does He Entirely, and Holily,
without the least touch of unrighteousness perform all the Trust committed to
Him, and that both toward God, and toward the Sheep; So as He is eminently,
by the Lord's own Testimony, His righteous servant, with whom He is well
pleased, and cannot but be well pleased: It will not be needful to seperat
these qualifications of His Service, in the Administration of His Offices: In
speaking to them, we shall only desire you to take notice of some few Places of
Scripture that hold them out; The first whereof is that, Isai. 40.11. He shall
feed his flock like a shepherd, he shall gather the lambs with his arm, and
carry them in his bosom, and gently lead those that are with young. Never
shepherd was so careful of his Flock; for He seeds them, and in Feeding them
waits diligently on them, and takes them to these places where it is best for
them to Feed; He thinks fit now and then, it is true, that Dogs be hunded at
them, yet He is so warm to, and tender of them, that He gathers them with His
Arm, and He is so dexterous, and skillful in Conducting them, that He gently
leads them that are with young; that is, such of them as are in Pangs of the
New Birth, He will by no means over-drive: To speak it with reverence; He is as
a skillful Midwife, to make these who are with Child safely to bring forth;
Well then may He get this Name, of the Lord's righteous servant. The next place
is, Isai. 42.1, 2, 3, 4. Behold my servant whom I uphold, my elect, in whom my
soul delights, I have put my spirit upon him he shall bring forth judgment
to the gentles. He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard
in the street. A bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall
he not quench, he shall bring forth judgment unto truth, etc. Is there not
here a wonderful commendation that the Father gives to the Son, and that the
Gracious Master gives to the Righteous Servant in His Office. He is His Elect
choice Servant, in whom His Soul delights, He does not cry, nor lift up His
voice; He is bussier about His Work, then in making any din about it; there is
no frowardness in His way, but He is tender of Souls that are like to a
bruised Reed, and smoking Flax; He will not break the one, nor put out the
other; Where a Soul is weak or wounded, He will not break nor bruise it, by a
rough touch, or word; and where there are the least breathings of sincere
desires after Him, He will not quench nor stiffle them; and though the Task be
great, that He has in hand, He fails not is going through with it, He sits not
up, nor is He discouraged under it, notwithstanding all the Wrath He has to
meet with in His way; Therefore, when the Cup is put in His hand, at which His
holy humane Nature some way shrunk and skarred, yet He takes it pleasantly,
saying, But for this cause came I unto this hour; and prosecuteth His Work
Courageously, and Constantly, till He bring forth Judgment to Victory, and
till He gain His Point; This shows Him to be a most Choice and Faithful
Servant. A 3. Place is, Isai. 52.13. Behold my servant shall deal prudently.
etc. It cannot be imagined, what a Spiritual, Cannie, and Dexterous way He has
in the saving of Souls, and how Wisely, and Prudently He pursues that Work:
There is a 4th. Place, Psalm. 89.19, 20. I have laid help upon one that is
mighty, I have exalted one chosen out of the people, I have found David my
servant. The enemy shall not exact upon him, etc. He is so Dexterous and
Powerful, that the Devil shall gain no ground of Him, but He shall gain ground
of him, and defeat him; so that we come after only to gather the Spoil. He is
able to save to the uttermost, (as it is, Heb. 7.26.) all that come unto God
through him; And near the close of that Chap. It is said, Such an high priest
became us, who is holy, harmless, seperat from sinners, made higher then the
heavens. These are His qualifications, He is an holy and harmless high Priest,
a sweet (and to say so) illesse Mediator; by whom there was never any hurt; His
ill was never heard of, in the place where He was; He is Undefiled, Pure and
Spotless, in the management of all the Trust committed to Him; there was never
any thing done by Him, of which it could be said, that it might have been done
better; He is seperat from Sinners, and so another kind of high Priest then
these who were before Him; And all this, both as to God, so as He could say,
and go to Death with it, It is finished; And as to them that were entrusted to
Him, so as He could say, Of all that thou have given me, I have lost none; he
makes a Full and Faithful account of all committed to Him.

This is a plain, and yet a most useful Truth: For Use of it. Behold here, and
wonder at the way of Grace, that not only gives a Mediator, but such a
Mediator, who (as it is Heb. 3*) is faithful over the house of God: This is
the very Life of our Consolation, that we have an able Mediator, a good
Shepherd, a Wise, Prudent, Tender One, and Faithful; and indeed it would well
become us to wonder more, that the Lord, in the way of His Grace has thus
condescended; and it should exceedingly provocke us to be thankful on this
account, that not only there is a way of Grace, but such a way of Grace found
out, and established, whereby we have such an high Priest, that manages all so
Well, and so Dexterously. O! have ye ever suitably Prized this, That God has
given such a Righteous and Faithful Mediator, and Servant? I fear many suffer
this most observable Dispensation to pass without due Observation; Though the
Lord Jehovah speaks not of Him without commending Him; yet wretched and
ingrate, we can, Alace! speak of Him, and hear Him spoken of, with hearts very
little affected: Believers may be ashamed of this; we think lamentably little
of Him, we esteem not suitably of Him; when we see Him, there is scarce any
Form or Beauty seen in Him, wherefore we should desire Him, we do in a great
measure undervalue this way of Graces Administration, that should be in a
special manner Ravishing to us, that we are thereby brought under such a Tutory:

The 2d. Use, Is for Believers Comfort, and Encouragement; O! but they are
happy, that have committed themselves to Him, as to a Faithful Shepherd and
Overseer* They may be sure that He is a notable and non-such Overseer: As might
be more fully cleared, if we would descend to the particulars of Believers
need: Have they little Grace? Is it scarce smoking? He is not a rigid
Task-master, like to the Egyptians, nay, nor like to the Law, He quenches not
the smoking Flax- Are they staggering, because of apprehended or real
Weakness, and their hearts shaking as the Trees in the Wood, or rather like so
many Straes? They may with Comfort give Him the Oversight of them, He will not
break the bruised Reed, He will bear the heaviest end of His own Yoke. Have
they a straying Disposition? Are they like young wanton Lambs leaping out from
the rest? He will gather them with His Arm; and when He takes a rougher way,
yet Grace shines still in it; Are they Fainting and Swooning? He will take them
into His Bosom; He will lead the Blind, He bears the Weak, He has a way of
Supporting His own that is most Tender. My grace (says He to Paul) is
sufficient for thee; my strength is made perfect in weakness. Are their any of
them with Child (to speak so) Or is their bringing forth quick and lively? He
gently leads those that are with young, and will not suffer them to miscarry,
in the bringing forth; He will not put new wine into old bottles, he will not
cause to travel, and not make to bring forth; The Lord has given Believers
such a Servant as they stood in need of, even a Righteous Servant, suited every
way to their Condition, who will not be behind, nor wanting in looking to the
lest wrigling, (to speak so) under His Care and Oversight.

It serves therefore, In the 3d. Place to reprove the Suspicions, and
Jealousies that Believers have often of Christ, who are disposed to say with
the Psalmist, Psalm. 77. I said, my hope and my strength is perished from the
Lord, will the Lord cast off for ever? will he be favorable no more? is his
mercy clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore? has he
forgotten to be gracious? etc. Nay, the Jealousy, and Misbelief of some
serious Souls, will sometimes talk it this Rate, I may give it over, this work
will never go with me; beware, I beseech you of this; for the language of it
is, That Our Lord is not a Righteous Servant; Let therefore your Spirits be
calmed, and pray the Lord to command a calm in them which are committed to
Him. Bespeak your Souls as David did his, Psalm. 42. Why art thou cast down O my
soul? And why art thou disquieted in me? Trust in God; For He is Faithful (as
if he had said,) that has the oversight of me. And essay with Paul, to be in
case to say, I know whom I have believed; and so shall not be ashamed; I am
persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed to him, against
that day. I know that He is such a Christ, that I commit my self to, who is so
Skillful, Dexterous, Tender and Faithful, in keeping that which is given Him.
And is not this most comfortable; and a notable ground of quietness; That Our
Mediator is such as cannot miscarry; And may it not shame Believers, when
either they adventure upon any thing their alone without Him; or, when they
commit themselves to Him, and yet do not so entirely Trust Him, but entertain
Suspicions and Jealousies of Him, and think, because their Spark is not a Fire,
or a Flame, but Smoaks only, that therefore it will die out, and be utterly
quenched, as if He could not keep it in, and increase it; and because they
cannot guide themselves, think that they will utterly miscarry, as if He had
not Arms to carry them; indeed Presumption is to be abhorred; but such as are
fled in to Him, would trust in Him so far, as to keep up their hearts in Him,
and would study to be cheerful in Him, and to walk up and down in His
strength; this is certainly called for from you; therefore be content to be
born by Him, where ye cannot go your alone.

Use 4. Is He such a Righteous Servant? Then let me say, are there any of you
that need to fear, or to have the least hink, or hesitation, to commit your
selves to Him? And should it not be a Motive to press you to give Him credit?
For He says, John 6.39, 40. That it is His Commission and Service to keep them,
which are committed to Him, and to raise them up at the last Day, and to give
them Eternal Life; And He is Righteous and Faithful in Performing of it; If
so, then credit the Salvation of your Souls to this Righteous Servant; Commit
your souls in well-doing to him, as unto a faithful creator; Never be at
peace, nor at ease, till ye be under His Charge and Keeping, and though ye be
as little Lambs, as weak Wriglings, or heavy with Young, it is the less matter,
if ye be of His Flock, ye shall be preserved: Is it possible that ye can be
right if ye be from under His Care and Custody? Nay, it is utterly impossible,
that ye can be secure, but under His Care; And it is as impossible, but that ye
must be safe, if ye be under His Care and Oversight: And therefore endeavor to
be within the reach of it, and to count your selves happy, when ye do sincerely
give Him credit; and to believe that ye are in greatest hazard, when ye take
most on your selves. What a shame will it be to many, who have heard that
Christ was such a Servant, and yet they would not take His Service to bring
them through to heaven? Thus it stands with you, to whom He is spoken of in the
Gospel, ye shall be found either to have accepted or rejected Him, according as
by Faith, ye yield your selves to Him, or by unbelief, ye refuse to close with
Him: Let not this word slip, as many have done. And the Lord Himself make you
wise, to make choice in time of the Service of this Righteous Servant, for your
Justification and Salvation.

SERMON L.
ISAIAH LIII.XI. Verse. 11. -- By his knowledge shall my righteous servant
justify many, etc.


IF we had such thoughts of the Salvation of our own Souls, as the Lord had,
and still has of the Salvation of Souls, we could not but be more seriously
concerned about them, and more taken up, how to get them saved: This Work of
the Salvation of Sinners did before the World was (to speak so with reverence)
take up the Persons of the Glorious Godhead; and was singled out, and made
choice of, as an employment worthy of the Son of God, who was chosen for this
very Work; that by Him many might be Justified and Saved; For the
accomplishment of which, He became a Servant: Must it not then be an excellent
Work, that none but He could be trusted with, who is Heir of all things, and by
whom the World was made?

We show you the meaning of these Words the last Day, and Observed two things
from this Designation, that Our Lord gets here. 1. That Our Lord Jesus, in the
Work of Mediation, and of the Redemption of Sinners, was Gods Servant, not so
much to denote His being inferior, as Mediator to the Father; as to hold forth
His being Commissionated for this Service, and the Lord accepting of Him in it.
2. That Our Lord Jesus did excellently discharge this Trust committed to Him.
Therefore He is not only called a Servant, but my righteous servant, as having
most Faithfully acquitted Himself, and as being fully approven, and accepted in
the Trust committed to Him. When the Lord speaks so of Christ, It ought
mightily to engage us to be much in love with God, who has given such a
Faithful Mediator aad Servant, and with Jesus Christ, that condescended to
take the Trust of poor Sinners Salvation, and that does so kindly discharge it.
There are somethings here, that may be passingly hinted at, and then we shall
come more closely and particularly to the Words.

1. Then Observe, That it is a Privilege and Prerogative to be Gods Servant;
Therefore it is mentioned here as a Piece of the Mediators Privilege; It is
true, He was Singularly, and Eminently a Servanr even the Lords Choice Servant,
in whom His Soul delighted, and does delight, above what any others can be
capable of; yet to be a Servant to God, to take direction from Him, to do His
Will, to seek His Honor, to give obedience to Him, in what He calls for, is
certainly a Privilege, and a great one; yea, it is spoken of as a Privilege
of Glorified Saints in Heaven, Revel. 22.3. His servants shall serve him, And
if it be a Privilege in Heaven, we would think it so here on Earth; and yet if
the Language of our hearts were known, there would be found a secret disdaining
of, and repyning at service to God, and a saying on the matter; Let us break
his bonds asunder, and cast away his cords from us. But know ye what ye are
doing? Even disclaiming and despising that which is your great Privilege; all
those that are in Heaven, and all those who are in a right frame on Earth,
count it their Privilege to be His Servants; and we are commanded to pray; Thy
will be done on Earth as it is done in heaven. Or, be thou served on Earth, as
thou art in Heaven: Therefore, it ought to be accounted of, as a Privilege, as
a great and glorious Privilege to be His Servants.

2. Observe, That the Lord can tell exactly and infallibly, how every Servant
carries himself; Who are ill and sloathfull, and who are good and faithful
Servants; Who are righteous Servants according to their measure, and who not.
Will He take notice how Christ carries Himself in His Service, and Trust, and
will He not take notice of others? Most certainly He will; and therefore,
Matthew. 25. and Luke 19. He calls the Servants to a Reckoning, to whom the
Talents are given; and as they have made use of them, and improved them, or
not; so does He commend and reward them, or not: There are none of us, but have
gotten some one Talent and Trust, or an other, and no doubt, there will be much
to Reckon for; I am afraid, that when He calls us all to an account, though
there will be some to whom it will be said, Well done good and faithful
servant; There will be many to whom it will be said, Thou evil and sloathfull
servant; and the Sloathful servant will be found to be the Ill Servant, and
amongst other Aggravations of his guilt, this will be one, that he was unlike
to Christ the Righteous Servant.

3. Observe, That the right improvement and discharge of the Trust committed to
us, and of our service to God; is a commendable and honorable thing. It is
Recorded here to Christ's Commendation, that He was a Righteous servant, even
Faithful over the House of God, in all things; and Proportionably is the
Commendation of the ordinary under-servants, when they, in their Places and
Stations perform their Service honestly and faithfully, so as they may be
accepted of God on His account: The day is coming, when every man's work will be
rewarded; and as we Sow, so shall we Reap; In that Day, if we had all the
World, we would give it, to hear that Word from Christ's mouth, Well done thou
good and faithful servant. But jew will get that Testimony: ye think it much
now, to get a name of Fidelity amongst Men, and to be esteemed such as keep
your Word, and will not break your Promise, nor Parrol (and it is good in so
far, that it be so) but many such will be found to have broken many a Word to
God, and falsified many a Promise; think upon it, and lay it to heart, that it
will be better to have a Word of Testimony from God in that Day, and to have it
said to you, by Him, Faithful Servant thou improved well the little that I gave
thee, it was laid out, and expended not so much to buy, and to put on brave
Clothes, nor to buy or build fine houses, as it was for Me, and for My Honor;
Whatever Place, Station, Capacity, or Employment thou was in, thou endeavored
to do good in it; and when thou could not do for my Work, for my People, and
for my Honor, thou was Praying for them; and when thou had an opportunity to
hear my Word, thou did not slight, nor let that slip. This, I say, will be
better than a great Name, and Testimony from, and amongst Men: But alace, we
fear that it shall be said of many, ye had many opportunities of getting, and
doing good, but what use made ye of them? It had been better that ye had never
had them; it had been better that ye had never had a Groat or two Pence, then
to have had all these Riches; and to have had none rather then to have had such
and such a Lucrative, or Gainful Place and Employment which ye improved not
for God: It Is a sore matter, that we should Preach, and ye should hear these
general Truths of the Gospel, from day to day, and that yet they do not sink
into your hearts. Ye will not readily den^, that there is a day of Reckoning
coming; and that it will be a great favor to be commended of Him, in that day;
and yet how few do by their Practice evidence, that they lay weight on it? It Is
very sad that Religion should be so triffled in; Many of you will come to the
Church, and seem there, and in your other carriage, as if ye were going to
Heaven, when, in the mean time, ye have few serious thoughts, either of Heaven
or of Hell; But in that Day wherein ye shall stand trembling before His
Tribunal, and shall there receive the Sentence of an evil and sloathfull
Servant, ye will find to your cost, That there was weight in these Truths, that
now ye take but little notice of.

4ly. In General, Observe, That it is Singular, Proper, and Peculiar, to Our
Lord Jesus to be Gods Approven Servant; so as to be without all ground of
Challenge, in the Discharge of His Duty, and Trust; and indeed there is no
Righteous Servant, in this sense, but He only, who, according to the very Rigor
of the Law, was such; the Law could not charge Him with any the least violation
of it, or want of Conformity unto it; For He fulfilled all righteousness. We
spoke to this, on v. 9. and shall not now insist on it; Only it is a sore
matter, that this Truth should be called in question, and called an untruth in
these days; and that Men should say, that this Designation and Title is not
proper to Christ, but that it is common to all true Christians, as if they were
all free of Sin; and that not by the imputation of Christ's Righteousness to
them, but by their own doing of Righteousness: Lord save us, what a high injury
is this to the Son of God? And what gross ignorance is here of the corruption
of Man's Nature, which in the best and holiest of mere Men, is never in this
Life finally expelled, as the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament most
convincingly clear, and what a wronging is this of the Truth of God, which
holds forth Our Lord Jesus, as singled out to be, and who is designed by this
Name, The Lords righteous servant; Now if there were any more properly so
called, we could not say that it were meant of Him. But it is not very
profitable to insist in speaking of these Dottages and Foolries.

But to come more particularly to the benefits that flow from, and come by this
Righteous servant, and from the service entrusted to Him, and so faithfully
managed and discharged by Him; By his knowledge, (says Jehovah) shall he
justify many: That is, His Service is to absolve Sinners, and set them free
from the guilt of Sin, and from the Curse that Naturally they are under and
liable to.

Looking on these Words in the Connection with the former, we shall O^serve
Three or Four things, ere we come to the more closs and particular
Consideration of the Words in themselves.

The 1. of which is this: That the Justifying of many Sinners, even of all the
Elect, is the special Trust, committed by Jehovah, to the Mediator. It is in
this especially, wherein His Service consists: Would ye then know, what is the
employment of this, Righteous Servant? It is even this, He shall justify many.
He shall procure their Absolution from the Guilt of Sin, and from the Curse of
God, and shall set them free from the Judgment which the Law has against
them, whereby they are oblidged to the Curse, for disobedience thereunto: This
we may consider. 1. As it relates to God; and so it imports, that the
justification of a Sinner is very acceptable to Him; For it is that for which
He has given a Commission to the Mediator; and what He has Commissioned Him
in, the performance of it must needs be acceptable to Him: Therefore that which
is here called the Lords Service, is called The Lords pleasure. v. 10. To wit,
to see a poor Sinner brought in by the Mediator, and on the account of His
Satisfaction Justified, He is pleased with, and takes it well. 2. It may be
considered as it looks to the Mediator; And so it speaks out the Mediators
Design and Work; it is that wherein He is employed, and with which He is taken
up, even to get Elect Sinners brought from under the Curse of God, and freely
Justified through Himself; So that if ye would know what is the Sum, and Effect
of Christ's Errand, and Work in the World, here it is, He came to save sinners;
as it is, 1 Timothy 1.15. He came to seek and save that which was lost; To bring
home the lost sheep on His shoulder; to seek and find the lost Groat, to
reclaim Prodigals; As it is Luke 15. This is His Meat and His Drink, His Work
and Business; as Himself says, John 4.34. My meat is to do the will of him
that sent me, and to finish his work. And, Luke 2. Know ye not that I must be
about my Fathers business? Which is to rescue poor Sinners from the Devil, and
to engage them to God, that their Sins may be Pardoned. 3. It imports the
Mediators Meetnesse for this Service, that He is Furnished, Fitted and
Qualified for, as well as taken up with the Justifying of Sinners, and setting
them free before the Throne of God; He has a full Purse (to speak so) to pay
their Debt; Therefore, Revel. 3.19. He bids Sinners, Come and buy of him
eye salve gold, and white raiment. He has Eye Salve for the Blind, Gold to
Enrich the Poor, Garments for the Naked; and in a Word, every thing that is
needful for Sinners. It is comfortable to hear that Christ is a Servant; But
to hear that this is His Service, to Justify Sinners, and that He is so well
fitted for it, makes it so much the more comfortable: And were we suitably
sensible of Sin, and did we thoroughly believe this Truth, our hearts would
Laugh within us, as Abraham's once did, to know that this was given to Christ
in Commission, to Justify Sinners, and that He is so well fitted for this
Business, that He is Commissioned about, and employed in; especially now, when
He is so bussie about His Work, and Employment, for though He be ascended on
high, yet He has received gifts for, and given them to men, even for the
rebellious, that God the Lord might dwell among them; As it is, Psalm. 68.
compared with, Ephesians. 4. This is the End of the Ministry and Ordinances, even
to further this Work of the Justification of Sinners, that by acknowledging,
and making Use of Christ, this Work may be brought about, and this Effect made
to follow; this is the End of Fasts and Communions, even to Arrest perishing
Sinners a while, to Tryst, and Treat with Him, about the concerns of their
Souls; these are special seasons for putting Him to exerce His Office in
Justifying of them; and this day, this Scripture is fulfilled in your ears, and
ye should let it sink in your hearts, that Our Lord Jesus is pursuing His
Commission, and performing His Service, keeping up the Treaty, and inviting,
and persuading Sinners to come to Him, that the pleasure of the Lord may
prosper in His hand. And therefore know assuredly that this is it, that Christ
is employed in, and taken up with, even to get sinners fred from the Guilt of
Sin, and from Wrath by His Righteousness; It is not only, nor mainly to get
them brought to the Church, and to His Supper, or to get them made Formal, and
to abstain from Cursing, Swearing, and Profanity, (though these will follow of
will) but it is to get them brought in to Himself, and Justified. And we have
these two Words to say to you further in this matter. 1. There is here good
ground of encouragement to a poor Soul, that would fain make Use of Christ for
Pardon of Sin; This is even it that Christ is entrusted with; It is for this
end that He is Legated and Commissioned of the Father; And will He not, thinks
thou, do that which He is entrusted with, and for which He is mainly sent? This
is, says He, John 6.39. the will of him that sent me, that every one that
sees the Son, and believes on him should have everlasting life, and that I
should raise him up at the last day. Which is in Sum, That by his knowledge
many should be justified. And it is added, For he shall bear their iniquities,
To anticipat and answer an objection: For a sensible Sinner might say, how can
I be justified, that have so many Sins? Here is a Solution of that doubt, He
shall satisfy for them: All these Words are, (as it were) big with Child of
Consolation, being the very Heart and Life of the Gospel, as any thing that
comes so near to Christ's Commission, and unfolds so much of it is. A 2d. Word
is this, That ye mistake Christ's Errand, Work and Service very far, who think
to content Him, and put Him off with this; who would give Him the Name of a
Savior, and yet would be at the saving of your selves without Him, who would
complement Him, as it were with fair Generals, but will have none of His
Physic, or of His Cures, nor will renunce your own Righteousness, and make use
of His, for your Justification: This says one of these Four, Either that He is
not Commissionated, and Trusted for this end, or that He is not meet for that
Trust; or, that He is not Faithful in it; Or else that ye can do your own turn
without Him, and that there is no need of His Office; And which of all these
can abide the Trial before God? And yet it shall be upon one of these that ye
shall be found to have cast at Christ, and to have refused to permit Him, (so
far as ye could hinder, and abstruct) to do His Fathers business; and if ye
Just not accounts with Him, there will be a most dreadful Reckoning betwixt
God and you.

2dly. Observe, That this particular Trust anent the Justifying of Sinners, Our
Lord Jesus does most Righteously, Diligently, Dexterously, Tenderly, and
Faithfully Discharge. It was His Fathers will, that He should be Baptized, and
fulfill all Righteousness; and more especially, that He should Justify many,
in this He is very Skillful, and Faithful, and it is on this account He is
called The good shepherd, and that He is said to lay down his life for his
sheep; That He is called a faithful high Priest; and is said to be one that is
able to save to the uttermost these that come unto God through him; and that He
is Holy, harmless, and separat from sinners; fit to make Peace betwixt God and
Sinners, another sort of Priest than Aaron was, or any that were before Him; He
is in a word, such a high Priest as became us, and as we stood in need of, who
needed not to Offer Sacrifice for His own Sins He had no more to do, but to
Satisfy for us. The Prophet Isaias, Chap. 40.11. Tells how tender he is in
bringing Souls to Heaven; He gathers the lambs with his arm, he carries them
in his bosom, and gently leads those that are with young. And Chap. 42.3. That
a bruised reed he will not break, and the smoking flax he will not quench. And
it is said, 1 John 2. If any man sin, we have an advocat with the Father, and
who is he, Jesus Christ the righteous. Righteous in the Faithful managing of
His Trust, by making Sinners Peace with God. Would ye know then, in what
respects, or, on what account it is, that Christ is called Servant? We answer,
in these Respects. 1. Though we have failled, and broken the Law, yet He has
not; and God will not look down on Him. 2. In this Respect, That He pleads for
no Sinners Pardon, but He can fully pay their Debt, and has done it; if He
seek one thing from God, He yields in another; and according to the Covenant of
Redemption exactly proceeds; For He is a propitiation, He seeks nothing but he
pays for it, and wrongs not him in the least who has Trusted him; the Lord
Jehovah is not a l^ser, but has His Honor restored by Him. 3. In respect of
His keeping Faith to the Persons that have need of Him, for whom He has
undertaken; He is not only faithful to the Master, but to the Children, and
Servants; He owns and acknowledges them, when they come to Him under their
necessities, and is forthcoming to them; every way suitable, and answerable to
His Place, and Trust in doing good to Sinners.

Use. Had we sensible Sinners to speak to, Sinners groaning under a Body of
Death, with pricked hearts crying out, What shall we do, for the wrongs that we
have done to God? Sinners under holy fear, to spoil and mar the Bargain, and to
hazard their own Souls, had we, (I say) such Sinners to speak to; There are
good news here to them; the Trust of saving Souls is committed to a Faithful
Shepherd, it is not committed to your selves; for so, it had been a doleful
Trust; but it is committed to Him, that has gotten the Sheep by Name given to
Him, to be kept by Him, and He will not suffer them to miscarrie, nor to go
quite wrong; And what more would ye have? A salvation and a Price is much, but
it is more to have a Savior, to make the Application of His Purchase; a Bishop
of Souls to Justify, and carry Sinners through, to make it sure before God,
and to make it out; the Sinner may sleep sound, which in the sense of Sin has
betaken himself to Him, to be Justified by His Righteousness, and to be in His
Debt, and Common for obtaining of Pardon, and for making the Application, of
what, by His Sufferings, He has Purchased: We can say but little to this
purpose, to you, who care not for your Souls, and are not sensible of your Sin,
for He came to save Sinners, and if any such do Trust Him with the S^lvation of
their Souls, He is Faithful, and will not suffer them to Perish.

3dly. From comparing these Words, By his knowledge he shall justify many,
with the former, He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall be
satisfied; We Observe, That Our Lord Jesus is never satisfied with Sinners, nor
content, till He be employed by them, in this piece of Service, even to
Justify them by H^s knowledge, or by Faith in Him, He gets not Satisfaction
for the Travel of His Soul till this be, and this is it which satisfies Him; He
cares not for Complements, great professions of respect to Religion, and
Hosanna's without this; He wept over Jerusalem, notwithstanding of these,
because of the want of this; He cares not for Martha's cumbersome Service, but
is content of Mary's sitting down to hear and receive His Word; if He get not
this employment, no other thing will content Him; as we may see in these three
Parables, Luke 15. When the lost Sheep is amissing, He is not satisfied till it
be brought home. The making the house clean will not please Him, if the lost
Piece of Money be not found; the finding whereof brings out that, Come and
rejoice with me. And when the Prodigal returns, then, and not till then, are
uttered these joyful words, This my son was dead, and is alive, he was lost,
and is found; Then comes the mirth, and all the Minstrels are yocked. Would ye
lay the hair of your head under Christ's Feet, would ye give Him thousands of
Rams, and Rivers of Oil, and the firstborn of your Bodies for the Sin of your
Souls; all these will not please Him, if ye get not your selves to be Justified
by His Knowledge, nothing will content, and satisfy Him but that: The Reasons
are. 1. Because He gets not His Work entrusted to Him, carried on otherwise
(if I may speak so) for as the Father delights to see the Work, which He has
trusted Him with, prospering, so does He: 2. Because He gets not the native
Credit and Honor, of His Office, till He get this, but counts Himself to be
like to an Ambassador, who comes to woo a Wife for the King, his Master, who
is well Treat and Entertained; but gets a refusal of what he came for: It was
the Disciples commendation, John 17. That they received his word. Though all
other things could be, if this be not, He never gets kindly respect. 3. Because
without this, Folk can never love Christ; for it is this benefit of
Justification, and Pardon of Sin, that much ingages to love and praise Him:
Because (say and sing the Redeemed,) Revel. 5.9.) Thou have redeemed us to God
by thy blood, thou art worthy to receive all praise, dominion, power, and
glory: It Is impossible that they can suitably esteem of Him, and love Him, who
are not Justified by Him; and therefore they that believe not on Him to
Justification, are called Despisers of him, and traders of the blood of the
Covenant under foot; and they fall under that sad complaint, which is made,
John 1.11. He came unto his own, and his own received him not; be was in the
world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not. There is then
a necessity laid upon you, either to give Him employment in this, or to lie
under His displeasure, and to be made countable for standing in the way, so far
as ye would, of His Satisfaction. The Lord has so molded the way of His
Grace, that not only does He invite and allure Sinners, but also He lays
strong Bonds on them for their good; and leaves it not indifferent to them, to
make use of Christ, or not, for their Justification; but they must either take
this way, or have God, and the Mediator to be their enemies, in the greatest
measure, and in the highest degree; choose you then, whether ye will Satisfy
Christ Jesus or not. How shall He be Satisfied? will ye say, even by your
betaking of your selves to Him, and by improving His Righteousness, for your
Peace with God, and for your Justification before Him; humbly pleading Guilty
at the Bar of Justice, and Begging Pardon, and acceptance on the account of His
Satisfaction, and by Faith, Extracting your Discharge, and Absolution, that so
the Application of His Purchase being obtained, the Conscience may be quieted
on that ground. And do ye think this a matter to cast out with Christ about?
That He would have you Justified, and that ye will not; That He would have you
washen in His Blood from your Sins, and that ye had rather lie still in them:
Think ye this reasonable? And yet thus it stands with you, and we declare it to
you, in His Name, That Christ and ye shall never be Friends, except on these
Terms; That ye take with your Sins, and Natural Enmity against God, and welcome
heartily the News of a Mediator, and embrace His Righteousness, trampling your
own under your Feet, as to all expectation of Justification by it; That in a
Word, ye do by Faith, take hold of the offer of Salvation through Him, in the
Gospel, Resigning your selves absolutely to Him, and founding your humble Plea
before God thereupon. This is the Shield of Faith, that quenches the fiery
Darts of the Devil, and that which gives Wings to the Soul, to flee to Heaven
upon; and we wot well this is no unfriendly Message, nor evil Bargain, and ye
may have it of Him; He is indeed a Dexterous, and Skillful handler of Souls,
that commit themselves unto Him. Why do you not then in His own way, hazard
your Souls on Him? Were Sinners hazard known, and what solid confidence they
may have, in putting their Souls in Christ's hand, they would be thronging in
upon Him, to get hold laid on His offer, which is like to a Banner displayed,
and spread out in this Word of the Gospel, to which every one may put his hand;
This is the very Sum of the Gospel, to pray you to be reconciled to God, to
admit of the Mediator, and to give Him a Commission (to speak so with
reverence,) or rather to entreat Him, to make your Peace, that is, to give Him
the credit of saving you; that if Justice were pursuing you, ye might be found
in Him, not having your own Righteousness, but His; and in Him, have one Answer
to all Challenges; not thinking your selves the less sicker and sure that ye
have given up with your own Righteousness, and betaken your selves to His, who
knows but Souls might be getting good at such a time, if this were made use of,
and believed? O! so faithful as He is,: He dar give His Word and Seal, that He
will keep to you; And this is His end in Word and Sacrament, that Sinners might
be brought to trust in Him, in giving Him the employment to Justify them; That
they being in themselves blind, may come to Him for light; being poor, may come
to Him for Gold to enrich them; being ^^ked, may come to Him, for garments to
cloth them; being ungodly, may come to Him, that He may Justify them: But,
alace, People are for the most part senseless, and regardless of their Sin and
misery, and therefore He gets no employment from them; Many sit very brave and
fine here, and have no Legal Bar on them, to keep them from the Communion, who
yet have sleepy and senseless Souls, and are ruining and destroying themselves;
This we assure you, is the condition of many of you, who never knew to make use
of Christ, and of His Righteousness, and yet will boast of your Faith, and of
your good heart* to God; Away with your old presumptuous Faith, take with your
unbelief and presumption; Say not ignorantly, that ye shall do as ye can,
though ye cannot do as ye would; ye are unsound at the heart, mistaken about
your spiritual state, and know that the Devil, by a deceitful heart is speaking
out of you such language; For it is enemies we are Commissioned to reconcile;
and it is lost Sinners that Christ came to seek, and save; and ye see not your
selves to be such, and therefore ye care not for such offers of Grace; But, ah!
many of you, if Grace prevent not, will get a cold welcome from Christ at that
Day; and will be made sadly to smart, for the slighting of many Precious
Opportunities, which God did put in your hand, and whereof to make use, ye had
no heart.

SERMON LI.
ISAIAH LIII.XI. Verse 11. -- By his knowledge shall my righteous servant
justify many, etc.


THere has been much spoken from this sweet Scripture of Our Lord Jesus His
Sufferings; and somewhat also of the Promises made to Him, that His Sufferings
should not be for naught; in these Words, we have a compendiou^ explication of
the Effects that ^^ow from them, by which He shall be Satisfied for them all;
which ye may take up in these Four. 1. The great benefit it sel^ that is holden
out here, and that is Justification. 2. These to whom it shall come, it is
many, so that His having a Seed, spoken of, v. 10. Is exponed here by this,
that many shall be justified. 3. The way how this is derived to them, by his
knowledge, which we show is to be understood, of Faith in Him. 4. The ground
from which this flows, and on which it is built, and that confirms it; For he
shall bear their iniquities; And as it is in the following v. He bare the sin of
many, And therefore they must be Justified; it being but reason, that these
many, whose iniquities He bears, and whose Debt of Sin He pays, should be
Justified.

We may speak more particularly to the Explication of each of these, as we come
to them; we shall then first expone, and give the meaning of this Word,
Justification, or to Justify ere we come to the Doctrine, because it will
serve to clear it, and will make way for it, and so much the rather, as it is
the very hing of the Gospel, and that on which our Salvation depends, though
yet but very little, and very ill understood, there being many that cannot tell
what it is, though there be not many Words more frequently mentioned in the
Scripture, and though it be that whereby a Person is translated from the State
of Enmity, into the State of Friendship with God.

As for this Word, To Justify, or Justification then; there are three senses
given of it; Two whereof are Erroneous, and the last only is according to the
mind of the Spirit of God, speaking in the Scripture, which we shall Clear, and
Confirm.

1. Some take this Word Physically, as if it were to make Just, by the infusing
of habitual Grace, or by a Physical, and Real Change; and so taken, it is the
same with that which we call Sanctification; but in all the Scripture we know
not one Place, where necessarily the Word is so to be understood. Although this
acceptance of the Word, is the great rise of the Popish Error, in that
Controversy concerning Justification. 2dly. Others take it for Gods Revealing
Manifesting, or Declaring the way, how a Guilty Person comes to be Just; and so
to Justify, is for Ministers to teach the way to People, how they may live
holily; As it is said, Dan. 12.3. They that turn many to Righteousness, etc. By
which sense, some Wickedly, and Blasphemously detract from Christ's
Satisfaction; as if His Justifying were no more, but a teaching of Sinners the
way how to be Ju^^^fied; to wit, by living holily and justly. But the Word that
follows in the Text; For he shall bear their i^iquities, Cu^s the Throat of
that Exposition; for it is by Christ's bearing of the punishment of the Elects
Iniquities, and for paying of their Debt, that they come to be Justified;
Therefore the one is given for a Reason of the other. 3dly. Considering the
Word according to the meaning of it in Scripture, we take it for a Legal
forensick, or Court Word, borrowed from men's Courts, wherein a Person arraigned
for such a Crime is either Condemned, or Absolved; And when he is Absolved, and
Declared to be acquitted, or made free from that which is laid to his Charge,
he is said to be Justified; so is it before God, and in His Court:
Justification is the freeing of a Sinner, from the Charge that the Law gives
in against Him, and the absolving and declaring of him to be free from the
Guilt of Sin, and from the punishment thereof, which by the Sentence of the Law
is due to Him. The former two senses run to the making of a man to be
inherently holy, or without a Fault; Which is, as if a Guilty Man, or a
Criminal, being sifted before a civil Court of Judicature, were declared to be
Innocent; But this true meaning of the Word, sets out a Man arraigned before
Gods Tribunal, and charged with Guilt, and found Faulty, but Absolved, and
Acquitted, not because he wants Sin, but because his Debt is paid, and his
Sins Satisfied for, by a Cautioner; Even as a Man that is called before a Civil
Court, for such a Sum of Money, and is found liable to the Debt; but his
Cautioner coming in, and paying the Debt for him, there is both in Reason and
in Law just ground, why that Man should be absolved, and declared free of the
Debt: So is it here, Christ Jesus taking on, and satisfying for the Debt of the
Elect, and procuring Absolu^ion for them, for whom He paid the Price; there is
Reason, and ground in Law, that they should be Justified and Absolved: All
these Opinions agree in these two 1. That Men naturally have Sin, and that they
must count for it. 2. That this Jus^ification whatever it be, where it is, does
fully Absolve and Acquit the Sinner, and makes him free of Sin, as to the
Guilt, the Punishment, and Consequents of it, Death and the Curse, as if he had
never had Sin: But the difference lies here, that this last acception of the
Word, absolves a Man, though he have Sin in himself, by the interposing of a
Surety, and Cautioner, who pays his D^bt, and procures the Sentence of
Absolution to him; And in this Sense, Justification is, as if a Man were
standing at the Bar of Gods Tribunal Guilty, and having a witness of his Guilt
in himself, and God, out of Respect to the Mediator His Satisfaction, and
Payment of His Debt, which He has laid hold upon by Faith, does pronunce that
sinful Person to be Free, Absolved, and Acquitted from the Guilt and
Punishment of Sin; and does accordingly Absolve him upon that account: So then
Justification is not to be considered, as Gods Creating, and Infusing of
gracious habits in us; but the declaring of us to be Free, and Acquitted from
the Guilt of Sin, upon the account of Christ's Satisfying for our Debt.

This we will find to be very clear, if we consider how the Word is taken, both
in the Old and new Testament, as namely, Isaiah 5.23. Woe unto them that
justify the wicked for a reward, and take away the righteousness of the
righteous from him. And Prove. 17.15. He that justifies the wicked, and he that
condemns the just, even they both are abomination to the Lord. Where the
plain meaning of the Word can be no other then this, that when a Judge
pronounces a man to be Just, although he be unjust, it is a wicked thing which
the Lord abhores. And so, Psalm. 51.4. That thou might be justified when thou
speak. That is, that thou might be declared to be so. And, Matthew. 11.19.
Wisdom is justified of her children. 2. We will find this meaning of the Word
to be clear, if we consider Justification, as distinguished from
Sanctification, For in that Popish sense, they are both made one and the same;
but they are distinguished in Scripture. As 1 Cor. 6.11. Such were some of you,
but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified. Where he looks
on these two Benefits of Justification and Sanctification as disti^ct, and
distinguishes the one of them from the other; now Sanctification being the
Grace that renews our nature and makes an inward spiritual change;
Justification must needs be that Act of Gods Grace, that takes away the Guilt
of Sin, and makes Sinners to be friends with God, through Christ's
Righteousness; and so is a relative change of their State. 3. It will be clear
if we consider to what it is opposed in Scripture; it is not opposed to
sinning, as Sanctification is, but to these two. 1. To the charging of a Sinner
with somewhat unto Condemnation. And 2. To the Act of Condemning; now the
opposite to Condemnation is Absolution, as is clear, Romans 8.33. Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that justifies, who shall
condemn? etc. Gods Justifying is put in as opposite to the Charging, and
Lybelling of the Elect, and to the Condemning of them; therefore none of these
can be; and so Justification there, looks both to the part of an Advocat
pleading, and declaring a man to be Free, and to the part of a Judge
pronouncing him to be Absolved, and Justified; which well agrees to Our Lord
Jesus, who Justifies His People both ways. 4. It may also be cleared from
parallel Scriptures, where Justifying is called Reconciling; As 2 Cor. 5.18,
19, 20. God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their
trespasses unto them, and has committed to us, etc. And how that comes to
pass, is told in the last v. For he made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. So that to be made the
Righteousness of God is to be Justified, and to be Justified is to be made
friends with, or to be reconciled to God; and that not by working a moral
Change; but upon the account of Christ's Satisfact on, bringing us into
friendship with God. So, Ephesians. 1.6. Where to be Justified, is exponed, to be
made accepted in the Beloved* And what else is that, but to be in good terms
with God, to have him passing by all quarrels, as having nothing to say against
us, but accepting us through Christ as Righteous? So, Acts 13.38, 39. Be it
known unto you, that through this man is preached unto you forgiveness of sins,
and by him, all that believe are justified from all things, from which ye could
be justified by the law of Moses. A place that clearly holds forth, that as all
the Elect are naturally chargable by the Law, as being Guilty of the breach
thereof, and that they cannot be absolved from it by ought in themselves; so
they are through Faith in Jesus Christ freed from it: As if the Lord had said,
ye are fred from the Sentence of the Law, because, through Christ is preached
unto you Remission of Sins, and there is away laid down for your Absolution,
who believe, from the Guilt of Sin, and from all the consequents of it. 5ly.
It Is clear from the Text, because it is such a Justifying, as has in it Christ's
being Sentenced in our Room, as the cause of it; now He was Sentenced in our
Room, not by having Sin infused in Him, which were Blasphemous to think, but by
having our Sin imputed to Him; and therefore our Justification must be our
Absolution, by having His Righteousness imputed to us, As is clear throughout
this Chapter; Therefore its said, He has carried our sorrows, and born our
griefs; He was wounded for our transgressions, He was bruised for our
iniquities, by his strips we are healed, He laid on him the inquitie of us all,
And in these words, By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many,
for he shall bear their iniquities; It Is a Justification that comes to us by
Christ's taking on our Debt; And this we cannot imagine to be otherwise, but
by a Legal Change, or by a Change of Law-rooms; He coming as Surety in our
Room, and we having Absolution, by virtue of His Satisfaction; So that the
meaning of the Words in short is, As if the Prophet had said, would ye know
what we have by Christ's Sufferings? Even this, to wit, That many, as many as
whose iniquities He bore, and satisfied for, shall be Acquitted, and Absolved
from the Guilt and Punishment of their Sin, through His Satisfaction; They
shall be fred from the Sentence, and Curse of the Law, which they deserved; And
shall be declared Righteous, through the Righteousness of their Cautioner,
which they have laid hold upon by Faith.

Hence, Observe, 1. That all Men and Women, even all the Elect themselves, are
by nature liable to an arraignment before the Justice-seat of God; That they
are Justified, supposes a bringing of them, as it were, before His Tribunal,
ere they can be Justified, and have the Sentence of Absolution past in their
favors; The Apostle takes this for granted, Romans 14.10. We shall all stand
before the judgment seat of Christ; And, Heb. 9.29. It Is appointed for all men
once to die, and after that comes the judgment; There is a Solemn Decree past,
That, as all Men shall die, so every Man shall be brought to a Reckoning, and
Judgment; And Act. 17.31. He has appointed a day in which he shall judge the
world in righteousness, etc. and that cannot be ranversed; See, 2 Cor. 5.10.
For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, We must, There is
an inavoidable necessity of it. For further clearing, and confirming of this,
ye would know that there are Three Courts, that especially the hearers of the
Gospel are liable unto, which we would make our selves for; They are all put
together, Romans 2.12, 15, 16. There is 1. The Court of the Word, wherein God
keeps a Justice-seat, or Tribunal, Condemning the Wicked, and Absolving the
Righteous: As Christ says, John 12. The word Which I speak shall judge you in
the last day; And this is it that the Apostle has in that forecited place,
Romans 2 12. As many as have sinned in the law shall be judged by the law. A 2.
Court is the Court of the Conscience; And this is more broad and extensive,
reaching all Men, without, as well as within the Church; Wherein God has His
own way of Lybelling and Accusing of, and passing Sentence upon Sinners; As v.
14, 15. When the gentles who have not the law, do by nature the things
contained in the law, these having not a law, are a law unto themselves, which
show the work of the law written in their hearts, their Conscience also bearing
witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing, or else excusing one
another. A 3d. Court, or Judgment Seat is that which is more Discernable,
Distinct and Terrible, And that is the Judgment Seat of God, when He shall
conveen all and every one before Himself immediately, and shall Judge and pass
Sentence upon them; Whether this be done to a particular Person, or to the
whole World, as v, 16. In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by
Jesus Christ according to my Gospel.

Use, We would have you confirmed in the Faith of this Truth, That there are
none of us but we are liable to all these Courts; And therefore ye would live
so, as ye may be in a posture fit for this appearing; many of us, alace, live
as if we were never to be called to an account. And as if there were no
Tribunal that we were to appear before.

2ly. Observe, That all Men and Women, even the Elect themselves, are
naturally, and as in themselves obnoxious to Condemnation, and liable to the
Sentence of it before Gods Tribunal; for Jesus Christ His Justifying of them,
and procuring their Absolution, implies this much, That they, as considered in
themselves are liable to, and cannot receive another Sentence then that of
Condemnation; It says that not only they have Sinned, but that because of
their Sin, they are liable and obnoxious to Condemnation; That for their Sin,
Gods Curse is due to them, John 3.18.36. He that believes not is condemned
already: And he that believes not shall not see life, but the wrath of God
abides on him; The Sentence is standing against Him unrepealled; even that
Sentence which we have, Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continues not in
all things written in the book of the law to do them; The Sinner comes no
sooner to look to the Court of the Word, nor to the Court of his own
Conscience, but that Sentence is laid before him, And when he comes before God,
he can expect no other thing, The Lord proceeding according to the Rule of the
Word; So Romans 3.19. We know that whatever thing the law says, it says to them
who are under the law, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may
become guilty before God; Which suppons a lyableness to His Curse, and a
subjection to the Judgment of God, as the Word is rendered on the Margent;
There are none, as considered in their natural condition, who have a word to
say against it: To clear it a little, ye would consider two things in the Law,
as it is a Covenant of Works, under which all Men are by Nature, 1. The
Directive or Commanding part of it, that carves out Man's Duty, and so it is the
Rule of Righteousness to Men and Women, and what is not conform to the
Commands, and Directions of it, is Sin, and has a Guilt with it; This is most
certain, that the Law, even as to Believers, is a Rule of Righteousness,
according to which they are to walk. 2. There is in it the Sentence of a Curse,
whereby the Person that Sins, is not only declared to be Guilty, but liable to
Gods Wrath and Curse; This may be separated from the former; The Law was no
doubt a Law of Righteousness to Man in his Innocence, and is so to the Believer
still, who is Absolved from the Curse of it; but yet the Believer, as
considered in his Natural Condition, is not only Guilty, but stated under the
Curse; And this is the meaning of the Doctrine; That Naturally, not only are
all Men Sinful, but they are stated under the Curse of God; The Law says on
the matter, Man and Woman thou have not abiden in what is written, and
therefore thou must die, Thou art liable to the Curse, which will light if it
be not prevented: If there were any need of Reasons to prove this, they are not
wanting; It is so. 1. That the Lord may humble all Flesh, as the Apostle says,
Romans 3.19. That every mouth may be stopped, and that all the world may become
guilty before God. 2. It is so ordered, that His Grace may shine the more
conspicuously; When the Person is found Guilty, and abnoxious to the Curse by
the Law, Grace shows it self to be wonderful, in pulling the Sinner from under
the lash of the Law; As Isaac was set free, and a Sacrifice was accepted in his
Room; So the Sinner is set free, and the Mediator in His Satisfaction is
accepted in His Room; To this purpose it is said, Romans 11.32. God has
concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have have mercy on all; Not that
He shows mercy on all that ate in unbelief, but this is the meaning, That it
might be mercy to all that should get good of the Mediator, and alone mercy to
the Elect, both of Jews, and Gentiles, It Is on this ground, That Ephesians. 2.3.
The Apostle not only says, Ye were dead in sins and trespasses; But also
turning it over on Himself, He adds, And we are all the Children of wrath even
as others; Liable by Sin to the Curse of God, if it had not been graciously
prevented.

Use, 1: Let all of us take a view hereof our Natural Condition; and indeed it
were the better for us that we were more frequently viewing it, What is it,
will ye say? It is even this, Ye are all liable to appearing before God's
Justice-seat; Ye are all guilty, and by the Sentence of the Law, under Gods
Curse, and Condemned already; Because God has said, He that sins shall die; We
are, I say, all thus by Nature.

Use, 2. It gives a great commendation to the Grace of God in Christ Jesus; it
makes Grace wonderfully Glorious, That takes the Sinner at this ni^k, and in
this pinch; We shall not dispute here; nor is it needful, nor edifying,
whether God might have forgiven Sin freely, without any intervenient
Satisfaction to His Justice, seeing He has declared His mind, concerning that
in His Word, Exodus 23.7. I will not justify the wicked; And Chap. 34.7. That
will by no means clear the guilty; And Genesis 3. The day thou eats, or Sins, thou
shall surely die: This is it that puts Man as considered, in his Natural
Condition, to be as it were in Hell, while he is on Earth, and puts Him in such
a near capacity to the Wrath of God, if we may so speak, and to the actual
undergoing of it; That there needs no more but the blowing out of the Breath,
to put him in the pit; yea, while He is living, he is a Prisoner in Chains,
till the day of Execution come; If Grace reprive him not; ye would think much
of Grace. O! how very much! if ye were seriously comparing these two together;
to be so near Hell, and yet as it were, to have a Ladder set up for you to
ascend to Heaven by; And that in such a way, as, by Christ's becoming a Curse:
They will certainly never think much of the Grace of God, and of the Love of
Christ, they will never think much of their own hazard nor will they ever in
earnest make use of Christ's Righteousness, who have not some quick and lively
impression, and sense of this their Condition by Nature; And therefore, when
ever ye go to Read, to Hear, to Pray, to Meditat, etc. Take up your selves, as
naturally arrested before the Court of God, and obnoxious to His Wrath; This
would lay your Pride, and make Christ's offers in the Gospel lovely to you.

Use, 3. This shows, That these who get any good of Christ, are much in Christ's
Debt and Common, and have in themselves no cause to boast of it; If this be
true, even of the Elect, that they are all once under the Sentence of
Condemnation, else they could not be Justified, and Absolved by Christ; Ye that
think your selves to be something, what have ye to boast of? Who has made you
to differ, and what have ye, but what ye have received? It sets you well
therefore to be humble, and to put a Price upon Christ, as the Apostle does on
the same consideration, Gal. 2.20. When he says, Who loved me and gave himself
for me; That makes Him relish sweetly to the Believer; And this is the ground
of His Triumph, Romans 8.33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
Elect? It is God that justifies, who is he that condemns? It is Christ that
died, yea, rather that is risen again, etc. This way of Justification makes
Christ's death Wondrous Lovely, and it is on this that the Song of the Redeemed
is founded, Rev. 1.5. Unto him that loved us and washed us from our sins in his
own blood, and has made us kings and priests unto God, and his Father, To him
be glory, and dominion for ever and ever amen; And of that new Song, Revel.
5.9, 10. Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open the Seals thereof, for
thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood, etc. It is an evil
token, when folk can talk at a high rate of their hope of being Justified,
when, in the mean time, they have so little estimation of Christ, and their
hearts are so little warmed with love to Him, who is so Lovely to Believers;
And when they can so confidently make application of His Purchase to
themselves, and yet cannot tell when their heart was ever in the least measure
ravished with the consideration of Christ's love, neither did it ever relish to
them, nor were their hearts ever in the least engaged to Him on that
consideration.

Use, 4. All of you, who are lying in this Natural Condition, and know not what
is your hazard, who are living in your Prophanity, or at best, in your
Hypocrisee, Civility, Formality, not Regenerat, or Born again, but have still
the same Faith, and Love that ye were born with, and no other, what is your
posture? ye are not in Christ, but lying naked, obnoxious to the Wrath and
Curse of God, condemned already; And what if your breath go out in this doleful
condition? What if a Palsy, or Appoplexie overtake you suddenly? What if a
Stone fall upon you, ere ye go home out of this place? There is even but that
much betwixt you and Hell; Ye are liable to be arrested before the Court of
Gods Justice, and how will it be with you, when ye come there? And when it
shall be said, that such a Person has broken the Law, and therefore Gods Curse
is due to him, and therefore away with him; For he judges according to men's
works; Are there none of you afraid of this? Do ye believe it to be a Truth? O!
that ye did, who are lying contentedly, and secure in your Natural Condition,
and yet it does not trouble you; Will you yet lie still contentedly in this
dreadful state? Is it possible that ye can be well in this condition? though ye
would heap up Riches as the Sand? ye cannot look into the Bible, nor into your
own heart, but it curses you; Ye cannot look to the Bar of Gods Justice, but
the Sentence meets you, Depart from me ye cursed; This is the Truth of God; And
if ye think there be any here lying still in black nature (and we are not sure
all renewed) think then upon your case, O! that ye saw your posture; The
Hand-writting coming forth on the Wall, did not so afright Belshazzar, as this
Curse would afright you, if it were believed: And, 2ly. If this be your Natural
Condition, and if ye believe it to be truly so, we would expostulat with you,
and even wonder, 1. How comes it to pass, that so many of you lie still in
your Natural Condition, and endeavor not a change of your State; It will be
wondered at by Angels, and by all the Elect; yea, and even by the Reprobat,
that never heard of Christ, That so many heard the Gospel, and had the offer of
Christ, and yet did not stir up themselves to make use of Him: Is it not a
wonder that Folk can sleep secure, under the Curse of God, And bless
themselves, till their iniquities be found to be hateful? To be in this
condition, and to sleep quietly under it, will have a doleful wakning. 2dly.
How is it that so few take pains to try how it is with them? If many of you
were lying under a Decree of an hundredth pound Scots, ye would not be so
secure, till ye knew that ye were fred of it; And if it be true, that this is
your Condition by Nature, to be under the standing Sentence of the Law, and the
Curse of God, How is it, ye never try if ye be come out of that Condition? I
ask the most Profane Men among you, were ye never under this Sentence? If ye
say not, the word of God will stand up against you, and say to you, that ye lie
falsely; and if ye be under it, is it not hazardous to be so? But I fear, that
many of you dream, that the Curse of God, wears away as ye grow up. 3dly. Think
ye never of coming to Judgment, and of Gods proceeding in Judgment against
you? Think ye never that ye will die, and after death come to Judgment,
according to the general appointment past upon all Men? How comes it, that ye
are not thinking on it, and what may be the Judges procedour toward you? He
will Judge you according to this Word, and all that are out of Christ, and not
Justified by Him, will be cast into the Pit of Hell; There is no new Sentence
to be past, or to be executed upon you, but that which was standing over your
head before. 4ly. Know ye how long He may treat with you, or how long ye may be
in Capacity to get your state changed? Are there not many taken suddenly away,
of whose estate we shall not Judge, but may it not be so with you? why are ye
then so secure, why decline ye the Word, and refuse to let it search you, while
ye know not whether the Curse be removed, and whether the Sentence be changed,
or recalled? Some of you, perhaps will say, The Lord knows that, it is not for
us to know; And that says, that ye do never so much as essay to know, and to
win to clearness about your state: Others of you, will it may be say, that ye
hope all will be well, and yet that at the best is but a guessing, and ye would
be loath to speak so of a Decree that were past against you, about a Sum of
Money, in any poor Court of Judicature on Earth; and will ye suffer this
terrible Sentence to stand over your head, in the Court of Gods Justice, and
not study to be distinct, and at a point upon solid, and good grounds, that it
is repealled? If ye did really believe that it was once so with you, and that
yet ye are in hazard of this Sentence, ye would not, ye could not, I am sure,
ye should not be at rest, till ye knew that it were removed; It would put you
to make use of Christ in good earnest for your Peace, and to seek after an
extract of the repealled Sentence, and of your Absolution, Sealed up in your
Bosom: And this is the thing that we aim at in all this, even that as ye would
not have a terrible meeting with God before the Bar of His Justice, that ye
would seek to have the Curse that ye are naturally lying under, removed, and to
have your peace made with God, and to have some well grounded clearness about
it, that ye might live comfortedly, and die with solid confidence, and
Christian Courage, without which ye can do neither.

SERMON LII.
ISAIAH LIII.XI. Verse. 11. He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall
be satisfied: By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many: for he
shall bear their iniquities.


THE way of Absolving a Guilty Sinner in the Justice of God, is the great sum
and scope of all the Gospel; Even to show how a lost Sinner, Obnoxious to the
Sentence of a transgrest Law, may, without prejudice to the Justice of God,
come to be Justified; we are persuaded, that there is nothing of greater
concernment to Sinners; And if we knew our Debt, and our Hazard, we would
think, that there is nothing of greater concernment to us in particular: The
Sum of the Covenant of Redemption runs on this, and it is the great thing aimed
at, in all this Chapter, wherein the Prophet lets us see. 1. What is the great
thing that Satisfies Justice; And for this end much has been spoken of Christ's
Sufferings, and Soul-travel. 2. He lets us see, what is the benefit that comes
to us, by Christ's Sufferings, and that is Justification, or Absolution from the
guilt of Sin, and from the Curse which it deserves. 3. He lets us see the way
how this benefit is derived, And it is, by his knowledge; This, faith He, shall
be the great result of Christ's Sufferings, Many shall be justified, And this
shall be the way how it shall be derived to these many, and that is by his
knowledge, or by Faith in Him, resting on His Righteousness and Satisfaction.

We opened up the meaning of the Words the last day, and pointed at two
Doctrines from them. 1. That all Men, and Women have a Judgment to abide
before God, an Arraignment, and Indictment there, to which they must answer;
They must all come to get a Sentence from God. 2. That all Men Naturally are
liable to the Sentence of Condemnation; This is supposed here; For in as far as
Sinners are only by Faith in Christ Justified; in as far the Sentence of the
Law, and of the Covenant of Works is standing against them, and over their
heads, who are not by Faith united to Christ Jesus, and Justified by His
Righteousness.

The 3. Doctrine (Which is almost the very Words of the Text) that now we
intend to speak to, is this* That although all Men naturally be obnoxious to
the Sentence of the Law, and to the Curse of God* yet there is a way laid down,
how a Sinner so obnoxious, may be Justified, and fred from that Sentence; and
this is by Faith in Jesus Christ only: If any Doctrine be of concernment for us
to know, and to be well and experimentally acquainted with, This is of
concernment to us; By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many.
There are Three things in this Doctrine employed, which by one, and the same
labor will be proven, and therefore we shall put them together. 1. That
although all Men be naturally obnoxious to the Wrath and Curse of God, yet He
has appointed away how guilty Sinners may be Justified and Absolved. 2. That
the way of attaining to this benefit of Justification, and freedom from the
Curse, is by Faith in Christ's Righteousness, It Is by his knowledge, says the
Text. 3. That there is no other way by which a Sinner obnoxious to the Curse,
can be Justified, but by Faith in Christ's Righteousness allanarly. This last
branch of the Doctrine says not only, That there is no other mean to Satisfy
Justice, but Christ's Merit and Satisfaction; But that there is no other way,
but the way of Faith to win to the application of His Satisfaction; whereby
many Questions may be Answered, and many Errors in Doctrine, and Practice
confuted; But our present purpose is to show, how a guilty Sinner may be
Justified.

And therefore we shall, 1. Give you a general view of the Truth of the
Doctrine; by confirming it from Scripture, in all the parts of it. 2. We shall
^peak more paticularly to the several branches of it. And 3ly. To the way of
attaining Justification, in the several Causes of it, as it is here holden
forth.

For Confirmation of the General Doctrine, ye shall 1. Look upon some
Scriptures, And 2. To some Grounds of Reason.

As for the Confirmation of it by Scripture, If we look through the Gospel, it
is Our Lord Jesus Christ His own Doctrine, which He preached, and the way which
He laid down therein, for Justifying and saving a Sinner, So, John 3. Where it
is three or four times repeated, As v. 16. God so loved the world, that he gave
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him, should not perish, but
have eternal life; v. 18. He that believes on him is not condemned, but he
that believes not, is condemned already, because he believes not in the name
of the only begotten Son of God; v. 36. He that believes on the Son has
everlasting life, and he that believes not the son shall not see life, but the
wrath of God abides on him; And v. 14, 15. As Moses lifted up the serpent in
the wilderness, so must the son of man be lifted up, that whosoever believes
on him should not perish, but have eternal life; And that is all one as to say,
he that believes shall be Justified; Mark 16.16. He that believes, and is
baptized, shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be damned: These are
the terms on which the Apostles are by Christ warranded to preach the Gospel,
and to make the offer of Life to every Creature; And therefore if we look
forward to their Preaching, we will find it to run in the same s^rain, A Acts
13.38, 39. Be it known unto you therefore, men and brethren, that through this
man is preached unto you the forgivenness of sins, and that by him, all that
believe are justified, from all things, from which ye could not be justified by
the law of Moses; Where, while Paul is summing up the whole Message that he had
to deliver, he goes upon the same ground; And wherein we have these three
clearly holden forth, 1. That all M^n are liable, as in their Natural Estate,
to God's Curse, and by the Law cannot be Justified. 2. That there is a way laid
down, through Jesus Christ, to come by Justification, and Remission of Sins. 3.
That the way how Sinners came by this, is Faith in Christ; All that believe are
justified: Look to the Epistles, especially these written to the Romans and
Galatians, Where this question about Justification is expr^sly, and of purpose
handled, and we will find, that it is the sum of both; As, Romans 3. Where having
said, v. 23 That all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God, And so,
that all are liable to Gods Judgment, he subjoyns, v. 24. Being justified
freely, by his grace, through the redemption, that is in Jesus Christ, Where is
the great mean of our Justification; and then he adds, v. 25. Whom God has set
forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood; Where we have the mean
of Application, to wit, Faith; and Chap. 4.5. To him that works not, but
believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for
righteousness; Which place demonstrats this, That an ungodly Person, taking
hold by Faith of Christ's Righteousness, may be, and is Justified, and
Absolved, and fred from the guilt of Sin, as if he had never Sinned; So Gal.
2.15, 16. We who are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles, or not
without the Covenant, as they are, Knowing that a man is not justified by the
works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ; even we have believed in
Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the
works of the law, for by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified;
Which place shows not only this, that through Faith in Christ, is
Justification, and Life to be had, but it also excludes all other ways of
Justific^tion, Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but
by faith; But that which we are now speaking to, is only the positive part of
the Doctrine, To show that a Guilty Sinner, obnoxious to the Curse; May by
Faith come to be Justified, and made free from the Guilt of Sin, and from the
Curse, as if he had never Sinned, nor been under the Curse.

For further Confirmation of the Doctrine, ye would consider these Four
Grounds, and ye will see from them, good reason for it; Only remember this,
That Justification looks always to a Judicial Procedour (as we hinted before)
Wherein the Lord is, as it were on the Throne, and the Guilty Sinner at the
Bar, pleading through Christ's Righteousness and Satisfaction, to be Absolved;
which is even as if a Debtor were arrested for Debt, should plead for a
Liberation, not because he is not owing the Debt, neither because he has paid
the Debt, but because his Cautioner has paid it for him; This being supposed,
and remembered, ye would, (we say) consider these Grounds, or Reasons, for
confirming the Doctrine. 1. The Sufferings that Christ has endured, and the
Satisfaction that He has made, in the Room of Sinners, as the next Words hold
out, For he shall bear their iniquities; And v. ult. He bare the sin of many;
Nay, this is the great scope of the Chapter; Therefore it is said, That he has
born our griefs, and carried our sorrows, and that the Lord has laid on him
the iniquity of us all; This makes a Ground of Confirmation. 2. Consider, How
that there is not only a sufficient price paid, but there is a Covenant of
Redemption warranding Him to pay it, and accepting it off His hand as complete
Payment, and Satisfaction for the Elects Debt; And except there be a look had
to this Covenant, Faith has not a sufficient Ground to rest on for
Justification through Jesus His Satisfaction, because otherwise we see not a
Reason, why His Sufferings can be accepted for us; For, suppose, (if such a
supposition may warrantably be made) Christ to have Suffered, yet it was free
for God to have accepted that as a Satisfaction for our Debt, or not; But the
consideration of the Covenant of Redemption removes that Doubt, and gives Faith
a Ground to lay hold on Christ's Sufferings, as Satisfactory to the Justice of
God; because, in the Covenant of Redemption, it is so transacted, and agreed
upon, betwixt God and the Mediator; Therefore the Apostle speaking, Heb. 10.8,
9. and forward, from Psalm. 40. of this Covenant, shows, That when Sacrifices
and Offerings will not do the turn, Christ comes in, Saying, Lo I come in the
volume of thy book, it is written of me, I delight to do thy will, O! my God;
By which will, (says the Apostle) we are sanctified; And had there not been
such a Will, His Sufferings had not been useful to us. 3. Consider the Offer
that is made in the Gospel to Sinners, which is the object of our Faith; For
the Covenant of Redemption is not the Ground, and Object of our Faith, though
it clears the Ground and Reason of our Faith, but it is Gods Offer in the
Gospel, according to that place, Mark 16.15, 16. Go ye and preach the gospel to
every creature, he that believes, and is baptized shall be saved; He warrands
them to go, and make it known to all to whom they shall Preach, that there is
Remission of Sin^ to be had through Faith in Christ; and this is a Ground to
Faith, when God makes offer of Christ's Satisfaction in the Gospel, on
condition that we believe, and accept of Him; When we by Faith close with the
offer, it gives us, as it were, an Assignation to Christ's Purchase; The Gospel
says, as Paul does, Acts 13.38. Be it known to you, that through this man is
preached to you remission of sins, and by him all that believe are Justified;
And Faith consents to that, as giving God credit, and accordingly closes with,
and rests upon it, as the ground of it is Plea before God; So that when the
Question comes to be asked, What have ye to Answer the Law, and to pay your
Debt with? Faith, or the believing Sinners Answers, I have nothing of my own,
but there is a Satisfaction in Christ, according to the Covenant of Redemption,
which is holden out, and made offer of to me in the Gospel, and is given, and
allowed to me, for defense, against what the Law, or Justice can say; And I
betake me to that; And this is the native and kindly Act of Faith in
Justification, when it makes use of this Defense, and Trusts to it alone; This
is even it that Paul has, Philip. 3.9. compared with v. 8. I count all things
loss, that I may win Christ, and be found in him; That when it shall be asked,
Paul, where art thou? I may have it to say, I am here, Lord, even in Christ,
and in His Righteousness; this is the ground of his Plea, having given up with
his own Righteousness, as to his Justification before God, and he will have no
other defense but that. 4. Consider the end of all these, to wit, of Christ's
Sufferings, of the Covenant of Redemption, and of the Offer of the Gospel; It Is
the Praise of the Glory of His Grace, that God may make it known, that He is
Gracious, and freely Gracious, without respect to any thing in in the Sinner;
This End is not only set out in these two peaces put together, one is, Romans
3.26. To declare, I say, his righteousness, that he might be just, and the
justifier of him which believes in Jesus; That he might be Just, That is, one
that will fulfill His threatenings, and therefore He has provided One to
Satisfy His Justice, and One that is Faithful in keeping His Promises, and
therefore He is the Justifier of them that believe in Jesus; The other place is
Ephesians. 1.6. Where, when the Apostle has spoken of Election, Predestination,
and Adoption, he sets down the end of all, to wit, To the praise of the glory
of his grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the beloved; And this is a
Ground that makes all sure; For God cannot fail to Justify the Sinner that
believes in Christ, as He is offered in the Gospel, because that is the very
end of His Justifying Sinners, the Praise of the Glory of Grace, which He will
not miss, but most certainly and infrustrably come by.

The Uses are 4. in general, The 1: whereof is, for Information, and it is such
a Lesson of Information, as without it, all the Preaching of the Gospel is to
no purpose; and the hope of Eternal Life were utterly desperate, if such a
Doctrine were not in the Gospel, that through Faith in Christ a Sinner may be
Justified; would any know then how they may be Absolved; this Answers the
Question, and tells us that it is through Faith in Christ's Righteousness, and
no other way; And if we digestedly believed the former two Doctrines, 1. That
we must all come before the tribunal of God: And, 2. That we are all obnoxious
to the Curse of God, we would think this were a very concerning Question to be
put, how such a guilty Sinner may be Absolved and Justified? And indeed, if we
be not clear in this point, It Is, as to any Fruit, in vain for us to Preach,
and for you to hear, or to think of coming to Heaven; Which is in a Word, that
a Sinner through resting on Christ's Righteousness, according to the Covenant of
Grace, may come to be absolved, and fred from the Guilt of Sin, and from the
Curse, as if he had never sinned, nor been liable to that Curse.

For further clearing of this Use, Consider, 1. What Justification is. 2. What
we mean by Faith; And, 3. What are the Causes of this Justification spoken of
in the Text. 1. By Justification in this place, is not to be understood, the
making of a Person perfectly holy, nor to have Grace infused into him, for that
is Sanctification; But it is to be absolved, and declared free, in respect of
the Guilt of Sin, and of the Curse, as if a Man had never Sinned; As it is said,
Ephesians. 1.6. Wherein he has made us accepted in the beloved; It Is an Act of
Gods free Grace, whereby our Sins are pardoned, and we accepted as Righteous in
His sight, etc. (as our Catechism has it) as if our Sin had never been. 2.
When we speak of Faith, we mean not a General Historical Faith, that Devils, or
Reprobat Men may have, and whereby an assent of the Judgment is given, to the
Truths of the Word, though indeed Justifying Faith does presuppose that;
neither by Faith do we mean such a Faith whereby a man does at the very first
believe that he is Pardoned, and which puts away all doubting, and lifts him in
his own conceit, to the hight of assurance, about the obtaining of the thing;
It Is the Antinomian presumption, to believe at first hand, that I am Justified
and Pardoned; But it is such a Faith, that takes hold of Christ's Righteousness,
made offer of in the Gospel, that I may obtain Justification, and pardon of Sin
through Him; According as it is said, Gal. 2.16. We believed in Jesus Christ,
that we might be justified by the Faith of Christ; It Is an actual closing with
the offer of Christ's Righteousness, and a submitting to the terms of it, for
Justification; The Souls founding of all it is defense before God, on Christ's
Righteousness, and Purchase offered to it in the Gospel, and resting on it,
for Life and Salvation: As suppose there were a Multitude of Rebels to whom
Pardon were by Proclamation offered, on condition, that at such a time they
should lay down their Arms, and come in; and if one of them were challenged,
and called to a Reckoning after his coming in, for his Rebellion; The ground of
his Plea would not be, that he never was out in Rebellion, but that such an
offer was made, and that he did hazard his life on it; So is it here; A Sinner
is a Rebel against God by Nature, and being in Rebellion, has the Offer of
Pardon, and Life made to him, on condition that he close by Faith with Christ's
Righteousness, and the Sinner does by Faith, give God credit, and hazards his
Soul on that; Whereas unbelief (to follow the similitude) is, as if a Rebel
hearing of such a Pardon offered, would not think that a sure way to come off,
but would either plead innocent, or take him to some other shift; This then is
the Faith that I mean of, which actually closes with, and makes use of Gods
Offer of Christ's Righteousness, for Absolution. 3dly. Consider the Causes of
Justification; And there are Three in the Words. 1. The Meritorious Cause that
has procured, and bought this Benefit, is Christ's Satisfaction; His bearing of
our iniquites; He shall justify many, for he shall bear their iniquities. 2.
The Instrumental Cause, Condition, or Mean, or Way, how that Benefit is derived
to us; is Faith, called here His knowledge; It Is the Faith we spoke of just
now; Faith taking hold of such a Promise, and resting on Gods Faithfulness for
the making out of it; It Is this which gives the Soul a Title to Christ's
Righteousness, which formerly it had not, and makes Christ's Purchase of due,
to belong to it, by virtue of Gods Offer, and consequently, the benefit of
Justification is derived to it, by it is taking hold of the Offer, which
otherwise it could not partake of. 3. The formal Cause, wherein Justification
properly consists, is this, even God's Absolving or Judicial pronouncing of the
Sinner to be Free, and His accounting of Him as righteous, on account of
Christ's Righteousness imputed to Him, and taken hold of by His Faith; where the
Sentence is past, we need not curiously inquire; It Is like, as the Sentence of
Condemnation stands in the Word, while the Sinner is in unbelief; So by
believing in Christ, He has Absolution in the Word, as John 3.18. He that
believes on him, is not condemned; And this Sentence of the Word, is as
effectual for Absolving of the Sinner, as if the Sentence were pronunced in an
immediate way, or with an audible voice from Heaven, by God, with the Sinners
name, and surname in it; And therefore let me commend this, with the other
places I named before to you, that from them ye may learn to take up the way,
how a Sinner is Absolved, and Justified; It Is Christ's Satisfaction that makes
the amends, and is the Meritorious Cause; It is Gods Word that makes Offer of
that Satisfaction, and it is our Faith begotten, and quickened by Gods Spirit,
that takes hold of it; and Justification it self it Gods Absolving, and
Accepting of the Person, as Righteous in His sight, who is fled to Christ's
Righteousness; And thus, though Gods Grace and Mercy, be the Efficient Cause
that admits of the Ransom; yet neither is Grace in us the Formal Cause; nor is
Grace in God the Meritorious Cause, but it is that which lays down the way how
a Satisfaction shall be provided, and accepts of it, when provided, and of the
Sinner on account of it, when by Faith he betakes himself to it.

Use, 2. Seeing there is such a way of Justification provided, and by the Gospel
brought to light, revealled, and made manifest, as the Word is, Romans 1.17. and
3.21. Since, I say, that Mystery, which before was hid, is disclosed, and Life
and Immortality brought to Light by the Gospel, let me earnestly entreat you,
that ye would make use of this Mean, and way of Justification, for the
obtaining of Absolution before God; The end of Preaching (as we said) is to
reveal this Righteousness, and the end of the revealling of it, is to engage
Sinners to make use of it; Of which, though we should Preach to you, from the
one end of the year to the other, if ye do not betake your selves to it, so as
to close with it, and heartily to submit unto it, it will all be to no purpose.

For pressing of this Use a little further, consider the great concern, and
moment of this Application, and what may induce you, seriously to mind it; And
to this purpose, 1. I would pose, and put you to it, if ye believe that by
Nature ye are liable to Gods Curse, and that ye must compear before His
Judgment Seat, and if ye be found in Nature when ye compear, that it will be a
Woeful, and Dreadful Sentence, that ye will meet with from God; and if withal ye
believe this; that by Justification, ye may have Sin Pardoned, be Reconciled to
God, and have the Curse removed from you, and be put in such a State, as if ye
had never Sinned; If, I say, ye believe these things to be the Truths of God;
is not this of your Concernment? whether ye be made Friends with God, and have
your Sins Pardoned, or not, whether ye shall be Eternally Happy, or Eternally
Miserable, whether ye shall get Gods blessing, or lie for ever under His Curse?
If this, I say, be of your concernment, then surely Obedience to this
Exhortation, is of your Concernment, because there is no other way to win to
Absolution, but this. 2. Consider, That it is the very design of the Gospel, and
of this benefit that is made Offer of to you therein, which all the Nations
that have not the Gospel want; The privilege being denied to them: God makes
Offer of a way to you, how ye may be Justified; and ye profess your desire to
learn it, and to get it practically made use of, and Improved, and (as Paul
has it, Philip. 3.8, 9, 10.) That ye may know Christ, that ye may win Him, and
be found in Him; And it is the Sum of the Gospel, as we have it, Act. 13.38. Be
it known unto you, men and brethren, that through this man is preached unto you
remession of sins, and by him all that believe are justified; This is even the
time that the Lord is making this Proclamation, that was before Prophesied of,
and Published by Isaiah, By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify
many; This is it that is even now Revealed, Declared, and made Manifest to you,
that by Christ Jesus alone, Righteousness is to be attained; And if it be of
such concernment, that for this very end, God has sent His Sone to die, and
has sent this Gospel to declare, and make offer of this benefit of His Death
unto you; It Is no doubt, greatly of your concernment, to make use of it, when
it comes to you. 3. Consider, That if the Lords Proclamation of it, have not
that effect, to engage you to Christ Jesus, for the obtaining of Righteousness
through Him, it will leave you in a wor^^ condition then it found you in; It Is
not now, whether ye will perish or not? though that be a great matter (the most
Barbarous Heathens will readily think, that Gods Justice is terrible to meet
with) but it lays these two in the Balance; It Is either a most inconceivable
condition, beyond what others who have not heard the Gospel, will come under,
if the Offer be slighted, or Eternal Salvation, if it be embraced; Woe to thee
Chorazin, woe to thee Bethsaida (says the Lord, Matthew. 11.21, 22.) For if the
mighty works which are done in thee, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they
would have repented long ago; And it shall be more tolerable for Sodom in the
day of judgment, then for Capernaum, who, because they were lifted up to
heaven, in respect of a glorious Dispensation of Gospel Ordinances, and
improved them not, shall be cast down to hell; and whereon is this dreadful
denunciation founded? Even on this ground, just now hinted at, the Gospel was
more plainly and powerfully Preached to them, then it was to Tire and Sidon, to
Sodom and Gomorrah, who had Lots Testimony, but Christ's and His Apostles
Testimony, in a manner, swallowed up that, which Testimony they slighted: Now
pose your selves, whether this Gospel has not sounded loud in your ears? have
ye not heard it? yes verily; We may here allude to that Word, Romans 10.16.
Doubtless ye have heard, the sound thereof is come to you; and ye shall never
have that to object, that ye heard it not. This Text, and this same Sermon on
it, and others, will bear witness, that through Jesus Christ, ye had a way laid
down to you, for remission of Sins, and for Justification; and what will
follow? either ye must betake your selves to Christ's Righteousness for
Justification, and study to be Holy, or else ye will bring upon your selves a
more terrible Condemnation then came upon the inhabitants of Sodom and
Gomorrah, who were consumed, and burnt quick, by fire and brimstone from
Heaven; And therefore there is ground here for all to look well about us, what
use we make of this benefit offered to us, that we miscarry not, and make not
our selves most inexcusable, for slighting of it.

I shall here speak a little to some sorts of Persons, that ought mainly to lay
this to heart. 1. To some that are so utterly careless, and indifferent, in
making their Peace with God, that to this day, all warnings, threatenings, and
dispensations that they have met with, could never prevail with them, once to
make them that far serious, as to ask that Question, what they should do to be
saved? to whom much preaching, is but a beating in the Air, to whom such
Preaching is Fruitless, and Christ useless; It Is of these that He speaks,
Matthew. 22. Who being invited to the Wedding, They made light of it, and went
away, one to his farm, another to his merchandise; There is a Generation of
such Persons amongst us, to this day, who never thought seriously of the
Gospel, nor of this Doctrine, which is the Substance and Life of the Gospel,
and without which we can enjoy no Mercy, nor Benefit holden forth, and made
offer of in the Word; But slight Pardon of Sin, and think little of
Justification, who will, the day is coming, when it will be much thought of,
and when many of you, if God prevent not, would give all the World for an Offer
of it; and would be glad to be burnt with the World, or covered with, and
smothered under a Hill, or Mountain, rather then to come, and receive your
fearful Doom, and Sentence from the Judge, because ye had this favor in your
Offer, and made not use of it. A 2d. Sort are a Profane Company; who, if there
carriage be looked on, it says plainly, nay, it openly Proclames, that such
Men believe not, that there is a Judgment coming; otherwise they durst not
for a World, live as they do: Is this think ye, the way to be Justified, to be
Laughing, Sporting, Gaming, Tippling, and Trifling away your time? in spending
it in Decking, and Dressing your Bodies, in bestowing of more time, in one day
on the Body, then ye do in eight, or many more days on the Soul? To be glutting
in the World, to be following the desires of your hearts, and the sight of your
eyes? Profane as ye are, think upon it, for we declare even unto you, that
there is a way how the ungodly may be Justified, held forth, and offered in
this Gospel; and if ye contemn it, God shall vindicat His Grace; and your
trampling on it shall return on your own head. A 3d. Sort, are such as have
never taken with their Sin; nor with the fead betwixt God and them; We invite
the filthy to come and wash, Sinners to come and get Pardon; the Ungodly to
come and be Justified; but, alace, we cannot get Sinners that walk under the
due sense of their Sin to Preach to; I dar say, that to many of you, the
Doctrine of Justification is in some respect needless, I am sure for the time
useless; For ye were never convinced of your Sin, nor of your hazard, but
thought that ye were always sure of your Justification; ye never evened your
selves (to speak so) to Hell, God always, ye think, loved you, and perish who
will, ye will not perish; These, and such as these, have been your thoughts of
your selves, and of your state; And we have more difficulty to get you
prevailed with, to think seriously of making your Peace with God, then we would
readily have in this, to prevail with Pagans, or with Adulterers and Murderers,
whose Natural Conscience would sooner be awakened then yours. Justification is
not a serious matter to many of you, ye think to slip through Gods Judgment;
If ye be asked, whether or no ye be Absolved? yes, that we are, will ye say,
long since; But, ah! how came ye to be Absolved? was ye ever Chased, and did ye
ever flee for refuge to the Hope set before you? was ye ever pursued by the Law
to Christ, and were ye ever made cordially to close with Him, and to found your
Plea on His Righteousness? It will be strange, if so many shall slip in to
Heaven and never know how; we grant there may be some brought in, who have not
distinctly discerned the manner how; but that almost whole Congregations, and
Countreysides should be made Friends with God, and never know, or at least
never kindly take with the Fead; we profess we see not through it, it is to us
an unintelligible Riddle, and a Paradox: Therefore be entreated to Reckon over
again; Though there be a Justification, through the Blood of Christ, to be
gotten, yet assure your selves, that ye are not in the way to it, while ye
continue senseless of your Sin, and of your hazard. A 4. Sort are these, who
think that they have nothing to do with this Doctrine, they are Rich, they are
Wise, they are of honest Rank, and have a Name, and Commendation in the Place
where they Live, and they have, may be some School-craft, and Learning, and
therefore they are persuaded, that they cannot miss Justification; and where is
there one Person amongst many, if it be not some poor Body, even it may be poor
in the World; that ever thinks that the Severity of the Law, or the Threatenings
thereof concern them? But are there any more ways to Heaven, but one? Or is
there one for the Rich, and another for the Poor? Do not all come in at this
Door? is not this the way, even to take with your Sin, and to flee to Christ
for Life? And yet are there not some among you, that cannot endure to think of
Hell, to dread it, (or as we use to speak) to even your selves to it? because
ye are thought something of, able to do your turn, and have some parts, and
abilities; but there are many more Rich, more Wise, and Learned Folk then you
are, in Hell, that were never absolved before God, nor never shall; yet there
is a propensnesse in Great Men, in Rich Men, and in Men of Parts to slight this
Doctrine; But such have in some respect, more need to give all diligence to
make your calling and election sure, then many others and yet ye go not so far
as they do, who yet go not the just length. A 5th. Sort, are such as never knew
any inward Work, or exercise of the Spirit of God upon their Consciences, but
have lived with a sort of wholeness of heart all their days; If any be called
to take notice of this Doctrine, they are called to take notice of it* There is
a generation, says Solomon, Prove. 30.12. which are pure in their own eyes,
and yet are not washed from their filthiness; They conclude they are Absolved,
but never look inward, to see if there be ground to bear that conclusion. 6ly.
And lastly, There are a sort that are Formal, and Hypocritical; They were never
grossly Profane, but they were as little truly and seriously Religious; ye had
need therefore, to take heed whereon ye found your Peace, and beware that ye
take not the Form of Godliness for the Power of it, especially when the Form
is come to so great a hight; And seeing this way of Justification is holden out
to you through Christ; we exhort and beseech you all, and especially those of
such sorts as we have named, to look well that this Grace be not received in
vain: In a Word, these two sorts would take special heed to this Doctrine, 1.
Some that mind not Religion at all. 2. Others, who if they mind it, mind it not
in the way of Grace, but as it were by the Works of the Law; We declare to you,
that Justification i^ by Faith in Jesus Christ, and by resting on His
Righteousness; as many as take that way, they may be assured to come speed;
and they that misken, and slight that way, shall never win to Heaven, for there
is no other name given, whereby a sinner can be saved, but the name of Jesus
only; He is the way, the truth, and the life; and no man comes to the father
but by him.

SERMON LIII.
ISAIAH LIII.XI. Verse 11. -- By his knowledge shall my righteous servant
justify many, etc.


THere is (as I said lately) nothing of greater Concernment to a Sinner to
know; then these two, 1. What it is, that satisfies Justice; and makes a Sinner
acceptable before God? 2. To know how that may be attained, or what way it is
applied? And this verse, shortly, but very clearly answers both. 1. That which
Satisfies Justice, is the travel of Christ's soul, or His Sufferings. 2. The way
how this is Applied, Derived, or Communicate, is set down in the latter part of
the verse, By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, for he
shall bear their iniquities; This is the effect of Christ's Sufferings, that
many by them shall be Absolved from the Guilt of Sin, and from the Curse; And
this is the way, how these many come to be thus Absolved; It is by believing on
Him, for thus His Satisfaction is accounted theirs, as if they themselves had
Satisfied. We proposed the last day, this Doctrine to be spoken to from the
Words; That there is a way through Faith in Christ, and resting on His
Sufferings, by which a Sinner, obnoxious to Gods Curse, may attain to be
Justified, and declared free before the Throne of God; This Doctrine implies
these Two things in general. 1. That there is such a thing possibly attainable
by a Guilty Sinner, as Justification. 2. That Justification is to be attained
allanerly by Faith in Christ Jesus, resting on His Righteousness. By his
knowledge shall he justify many; As there is a necessity to be Absolved, so
there is a necessity to take this way for Absolution; because this, and this
only is holden out to be the way, how Justification is attained; It Is by
Christ's knowledge, which in short is by Faith in Him.

We discoursed somewhat of the positive part of this Truth the other day; Which
is of great Concernment; the understanding thereof, being the very hinge of the
Gospel, and that wherein, in a special manner the Gospel, and Covenant of Grace
differs from the Law, and Covenant of Works, and pointing out a way for coming
by Righteousness, and Life through Christ; in opposition to the Law, as a
Covenant of Works, that holds out a way to Righteousness, and Life, through
our own performances.

We touched also at some Uses of the Doctrine, for directing of you, to the
believing use-making of Christ, for coming at Peace with God; It would follow
now, that we should speak a little to that Use of Refutation, that flows
natively from this Doctrine; For if this be the way, and the only way of the
Justification of a Sinner before God, to wit, by, or through Faith in Christ's
Righteousness: Then all these ways that lead not Sinners to resting on
Christ's Righteousness alone, for Justification and Peace, must be inconsistent
with the Gospel, and so to be rejected, and abhorred, whether they be in
Doctrine, or in Practice; And we choose the rather to speak a Word to this,
because it will clear the Doctrine of Justification by Faith the more; when we
come to see, and consider these Corruptions, and Errors that are foisted in by
Heterodox Men, in this great Truth of God, to the Perverting, and Corrupting
thereof; And it will the more provoke us to thankfulness to God, who has
graciously delivered us from these Snares, Errors, and Corruptions; An Error
and mistake here, about the Substance of this Truth, being such, as though we
held all other Truths incorrupted, will ruin us.

There are, we suppose, Four Sorts of Errors especially, that contradict this
grand Truth, an^nt Justification, by Faith in Christ's Righteousness, to which
we shall speak a little. The 1. is, That old rooted Error of Papists, who, in
this Point, ^nervat, and overturn the whole way of the Gospel; And because this
is it that great part of the Christian World has been deluded with; though it
be in those days, little thought of by many, and because it is not one single
Error, but as it were a Chain of very Momentuous, and Fundamental Errors, We
shall insist ^ little, in laying it out before you; and ye would not so much
look on it, as a controversal, or merely speculative, as a grossly practical
Error, and such as is naturally rooted in all Men; ye would also look upon it,
with holy fear, and jealousy over your selves, left inadvertantly ye slide
into it; and withal, ye would look on it, and make use of it, as a Motive, to
provoke you to love the Truth the more, and to be as I said, the more thankful
to God, who has fred you from that dark, heavy and comfortless way of
Justification by Works, which is now impossible.

It may be that this Error of Papists will not be thought much of by some; when
they hear that they speak of Justification by Christ, and by His merits, and by
Faith, as well as we Protestants do; But it is the more dangerous, that they do
so; And therefore, ere I show you their way of Justification; and the
inconsistancy of it with the Gospel, I would have you to advert to these Three
things. 1. That in this matter of Justification, though Papists acknowledge the
name, yet they do not acknowledge the thing it self; and so upon the matter,
the Controversy is not so much, what Justification is, as whether there be
such a thing, as Justification at all, taking it to be a thing distinct from
Sanctification, and Regeneration; which they in effect deny; For if the Form
Constitute Justification, and if to them, the Form of Justification, be the
infusing of habitual Grace in the Soul, then it is nothing different from
Regeneration, and Sanctification, and therefore, when they speak of
Justification, they speak of it in this sense; For a Justified Person to them,
is a Man renewed, and made Holy, even as to califie, or heat water, is to make
that hot which before was cold; so Justification to them, is to make a sinful
Person Just, because of inherent Righteousness in himself. 2. When they speak
of Justification, they make of a twofold Justification. The 1. whereof is,
that which they call the Justification of a wicked Person, or of an unrenewed
man, when Grace is at first infused into him, which they grant a man cannot of
himself condign^y merit: The 2d. is of a man growing, or increasing in Grace,
when he attains to more Grace, and to more G^ory; Grace and Glory being of the
same Nature, (wherein they and we do not differ,) And to this Second,
Justification, they make necessary a Man's proper merit of Works; for they say,
that the first Justification will not do a man's turn, who is come to age,
though to a child it be sufficient; because their attaining of Glory, who are
at Age, is the proper hire of their Works, which supposes Holiness; And
therefore, when they say, that Christ's merit procures Justification, their
meaning is, that it procures the First Justification, but not the Second; That
is in effect to say, that it buys habitual Grace, as a Stock to a Man,
wherewith he may Trade; but when they come to speak of H^aven, and Glory, which
is obtained (as they say) by the Second Justification, that is come at by the
Man's own trading with that Stock of habitual Grace; And so the Man's Trading, or
Tr^ffiquing with his Stock comes in, as that ^bich procures, wines, and merits
the Prize. 3. Though they use the same names that we use, as of Faith, and
Pardone, or Remission of sin, yet there is very great dif^erence betwixt them
and us, as to the thing; for they count nothing to be Faith but Historical
Faith; which the Devils have; and for Remission of Sin; They divide, and
distinguish betwixt the removing, or remission of the blot of Sin, and the
removing, or remission of the punishment of Sin; And they say, that in the
First Justification, the Blot of Sin is expelled, by the ^^^fusing of habitual
Grace, even as Darkness is expelled by the coming in of Light; but as to the
Punishment of Sin, they leave a Man to satisfy in part for himself, after his
Justification.

Now, (as we said) Because there is not one Error, or two here, but a
Concatenation, or Chain of many Errors; Therefore, for further clearing of the
Truth, and discovering of these Errors; Ye would consider, That when the
question is proposed, this is the great state of it; what that is on which a
Sinner may ground his Peace before the Tribunal of God Justice, as a solid
Defenc^, to answer all the Challenges of the Law, and whereupon he may expect
to be Absolved, and admitted to Heaven? They say, that it is inherent Holiness,
wherewith a Man's Soul is Sanctified, Renewed, and made conform to the Image of
God, which (say they) is o^ that nature, that it cannot but make the Person
acceptable to God; so that in coming before Gods Tribunal of Justice, he has
in himself wherewith to answer all his Challenges, or all the Challenges that
the Law can bring against his inward, and habitual Grace, and Sanctification;
It is true, they grant that God works this Grace in them; and that Men are not
naturally born with it; And that Christ's merit procures the bestowing of this
Grace; but yet they say, though a Man do not merit this first Grace, yet he
must dispose himself for it, by the exercise of his Free Will. Faith,
Almsdeeds, and the like; and that so he makes himself congruously meet for, and
capable of Sanctification, and habitual Grace, without which God does not
bestow it: And, if we look to the Instrumental Cause, they take in the
Sacraments of Baptism, Penance, and extreme Unction, as means whereby God
works that Grace (and that as they say, by the very work wrought) if he be a
Man come to Age, and if there be not opportunity of getting the ^acrament, he
has it in his Vow, which comes in place of the S^crament; by which m^ans, they
have these Two effects. The First, is a positive bringing in of Grace into the
Soul, The Second, is privative, whereby the Blot, or Spot of Sin, as H a^
expells Cold, or Light expells D^rkness; And this they call Remission of Sin,
when Grace shuts, and drives it ou^, so that the Soul is not polluted with it:
And because all this takes in but the guilt of Sin, which they say is removed
in the First Justification; They have a Second Justification, whereby they say
that the punishment of Sin is removed, and whereby they merit Glory; And here
came in their Dotations, Fastings, Pilgrimages, Perigrinations, etc. Whereby
they make amends to God; and because they cannot win to make a full amends
here; They have their Purgatory, and Soul-masses; And so they have not only God
to Satisfy, for the wrongs which they have done to Him, but Heaven to procure
by their own merits; for they lay down this a ground, that Glory in it is full
being, the proper reward of merit, which, say they, is not founded on God's
Promise, for that were to merit Congruously only, and not Condignally; nor is
it founded on Christ's merit, for that were to reward His merit, which to them
is absurd; though they grant an intrinsic worth to be in both: But it is merit
in strict Justice on, and by which, they expect Heaven and Glory; and having
Heaven (as we say) to procure by their own Merit, because they cannot thus
Merit it, especially if Man's Nature be looked on as corrupted; they invent two
things, or forge, two divices for that. 1. To deny Concupiscence to be Sin; And
2. To distinguish betwixt Mortal, and Venial Sins; and Venial Sins they make to
be consistent with Merit, in which they take in a world of things, as not
deadly; And if a Man have not Merit enough of his own, they have a Treasure of
Merits of many Saints, who have Satisfied for more than their own Guilt
amounted to, and have merited more than Heaven to themselves; And the Pope
being by them supposed to have a right, and power to dispense these Merits; he
gives to them that want, a right to such and such a Saints Merits: And when all
is done, they confess that this way of Justification is not certain; that it
cannot give Peace; that it may be lost, and that being lost, it cannot be
recovered, but by a new Grace gotten by the Sacrament of Penance: the very
rehearsing of which things may let you see, how unlike their Justification is
to the Gospel; and to the way of Justification that it lays down; and what
ground of thankfulness ye have to God, who has not only contrived, but
revealed unto you, a more solid and comfortable way of Justification: 1. Though
their way has much Pains, Labor and Toil in it; yet ye see what it amounts
to, and how much Uncertainty, Anxiety, and Horror do accompany it, neither do
they ever attain to Justification before God by it. And this is the 2d. thing
we would speak a Word to, even to show that this way of Justification is
inconsistent with the Gospel; and that wherein a Soul can neither have solid
Peace nor Comfort, and we shall speak a little to this. 1. In general, and then
2. More particularly: 1. In general, their way of Justification, is the very
re-establishing of the Covenant of Works; For it supposes, that God has
conditioned Life to none, but on condition of their Works, which in their value
are Meritorious; It is true, they First allow to Christ's Merit this much, that
He has thereby procured this Merit to their Works. And 2. that He has
procured to them habitual Grace, to work these works; though (as we said
before,) they must dispose themselves for that Grace, but that does not alter
the nature of a Covenant of Works, seeing the terms are still the same: For
consider Adam before the fall, he was to expect Life, according to the terms of
that Covenant; Do this and live, and here the terms of the Covenant are the
same, though their use be different; and if the Scriptures so opposes these
two; That if it be of grace, it is no more works, and contrarly, then sure this
way of Justification, that puts a Man to the same terms of the Covenant that
Adam had to expect Life by, must necessarily be inconsistent with the Gospel;
This will be the more clear, if we consider, how they themselves illustrat
their Meriting by (...) Works of the Saints, by Adam his Mer^^^ng of Life while
he stood; the which Meriting flows from an intrinsic worth in the Works
themselves, without respect to Christ's Merits; And if the Covenant of Works
has these same terms, then their Justification, no doubt, must be a
Re-establishing of that Covenant. 2. The Scripture speaks of our obtaining of
our Justification, and Righteousness always in this sense, to wit, by Gods
imputing the Righteousness of Christ to us, not only for coming at the first
Grace, but for attaining Heaven and Glory; It Is that which Paul leans to, when
he comes before God, Phil. 3. That I may be found in him, not having mine own
righteousn ss, which is by the Law, but the righteousness which is through the
faith of Christ; He lays by the one, and betakes himself to the other, as his
only defense, and that whereon he does ground his Plea before God; Now this
being the Scripture way of Justification; and their way being quite contrare to
it; (for if they were asked, how think ye to answer before God? they behoved to
say, by the merits of our good Works) It must needs be inconsistent with the
Grace of the Gospel; and that which Paul would by no means hazard his peace
upon: We will find nothing more frequently mentioned in Scripture, for the
making of our peace with God, then Covenanting with God, the imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, and Justification by Faith; But all ^hese Three are
here in their way of Justification, shut out, and excluded; For they have no
such thing as Covenanting, they scorn the imputation of Christ's Righteousness,
as but a putative and imaginary thing, and they cannot endure Justification by
Faith.

But 2dly, and more particularly, Behold and consider, how universally it
corrupts, and even destroys the Doctrine of the Gospel: 1. It corrupts and
destroys the nature of Grace; for it hangs it on man's free will, he must
dispose himself for it, and it gives him liberty to choose, or reject it as he
pleases; and it makes that to flow from man himself, that satisfies Gods
Justice, as if Remission of Sins were not free; And in the Second,
Justification and Admiss^on to Heaven and Glory. It utterly excludes Grace, and
takes in Merit, and makes Heaven the proper rewa^d of Man's own Merit. 2dly. It
enervats the Merit of Christ, and His Purchase, though it seem in words to
acknowledge it; Because it neither admits of the Merit of Christ, as the
Satisfaction to Justice, by which the punishment is taken away; nor to be that
by which Life is procu^ed; but it takes in Works, Satisfaction by Penance,
Whippings, Pilgrimages, etc. And all that it leaves to Christ's Death, is the
procuring of a new Covenant of Works, and the buying of a Stock of habitual
Grace to Man to send for himself; but it lays not the removing of the
punishment, on Christ as our Cautioner, in our name satisfying the Justice of
God for our Sins, but it leaves it on our selves, and on our keeping the
Covenant of Works; as that whereto the Promise is made. 3dly. It overturns the
nature of Gods Covenant, for either it makes no Covenant at all, or it
transforms the Covenant of Grace into a Covenant of Works; putting us to expect
Life through the Merits of Works; For they will have no Promise of Life to be
made on condition of Christ's Merit, laid hold upon by Faith; but on condition
of our own Works alone; For though they pretend that it may be called Christ's
Merit, because, say they. He has procured Grace to work these Works; yet in
effect their way of Justification, is to restore us to that Covenant which Adam
had, and to ability to keep the same terms, though, as we said the rise be
different. 4ly. It Is inconsistent with our natural State; for it suppons Man
before Conversion to have a free will to good, and ability to dispose himself
to receive Grace, and gives him a hand in turning himself to God; as if he were
not dead in Sins and Trespasses; and so the soveraignity of Grace is bounded,
and limited to wait on a Man so disposed, and so disposing himself. 5ly. It
destroys the nature of Gods Law, as if it were consistent with His holy Law,
to have such and such Lusts abounding within, and did not exact a reckoni^g for
such branches of it, as they call Venial Sins. 6ly. It overturns the Scripture
Doctrine concerning Sin, for it makes many Sins to be in effect no Sins. 7. It
corrupts and destroys the nature of the Sacraments; and makes new Sacraments,
that God never appointed; and gives them power to work that which God nev^r
gave them; as if the very works wrought did confer Grace. 8ly. It is
inconsistent with the Justice of God; as if forsooth, such poor Triffiles, and
Toys as these which they invent were satisfaction enough to his Justice; yea,
as if some men could more then satisfy Justice, and could not only merit
Heaven to themselves, but also help to merit it to others; and as if God were
bound in proper Justice to the Creature; and that not only on the account of
this Promise, but also, if not mainly on the account of Merit of Condignity:
All these things are involved in this Popish way of Justification, and
inconsistent with the Truth of the Gospel; And we have touched on them, to let
you see, that it is not one Error that is here, but a complication of Errors;
And truly, if there be not an abhorrency at Popery, because of this gross
Error in Justification, there is but little ground to expect, that Men will
keep at suitable distance from it in other things.

And therefore, from what has been said, take a few Directions, as your Use of
it; and if we were tender, it might do us good, now and then to get a little
view of such Errors. 1. Then see here the necessity of being more distinct, and
clear in Gods way of Justification; in the way how peace is made betwixt Him
and a Sinner, when we see how many Errors follow, and creep in after one Error;
and when we consider, how Popish Priests, and Jesuits are moving, and how this
same Error which has so many Errors with it, is stealling in, ye had much need
to be well acquainted with the Truth, and to be guarding your selves against
Errors, especially, when some lay so little weight on it, that they call it a
striving about words, which says, that there is but little abhorrence of the
thing; I am apt to think, that the most part of them that are called
Christians, could not well tell how to expose Popery, Armenianisme, or
Antinomianisme, if they were tempted to embrace them, or any other Erroneous
Heresy; And when withal we consider, how naturally we are inclined to shuffle
by the Covenant of Grace; and to cleave to the way of Works, or to turn the
Covenant of Grace into a Covenant of Works; we would try well, what we incline
to in this point, whether in our Judgment, or in our Practice, least we fall
from that which is right, in practice at least, if not in opinion also: I
entreat you to study this, as a main point of Christian Religion; even that ye
may know, and be clear in your knowledge of the way how God accepts of and
justifies a Sinner. 2dly. Know that this Error of Popery in particular, is not
of so little concernment as many think it to be; It Is a wonder that Men should
think, differences about matters of Religion to be so light, and so little a
matter, as if it were but the change of outward ceremonies, or of Words; Hence
it comes to pass, that there is so little Care and Zeal to prevent the rise,
and spreading of Errors: We shall only commend to you Three things for guarding
you in reference to this Error. 1. Sist your selves often before the Tribunal
of Gods Justice, till your hearts be brought under suitable impressions of Gods
Holiness, and Justice; of the severity and strictness of his Law; and of the
necessity of your answering to it in your own Persons, or in the Person of a
Cautioner; And then consider what will be your defense in such a posture. 2dly.
Carry always along with you the impression of your Original Sin, and Natural
Corruption; and of the sinfulness of your Practices; This will make you
loathsome, and abominable in your own eyes, and Christ precious, and such a
Soul will not be in such hazard of putting his own merits in the room of
Christ's. 3. Think upon that which in Gods offer is presented to you, as the
way of making your Peace; Though ye would study Holiness, in order to that
end, when ye are so sinful, and when Divine Justice is so severe; It looks not
like the way to Peace; But when ye consider Gods offer in this Gospel, as it is
held forth, Act. 13.38, 39. Be it known unto you men and brethren, that through
this man is preached unto you forgiveness of sins, and by him, all that believe
are justified from all things from which they could not be justified by the law
of Moses; And the invitation that is given. Isa. 55. to them that have no money
to come and buy freely, without money, and without price; And see God tabli^g
His call on another ground than your Holiness; and putting in your offer Jesus
Christ, and His Righteousness; It Is a raising and rousing up of the Soul, to
expect Absolution before the Throne of God, on a more solid foundation; that
will bear it is weight: We would beware of taking that way of Justification, and
of making our Peace with God, that seems to be most rational like to our
corrupt nature; for as many say, to be sorry for Sin, to study to make amends,
and to do what they dow, seems to be the most reasonable way, and agrees best
with our corrupt nature; but that is not it which will do your turn, but the
way which God has holden out; and that is, by His knowledge, by Faith in the
Righteous Servant. 3dly. See here, how much we are obliged to God, for holding
out to us the right way to Life; If ye look to many Nations abroad; the way to
Life is holden out to them on this ground, even their own inherent Holiness,
their own Good Works, their giving of considerable parts of their Estates,
their Pennances, etc. Which yet can never quiet the Conscience nor Satisfy
Gods Justice; Yea our own Predecessors in this Nation were drowned in the same
Errors; And we were as foolishly, and senslesly superstitious, as the
Inhabitants of any other Nations, before the Light of the Gospel brake up among
us; accounting such and such Sins to be do Sins, leaning to their Merits, to
the Merits of Saints, to Indulgences, Soul-masses, Whippings, and a number of
things of that kind; And now that God has mercifully fred us of these
foolries, how much are we obliged to him? Has ever Scotland been thankful as
it becomes for this mercy? We do, by our unthankfulness, darken and obscure
the freedom of Grace, that by this Gospel is preached unto us; And there needs
no other evidence of it but this; That many are to this day as ignorant of the
way of Justification of Sinners, and as abstract from, and as great strangers
to the right way of making use of Christ's Righteousness as if it had never
been revealed unto them; or if they know, and can speak any thing of it, all
the use that they make of it, is to turn the Grace of God into wantonness; And,
because Holiness is not the ground of making their Peace with God, to take the
more Liberty to Lousness: These are not Fruits of the Gospel, other Fruits must
be brought forth; or else ye will repent it, when ye cannot mend it: Let it
therefore affect you, that God is so ill requite for His goodness; and study to
be more thankful to Him, that we may speak of these Truths, and discover their
Errors, and that we are not Judicially blinded as many other People and Nations
are. 4ly. Pity them that are lying under darkness of their Delusions and
Errors, and pray for them; It Is a sore matter, that the most part of the
Christian World should have the Name of Christians, and yet should maintain
such Doctrine; and lay down, and hold such a way, as keeps from benefit by
Christ Jesus; yea, as denies on their matter, that He is come; For this is
indeed the Spirit of Antichrist, and of the Man of Sin, that takes Souls off
from Christ; and yet how few make conscience to pray for these poor people; and
that God would pursue the whore, and brake up, and skell that Market spoken
of, Revel. 18. And would discover His Truth, and make His Gospel to be purely
preached to them, that are fitting in the Region of Darkness, and in the Shadow
of Death; ye would pity bound up, and imprisoned Souls, in this Error and pray
for their reclaiming, and that God would keep this Land from it; It Is an old
seated, and rooted Error, and the rest are but foolries, in comparison of it;
This is the Devils great ingine and arm, others are but vapourers, to say so,
which may tell us that speaking, and hearing of such a business is not
altogether useless: What if the day should come, that all our Bibles, and
every English Book that serves to hold out Truth, and to discover Error should
be taken from you, and ordered to be burned, and that Books stuffed with their
Errors should come in their room? Many of you think little, or nothing now of
the Light and Liberty of the Gospel which ye enjoy, but if Heaven be of so much
worth, this Gospel is of much worth to you, and this Truth of it in particular.
5ly. Let not this Gospel be preached for naught; O! receive not this Grace in
vain; that is, this Grace offered to you in the Gospel, and the clearing of
such Truths to you. O! What a challenge, and aggravation of our Guilt will it
be, when we come before the Throne? when many other Nations will be condemned,
because they leanned to their own Merits, and made not use of Christ; and many
of us shall be condemned, because, though we professed an indignation at these
Errors, yet we made no more use of Christ, than these, who by their Doctrine
excluded Him: If our Predecessors could speak, what could they say? Would it
not be this, it is just that ye perish, for ye had Christ, and His
Righteousness clearly preached to you, which we had not, and yet ye slighted
Him: Therefore take hold of, and improve the opportunity, God has clearly
revealed this Truth to the Land, and to this Place, walk in the Light while ye
have it, else your condemnation will be the greater, as it is, John 3.19. 6ly.
Seeing God has given us this a singular mercy, even the clear Revelation of the
way of Justification by Christ's Righteousness, and Merits; Let us not, through
our evil conversation, make the Truth of God to be evil spoken of, turn not the
Grace of God into wantonness; It was an evil that soon arose in the Primitive
Church, and which the Apostle disputs against, Romans 2.3, and 6. Because He
preached Justification by Grace, and not by the Works of the Law, some were
ready to abuse that sweet Doctrine, and to say, Let us sin, that grace may
abound, and let us do evil, that good may come of it, whose damnation, s^yes
he, is just; And he follows out these Objections, and insists in answering of
them; And, O! but this is damnable, from the abounding of Gods grace, to take
the more liberty to Sin; and yet what other Language have the Lives of many,
but this? Because Justification and H^ppiness are not builded on our Works;
therefore we may live as we list; dispitfully and presu^ptuously reflecting on
the way of Justification by Faith, and on God who has contrived it; But if any
of you will abuse Gods grace, and Sin the more; God shall charge it on your own
heads, this Gospel shall never do you good, God will require it of you; your
Sins are multiplied, and your Plagues shall be multiplied above any that have
lived under black Popery: I dar say, many of you would probably have had a
greater restraint on you from Sin, and would have been more Charitable, and
Foreward in many external good Works, if ye had been professed Papists, than now
ye are, being professed Protestants; a judicial stroke on you, for the abusing of
Grace; And is this the Fruit of the Gospel? No certainly, Grace was never
preached, that Men should grow cold and indifferent in the practice of good
Works; but that through the laying hold on Christ's Righteousness, they might
have peace with God, and that through the study of Holiness, God might be
glorified; Therefore study the exercise of Faith so, as ye seclude not
Holiness; and study Holiness so, as ye mar not the freedom o Grace; and put
these two together, which are the Compend of the Gospel, when suitably
practiced.

SERMON LIVE.
ISAIAH LIII. XI. Verse. 11. -- By his knowledge shall my righteous servant
justify many;


THis blessed Death, and Soul-travel of Our Lord Jesus, has been good news to
many: and it is the ground of all the hope of Life that arises from the Word
to a Sinner; It should never be tastlesse, nor dis-relishing to us, in
mentioning reading, or thinking of it, but it should in reason make Sinners
glad, that ever there was such a subject to be spoken of and to be considered;
It behoved certainly to be a great business, that brought the Son of God to
die; The Salvation of Sinners is a great Work, though many of us think but very
little of it.

The Sum and Scop of Christ's Sufferings and Death, are briefly holden forth in
these Words, By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, Where
we have, 1. The great benefit that comes by His Death; which is Justification,
or the Absolving of Sinners from the Guilt of Sin, and from the Curse of God,
due to them for Sin; by Christ's interposing Himself to become a Sin-suffering,
there is a way laid down, how Sinners may be relieved. 2. The parties made
partakers of this benefit, and they are called many. 3. The way how it is
derived to these many, it is by his knowledge; That is by, or through Faith in
Him.

We have spoken somewhat of the benefit it self, Justification; which is the
thing aimed at, for the most part in preaching, and in all other Ordinances,
That God may by the Righteousness of His Son in the Gospel, carry on the
Justification of S nners, through their knowledge of Him, or by causing them to
rest upon His Righteousness by Faith, in order to their Salvation; It Is sad,
that in this point, which is of so great concernment, so many should go so far
wrong, and mistake so grossly; that it is no great matter in some respect,
whether they be called Christians, or not; This being the advantage of a
Christian; that He has a way to Justification, and Absolution from Sin, and
Wrath before God, revealed to Him, which others have not; who, if he come short
of this, or fall in gross Errors about it, he has little or no advantage
beyond Heathens; who may have more of the Fat of the E^rth, and of the things
of the World, than these who are within the visible Church have; But in this,
in a special manner, the Christian excells, and goes beyond the Pagan, or
Heathen; That he has a way laid down to him, how he may come to be reconciled
to God, and freed from Wrath, and from His Curse due for Sin; which we have
showed to be by fleeing to Christ, and by Faith resting on His Righteousness,
and Satisfaction; For Christ the Cautioner having paid the Debt, by laying
down a Price fully satisfactory to Divine Justice; And this Satisfaction being
offered in the Gospel, upon the condition of receiving him; a Sinner giving his
consent to Gods offer, and closing therewith, may confidently expect, according
to that offer to be Justified; and no other ways.

We show you one particular great and gross Error, wherewith these who are
under the darkness of Popery, are woefully carried away, which we did the rather
touch upon, because, though it be a Doctrinal Error in respect of them, and
disputed for, by them; Yet in respect of the practice of many Protestant
Christians, it is very rise, and ordinary; that is, to Mistake, Error, and go
wrong in the way of making of their peace with God: And there are Three Sorts
especially, who do exceedingly Mistake, Err, and go wrong here; These of whom I
mean, and am now speaking, are not such as are maintaining Disputing, or
Writing for such Errors; but such as commit themselves to be sound Protestant
Christians, and haters of the gross Popish Error; That we spoke somewhat to
the last day: The 1. Sort are th^se, who, to this hour never laid down any
solid Reckoning, how to make their Peace with God, or what way to come at
Absolution before Him; these Persons do in practice deny, what ever may be
their Professions, that there is any such thing as a Reckoning to be made
betwixt God and them; or that there is a necessity of Justification, for
preventing of their eternal ruin and destruction; They live from their birth,
with a hope of coming to Heaven, without looking how they may pass this great
step of Justification before God; they never saw, nor laid to heart their need
of it; are their not many hearing me to day, that are of this number? who will
needs keep up confidently their fancied hope of Heaven; and yet never knew what
it was to answer a challenge for Sin, or a threatening of the Curse, for the
breach of Gods Law, from Christ's Righteousness, nor did they ever fist, and
arraigne themselves before Gods Tribunal, as guilty, nor did they ever think
seriously of their charge, nor of their Summonds, nor of the way of making
their Peace with God, by taking hold of Christ's Righteousness: A 2d Sort are
the generality of Legal Professors; I do not say, that they are Legal in their
Practices; that is, that they make it their business to keep the Law, for they
are as little concerned, or careful in that as any; but they are Legal in this
respect, that when it comes to the making of their peace with God, they know
nothing but the Law to deal with, as that man spoken of, Math. 25. That got the
one Talent, and was utterly careless to improve it; yet when it comes to a
Reckoning, he stands and sticks to a rigor of the Law, Master, says he, Lo
here thou have that which is thine, just so, such will be ready to say, we have
no more Grace then God has given us, we have a good heart to God; we are doing
what we dow or can: Here come in Profane Men, mere Civil Men, and Hypocrites,
and more especally the mere Civil Men; who do much in the duties of the Second
Table of the Law, and they will profess that they do mind Judgment, and a
Reckoning, but as if they had been bred and brought up in a Popish School, they
foist in a Legal Righteousness in stead of Christ's, as the ground of their
Justification before the Tribunal of God: ye may take in these instances of
this sort of Persons, which are very common; and who, in their Practice almost
in every thing agree with the Popish Doctrine. The 1. Instance is, of such
Persons that know nothing of the imputation of Christ's Righteousness, yet if
we speak of it, they will fall out in such expressions as these; we can do
nothing of our selves, there is no goodness in us, It Is God's grace that must
do our turn; yet in the mean time it is not Christ's Righteousness, they lay
down to themselves as the ground of their Justification, but the good which
they have done, as they suppose in Christ's strength, and the Grace which is
given them to work, and do that good by; which is the same thing with the
Popish way of Justification; as if Christ had procured an ability to us to keep
the Law our selves, in order to our being Justified thereby; hence they will
Beli^ve, Pray, Hear the Word, Praise, and go about other Duties, and will
profess that they acknowledge Christ in these; and that they have the Grace
from Him to preform them; He furnishes the Stock, and they Trade with it, and
so for the attaining of Life, they are obliged to their own Trading; which is
in Words to pretended Grace, but really to put our own Works and Righteousness
in the Room of Christ's Righteousness, as the ground, or meritorious cause of
Justification; for the Grace given to us, enabling us to Work, is not Christ's
Righteousness but our own, because given to us, and working in us; and so it is
always our selves, and our own Righteousness, not Christ, and His
Righteousness that we rest upon. A 2d. Instance of some Folk, that speak of
Christ, and of attaining Life through Him; yet it is not in respect of His
Merit, but in respect of His Strength; for such will say, we hope through
Christ's Strength to come to Heaven; their meaning wherein is, that He will help
them so to repent and believe, so to be holy, and resist tentations, as they
shall come to Heaven thereby, as the deserving cause of their coming thither;
It Is true, there is something right here, when in it is own place, if whole
Christ were rested upon, Justification being put in the first place, and His
Merit rested upon for that; it were good that His strength were leaned to, and
made use of, for performing the duties of Sanctification; but when His Strength
is rested upon, as the alone thing; and when we look not to Christ's Purchase
and Merit, as the ground of our acceptance; but to Christ as enabling us to do
Duties to the end that we may give God a recompense thereby; at the best it is
but He and we together, this certainly is wrong; for nothing is proposed as a
Satisfaction to Gods Justice here, but what is immediately our own. A 3d. Sort
are somewhat wiser, who, it may be, think that any thing that is in themselves,
is not worth the naming; but partly through Christ's Merit, and partly through
what they have, and can do themselves; or by these joined together, they hope
to be saved. This was the Doctrinal Error of the Galatians, who attributed
Justification to Christ, and to the Works of the Law jointly: This way ascribs
to Christ's Righteousness this much, that it makes our own Righteousness to be
accepted, as the ground of our Justification before God; which in some respect
is worse then the Covenant of Works; for the Covenant of Works sought a perfect
Righteousness, but this way offers an imperfect Righteousness, and to mend,
and to eke out our imperfect Righteousness, it takes in the Righteousness of
Christ; but there is no such Covenant, or way of Justification in Scripture:
for God made but two Covenants for men to attain Life by, one of Works, which
is now impossible; The other of Grace, by which only it is possible to attain
Justification and Life: This makes a third Covenant, or Contrivance by a
mixture party of some Works in us, and partly of some Grace in Christ, to make
up what is inlaking in our Works; and yet this way is very pleasing to our
nature, and that to which we are much inclined for Justification; for men are
naturally disposed to think that they give Christ enough, when they allow His
Righteousness, to make up what is defective in their own; It Is true indeed,
that Christ's Merits do wash our Duties, but our Duties come never up to be the
ground of our Justification in whole, o^ in part; which is evident from this,
that ere Christ make our Duties, or Performances acceptable, He makes our
Persons first to be accepted; and that once being, then any thing performed by
us, in Christ's strength according to the will of God, is acceptable also.

But now we proceed further in the Words of the Text; and before we come to the
causes of our Justification, we shall briefly Observe two or three things, that
lie obviously in our way; The 1. whereof is this, That the Absolving of a
Sinner, through the imputation of Christ's Righteousness, is the proper, and
native result of Christ's Purchase; and the great intendment of it; His
Sufferings, and Soul-travel were undergone, to procure Justification to many;
So that if we would know what is the Fruit of Christ's Soul-travel? here it is;
By his knowledge shall many be justified; Therefore, Romans 5.9. It Is attributed
to his Blood, Being justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath, and 2
Cor. 5. ult. He was made sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God through him; That which I mean is this, That Christ's
intendment in His dying, was to redeem, and, really, and actually to procure
Absolution, and Justification before the Throne of God to so many as should
believe on Him: Or we may take the Doctrine these two ways, which yet come
both to the same account, 1. Thus, that the things which Christ intended in H^s
Death, was not a mere possibility, that Sinners might be Justified; nor to lay
down a conditional way of their Justification, whereby ^h^y might come, or not
come to it, and so to make it possible; bu^ that which He intended was that
their Ju^^ification might follow absolutely; I do not mean instantly, and
without the interveening of a condition; For here His knowledge comes in, as
the condition, but that which I mean is, that He di^d, that their Justification
might actually, and certainly follow as a fruit of His Purchase; In a word, His
Death and Sufferings were, not to make Ju^^ification possible to all, but that
so many as He bargained for might be absolutely Justified; or that many that
is, all the Elect might be actually Justified; because He shall bear their
iniquities, therefore by His knowledge they shall be Justified.

We Observe it for these Ends, or Uses, 1. To give an answer to that question,
What is the native result of Christ's Death to His People? we say, it is their
absolute, and actual Justification: These that would extend the Grace of God,
and the Death of Christ so broad and wide, as to leave out none, say in effect,
that the design thereof was to lay down such a way, as makes it possible to all
to be Justified; and yet such a way as makes it possible that none at all shall
be justified; for it hirgs justification on the free will of the creature; and
so in striving to make Grace broader then God allows, they come to make it none
at all, by leaving it on man's freewill, whether it shall be effectual or not,
But blessed be God, the Covenant of God was not on these terms, for it is said
here, That by his knowledge he shall justify many. 2. It gives us these two
practical Uses. 1. It shows, what should be our intendment, in our Use-making
of Christ's Death, and that is, that we may be Justified, and Absolved by it,
even to make use of it, for attaining to Pardon of Sin, and Peace with God; If
this be over-looked, and neglected, all other Fruits of it were useless; it
will avail but little to be a Member of the visible Church, to be Baptized, and
to be admitted to the Lords Supper, to have Litural knowledge, of the
principles of Religion, to have a Gift of Preaching, or of Prayer, etc. these
will not Justify; The peculiar thing aimed at in Christ's Death, and that which
His People aim at, and have to rejoice in, is Justification through his
knowledge, which is always to be understood without prejudice to the study of
Holiness.

2. It gives us this Use, whoever would have Absolution before God, would know
that this was the very thing engaged for to Christ, and His intendment in His
Death; That Sinners believing on Him, might be Absolutely, and Actually
Justified by Him; it was not simply to propose Justification to them; but that
Absolutely they might be Absolved from the Curse of God due to them for Sin:
And now may I not ask, whether this is more encouraging to Sinners, to have
Christ procuring Justification only conditionally to them; or to have the thing
absolutely conferred upon them? This is a ground whereupon believing Sinners
lift up their heads confidently, and expect Justification through His
Righteousness: It is this that was promised to Christ, and it is this that is
the native fruit of His Death, without which it will be fruitless; And this
may remove the great obstruction that readily a Sinner, when he is serious,
sees lying in his way, to wit, the want of Righteousness, and the fear of not
being Absolved, the want of inherent Righteousness in himself, which makes him
liable to the Curse of the Law; when he sees upon what terms Christ died,
First, To procure a Righteousness to them that wanted Righteousness. And 2.
Upon these terms, that Sinners through faith in Him might he Justified, and
fred from the Guilt of Sin, as if they never had Sin themselves; Considering
this to be his intendment, according to the terms of the Covenant of Grace,
what have they, or what can they have to skar or fright them from expecting the
fulfilling of this Promise? Because the contryvance of the Covenant of
Redemption, is to buy Justification absolutely, and not the possibility of it
only, nor to buy Grace to us, whereby to Justify our selves, but Ju^^ification
it self, so as we may be beholden to Him alone for it.

Again. 2dly. When we say that the Justification of a Sinner, is the proper
result of Christ's Death, it may be thus understood; That the Righteousness
whereby a Sinner is Justified, is immediately Christ's Death and Purchase, as to
the meritorious cause thereof; to that if we look to what Justifies a Sinner,
as to the meritorious cause of it; the knitting of these two together, He shall
see of the travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied; and By his knowledge
shall my righteous servant justify many, does hold it forth, to be Christ's
Death and Purchase; The travel of His Soul is, and must be the ground on which
a lost Sinner is Justified before the Throne of God; This both confirms what we
formerly proposed concerning this Doctrine; and also shows that the
Justification of a Sinner is not by inherent Holiness; whence comes it, I pray
that makes a Sinner acceptable before God? It is not from habitual, nor actual
inherent Grace, but from Christ's Righteousness, laid hold on by Faith, that
grippeth and adhereth to it; But from the latter part of the Words, we will
have more particular occasion to speak to this, where these two are knit
together; By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, for he
shall bear their iniquity; therefore we do now pass it.

The Object of this benefit is many, many, ordinarily in Scripture implies
these two things. 1. A great number, and so it shows the extent of the Object;
that is, that Christ shall purchase and redeem many; or by His Death procure
Justification to many. 2. A restriction, and thus many is opposed to all, and
so the meaning is; There shall many be Justified by Christ's Death, but not
all; and therefore, as none can from these Words plead for an universality in
Justification; So neither can they in Redemption, for he only bare their
iniquities, whom by His knowledge He Justifies.

Looking on these many, in these twofold considerations; we may take these
Observations from it. 1. Taking it extensively, Observe. 1. That the
Righteousness of Christ is of it self able to Justify many; It Is a
Righteousness that can Satisfy for the Sins of many; or thus, That in the
Covenant of Redemption, there is an intended Application of Christ's
Righteousness, and Purchase to many. 2. That there are many, who shall indeed
partake of Christ's Righteousness, and be Justified by it; It Is not one, or
two, or a thousand; but as it was intended to Justify many, so it shall be
actually applied to many, for their Justification. 3. Comparing, the former
Words, He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied; with
these Words, By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many,
Observe, That Christ is not satisfied for the Travel of His Soul, except many
be Justified; Or thus, It is Christ's Satisfaction, how many there be that make
use of Him, and that by making use of Him, come to be justified by Him; as
afterward we will see; These many, are all these that believe, all these that
have this true and saving knowledge of Him, and do rightly acknowledge Him.

The making out of one of these Doctrines will make them all out; That Christ's
Righteousness is able to Justify many, that many shall be Justified by it;
and that it is His S^tisfaction, and Delight that many be Justified, and get
this good of it; It Is said, Matthew. 20.28. That he came to lay down his life a
ransom for many, And Romans 5.15. That the gift of grace which is by one man
Jesus Christ has abounded unto many. and v. 19. As by one man's disobedience
many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made
righteous; Let but these Four things be put together, and considered, and it
will be found, that there is no just ground to quarrel these Doctrines. 1. The
native worth, and intrinsic value that is in the Satisfaction of Christ, It Is
the blood of God, of the Person that is God; It Is an Offering that flows from a
willing and cheerful Giver; which makes it the more acceptable; He was content
with delight to pay the Price, there cannot be a limiting, or bounding of this
Worth and Value; because there cannot be any bounding, or limiting of the
Person that gives the Value to it, if it be considered in it self. 2. Consider
the freeness of the Offer, which takes in many, Our Lord communicats very
freely, what He has bought very dear: and it is done with respect to His taking
in of many, to take away all exceptions from the poor and needy, and from them
that want money. 3. As the terms are free, so the Offer is very broad; and
comprehensive, as we see, Isaiah 55.1. Ho every one that thirsts come to the
waters; and Revel. 22. Whosoever will let him come, and take of the water of
life freely; And we find these expressions, all that believe, and, whosoever
believes, to be frequently used in the Scriptures; which takes in all that will
yield themselves to Him on the terms of the Covenant, to close the bargain with
Him. 4. Consider God's end in the Justification of Sinners; which is to make
His Grace to shine, and to triumph, and to make it is victory over man's Sin
Conspicuous, and Glorious, by being beyond it; not in respect of the number of
Persons, but in this respect; that as Adams one Sin brought Death on many; so
the Death of Christ has brough Justification to many; as it is, Romans 5. The
judgment was by one to condemnation, but the free gift is of many offenses
unto justification; Whereas Adams one Offense brought Death on many; here the
relieving of one Sinner is the procuring of freedom to many, because, in that
respect Christ is a Satisfaction for many Offenses: But it may be Objected
here; is it not said, that the way to Heaven is strait, and few their be that
enter in thereat: They are thin sown, to say so, that are Heirs of this
Inher^tance; I answer, by a distinction; Though they be comparatively few, yet
considered in themselves absolutely they are many; or they are simply many,
though comparatively but few; Consider, and Compare them with the multitude of
reprobats that are even in the visible Church, they are few, yet if ye will
consider them in themselves, they are many; and it is most true that is spoken,
Revel. 7.9. I saw a number which no man could number; if we look since the
beginning: of the World, how some are taken in this Age, and some in that, some
of this Nation, and some of another; they will be found to be but few, when all
of all Nations are put together, yet in themselves they are many: There are
these three Uses of it, which may be Reasons why it is put in here. The 1. is,
to let us see the largeness of the extent of the worth of Christ, and of the
allowance of Grace, in reference to the Justification of Sinners through Him;
which should make us stand, pause, and wonder: It had been much, if Grace had
saved but one, more if it had saved a thousand, or twenty thousand: But O! what
ground of admiration is it, when many are saved by it; This is the native end,
why it is put in here; even to show, that it is not for naught that Christ
died, It shall be a blessing to many, I mark it, because, though the
presumptuous thoughts of many lead them to extend the Merits of Christ to all
in the visible Church; yet it may be that in others there are too narrow, and
limiting thoughts of the extent of His Merits, and of the allowance of Grace,
as to the number of the Elect, that shall be saved: It being certain, that as
we are in hazard and ready to abuse any thing so this, if it be said that they
are many that are Justified: we are ready to exclude none, and if it be said
that they are few, we are ready to make Grace as it were an a nigard, and
Churl, and to contract, and narrow too much the application of it.

The 2d. Use of it (Which is a Second Reason why this Word many, is put in
here) may serve for encouragement to Sinners: and to hearten them to assay to
get this benefit of Justification made their own: many trow (and in some
respect it is a truth) that it is a singular and odd thing to come by
Justification; and hence they conclude, that they will never get it; and indeed
if the thought of it is Singularity and Rareness made them careful to win at the
thing, it were an profitable use of it; but when it makes them heartlesse, to
attain the thing; it is a wrong, and prejudicial use of it; But Sinners, there
is here ground of Encouragement, Provocation, and upstirring to you, to seek
after Justification through Jesus Christ; because there are many, that are the
Objects of it; The Righteousness of Christ, is a Righteousness that will save
many; It Is an Article of the Covenant of Redemption, that Christ shall get
many; the Promise will give Title and Right to many, He will not be content, if
He get not many; now putting these together, it cannot but be very great
encouragement to seek, and a strong ground to expect Justification on this
account, because, 1. That which a believing Sinner gets, is Justification,
Pardon of Sin both Original and Actual; and it is complete actual Justification,
not only the procuring the Offer of it, but the Application of it,
Justification from all things, from which we could not be justified by the law
of Moses; and Justification never to be reversed. 2. This Justification is
designed for, and allowed to many, the stepping in of some before others does
not wrong them; and there needs not be disputs about Election; for the Text
says, that the allowance of Grace is to many. 3. It is Christ's Satisfaction
that He get many to be Justified; and the more that step to, to lay hold on this
benefit; He has as it were the more Satisfaction: And if the Sinner should
say, I know not if I be included in that number; the terms of the Covenant run
to all that believe; if there be a fleeing to Christ, by Faith for refuge,
there needs not be anxious disputing whether the Sinner will come speed; but
there should be a steping forward, many have gotten good, and many will get
good, and there is room sufficient for as many as will yield themselves up to
Christ, and rest upon His Righteousness, It Is a large mantle that covers
thousands; and the Lord will have thousands to be hidden under it, and
Justified by it.

3dly. It serves to be a most terrible ground of inexcusableness to these, to
whom Christ's Righteousness is spoken of, and offered in the Gospel; who yet
neglect to make use of it; that He was content to lay down His Life, and that
as a ransom for many; none needs to say, I knew not if I will be welcome, He
said, it was for many, and though He said not it was for all, yet it is for all
that will believe in Him; And therefore it is not, nor shall not, because He
has confined the benefit to few, that ye are, or shall be excluded; but
because, though He extended the benefit to many, yet ye excluded your selves;
and none of you, who hear this Gospel, shall have it to say, I betook my self
to Christ by Faith, but He refused to admit of me, and He would have no more
then He had; there are many who please themselves with such a Word as this,
when they hear that many will be saved; But it will be the dearest bought
Doctrine that ever ye heard; it had been in some respect better, that ye had
heard that it was but two or three that will come to Heaven; because the
hearing of many's coming thither will greatly aggravat your guilt, who neglect
so great a Salvation.

Therefore take two or three Caveats of this Doctrine, And 1. Beware of being
secure, because there are many that shall be Justified; There are many more that
will perish; compare these that perish with these that will be saved; and it
will be found that they are but an handful that will be saved, and that Swarms
and Multitudes will go to Hell; Therefore, when ye hear that the door is opened
to many, let it encourage you to enter in; but remember this, that more will be
excluded, and perish, then will enter in and be saved: The Scripture says,
Many are called, but few are chosen; even in respect of the called within the
visible Church. 2. Consider that Graces enlarging of this benefit, to take in
many, will be your greatest challenge and aggravation that shall miss, and come
short of it, Therefore, let us (as it is, H^b. 4.) fear, least having a promise
left unto us of entering into his rest, any of as should seem to come short of
it; When this door is opened to us, we would by all means fear coming short, or
not entering through unbelief; for it will be worse with us then if the door had
never been opened; Folk ordinarily think not so much to miss, or come short of
a Privilege which but one or two have access to, but when it is such a
privilege as is made attainable by many, the missing of it galleth and
tormenteth the more; and when many shall come from the East, West, South and
North, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of
Heaven, what weeping and gnashing of teeth will it cause to them, who shall be
secluded? And therefore, 3ly. Beware of thinking that there is the less
diligence, or fear required, because we say, that many will be Justified; for
though there be many that are Redeemed, and many that shall be Justified, yet
all these come to be Justified through Christ's knowledge: And therefore such
as are ignorant and profane can but take little, or no comfort hence, while
they continue to be such; Though there be many that are Justified, yet none but
Believers are Justified; and none can warrantably look on themselves to be
Believers, but such as are sincere students of Holiness; I would not,
therefore have you laying weight, either on many, or few's being Justified,
except by way of Motive; but on the way that ye take to come by the end: Though
a great many more were saved then will be; if ye take not the way of Faith, and
Holiness to come to Salvation, ye will not get your selves shrouded in the
crowd, but though there were never so few damned, ye shall make up the number;
In a word, it is ground of encouragement to a poor Sinner, that would fain be
Justified in God's own way; it is also ground of shame, and confusion of Face
to the unbeliever, that restrains the benefit of Christ's Purchase, and shuts
himself out; when Grace does make use of such expressions to bring him in; and
it will be ground of conviction to all that have so wide a door opened to them,
and do not strive to enter in: It may be many of you think little of this now,
but in that day, when many shall be taken into the Kingdom of Heaven, and others
shut out, it will be known to be a matter of greatest concerment, if once we
could be induced to be in earnest in this one thing, there were a great point
gained on the hearers of the Gospel, and till it be seriously minded, there is
nothing that we can do in Religion, that will be to any purpose.

SERMON LV.
ISAIAH LIII. XI. Verse 11. -- By his knowledge shall my righteous servant
justify many, etc.


It Is a great matter to have the solid impression of Christ's fullness on our
Spirits, and to be thoroughly persuaded, that there is a Rigteousness to be had
in Him; yet the Consolation is not full, unless there be clearness in the way,
how this Righteousness is applied, and come by, and a kindly yielding to
follow that way; For though we know that Christ died, and that there is a
Righteousness Purchased, yet, there are many that are never Justified, and
that shall never be saved by it; And therefore it would not be so much, to know
that there is such a thing; if he had not laid down a way how we may be
partakers of it; which way can no more fail and misgive, then Christ's
Righteousness can; and these Words hold out the way, By his knowledge shall my
righteous servant justify many: That is, through Faith in Christ many shall be
made Righteous; His Satisfaction shall be accounted the Believers, whereby it
shall come to pass, that they shall be as really Justified; as if they had
born their own iniquities, because His bearing of them shall be accounted
theirs.

We spoke, 1. of this general, that there is such a thing as Justification, or
God's Abs^lving of a Sinner, who by His own iniquity, is liable to the Curse.
2. That this Justification is the proper effect of Christ's Death. 3. From the
Object of it; That they are many, yet not all, who are Justified, many being
put as a mids betwixt two extremes, neither including all, nor only taking in a
very few; having put by these more general Doctrines, we would now speak a
little to this great benefit of Justification, in reference to the particular
Causes that concur to the attaining of it, which will lead us to a more
distinct uptaking of it; there is ground for them all in the Text; and
therefore we shall put them together; that ye may have a short view of this
great benefit complexly.

There are commonly, six causes assigned to, or made necessary to concur in
Justification; though we know not well how to express them, so as ye may take
them up, because of the ignorance of many of you. 1. There is the efficient
cause, and that is God; the party that does Justify. 2. The end, or final
Cause, and that is His own Glory. 3. The Meritorious Cause, or that which
procures it, or the ground on which God Justifies, And that is Christ's Merit.
4. The inward instrumental Cause, by which we get a tittle to, and an interest
in Christ's Merit, and that is Faith. 5. The Formal Cause, or that wherein
Justification consists, and that is Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to
the Sinner upon His acceptance of it, and the Absolving of the Sinner, by
virtue of His Righteousness. 6. The External Instrumental Cause, and that is
the Word of God, by which this Justification is revealed, and wherein God
declares, and passes the Sentence.

For the First, ye would for clearing of it, remember what we spoke in our
entering on this Doctrine; That this Word Justification is a Legal, Forensick,
or Judicial Word; and we are to conceive of God, who is the party offended, as
the Judge; and of the Sinner Arraigned, and brought before His Tribunal to be
Judged, as a delinquent; the Law gives in the Lybel, or Indictment, founds the
Challenge, or Accusation; the Sinners Conscience, and Actions are as so many
Witnesses, proving the breaking of the Law, and him to be obnoxious to the
Curse on that account; In this we say that God is the efficient Cause, and so
we may take the Words, By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify
many; Actively, and efficiently to look to Christ, as having this Power, as He
is God; which is proper to God alone, as is clear, Romans 8.34. It is God that
justifies: 1 Cor. 4.4. Though I know nothing by my self, yet I am not hereby
justified, but he that judges me is the Lord; And this is a reason of the
former; to wit, that no other can Absolve but God, the party offended, who is
Judge.

We mark it for this practical Use which the Apostle makes of it, which is to
bid us lay less weight upon others, thinking well of us, or absolving us; and
on our own absolving of our selves; the Lord charge some thus, Luke 16.15. Ye
are they which justify your selves before men, but God knows your hearts: Paul
will not justify himself, for that is Gods place and prerogative; How many are
there, who take another persons testimony for Gods, and think, that since
others love, respect, and commend them, they are in a good condition, and well
enough; but, alace, is that Person God? Except men's testimony be founded on the
grounds that are held forth in the Word, (and if so, then it is Gods Testimony)
it will not do the business, nor avail you any thing; except there be ^
Sentence of Absolution pronounced, and ^ast by Him, their Sentence, or your own
will be recalled; Though many of you do not down right profess this, yet many
of you practically fall into it; always remember, that it is God that
Justifies, and that His Absolution is different from men's, and from your own;
many may have good thoughts of you, and so may ye of your selves, when God may
have none. For the 2d. To wit, The final Cause, it is clear here also, by
comparing the former verse with the Words going before, in this same verse; and
ye may take it in this Observation; That the Glory of God, and of the Media or,
is the end that God has before Him, in the Justifying of Sinners; Therefore it
is called the Lords pleasure, or delight, and the Mediators satisfaction;
because He has proposed to Himself therein the Glory of His Grace, especially,
and also of others of His Attributs, as His end, and so has a kind of longing
desire, and thirst after it; for the Lord being Absolutely Glorious, cannot,
but love His own Glory, and being the infinitely Pure, Alsufficient Good, He
cannot but love Himself, and His own Glory; and therefore, for attaining of
this end, He Justifies and Absolves poor Sinners: Now God is glorified here two
ways. 1. He gets the Glory of His Grace, that is exceedingly magnified
thereby, as is clear, Ephesians. 1.5. Having predestined us to the adoption of
children, by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his
will, to the praise of the glory of his grace; It Is the Lords pleasure, to
glorify His Grace; and this proves to be to the Glory of His Grace, when a
Sinner liable to Wrath is fully Justified, and Entitled to Heaven. 2. He gets
thereby the Glory of His Justice, and Righteousness, which takes in the
Glorifying of God's Holiness and Wisdom; He is seen here to be a Holy God, who
will needs testify His dislike at Sin, where ever it is; a just God, that will
needs punish it, a gracious God, that will pardon; and such a wise God, as
finds out the way how both to punish and pardon, without any the least
Imputation, either to His Justice, or to His Mercy, and Grace; and so He shows
Himself to be Infinitely Just, Gracious, Wise and Holy, in the Justification of
Sinners; These we may see, Romans 3.24, 25, 26. Being justified freely by his
grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ. There Justice and Grace
shine clearly, Justification is free, yet there is a Price laid down, and a
Satisfaction made to Justice; and the 26. verse shows the end, to wit, To
declare his righteousness, that he might be just, and the justifier of them who
believe in Jesus; He has indeed taken a way, how to pardon Sin, but so as it
is through a Redemption, or by the exacting of a Price, that He may be seen to
be Just, who will not pardon Sin without a Satisfaction; Justice kythes in
this, that Christ is put to pay a great Price; and that He may be seen to be
Gracious, He has laid down a way, how the Price that was to be paid by
Christ, might be imputed to or reckoned, on the account of the guilty Sinner,
and that He might thereby be Absolved: And thus Justice and Grace kiss each
other, in this admirable contrivance; And although none almost except Socinians
deny the Justice of God, in the Justification of Sinners; yet as they do
Doctrinally, in Substance deny it; So many of us, who profess to abhore their
Doctrine, do practically deny it also.

And therefore, as the 1. Use of it, let me speak a little to unbelievers, and
ask you, what think you will become of you? ye must either betake your selves
to Christ's Satisfaction, or ye must resolve to Satisfy for your selves; Secure
Hypocrites think of nothing but of Grace, and that God will always be Gracious;
and never suffer themselves think of the necessity of a Satisfaction to be made
to His Justice; and thus they slight, and on the matter deny His Justice; as if
He were not to be Glorified, in that Attribute as well as in His Grace, and
Mercy; whereas there is no other way to declare God to be Just, in the
Justification of them that believe; but this which brings them to Christ's
Satisfaction.

Use 2. It Is ground of notable Consolation, and Encouragement to a poor
exercised Soul, sensible of Sin, whereupon to expect Justification; It Is Gods
end in Justifying Sinners, to set out the Glory of His Grace; and is it not
much, that God should contrive such a way for glorifying of Himself, as should
carry along in it good to us, yea, such a way as should resolve in our good,
which comes in as a subordinat end, to the glorifying of His Grace, as the
ultimat end; may not this be an encouragement to them, to seek after
Justification on these terms, and for this end?

Use 3. It shows, that as many as submit not to the way of this Righteousness,
and of Justification by Grace, are thwarting with God's End; they set
themselves to hinder and obstruct it, even that He should not be glorified in
His Justice and Mercy; They do what they can, that God should neither be Just
nor Gracious; but He shall be Just in condemning them; whether they will or
not, though He be not glorified in His Grace, as to them, they setting
themselves, what they can to let it, yet in His Justice, He shall most
certainly be glorified: O! that Men and Women believed how deep their Guilt
draws, who are found standing in the way of the glorifying of Gods Grace; It
will be found in some respect, to draw deeper then the Guilt of these
abominable Sins of Adultery and Murder in the day of the Lord; and yet many of
you will be found to have done this, and to have come short of Righteousness.
For the 3d. That is the Meritorious Cause; Take it in this Doctrine, That the
Meritorious Cause, that procures our Justification, and with respect to which.
God J^stifi^s a Sinner, is the alone Merit and S^tisfaction of Christ Jesus;
And this arises from the Text, on these two Considerations. 1. Because this
Justification is laid down, as an effect of Christ's Soul-travel, and Suffering;
and if Justification be the proper, and immediate effect of Christ's Sufferings;
then His Soul-sufferings must be the Meritorious Cause of it, we cannot imagine
another; He purposes by His Sufferings, for the elect, that they shall by His
Knowledge be Justified, therefore they must be Absolved, and Justified by His
Interposing, to t^^^ on their Debt, and to His Sufferings must be the procuring
Cause of it. The 2. Consideration, is taken from the words following, He shall
justify many, for he shall bear their iniquities; If Christ's bearing of our
iniquities, be the ground of our Justification, or that by which it is
procured, then His Sufferings must be the Meritorious Cause of our
Justification, or that on account whereof we are Justified; because His bearing
of our iniquities can no other ways be the cause of our Justification, but by
His interposing to Merit the same to us by His Sufferings. Would ye know, as if
the Prophet had said, how Christ's Sufferings shall be the cause of our
Justification? Here it is, He shall bear our iniquities, and therefore our
Justification flows therefrom; the Lord by the Prophet has so knit these two
t^gether, that His Sufferings, both go before, and are subjoyned to His
Justifying of many, that it may be put out of question, that the Mediators
Suffering, is the alone Meritorious Cause of His pronouncing the Sentence of
Justification, and of accepting and accounting u^ as righteous before Him.

This is no in so many words professedly controverted, or denied by the
Papists, with whom we here deal; For they grant, that Christ, by His
Sufferings, procures Grace, and Gods acceptance of our good Works, in so far
as they are rewarded beyond their condignitie: But to make the difference
betwixt them, and us the more clear, we shall put in Four Words in the Doctrine
and speak a little to them; We say then, that Christ's Satisfaction is not only
the Meritorious Cause of Justification, but also 1. It is the nearest, and most
immediate Cause. 2. The alone Meritorious Cause. 3. The Meritorious Cause, as
Contradistinguished from, and opposed to our own Works, and inherent
Righteousness. 4. It is the Meritorious Cause, as inherent in Him, and as
imputed to us; These Four are clear in the Text, and may very well be put in
the Doctrine.

1. Then we say, it is not only the Meritoritorious Cause but the next Immediate
Cause, causa repinqua, (as we use to speak in the School) of our Justification;
So that if it be asked, what is the Cause or Ground, on which God Absolves a
Sinner, or the next Immediate thing, that He has a respect to in His Justifying
of him? It Is Christ's Merit, His Soul-travel, and Sufferin^; Papists deny this;
and make the next Immediate Cause to be the Grace infused in us, that which is
called, gratia gratum faciens: But if ye ask the Prophet, what is the Ground, I
mean the next Immediate Cause, on which Justification is deryved to many? He
tells us that it is not the inherent Righteousness of these who are Justified:
but that it is Christ's Soul-travel, and His bearing of our iniquities; Hence, 1
Cor. 1.30. Christ is called our Righteousness, He is, (says the Apostle) made
of God unto us, wisdom, righteousness, etc. Not only by Christ have we a
Righteousness, that makes us acceptable to God, but His Righteousness is
ours, and God respecting of us, in, or through it makes us acceptable.

2dly. Not only is His Righteousness the Meritorious Cause, but it is the only
Meritorious, or the alone Meritorious Cause; and herein Papists and we differ:
They grant that Christ's Satisfaction is the Meritorious Cause, but remotly
only, as it procures inward, or inherent Grace, by which we Merit; but they
will not have it to be the only Meritorious Cause; but will needs have our own
Works to merit also, and that properly; whereas the Prophet speaks of
Justification as the effect of Christ's Soul-travel only; and if so, then there
can be no other thing admitted, for there cannot be two social, or joint
Meritorious Causes; Therefore, throughout the Scripture, when the Merit of
Justification is attributed to Christ, it excludes all other things, and is
opposed to our own works; which is the Third thing.

3ly. Then we say, That Christ's Righteousness is the Meritorious Cause of our
Justification, as Contra-distinguished from, and opposed to our own inherent
Righteousness, or Works; and herein also Papists and we differ; They grant
indeed a Meritorious Influence to Christ's Righteousness; but that is (say
they) as it makes our own Righteousness Meritorious; Not as
Contra-distinguished from, and opposed to our own Righteousness, but as having
influence on it. Now these are directly opposed in Scripture, I shall only name
that one clear place, Phil. 3 9. That I may be found in him, not having my own
righteousness, which is of the law, out that which is through the faith of
Christ; Where Paul consulting, and resolving what he will betake himself to, as
his Defense at the bar of God; We see, 1. That it is His Scope, and Design,
that in the day of Judgment, he may be found in such a case and posture, that
he may be able to abide the trial, And 2. That he speaks of Two
Righteousnesses, the One is his own, that is the inherent Grace which he has
gotten, and the Works which he has done: The Other is the Righteousness of
Christ without him, which is by Faith; Now when he lays his reckoning, he is
so far from joining these two together, as Con-causes, or Social Causes of his
Justification, that he opposes them; That I may be found in him, not having
mine own righteousness in him, without my own, or, not having my own, etc. in
him, as having given up with denied, and renunced my own Righteousness; he
will not admit of that on any terms, in less or in more; so clearly does he,
as to his Justification before God, seclude his own Righteousness, and betake
himself to Christ's Righteousness alone, as Contra-distinguished to his own.

4ly. We say, That Christ's Righteousness is in Him, and imputed to us, or made
ours by imputation; is the alone Meritoritorious Cause of our Justification,
and Salvation; so as that which He has purchased is reckoned, and accounted
the Sinners, as if it were His own inherently and personally; This I also
gather from the Words, By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify
many, for he shall bear their iniquities; Would ye know, as if the Prophet had
said, how Christ is the Meritorious Cause of Justification? Thus it is, because
He shall bear their iniquities, if He has taken on the burden of their Sins,
and had their Sins imputed to Him, then it will follow by proportion, that they
are Justified by the imputation of His Righteousness to them; and there is
nothing that the Scripture does more inculcat then this, That we are Justified
by the Righteousness of Christ, without us, and imputed to us, or reckoned
ours, we by Faith laying hold upon it, and Gods accepting of it for us, make s
it become ours; and yet there is nothing that we do more particular^y err in,
and which Papists do more sco^n and flout at, wholly enervating the way, and
contrivance of Grace, by excluding and shouldering out the Righteousness of
Christ, (calling it in derision, a Putative, or merely fancied, and ^maginary
Righteousness, as if there were ^o reality in it) and by bringing in, and
establishing their own Righteousness; though it be very clear from this and
many other Scriptures, that Christ's Righteousness must be ours by imputation,
because He ^are our iniquities; He became our Righteousness, by paying of our
D^bt, as our Cautioner, and no otherwise; the Scripture never speaks of His
being our Righteousness, by procuring ability to us, to pay our own Debt.

I shall clear this 4th Branch a little further, because it will serve to clear
the rest, That is, that Christ's Righteousness, as it is in Him, and imputed
to us, is he only Meritorious Cause of our Justification; And if we consider, 1
The way of Justification that is used among men, this will be the more plain;
There being two Covenants, by the one of which, Life was once attainable, and
by the other, of which it is only now attainable; 1. The Covenant of Works,
which absolves a man that never brake it; which is, as when one among men, or
before men's Court, is declared to be free, because he was never o^ing the Debt.
2. The Covenant of Grace, that provides a Cautioner to pay the Sinners Debt,
upon whose payment thereof had recourse to by Faith, there is access in Law, to
the Sinner to call for absolution: even as it is in men's Courts; though the
principal Debtor has nothing to pay, yet if the Cautioner pay the Debt, it is
the principal Debtors cl^aring; and if he should be again charged to pay the
Debt; his immediate de^ence would be, that the Cautioner had paid it already:
So is it here, the Lord has borrowed, and made use of this way, that is used
among men, to make the Mystery of Justification, which passes in the Court of
God, the more clear to us; it is as if one should allege, that such a Person
is owing so much, and he should say, I cannot be charged with it, and upon what
ground? Not because I was not owing the Debt, but because such anon has paid
it for me; So says the Apostle, Romans 8.34 Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods elect, it is God that justifies, who shall condemn? it is
Christ that died, etc. The defense proposed before the Tribunal of God, is
Chritis dying, and that is as much, as he has paid the Price, or Debt; who
then can charge it on the principal Debtor? And the frame, and contexture of
the words shows, that it is a judicial precedour; for they suppose a charge or
lybel, and a sentence, and the Meritorious Cause of the Sentence of Absolution
is, that Christ has died.

2ly. If we consider the nature of the two Covenants, and compare them
together, it will be clear, the Papists confound the two Covenants; For works,
to them is the condition of both Covenants, making use of that place, Matthew
19.17 2^ Keep the commands, if thou will be perfect, sell all thou have, and
give to the poor, quite contrary to the scope of it; for therein Christ is
putting the man to a thing impossible to himself, to bring him to see the
necessity of a Mediator; and discover his unsoundnesse, when he will not forgo
his great Poss^ssions for him; But the Sc^ipture does so clearly dif^ere^ce the
Covenant of Grace, and ^he Covenant of works that they are opposed; For the
Covenant of works says, do this and live; and the Covenant of Grace says,
If thou shall believe with thy heart in the Lord Jesus, and con^^sse with thy
mouth, thou shall or saved; And therefore the account of ones being Ju^^ified
in the Covenant of Grace must be different, from the account whereon one is
Justified in the Covenant of W^rks, otherwise they would not be opposite; The
Covenant of Works respects inh^rent Righteousness, as the condition; The
Covenant of Grace respects Faith taking hold of the Righteousness of Christ;
and therefore H s Righteousness must Justify, as being in Him without us, and
as imputed to us, it cannot be our Righteousness within that Justifies; for
so, it should be the same with the Covenant of Works; for though Christ did
procure inherent Righteousness, to us, it makes no difference in the condition
it self, which is works.

3ly. It will be clear if we consider how the Scripture speaks of Christ's
Righteousness becoming ours, even as our Sins became Christ's, and was the
cause (if we may so speak) of His condemnation; that is, as He became liable to
the Curse, that as He stood a Legal Person in our Room, He became guilty, and
liable to the payment of our Debt; For otherwise it is abominable once to
speak of His condemnation, and if His Righteousness become ours, as our Sin
became His, then certainly His Righteousness is the cause of our
Justification, as it is in Him inherently, and in us by imputation only; The
blasphemy of Antinomians, is most detestable, and not at all pleaded for, even
by Papists; and therefore we stand not on it here; Now our Sin became Christ's
by imputation, therefore His Righteousness must be ours the same way; If it
then were asked, How we are Justified? The Text answers, He shall justify
many, because he shall bear their iniquities; The Prophet makes his Sufferings
to be the antecedent whereof our Justification is the consequent, for His
bearing of our iniquities is given as the reason of our Justification; this is
also clear, 2 Cor. 5. ult. He was made sin for us who knew no sin, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him; In which words the Spirit of
the Lord does so explain, bound, and inculcat this, that there can be no
rational exception against i^, nor evasion from it; He was made sin, that is a
Sin offering, or an O^^ering for our Sin, though there was no guide ^ound in
His mouth, though He had no Sin, neither was capable of Sin; yet He was made a
Sacrifice for our Sin; as He was made Sin, so are we made the righteousness of
God in him; If any should ask what is it to be made righteous? The Apostle
answers, even as Christ was made Sin, the some way are we made righteous; and
that is, by imputation of Christ's Righteousness to us, and not by our own
merit; we have no more merit then He had sin; but as He was accounted to be the
Sinner, though free of Sin in His own Person; so a believing Sinner is
accounted righteous, though without any merit in Himself, because God has
engaged in His Covenant, to make Christ's Righteousness forthcoming to the
Believer; Though that were enough; yet the Spirit of the Lord adds a further
Word; in him, to answer that question, whether Christ has procured inherent
holiness to us, that thereby we may be Justified; no says he, that is not
the way; Our Righteousness is in him, and not inherent in us, even as the sum
imputed to Christ is inherently in us; so the Righteousness whereby we are
Justified, is inherently in Him.

4ly. It may be clear from this, That frequently it is called a Righteousness
that is attained by Faith, and that is opposed to our own Righteousness, and
working; now it cannot be conceived, how we can get a Righteousness by Faith,
but by pleading, that His Righteousness may be imputed unto us; Romans 3.22. It
is called the righteousness which is by faith, and, v. 25. Whom God has set
forth for a propitiation through faith in his blood; and, cap. 4. v. 5. To him
that works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith
is counted for righteousness; Faith taking hold of His Righteousness offered
to Sinners in the Gospel; His Righteousness so taken hold of, becomes a
propitiation to pacify God toward the Sinner, as if He had satisfied in His
own Person: Even as if a company of men had been out in Rebellion; and a
Proclamation of Pardon comes forth from the King, because he is Satisfied by a
great friend, who has paid their Ransom: Which Proclamation of Pardon runs
on these Terms, whoever will lay down Arms, and come in, and accept of the
Kings Pardon, that is procured, and made offer of, shall be acquitted of the
guilt of Rebellion, and received into favor; Who, when ever they are
challenged, will plead their Absolution on that friends procurement, and
offered such Terms in the Proclamation: Now suppose (as I hinted before, not
long ago) that when these Rebels have yielded themselves, and accepted of the
Terms; if any of them should be called to answer at the Bar, or the Kings
Bench, as being challenged for his Rebellion; his answer, and defense would be,
that such a Proclamation was made to us, and I said down my Arms, and accepted
of the Pardon; this in Justice would be admitted, and sustained as Relevant,
because that procurement, or procured Pardon, becomes the Persons, according to
the Terms of the Proclamation: It is even so here, we are Rebels to God,
Christ Jesus steps in, as the great friend of Sinners, and Satisfied Justice;
and thereupon the Proclamation comes out, as it is, Act. 13.38, 39. Be it known
unto you, men and brethren, that through this man is preached unto you the
forgiveness of sins; and by him all that believe are justified from all things,
from which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses; When the Sinner is
arraigned before the Tribunal of God, He has two Acts of H s Faith; One that
submits to God, and to His way of absolving Sinners, and another that pleads
for Absolution, ^ot on the Terms of his own innocence, but on the Terms on
which Christ's Satisfaction is made offer to him; and so Faith Justifies as it
takes hold of the Meritorious Cause, and builds it is defense at Gods Bar, on
Christ's Righteousness, alone; It Is the procurement of the Mediator that it
pleads upon, and in this sense, the imputed Righteousness of Christ, and the
Righteousness of Faith are one and the same, because Faith takes hold of the
Righteousness without us, which can be no other but the Righteousness of
Christ.

5ly. It Is clear from the plain, and direct expressions of Scripture to this
purpose; Take but these few, as Romans 4.3. and 22. compared with, Genesis 15.6.
Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness; he had the
promise of Christ to come, and received, and rested on it; it was not his
Faith, but the promise of the Messiah rested on by Faith, that was imputed to
him for Righteousness; and v. 6. Even as David described the blessedness of the
man to whom God imputes righteousness without works; It is not blessed is the
man who is holy (though such a man is seriously studying to be holy, albeit not
in order to His Justification thereby) but blessed is he to whom righteousness
is imputed without works; and he confirms it from, Psalm. 32. Blessed is he
whose transgression is forgiven, and whose sin is covered; Blessed is the man
to whom the Lord imputes not iniquity: Blessed is the man to whom the Lord
imputs Righteousness, though he have it not in himself, and to whom he imputs
not Sin, though he have it in himself; So, 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespass^s unto them,
Jesus Christ is the reconcile^ of the World to God by His own Merit; being God
and Man in one Person, the efficacy of His Sufferings reconcileth the World of
the Elect, and how is this purchased Reconciliation applied? By not imputing
their trespasses unto them; That which here is called Justification, is there
called not imputing of transgression, through that Righteousness which Christ
has purchased, or through off ring up of Himself in a Sacrifice to God, to
satisfy His Justice

6ly. We might say, That this way of Justification through the imputation of
Christ's Righteousness; ought to ^he admitted according to Papists own
groun^^; For, 1. They grant that young Children, who cannot Merit, are
justified, and admitted to glory by Christ's Merit, as the immediate, and
proxime cause of their Justification, and why not also of these that are at
age? Is He not the common Cause? what absurdity is in the one more then in the
other? Is not the Justification of both alike free? though there be a
difference in the manner of Application, yet in the Meritorious Cause there is
no difference; and seeing to Children, Christ is the Meritorious Cause of their
Justification; why not also to these come to Age? 2. They will grant an
imputation of the Righteousness, and Merits of other Saints to them that want
of their own, as to the removal of temporal plagues, and the taking them out of
Purgatory; and if they grant that there may be an imputation of the Merits of
Saints; why deny they the imputation of the Merits of Christ, as to the removal
of eternal Wrath? is there any probability, that there can be any imputation of
the one, and not an imputation of the other? 3. They allow an imputation of
Christ's Merits, as to the procuring of the first Grace without all Faith
apprehending Him; and, if by their own Doctrine, it be not absurd to speak of
Christ's Merit, as to the infusing of Grace at first, why shall it be thought
absurd to speak of Christ's Merit, as to the procuring of Glory? 4. They grant,
that there is an imputation of Christ's Righteousness, as to the procuring of
Glory, in a higher degree; (though they say, that it is a far better Life,
which comes by our own works) and why not, as to the procu ing of Glory, in a
lower degree, yea, both of Grace and Glory, and of every good Thing? We have
insisted on this the more. 1. Because it is the main foundation of our Faith,
and the end of it, and the great scope of the Gospel. 2. Because there are so
many mistakes about this, and a gross mistake in this is remediless, when we
come before God; Even before the Tribunal of men, if we make a wrong defense,
it hazards our cause; So is it here, for to have a hiding place in Christ, and
under the covert of His Righteousness, is our only defense before the dreadful
Tribunal of God. 3. Because it serves much to clear this Truth, for we would
have you knowing, that it is not enough to speak of Christ's Merit, as the cause
of our friendship with God; a Papist will do that, who yet leans not to
Christ's Merits alone, but to his own, at least in part, and in conjunction with
Christ's; and therefore we would now and then speak of this, because there is
such horrible ignorance of it though a fundamental Truth; How many gay honest
folks (as they are called and accounted) are there among us, that cannot tell
how they came to be Justified, or what is the ground which they have to rest
on, if they were going to die? Is it not absurd, that men should be called
Protestants, and live so long under the clear light of the Gospel, and yet be
i^norant of this main point of the Protestant Religion?

Therefore 1. make this Use of it, to inform your selves in the causes of your
Justification; and to turn them over into Questions and Answers to your selves;
^o that if ye ask, what is the efficient cause of Justification? It Is God the
party offended; What is the final cause of it? It is H^s Glory; what is the
M^ritorious Cause? It is Christ's Merits, or His Righteousness impu^^d to us;
what is the inward instrumental Cause? It Is Faith, etc. According to the solid
answer given in our Chatechisme, to that Question, what is Justification? It is
an Act of Gods free grace, wherein he pardons all our sins, and accepts us
as righteous in his sight, only for the righteousness of Christ imputed to us,
and received by faith alone; Where the efficient cause is Gods free Grace;
Christ's Righteousness the only Meritorious Cause; and the only inward
instrumental Cause, Faith alone; The formal Cause, Gods pardoning our Sin, and
accepting of us as Righteous: Remember well, that it is not Christ's
Righteousness, as having a Merit in it, to procure inherent Righteousness,
but as it is imputed unto us, and accounted ours, that Justifies us; Thus ye
will remember the difference betwixt Christ's Right^ousnesse and our own; and
as for the external instrumental Cause, it is holden out in these Words of our
Catechism, in the description of Faith; as he is offered to us in the Gospel;
All these Causes must in ordinary dispensation concur to our Justification, and
the pardoning of our Sins.

The 2d. Use Serves to teach us to be on our guard against the Popish Error of
Justification by Works; though we here are mercifully kept free; yet the Land
is tempted in several corners of it, to shuffle by Christ's Righteousness, and
to bring in men's own Righteousness, or holiness, as the ground of their
acceptance before God; There are some spottings of it with in a few miles to
this place; and since this Error* draws Souls away from that which is their
right, and only defense before God, that is Christ's Righteousness; it cannot
but ruin them; which should make you all to look well about you; and upon this
account to abhor it: It as one of the great Delusions of the man of Sin, which
being once admitted, will, with your own consent, bring you again in bondage to
a Covenant of Works.

Use 3. Follow this way in your practice, in your seeking after Justification,
renunce your own Righteousness, and lean to Christ's Righteousness alone;
What better are many of us in our Practice, then Papists? If ye ask many, what
is it that satisfies the Justice of God? Some will answer. 1. Their good
Prayers, or their good Works, and if they have done a fault, they shall make
amends. 2. Others will say that they have a good heart to God; and they mind
well, though it is but little they dow do. 3. Others will thank God, that they
have ^e^n kept from gross evils, and that he has helped them to pray, and
to wait on ordinances, and though they have no Righteousness of their own, yet
God has helped them to do many good things, and thus, all that they lean to,
is still within the^. 4. Others will say, we warrant you, we can merit nothing;
but we hope through Christ's R ghteousnesse, our Holi^esse and Prayers will be
accepted; not as Duties, or Fruits of Faith, but they think to make these two
concur, as the ground of their Justification; to wit, Christ's Righteousness,
and their own performances together; And what is all this, but black and
abominable Popery? And yet, if we go through the generality of Professors,
great Folk, and mean Folk we will find few, but by one or other of these ways,
they delude themselves; and that but very few have Christ's Righteousness, as
the immediate ground of their Justification, and Defense before God: Be ashamed
therefore, that ye are so ignorant of this Point, and be exhorted to study it,
as the main thing, if ever ye think to stand before God's Tribunal, and to
carry your cause; be exhorted, I say, to be clear in this Defense, which only
will be found relevant before God, and nothing but this, to wit, the
Satisfaction of Christ taken hold of and rested on by Faith.

The 4th. Use, Serves for notable Consolation to a poor Sinner, that has no
Righteousness of His own; and who without this would never have peace, what
would any of you think, or say, if ye had your Prayers, and good Works to hold
up to God, for the ground of your Justification? But here is a way for the most
profane and graceless, to be Justified; which we do not mention to foster
prophanity, or an indifferency, as to the having or wanting of inherent Grace
and Holiness, God forbid we should; but to hold out the excellency of this way
of Justification by Grace, whereto, if ye kindly submit, ye may come to be
Justified; It Is not your own Righteousness, whether ye have less or more of
it, that Justifies you; for to that ye must be denied; and endeavor to make
this sure and sicker: Therefore let not this Grace be offered to you in vain;
if ye slight it, it will be a fearful challenge, and will make you one day
stand with a silent mouth, and an empty hand, when ye shall be charged; because
ye have not laid hold on this Righteousness, which only can answer all
challenges; and ye shall stand naked before God, because ye had this Robe of
Christ's imputed Righteousness, for covering of your nakedness in your offer,
and would not put It on: This is it that bare through David, Abraham and Paul,
and all other Believers; yea, that which (to say so) bare through Our Lord
Jesus who was justified in the Spirit, as He stood in the Room of Elect
Sinners; and Believers in Him may be fully assured of their Justification
through His imputed Righteousness, not that which is His Essential, but
Cautionary Righteousness, therefore through in to make use of it; and let God
Himself bless through Christ what has been said to you to this purpose.

SERMON LVI.
ISAIAH LIII.XI. Verse 11. -- By his knowledge shall my righteous servant
justify many, for he shall bear their i^iquities.


THese Words show the great Scope and Design of the Covenant of R^demption, and
of Christ's Sufferings agreed upon therein; which have been so much insisted on
in the former verses; And that is in a Word, that there may be a ground laid
down, how a Sinner may be Justified; therefore there is the greater need, that
this point be well studied, in all the causes of it.

It follows now that we consider this part of the Words, which holds out the
mean, by which this benefit is made ours, and that is, by his knowledge, which
holds out the Instrumental Cause of our Justification; It Is ordinarily so
called; and we see no cogent reason inducing us to a change of the Designation;
Faith ^here is called Knowedge, not as if it were a bare speculative notion,
such as Devils may have, but because Knowledge is a notable antecedent to
Faith, and Faith is cons^quent to, and supposes preceding Knowledge, as we may
see, Romans 10. How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? Thus
Faith is expressed by Knowledge, John 17.3. This is life eternal, to know thee
the only true God, and Jesus Christ, etc. Now it cannot be eternal life, to
know by a mere notional, or speculative Knowledge; For several reprobat men
exceed many Believers in this; but it is to know so, as to believe in God, and
to rest on the M^diator for Life through Him; as it is, 2 Pet. 1.3. He has
given unto us all things that pertain to life and godlin^ss, through the
knowledge of him, etc. Mere speculative knowledge cannot be the condition of
the Promises; For they are made to the Man that believes, which believing takes
in not only the Act of the mind, knowing, and assenting but of the will
consenting, and closing with the object known; and this will be the more clear
from these two. 1. That by knowledge here is meaned, that by which
Justification is made ours, or applied to us; and that which intitles us to it;
now mere s^eculative knowledge does not that; but it is Faith embracing Him, who
is made known. 2. If we compare that which is attributed to knowledge here,
with that which is attributed to Faith else, where, Romans 5.1. Being justified
by faith, we have peace with God; and, Romans 3.25. He is the justifier of him
which believes in Jesus; We will find, that what is called knowledge here, is
called Faith there; So that we may, without hesitation take the meaning of the
Words thus, My righteous servant shall by faith in him, justify many, who, by
His bearing of their iniquities shall be absolved, and set free; Therefore,
what is spoken of knowledge in the Doctrine, we may look on it as agreeing to,
and meant of Faith.

We shall here insist a little on this Doctrine, which is employed in the Words;
that Justification through Faith, or the obtaining of the Pardon of Sin,
through Christ's Righteousness, taken hold of by Faith, does necessarily
presuppose knowledge, in the person that may expect it; Or thus, Faith, where
it is Saving, and such as Justifies, has always Knowledge going along with
it; other ways Faith could not be called Knowledge; There may be Knowledge
without Faith, but there can be no Faith without Knowledge; and so consequently
a Sinner cannot expect Justification without Knowledge; For making out of this,
ye may consider these things. 1. Faith is of it self nothing, but as it lays
hold on some Object, How can Faith lay hold on an Object except it know it? as
the Word is, Romans 10. How can they believe except they hear, Can any person
rest on an unknown Mediator? that sure were not Faith but a blind guissing;
It Is just, as if ye should say that ye believe such a thing, when yet ye cannot
at all tell what it is; which is not Faith, but as I said, blind guissing, and
presumption. 2. Faith as Justifying, is always holden forth, as making use of,
and giving credit to that which is revealed in the Word; hence we that hear the
Gospel, have that revealed to us therein, binding us to the belief of it, that
Heathens have not, as it is, Romans 1.17. I am not ashamed of the gospel of
Christ, for therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith,
Where it is necessarly presupposed, that the revealing of the Righteousness of
the Gospel, (which here comprehends the knowing of it) must go before Faith,
and as a Person grows in Faith, he grows in the knowledge of it; hence also,
they are said to be strong in Faith, who were strong in knowledge; and they
were said to be weak in Knowledge, who are weak in Faith, Rom, 14.1. and 15.1.
Because they knew not that the cerimonial Law was taken away, and particularly
the difference of Meats; and so durst not hazard on some things, which their
Christian Liberty gave them access to. 3. Consider, that in Justification, God
would have a Sinner to proceed as a man does, who tables his defense before an
earthly Tribunal of Justice; who, if he pleads well, and on relevant grounds,
he comes* the better to; And as it is dangerous, in a weighty cause depending,
to have an ignorant Advocat, who puts in a wrong defense; so is it here, and in
this case to be ignorant; hence, Rom* 10. It Is given as the reason of the Jews
miscarriage in the point of Justification, but being ignorant of the
righteousness of God, they went about to establish their own righteousness;
That is being ignorant o^ that which God would accept for Righteousness; they
thought to patch up one of their own; and so is it still; For some hope to come
speed by their Prayers, others think to come speed by their good Heart to God,
a third sort puts in their good Works; if not in express Words, yet
practically; all which may let us see the necessity of Knowledge to
Justification. 4. Consider, that there must be Repentence, ere a Sinner can be
Justified; which supposes Knowledge; For he must needs know his Sin, and that
his own Righteousness will not do his rurn; and so long as he is ignorant, he
cannot Repent, nor renunce his own Righteousness, For while he is so, he
cannot know what is Sin, and what is not Sin; what is Faith, and what is
presumption, unless it be by guess; and folk will never be suitably affected
with Sin by gues^; The Apostle Paul (as it is, Romans 7 9.) Before the law came,
I was alive; that is, before it came to him in the knowledge of it is spiritual
meaning* and broad extent of it; while he was a Pharisee, he was alive in his
own esteem, But when the commandment came, sin revived, and he died; He then
saw need of another Righteousness then his own: We preach to you sometimes the
necessity of Repentance, and of your being humbled, and that ye should deny
your own Righteousness, and betake you to Christ's; but except there be
knowledge of your unrighteousness; It Is as if we should bid you wash where
there is no spot seen. 5. Look so reward to the Duties of Holiness, which are
necessary, though not to Justify you; yet that ye may live as it becomes
Justified Persons, though not to make your peace, yet to glorify God, and to
keep up friendship with Him: Now can any know, or do duties, who are ignorant?
Hence it comes to pass, that some hazard on Sin, taking it to be Duty, and
scar sometimes at Duty, as if it were Sin. 6ly. Consider your own peace, and in
order to it, there is a necessity of Knowledge; else there will be still a
doubting whether ye are right or wrong, hence it is said, Romans 14. He that
doubts, or does doubtingly is damned; For he has a Sentence in his own
Conscience against himself though he may be doing that which on the matter is
Right. 7ly. In a Word, Ignorance puts us out of case, to make use of many
notable opportunities and privileges; we know not what use to make of the
Word, of the Sacraments, or of Christ; How many have lived a considerable
number of years strangers to the advantages that are to be gotten by him,
through their want of Knowledge? Therefore John 4. Christ says to the
Samaritan Woman, If thou hadest known who it is that asked it of thee, thou
would have given him drink, and he should have given thee living water;
where He insinuats, that her Ignorance was a great cause why she kept at such
a distance from Him; It Is hardly possible, that so many poor Souls, would abide
at such a distance from Christ, if they knew Him; There is no desire after that
which is unknown; and therefore many do live at such a distance from Christ;
because they have not so much as the literal Knowledge, or Historical Faith of
His Worth.

The Uses are Three. 1. Take it for granted, if ever ye would see the face of
God, that there is a necessity of Knowledge; For Knowledge is a piece of God's
Image, as well as Holiness; and Knowledge is commanded as well as Holiness;
Knowledge was placed in the first Man Adam, as well as Holiness; and when we
are renewed after the Image of God, in conformity to the second Adam, we are
renewed in knowledge: And not only so, but Knowledge is a mean of the exercise
of Faith, of Repentance, and of Holiness; and if such a thing be needful, by
the necessity of a mids, in order to an end; if obedience to a command; or, if
the thing it self that is to be known, be needful, then Knowledge must be
needful; It Is true, we would beware of extremities here; as either to say on
the one hand, that their must be such a high degree of Knowledge; For in the
speculative part of Knowledge, (to speak so) Reprobats may go beyond Believers;
Or upon the other hand, to think that Knowledge is enough, and that there needs
no more but Knowledge; as, alace, many do rest upon their Knowledge; and
therefore we would beware of seperating these two, Knowledge and Faith.

If it be asked here, what Knowledge is requisite to Justification? I would
speak a Word to this Question, not so much for satisfying of curiosity; but for
your Instruction, who are more Ignorant; and to show the necessity of the
thing, and to give you a short view of these things, that are necessary to be
known about this matter, and therefore, 1. Ye must know God, that Justifies
you, ere ye can be Justified; as it is, John 17.3. This is life eternal, to
know thee the only true God, and him whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ; If ever
ye be absolved, before such a Judicatory, ye must know your Judge; That there
is one God, that He is one in His Essence; and that there are three Persons;
yet so, as the Trinity of Persons does not hinder, or obstruct the Unity, or
Onness of the Godhead, John 5.7. There are three that bear record in heaven,
the father, the word, and the holy ghost, and these three are one; Study then
to know God, who is your Judge, not so much out of curiosity, seeking to know
how the Persons differ, as to their manner of subsisting, as how to be fixed in
the Faith of the thing. 2. Ye would know your selves, and what may be charged
on you before God; Can men carry rightly before a Judge, or before a
Judicatory, if they know not how it stands with them: And this will lead you to
know the State and Case wherein ye were made at first; And the Covenant of
Works, which God made with Man at the beginning, when He gave to Him the
promise of Life, upon condition of Obedience; and that ye are liable to the
Curse, due for the breach of that Law and Covenant; else ye will never know
your hazard; and knowing the breach of the Law, and Covenant of Works; it will
make you, through God's blessing, to seek after Justification, which otherwise
ye will never do; And so ye are to know, that the first Covenant was broken by
Adam, and that this made him, and all his posterity liable to the Curse, as
being guilty of his transgression; and this takes in the knowledge of Original
Sin, even of the sinful Estate wherein ye were born, and of your Actual Sins.
3. Ye must know, how a Sinner, lying in such a State, and Case under Sin and
Wrath, may come to be absolved; And this leads you in to know, that there is a
New Covenant made through a Mediator, in which there is a Promise of Life and
Salvation, through believing in Him, which, Romans 10. is called the law of
faith, which gives a Sinner ground of hope to be Justified by the
Righteousness of a Cautioner; and leads him in to know the Defense, that he
may, and ought to plead upon before God; And there is here presupposed, as a
necessity of knowing your selves, so a necessity of knowing the Law, and
Covenant of Works, (for if we plead innocent in any one Sin, whereof we are
guilty, it may hazard our eternal ruin) And a necessity of knowing Jesus
Christ, who is the Meritorious Cause of our Justification; that He became man,
and did take to Himself a true Humane Body, and a reasonable Soul; that by the
Union of His two Natures, He might be God and Man in one Person; in reference
to which He must needs be known; for if we know Him not to be Man; we cannot
understand how Divine Justice is Satisfied; and if we know Him not to be God,
we cannot understand how the Humane Nature can be sustained, and supported and
carried through in Satisfying the Justice of God; and withal, a necessity of
knowing how the Mediator procures this Justification: and this leads us in to
know His Office; how He was a Priest, and interposed betwixt God and Sinners,
and made Himself an Offering for our Sin, and makes intercession for us; how
He was a Prophet, and how, when the thing was unknown; to wit, how a Sinner
might have peace with God, He revealed it of Old by His Prophets, in the Old
Testament, and by His Apostles, and Ministers in the New Testament, and does by
His Spirit ellighten the Soul, to take up the difference betwixt Justification
by Faith, and Justification by Works; how He is a King to subdue Sin in us, to
mortify our Corrupt Nature; that will still boast till it be subdued, to guide
us in His way, to fight our Spiritual Battles in us, and for us; and to take
course with all His, and our Enemies, Otherwise, if we know not this, though
we were justified just now; we would be led captive by Sin, and Satan to our
ruin within an hour, but knowing Him to be King, it gives Faith* footing to
expect Through-beating and Victory. 4. As we must know what Christ is; so we
must know what is in Christ, and what is communicated and applied to Sinners by
Him, and so the condition of the Covenant of Grace, which is Faith, whereby we
come to be united to Christ; and that this Faith is not a bare assenting to the
Truth, but a closing with, and a resting on Him; for we can never believe,
except we know what Faith is. 5. It is needful, that we know what Duty is
called for, from a Justified Person; to wit, Repentance and Holiness; because,
though He Justifies none for Repentance, yet He Justifies none but Penitents,
and He requires Repentance from all whom He Jus^ifies, Except ye repent, says
Christ, ye shall all likewise perish; For the Curse lies at the door, and we
are so to Repent, as that with grief, and hatred of Sin, we turn from it unto
God; with full purpose of heart, and endeavor after new Obedience. 6. There is
also a necessity of the Knowledge of Christ's Ordinance (though non absolu^ely,
in order to Justification,) to know the Sacraments, and how they represent
Christ, and the benefits that come by Him; and how they do Ratify and Confirm
the Believers Right to Him, and these good things promised through Him: Let me
entreat you Believers, and as many as look for Justification, to ^^ndy
thoroughly to know that these things are necessary to be known; even to know
God, and your selves, and what ye may be justly charged with before Him; that
your mouths may be stoped; to know Jesus Christ, and His Offices, (For ye can
never upon ground, expect Justification except ye know who has procured it) to
know what God requires of these, who are Justified; in a Word, study so much as
may bring you to know your lost estate, and the remedy thereof; and how to
found your Defense, when ye come before God, etc. And if ye would study thus to
know God, and know your selves, and your Natural Condition, and Jesus Christ;
and the way how ye come to be Justified through Him; and your Duty to Him, and
so make a Catechism to your selves, out of these few heads, it were a short
and sure way to come to knowledge.

The 2d. Use, Serves for Reproof, and Conviction to them that lie still in
ignorance, which is a most Sinful and Dangerous Condition; for if Knowledge be
a Duty, and if Ignorance be a Sin, and such a Sin as hazards the Soul, then
what a woeful case are many of you in, who now hear me? Lay aside all other
Sins, I would be ashamed to speak of the great Ignorance that is among you; How
many of you are there, that cannot give any tolerable account of your
Catechism; who know not your natural State and Condition, nor the way how to
come at peace with God; nor any ground for your Faith to rest upon; nor Christ,
nor His Offices? and, alace, if it be so, what better are ye then Heathens?
Sure ye are much worse; because ye have despised Knowledge; Can the Gospel give
you Faith, to whom it never gave Knowledge? There are several sorts of Persons,
to whom I would here speak a Word. 1: There are some that never lay the
necessity of Knowledge to heart, betwixt whom, and Turks and Pagans there is in
this resp^ct, but little difference, and yet such will be ready to say, we
live, and do as well as we may; that there may not be a quarrel, or
contraversie betwixt God and us; But is it possible, but there must be a
quarrel, if it were but on this alone account, that ye think there is none? O!
that ye would consider, what a Sin Ignorance is; when the Devil appeared in the
World, he made it a great part of his first Work, to extinguish, and put out
the light of Knowledge, and by this means he labors still to keep Folk in
Ignorance; hence the Apostle says. 2 Cor. 3. If our gospel he hid, it is hid
to them who are lost, whose eyes the god of this world has blinded; Prophanity
and Error are great Baits and Snares; but Ignorance carries more to hell then
both these do; for Ignorance fostereth and cheerisheth, if it do not also
beget, Prophanity and Error; as the Apostle Peter insinuats, when he says,
that the Ignorant or Unlearned, Wrest, or pervert the Scriptures unto their own
destruction; much Ignorance, and Conceit of Knowledge, will soon and easily
shake people loose, and make them a Prey to Error, and also to Prophanity; must
not Ignorance then be an evil thing, when it leads the way to so many other
Sins, and at last to Hell, and Destruction? hence it is, at least in part, that
the Kingdom of Satan is called the kingdom of darkness; and sure they are very
proper Subjects of his Kingdom, who are Ignorant; and is it possible think ye,
that people can think of God, or of their Duty aright, or have any solid
peace, who are in that Condition? They are just like to one sleeping on the top
of a Mast, in great hazard, and yet utterly senseless of it: Look but to two or
three Words, that hold out the dreadful danger, and hazard of your Condition,
who are Ignorant; The First is that, 2 Thessalonians. 1. Christ will come in flaming
fire, to render vengeance to all them that know not God, and obey not the
Gospel; The 2d. is, Hos. 4. My people perish for want of knowledge. The 3d. is,
Isa. 27. This is a people of no understanding, therefore he that made them,
will have no mercy upon them; Think not then little of Ignorance, neither think
your selves to be well, so long as ye live in it. A 2d. Son will readily grant,
that Ignorance is an evil thing, and that Knowledge is good and desirable; but
yet they take no pains to have their Ignorance cured, and removed, or to attain
Knowledge: They are secure and confident, though poor, blind and wretched, and
make their Ignorance a cloak of excuse for their other Sins: Hence some will
say, we have been poor ignorant bodies, and we hope that God will not lay Sin
to our charge: O! what delusion, and disperat danger is here? If it be asked,
(and it would become us well to inquire in it:) What can be the reason of this
horribly gross Ignorance, that is among us? which is such that we are almost
hoplesse of many of you: if some extraordinary works of God's Spirit fall not
in on your minds, and hearts: very readily these go together, the most
ignorant, are the most senseless, and the most Ignorant, are the most confident:
The causes of this may be several, as, 1. Folks undervaluing the practice of
Religion, let the most Ignorant Persons, being earnest in the practice of
Religion, and they will, readily through Gods blessing, as seek after, so come
at some measure of Knowledge: This is a fountain of your Ignorance, that ye are
not in earnest in Religion: Then shall ye know, (says the Prophet Hosea, Chap.
6.) if ye follow on to know the Lord: Excuse not your Ignorance, and want of
Knowledge, by your not being Book-learned: by your want of time and leisure,
and by other such shifts: If ye were in good earnest, and serious in seeking
after the Knowledge of the things of Religion, ye would soon in some measure
understand, and take them up: But ye come and hear, and sit for an hour, and
take no heed what is spoken: ye will not read the Catechism, nor ask a question
about what ye are ignorant of; nor will take heed to what is said, when others
are examined; There are none of you, but if ye were in earnest, ye might come
to some good measure of Knowledge; because they were sometim^^ as ignorant as
ye are, and as incapable, who yet have come to Knowledge, and these will be
witnesses against you, who had the same Gospel, the same seasons and means of
Knowledge, and yet continued full in your Ignorance. 2. Many of you do not
value the sinfulness, and hazard of Ignorance; For ye continue as secure, a^
if God would never lay it to your charge, ye would not readily lie in the Sin
of Drunkenness, or of Swearing, or of any other such things without a
challenge, but ye can lie still in your Ignorance, and in the Sin of not
profiting by the means which ye are under, and yet dispense with your selves
therein; and ye secretly say within your selves; if we be well otherwise, we
hope Knowledge will not be required of us; But will not, think ye, Gods Image
be required to be in you? are not Faith, Repentance, and Holiness required? and
can any of these, I pray, be without Knowledge? do ye see any touched with the
impression of their Sin and Guilt, but as soon they fall to the study of
Knowledge? and who continue to be Ignorant, but stupid bodies, that never saw
their hazard? which is an ordinary companion, and attendant of Ignorance. A 3d.
Cause is Negligence, and sloathfulness; The wise man says, The hand of the
diligent makes rich; and slothfulness brings on poverty, in every thing; if ye
compare Folks together, ye will find that wherever any are soberly, and
seriously diligent God blesses it; So that we may gather, and conclude their
diligence from their Knowledge; There are many here, who, I suppose are very
Ignorant, but let me ask you, what time and pains have ye ever bestowed on the
study of Knowledge? ye hear the preaching, and ye read a Chapter of the Bible
now and then; but that is not enough, for ye may be present here, and yet not
hear to any purpose; How many come to hear the preaching of the Word, from
whom, through their own fault, Devils come, as so many Craws on new sown Land,
and snatch away the Word that is sown? and it is never known, that such seed
was sown; for most part, ye either hear negligently; or ye quickly forget all
that ye hear; ye never speak of it in your Families, neither take ye any time
for re^ding, and pondering the Catechism; how many of you did ever set any
days, or hours apart to study Knowledge? Ye will cry out against pretended
Enthusiasiness, and Inspirations as Delusions, and there is good reason for it;
But how shall ye get Knowledge, if ye will be at no pains for it? your practice
says, ye expect it should come by immediate inspiration, without all use of
ordinary and appointed means. 4. Others will say, that they would fain know, but
they are very dull and incapable; and it is often true, that they are so; but
are such in earnest, out of love to Knowledge, studying to come by it? It Is
said of some. 2 Thessalonians. 2. Because they received not the truth in love, God gave
them up to strong delusions, to believe a lie. There are many, who study
Knowledge, but not from a right principle; nor from a right motive; it may be,
that they may get their Token to come to the Lord's Supper, to eshew shame when
they are examined, or that they may be able to talk; It Is just with God to let
such want Knowledge. 5. Folks go not about the use of ordinary means, as having
therein, need of God's blessing, and of His Spirit to help them rightly to take
up His Mysteries, they pray not for Knowledge as Gods gift, how many of you,
when ye take up the Catechism to read, fall down on your knees to seek God's
blessing on your reading thereof? When John is speaking of the benefits that
come by Christ; this is by him put in among the rest, And has given us an
understanding, that we may know him that is true, 1 John 5.20. If therefore ye
would know God aright, seek His blessing in the use of His own appointed means;
ye study the Knowledge of God even as if ye were to read a common humane
History; if ye seek a blessing to your Meat, why seek ye not a blessing on the
means of Knowledge? which is as necessary to the Soul, as Meat is to the Belly:
How often has David such a suit to God, when he says, Psalm. 119. Open mine
eyes, that I may see the wondrous, things of thy law; teach me thy statutes,
etc. He thought no shame to pray for Knowledge; sure if we prayed more for it,
we should thrive better in it; Other reasons may fall in, in the Directions
annent the study of Knowledge which we shall give you.

The 3d. Use, Serves to exhort you to, and to commend the study of Knowledge to
you, as a necessary commendable, and profitable Duty; can we hope to prevail
with you in any thing; if we prevail not with you in this, even to lay the
necessity of Knowledge to heart? will not the excellency of the Object, the
Authority of God commanding it, the advantages that come by it, with the
prejudices that attends and follows the want of it, commend it to you? will ye
ever be persuaded to seek after Faith and Holiness, that will not be persuaded
to study Knowledge? It Is a wonder how many of you can have the confidence to
say, that ye keep your hearts to God, when ye are so void of the very form of
Religion, which much consists in Knowledge, For it is that wherein it is kept,
and whereby, through Grace it is suitably exercised; Sure ye can never have the
power of Religion, who want the form of it; therefore let me exhort you all,
especially such of you, as have some eminency above others to study Knowledge,
let the more aged study it; and let these that are younger study it; If the
time of youth go over without it, it is one to many if ever the loss be
recovered and made up again; and ye that can read, and have time and parts,
study the Knowledge of God; many of you will be very sad, and dreadful
spectacles in the great day, when ye shall be charged with this, that ye never
Judged Precious Jesus Christ to be of that much worth, as once to put you
seriously to the study to know Him; This is no Fable nor Fiction, but a sad
truth, when Men vallue and esteem any thing, be it Science or Art, they will be
at pains, and give diligence to know it, because they prize it. Therefore, for
helping you to the study of Knowledge, take these few Directions, and a Caveat
or two in the close. 1. Let none put themselves without the reach of this
exhortation; let none say, we are too old to learn, if ever ye think to be
Justified by Christ, knowledge concerns you greatly; It were a commendable
thing to see aged Men and Women carefully, and conscienscious reading the
Catechism; and could we once but get you under the impression, and conviction
of this, as a Duty, we would think that much were gained. 2. Spend some time
about this in private weekly; It may be, it were fit that some of you did so
daily, ye spend much time more idly; If ye knew the hazard of Ignorance, ye
would even take some set time to study Knowledge, and this would not need to be
counted any wronging of, or incroaching upon your Christian Liberty; as ye
stint sometime for Prayer, may ye not stint sometime to read the Catechism or
to go to some Family, where ye that cannot read your selves, may have one to
read it to you; And to several, I may add for a help to this, that ye would
take a part of that time, which ye spend on Tippling; Is it not obvious, that
the person that is oftest in the Hostler-house, or in the Tavern, is ordinarily
the most stupidly Ignorant; Tell me whether is it better spent time, to take an
hour, in two or three days, and bestow it in Reading of the Scriptures, or of
some good and edifying Book; whereby you may come to Knowledge, and to grow in
it; then to take several hours every day almost, in an Alehouse, or Tavern,
many of you, as it is well known, will sit down in such places, at four or five
a Clock in the afternoon, and continue till eight or nine at night; how much
ye drink I speak not to that; but sure ye mispend much precious time, and much
debauch your own Spirits: What if by such doings, ye be laying a ground for
this a challenge: Sir, you lived in such a place, under such means, and you
spent your time so and so; you might have been fred from the guilt of
mispending of your time, and of your ignorance, had you taken a part, or the
whole time, and spent it in the study of Knowledge; would not this be better
for your Families, better for your Souls, and better for your Bodies? would it
not prevent much Sin, and much Reproach? And therefore, if ye lay weight on the
good of Soul and Body, bestow more time in the study of Knowledge; that Sin of
Tippling brings along with it many other Sins and were it not well done to put
some Duty, and even this Duty in particular, in the place of it? Others of
you, that Drink and Tiple not a way so much of your time, ye know what time ye
spend walking on the plain stones, and in prattling and talking of idle and
unedifying subjects; in Drolling and Jesting, or in sitting over the Fire; (as
we use to speak) in your houses, doing nothing; when will ye take some of that
time, in seeking after Knowledge? Others of you, that follow your Callings,
will ye leave your Work a little sooner then ye use to do, on the Saturnday
evening; or take the Sabbath afternoon for this Work; some of you may study
Knowledge in your Shops; Others may do it in your Houses, if ye would but give
over to walk up and down the Streets, when ye are not all called to do so. 3.
Make Conscience to improve the means of Knowledge which ye have; read
especially the Bible, and also the grounds of Religion, compendiously summed in
the Catechisms lesser and larger; ye have frequent preaching and Catechizing at
every Diet, study to get something; and put every days lesson to another, and
this would, through Gods blessing, increase your Knowledge; For instance, take
this Lesson to day; that nothing can Justify, but the Righteousness of
Christ, laid hold on by Faith; take another with you the next day, and let not
one days Lesson shoulder out another; Let the Husband and the Wife, the
Children, and Servants, compare their Notes, or what they remember of Sermons
together; Be often speaking of what ye hear in your Families, ye have, it may
be, some Neighbors, who would be content that ye come in to them; or, it may
be they have Children who can help you; make use of such Means, and Persons;
and that would both help your Knowledge, and evidence your Love (when sincerely
gone about) to the Communion of Saints. 4. Be about the use of the Means, with
an eye to God for His blessing on them; pray to Him for opened eyes, and that
He would give you an understanding to know Him; There is a stupidity in many of
you; that makes all that ye hear to go by you, and as it were, to slide off
you; So that if it were known, some would wonder how there could be such
Ignorance amongst them, that frequently hear the Gospel. 5. Any light of
Knowledge that ye have, be tender of it in your practice; God ordinarily
refuses to give more, where that which He has given is not used well; where
Men do not like toretain God in their knowledge, or where the truth is detained
in unrighteousness, it provokes God to give up to a reprobate mind, as the
Apostle tells us, Romans 1. If ye continue in my word (says Christ, John 8.31,
32.) then are ye my disciples indeed, and ye shall know the truth, and the
truth shall set you free: And, John 7.17. If any man will do his will, he shall
know of the doctrine whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self. He
that goes conscientiously, and constantly about the Duties of Holiness that he
knows (For he must make conscience of all, else he will thrive in none) he
shall increase in Knowledge.

There are also some things, that more generally conduce to Knowledge, as that,
Magistrates, Ministers, Elders, Parents, Masters of Schools, and Masters of
Families do their respective Duties. 1. Then let me desire you to see to the
Education of the youth; I mean of the Children of the meanest and worst, to
bring them up at Schools; I^'s sad to consider, how many young Ones of
Graceless, Careless, and Ignorant Parents, are brought up to the Devil; it
were no great business to help them, that cannot entertain them at School; O!
that we were all willing, to contribute for such a work; It might help them to
know som^thing of God, or to be civil at least; It would also remove the excuse
that we frequently meet with from many, to wit, that they cannot read; And if
Parents will not be seriously concerned in this themselves, God requires us to
take some course to bring up their young Ones, in the Knowledge of God; and
truly, if this external easy mean be neglected, we can expect little of other
means; if this were minded it might be an ornament to the City; and the burden
would not be so very great, if it were once put to the trial; will ye that are
Parents, and able, be induced to put your Children to the School; if ye be not
able, make it known; I know there are some who will drink more in one day
sometimes, then would keep their Children at the School for many days; and I
suppose, that there are but few who can say that it is mere necessity that lets
them; are there any of you that can say, ye would fain bring up your Children
at School, and ye spoke to Magistrates, or to Church-session for help, and that
it was refused you? It Is your part to seek for help, that are really unable;
And it lies on you, to see to it your selves who are able; And while ye
neither do your selves, nor seek help from others, ye are utterly in-excusable.
2. I would commend to you the necessity of using private means; and that ye
would not lay all the weight of your profiting, on your being in the Church,
and on your coming to be Catechized, or to hear others Catechized; but give
diligence in private to come to Knowledge; else it will be long ere ye thrive
and profit; ye that are in one Family, when ye come home from Sermon, confer
together now and then; and be speaking of what ye hear on the Sabbath, betwixt
Sabbath-dayes; and when ye can get any to answer a Doubt, or Question to you,
make use of the opportunity; though we could go through you all twice a year in
Examination and Catechizing, it will not do your turn, if this be neglected:
But as ye would be careful to keep your Children at School, so ye would be
busy in your Families, at all Family Duties; This was wont to be the old way
of Gods People, and it would make hearing of Sermons profitable. 3. I would
commend to you careful attendance on, and conscientious use making of the
Ministry of the Word, the great ordinary mean of Knowledge; and that ye who are
most concerned would be thinking of the great convenience, if not necessity of
more Laborers, If it were known how numerous a People we are; how many
hundereds every one who Labors among you, has under his charge, how little
time we have to go through you all particularly; and what abounding Ignorance
there is in the greatest part of the People; I suppose it would be thought,
that the charge of any one of us might require two to discharge it suitably;
which we do not pre^^e to spare our own Labor and Pains; but to stir you up to
a necessary Duty; the effecting of the thing is not impossibly; and it is a
Work and Duty, well becoming you, and worthy of you; The Lord Himself persuade
you to mind it. I shall close up all with a Caveat, or two. 1. Beware of
placing over much Religion in Knowledge; or of being puffed up with your
Knowledge, when ye attain to any measure of it. 2. Beware of counting mere
Knowledge to be Faith, but when ye come to know, and discern the Object, be
sure that ye take hold of, and rest upon that which the eye of Faith discerns;
the Land is to say so afar off, and within the Vail, cast therefore the Anchor
of Hope there. 3. Beware of thinking, that ye merely of your selves, can
acquire any sound and saving Knowledge, or pumpe it out of your selves; we bid
you not study the Knowledge of God, as ye study other common things; There are
here requisite Humility, Fear, Reverence, Love to the Truth, dependence on God;
Prayer to Him; and acknowledgement of Him: Let me again seriously commend this
study to you; and through it, let me commend Christ unto you, whom to know is
life eternal, To Him be praise for ever.

SERMON LVII.
ISAIAH LIII.XI. Verse. 11. -- By his knowledge shall my righteous servant
justify many; For he shall bear their iniquities.


IF any thing should be studied with diligence sure this should be, even to be
clear how we may come to be at peace with God; how we may be Absolved and
Justified, when we come to reckon before Him; It is no curiosity, singly and
diligently to make inquity here; although the unfaithfulness, and pride of some
unhappy men, have made the study of it unpleasant by corrupting, and making
crooked Gods plain, and straight way of making of our peace with Him, and of
our being Justified before Him.

We entered to speak of the great mids, or mean by which this Righteousness,
that Justifies a Sinner before God is derived, or, by which we come to have a
Title to, and an interest in it: And as we have great need to be clear in that
Righteousness, which will be a relevant defense before the Tribunal of God's
Justice, that we propose not one that will be casten, and rejected; So we have
as great need to be clear in the way, how that Righteousness may be made ours,
seeing many are, and will be condemned, notwithstanding of Christ's
Righteousness, because there is no application of it made by them to
themselves.

We show you that by Knowledge here is meaned Faith, as the Scriptures in the
New Testament (which hold out Justification to be by Faith) make clear: It
being evident, that no merely speculative Knowledge can entitle to this
Justification; yet it is called Knowledge. 1. Because Faith necessarily
presupposes Knowledge; If i^ be not a part of it, yet certainly it is a
necessary antecedent of it. 2. Because, though there be not an evidence to
reason in all the things which we believe; yet there is a certainty; and Faith
gets this Name, because it makes men certain of these things which it takes up,
as if it were a Science or Knowledge. 3. To distinguish it from all other sorts
of Knowledge, and to bound and include it, mostly, at least within this Object,
Christ, to speak so; Therefore it is said, by his knowledge, or as the Word is
better rendered, by the knowledge of him shall my righteous servant justify
many; Which shows, that it is not Knowledge taken largely, that he means of, but
Knowledge with respect to Christ, the great Object of it; as it is, 1 Cor. 2.2.
I determined to know nothing among you, but Jesus Christ, and him crucified:
And says, Paul, Philip. 3.8. I count all things to be but loss, for the
excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord. Ye will ask men, how does
Knowledge and Faith differ, seeing, wherever there is Faith, there is
Knowledge, though not contrary ways, wherever there is Knowledge there is
Faith? We shall not stand upon this; but shortly we conceive, that Knowledge
discovers the Object, and Faith takes hold of the Object and rests upon it;
Knowl^dge is the Eye of the New Creature, discovering such a thing; and Faith
is the hand that catches hold of, and grips that thing that is discovered; Or
thus, Knowledge is like to the Head, that takes up such a thing in a Notion,
and Faith is as the Heart that closes with it; Therefore, Romans 10. It Is said,
With the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession
is made unto Salvation: I know many take Knowledge for Faith, which at the
best, is but Historical Faith; and it is as if a Man who is a drowning, should
see another casting in a Rop to him; and he sees, and knows such a thing, but
takes no hold of it, and therefore perishes; or, as a Sea-mans discovering good
ground, to cast Anchor on, but not casting forth his Anchor thereon, is exposed
to the violence of the Storm, and so shipwracked; Knowledge discovers the
ground, but Faith casts the Anchor on it: It Is much to get you brought up to
know, but much more to get you brought to know the difference that is betwixt
Faith and Knowledge; Hence it is, that many say, that they believed ever since
they knew good by ill; because they never looked on Faith but as the knowing,
professing, and declaring such a thing to be true; But it is one thing to know a
Physician, and another thing to employ him, and to make use of his Physic.

We spoke of this general Doctrine, that Knowledge is a necessary thing, as
being presupposed to Faith, and particularly the Knowledge of Jesus Christ;
Therefore it is called, The knowledge of him; Because it is Christ Jesus which is
the Object of Faith; Therefore our study of Knowledge would especially be with
reference to Him: There are Two sorts of Persons, who are not utterly ignorant,
and yet are defective here. 1. There are some that love and study to be
Scholars, but Christ is not the Object of their Knowledge; it is not the
Knowledge spoken of here, to be well skilled in Philosophy, in Tongues, in
Mathimaticks, etc. Which we discommend not; nor is it to be able, speculatively
to disput and discourse of Divinity, but it is the Knowledge of Christ's
Righteousness; and to study experimentally, and practically to make use of it,
and to be clothed with it; as one says well; If we know him we know all, and
if we know not him though we know all, we know nothing; Therefore, though Paul
was a very learned man, and a great Scholar, yet says he, 1 Cor. 2.2. I
determined to know nothing among you, but Christ Jesus and him crucified. A 2d.
Sort, are such as want not affection to Truth; nor love to Piety, yet to them
the studying of this Doctrine, that concerns Christ, and His Off^ces, is
somewhat tastelesse, and wearisome; they would be at hearing of Duties, Cases
and Questions spoken of; though we may, in some respects say, that none of
these are Objects of Faith, properly, at feast as it is Justifying; but means
and midses to guide you to make use of, and to carry suitably to the
previledges, that are in the Covenant; Hence many have good affection, that are
very shallow in their Knowledge of Christ, and think but little of Preaching,
and Books that hold out the Doctrine concerning Christ, because they come not
in so closse to practical Things, and Cases, whereas, If they were better
settled in the knowledge of Christ, it would answer all their Cases, and louse
all their Questions and Doubts, let therefore these be well looked to, and this
by no means be nauseated or slighted; Though Knowledge of the Truths of God be
necessary; yet it is especially the Knowledge of Christ that is necessary.

There is another thing supposed here, that serves to clear the Doctrine of
Justification, which we shall Observe, ere we speak of Faith it self
particularly, because it is antecedent to it, and it is this, That the Gospel is
a necessary external mean, for promoving of our Justification; for Faith, as we
have showed, presupposes Knowledge, and Knowledge presupposes the Revelation of
Gods mind in the Gospel; and If Knowledge be necessary to Faith; then the
Gospel must be necessary; For it is said, Romans 11.17. That by it the
righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith; There is great need to
observe all the steps of this Doctrine well, and this among the rest; The
Gospel is not a thing that bred in natures breast; or a thing that man by
nature has the Knowledge of; Nay, it is foollshnesse to the wise Men of the
World, as we may see, 1 Cor. 1. we, (says the Apostle) Preach Christ crucified
to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness; Faith comes by
hearing, as it is Romans 10.17. and hearing by the word of God; and in the same
Chap. v. 14, 15. How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and
how shall they hear without a preacher? and how shall they preach except they
be sent? Where the Apostle clearly, and convincingly in^^rt the necessity of a
lawfully called Ministry for preaching of the Gospel, and for carrying on the
Work of Justifying and S^ving Faith: The reason is, because, if their be a
necessity of Faith, and if no Faith can ^e without Knowledge, then there must
necessarily be something to reveal it; I spe^k here of the ordinary way of Gods
revealling Himself; what He may do ^xtraordinarly toward Dumb and Deaff
Persons, to Idiots and Young Children, I middle not with that, but leave it to
Himself as a Secret, which He thinks not fit to impart to u: I call the
Gospel the external mean of promoving our Just^fication, in Four respects. 1.
Because it lays before us the Object of our Faith, for in it, (as it is, Romans
1.17.) is the righteousness of God revealled, etc. and, Romans 11.21, 22. it is
said, Now the righteousness of God without the law is manifested, etc. We
would never know the way how a Sinner comes to be at peace with God, and to be
Justified without the Gospel. 2. Because, it not only reveals the Object of
Faith, but it makes offer of it; and hereby a Sinner that hears the Gospel,
has warrant to embrace and make use of Jesus Christ's Righteousness, and to
rest upon it; and therefore, if tentation should say to the Sinner, though
Christ dyed, what is that for thee; Faith has this to reply; The Gospel calls
me, and that warrands me to come to Him, and to make use of His Death; the
Promise, as it is, Act. 2. Is to as many as the Lord our God shall call; And in
this respect, the Promise is our Right and Evident, whereby we come to have a
claim to Christ. 3. Because God makes use of the Word preached, for engaging of
Sinners to Christ, and for making them to take hold of Him; It Is true, that it
is not powerful of it self, and without the Spirit; yet it is the ordinary mean
that God makes use of, Therefore, says the Apostle; 2 Cor. 10.4. The weapons
of our warefare are not carnal; though they be weak in themselves, yet they are
mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds: And in this respect,
the Gospel not only offers Life, but through Gods blessing, as a mean begets
Life; and by the Spirit accompanying it, Sinners are engaged to take hold of
Christ, and to rest on Him for Salvation. 4ly Because this Word being taken
hold of, and closed with, contains the pronuncing of the Sinners Absolvitor, of
His absolving Sentence, when it says, If thou believe, thou shall be
justified and saved; upon supposition of believing, the Sentence stands good to
the Believer, Thou art past from death to Life; There being no condemnation to
them who are in Christ Jesus.

The 1. Use Serves to clear that which we hinted at before; in naming this for
a cause of Justification; though it be the external instrumental cause, yet it
is a Cause.

The 2. Use Serves to teach you to put a Price on the Gospel; It Is the bane
both of profane secure Sinners, and of a sort of vain and giddy People among
us, that they prize not the Preaching of the Gospel, as the external
instrumental Cause, that concurres in the Justification of Sinners; but if ever
ye be absolved, ye will be beholden to this preached Gospel; I will not say
always to the Preaching, but sure to the Gospel that is Preached: This on the
one hand reproves these who will be ready to say, that they have Faith, who yet
never knew the Gospel to do them good; and such also who seldom come to hear,
and who never care for preaching; And upon the other hand, it reproves these,
who, when they fall a Tottering, Reeling, and wavering, and begine to incline
to error; cast at the preaching of the Gospel, having, it may be slighted it
before in their hearts; whether, when Satan once gets them, he tosses them in a
great measure, as he pleases, and makes them so giddy, by frequent turning
about, that they scarcely leave to themselves a foot-broad of Scripture-ground
to stand upon: But as ye respect the glory of Christ, the good of your Souls,
and your absolution before God, esteem much of the Gospel; For it is the power
of God to salvation; And if ever ye ye come to Heaven, it will be by this
Gospel, as the external mean: These Nations that never heard it will think you
to be most desperately wicked, and miserable, who have had it, and yet so
unworthily slighted it.

For pressing of this Use a little, Take Two or Three Directions in reference
to it. 1. Walk under the Convictions of the necessity of the Gospel; For there
is no absolution without it; It is true, God might have taken another way, but
on the supposition, that He has appointed Faith to be a mids to Justification,
and that Faith supposes Knowledge, then certainly Knowledge does suppose a
necessity of hearing the Gospel; ye will never value Preaching, nor any other
Ordinances of Christ, if ye see not a necessity of them, and know them not to
be for your good. 2. Study to know what is the main End and Design of, and what
is the advantage that is to be had by the Ordinances; many come to the
Preaching of the Gospel, to hear and learn some Lesson, for informing their
Judgment, some come to get Directions, in ref^rence to some particular Duty,
some to get a doubt loosed, none of which are to be dissallowed in themselves*
but rather in so far to be commended, but how few come to it, as to a mean to
carry on, and bring about their Justification; and to bring them out of Black
Nature into a State of Grace? It Is the sum of Paul's Preaching, and the end of
it, as the Divine Historian shows, Act. 26.18. To open blind eyes, to turn them
from darkness to light, and from the power of satan unto God, that they may
receive forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among them that are sanctified
by faith that is in him. 3. Aim in your practice to carry on this Design, even
to put a close to the Treaty anent Justification betwixt God and you; when ye
come to the Preaching, and hears us declare in the name of the Lord, that a
believing Sinner has access to have his Sin taken away, and to be Justified
through the imputation of Christ's Righteousness; ye would step to, hearing
this Proclamation made of the pardon of Sin* by one of Christ's Ambassadors in
His Name, and accept of, embrace, and cordially close with it, if it were just
now, at this very occasion. 4. This would be the great design, both of
Preachers and Hearers; Of Preachers to follow that way of Preaching most, that
lays open the mystery of Faith in Christ; and of Hearers to love that way of
Preaching best; not so much that which fills the head with Notions, as that
which serves to help to close a Bargain betwixt God and you; This was Paul's
great design in Preaching, as we see, 1 Cor. 2.2. and 1 Cor. 1.23.24. He no
doubt ta^ght other things; but he compended all in this, or levelled all at
this, as the scope, and this was his main Design in his Preaching and Pressing
of other things.

The 3d. Use Serves, To make a sad discovery of many of you; is this Gospel the
external mean of Justification; Then see if ye ever knew any benefit ye got by
it; ye will belike say; that ye are in friendship with God? but, how, I pray
you, came ye by it? There is little ch^nge, to the better in your Knowledge,
and as little odds in your Practice, ye are as much given to Covetousness,
Tippling Lying, Swearing, Pride, Vanity, etc. as ev^r; and are these, think ye,
the Fruits of Justification? do ye think that to be Justification, which is
neither from the Word, nor conform to it? If God would commend this to your
hearts, I think it might alarm you to more serious thoughts of your Condition;
I put it to your Conscience, if ye can conceive any difference betwixt you, and
these that never heard the Gospel? ye are baptized, and hear preachings. etc.
But, alace, it is none of these that Justifies; they are only useful as they
lead you forward to the use making of Jesus Christ: Again, let me ask you, what
effect has Preaching upon you? H^th it convinced you of Sin? ^o, how then can
it convince y^u of Righteousness? Therefore, if ye would make sure
Justification indeed, try it by the Word. 1. What was it that put you to seek
after, Righteousness, and Justification? was ye ever convinced of the need of
it? and if ye have been convinced; was it by Preaching of the Word? 2. If ye
have been convinced of your Sin and misery; where sought ye for a remedy? was
ye led in through the Word, to seek a Plaster to heal that wound of
Conviction? 3. What was it that warranted you to take hold of that Word, or
that gave you right to it? I know that ye will say, that it was Christ holden
out in the Word, that ye did betake your selves to; but what weight laid ye on
Gods call in the Gospel warranding you to lay hold on the Promise of
Righteousness, and Pardon of Sin through Christ? I know there are many, who,
though there had not been a call from God, would have confidently stepped
forward to the Promise; but were ye ever like to Peter's hearers, pricked in
your hearts, and made to say, men and brethren what shall we do? Or, being some
way pricked, was it Gods call holding out, the Promise to be to you, and your
children, and to as many as our God shall call, that brought you to rest on the
Promise? God has designed preaching for this end; and ye would try, if ever ye
was put to it, to look to Gods call, that g^ve you warrant to believe; for
there is nothing more certain then this; that wherever Faith is sicker and well
built, it is grounded on Gods call, and does take His Fai^hfulnesse for it is
Back-bond (to say so) and warrant.

More particularly, we come to speak of this Word, as it respects the inward
mean, or the inward instrumental cause, of Justification, which is Faith; for
there is this order and method. 1. The Sinner is convinced, and made sensible
of Sin, and brought to reckon for it, in his own Conscience, before God. 2.
There is Christ's being holden forth interposing himself to take on Sinners
Debt, and satisfy^ng the Ju ^ice of God for it, which is the meritorious Cause.
3dly. There is Gods Offer in the Gospel, holding our Christ's Righteousness to
lost Sinners, and calling them to make use of it. 4ly. Upon this, there is
Faith's receiving of the Offer, and resting upon Christ, and His Righteousness
for Life; which (to speak so) is the inward instrumental Cause taking hold of
the external, and as I said of Christ in it. 5. And lasty follows Gods imputing
the Righteousness of Christ to the Sinner, and absolving him, by virtue of
that Righteousness from the guilt of his Sin, as if he had never Sinned.

In speaking of this inward instrumental Cause, Five things would be cleared,
which we suppose are employed in the Words. 1. The necessity of Faith, holden
out, as the Mean, by which Justification is come by. 2. The immediate Object of
Justifying Faith, and that is Christ's Sufferings, or Jesus Christ, as
Suffering, Traveling in Soul, and paying our Debt. 3. The Act of this Faith,
on this Object; which is not a bare speculative Knowledge, or a mere Historical
Faith, but something that really Acts on Christ with respect to His Sufferings.
4. The effect of this Faith taking hold on Christ, and His Sufferings, and that
is Justification, which is not the making a Sinner to be Just, by inherent
Righteousness, but the Actual absolving of him from the Guilt of Sin, and from
God's Curse, the changing of his State, and the bringing him from under the
Curse, into good terms with God. 5. The manner how Faith concurres in
proceeding, or bringing about this effect; wherein we have this general; That
Faith has a peculiar influence in the Justification of a Sinner, that no good
work, nor any other Grace has; There is none of all these things but it is in
this miserably declined generation (wherein the Devil sets himself mightily to
obscure Truth, as the Lord by the Gospel does clear it) contraverted, I shall
only endeavor to clear the positive part, and let you see what is Truth in
these things, whereby ye may be brought to discover, and abhore the errors that
are contrare thereto.

The 1. Doctrine than is this; That before a man can be Justified, and Absolved
from the Curse of God due to him for Sin, there is a necessity of Faith in our
Lord Jesus Christ; This is clear from the Words, and from what has been said
in the opening of them up; If it be by his knowledge, or the knowledge of him,
that many are justified, then it cannot be that they are Justified before they
come to the Knowledge of Him, or from Eternity; only in passing, take two or
three words of Advertisement, and then we shall confirm the Doctrine. 1. When
we speak of Justification, it is in respect of our being absolved, and fred not
from the pollution of Sin, but from the guilt of it, as it makes us obnoxious
to the Curse, the clearing of the effect will clear this more. 2. When we speak
of Faith, it is not to be understood as it were a Declaration, or Manifestation
of our Justification; Or, it is not to be understood of Faith, in the hight of
full assurance, and as it is a plezophory; but of Faith, as it is a laying hold
upon Christ. 3. When we speak of the necessity of Faith, in order to
Justification, we mean not, as if there were such an absolute necessity of it,
in it self, that God could not do otherwise, or Justify without it; but we
mean a necessity, in respect of the order which God has laid down, and held
forth in the Gospel, which is by the Knowledge of His Son to Justify many; And
from these considerations many Arguments of our Adversaries are made very
little regardable, yea utterly void.

For Confirmation of the Doctrine then, 1. Consider these Scriptures that
expressly limit, confine and bound Justification, and pardon of Sin to the
Person that does believe; So, Romans 1.17. The righteousness of God is revealed
from faith to faith; as it is written, the just shall live by faith. Romans 3.24,
25. Being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in
Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his
blood, etc. Col. 3.22. God has concluded all under sin, that the promise by
faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe. Act. 13.38.39.
Through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins, and by him, all
that believe are justified from all things, from which they could not be
justified by the law of Moses: Consult the Scriptures, and we will find, that
Paul clears both these Questions. 1. who are Justified? All that believe. 2.
When are they Justified? When they believe. 2ly Consider these Scriptures, that
place all men before believing, into a state of Wrath, and they will furnish a
second ground for this, as John 3.18. He that believes on him, is not
condemned: but he that believes not, is condemned already, He lies under the
Covenant of Works, and is condemned, as considered in himself, though God may
have a purpose to make a change of his state; So, Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. You has he
quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins, wherein, in time past ye
walked, and were children of wrath even as others, etc. and v. 12, 13. We were
sometimes without Christ, being alians from the common wealth of Israel, and
strangers from the Covenant of promise, without hope, and without God in the
world; but now in Christ Jesus, ye who sometimes were far of, are made near by
the blood of Christ; and v. 8. By grace are ye saved, through faith, and that
not of your selves, it is the gift of God, not of works, least any man should
boast, it is Faith that gives the Title, which we had not before. 3. Consider,
That the Scriptures do expressly make believing to preceed Justification; and
make Justification to be an effect, or rather a consequent of Faith, to which
Faith necessarly concurrs; as all these places, which say, that we are
Justified by Faith in Christ, do clear, as Romans 5.1. Being justified by Faith,
we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ; which place looks on
Faiths concurring in Justification, with a kind of causality, Romans 3.22.25. The
righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all
them that believe, etc. Ephesians. 2.8. By grace are ye saved, through faith; See
more fully to this purpose, Gal. 2.16. where the Apostle designedly as it were,
sets himself to confirm this Truth; For speaking of the way, how Sinners come
to be Justified, and as it were entering in the Debate, he says; Knowing that a
man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ,
even as we have believed in Jesus Christ that we might be justified by the
faith of Christ; In which place we have three things considerable, to make out
the point. 1. He compares the concurring of Faith, to Justification, in the
Covenant of Grace, to the concurring of Works to Justification, or to the
obtaining of Life, in the Covenant of Works; as Works did Justify, in the
Covenant of Works, so does Faith in the Covenant of Grace; Now certainly the
performing of Works, in the Covenant of Works, behoved to go before
Justification that way, therefore the want of Works made Adam to come short of
Justification by Works. 2. He looks on Faith, and speaks of it, as concurring
to Justification, with a respect to Christ, and never looks on it in this
matter, as a Grace considered in, and by it self; but as acting on Christ in a
peculiar manner. 3. In express words, he says, We have believed in Christ
Jesus that we might be justified; which clearly implies, that they could not be
Justified before they believed, and we may well, and easily gather, that the
Justification here meant, is that which is real and actual, and not the
declaring of a man to be Justified to Himself; else Works might declare a man
to be Justified to himself, as well as Faith; But he contradistinguishes Faith
and Works here, and opposes the one to the other.

The 1. Use, Serves for clearing of this Truth, That there is a necessity of
Faith's taking hold of, and resting on Christ, ere we can be absolved, and
Justified; And so both these Errors of Antinomians fall to the ground, 1. That,
by which they assert, that these who are Justified, were Justified from
Eternity; and were never under God's Curse: And 2. That Faith is not necessary
to the attaining of Justification, but only to a Persons knowing that he is
Justified; and so they say, that Faith enters us not in the Covenant; which is
false, it being the terms, or condition, on which God proposes, and promises
pardon in his Covenant, as is clear, John 3.18. Whosoever believes shall not be
condemned, but shall have everlasting life, and, Mark 16.16. He that believes,
and is baptized, shall be saved, with this opposition, He that believes not
shall be damned; Faith being it which enters us in the Covenant; For, either
Sinners are Justified before they can be in Covenant with God, which is an
absurdity, and inconsistent with Gods Covenant, or it is by Faith that they are
entered in the Covenant: There is here also a clear discovery, and confutation
of a 3d. Error of Antinomians, concerning the nature of Faith, That it is
Persons believing, that they are Justified; No, not so, For as the Apostle
says* Gal. 2.16. We have believed that we might be justified, We believe, in
order to Justification; And to say, as Antinomians do, would do much to infer
universality of Justification, as well as of Redemption; It Is Gods mercy, that
this Error is discovered; and that we have His Truth pointing out to us, that
Justification must have Faith going before it, and along with it.

The 2d. Use Serves to demonstrat the absolute necessity of believing, and
taking hold of Christ; If Absolution and Justification be necessary, Faith must
be necessary; And therefore, if Christ be preached to you, and if by Him, all
that believe are Justified; Take hold then, I beseech you of the Offer,
receive, embrace, close, with it, and let your very hearts open to it; without
which ye can never expect to be Justified, before the Tribunal of God, Now let
God Himself bless the same Word to you, through Jesus Christ.

SERMON LVIII.
ISAIAH LIII.XI. Verse 11. -- By his knowledge shall my righteous servant
justify many, for he shall bear their iniquities.


SOme further, and more serious apprehensions of our Sin, and hazard, would
make the reading of these Words to be refreshful, and welcome to us; The stayed
thoughts of an Arrestment laid upon us, to appear before God's Tribunal, and to
reckon for our Debt, would make us think much of a Cautioner; The want whereof
make the glad tidings of the Gospel to be tastlesse, and without relish, This
is the great scope of these Words, to show how a Summonded Sinner arraigned at
Gods Bar, may be Justified, and fred from the charge that he is liable to; For,
says the Prophet, By his knowledge, who is the surity of the Covenant, shall
many be just^fied. That which we last left at, was this; That Faith in Christ,
receiving, and resting on Him, is necessary for the attaining of Justification;
so that in Gods way, these are so linked and knit together, That never one
shall be Justified, but a Believer; Though there be a Righteousness in Christ,
yet it shall be derived, and communicated to none come to Age, but to these,
who by Faith betake themselves to Christ; what way the Lord takes with infants,
Elect Infants, I mean, is not that which the Prophet aims to speak of; though
it be Christ's Righteousness, that is communicated to them, as well as it is to
them who are at Age; yet as to the manner of communicating it, God has His own
way which we know not.

Now that we may learn in speaking to these Truths, not only to get some Light
for informing of our Judgment; but also some help for our practice; take two
or three Uses, ere we proceed any further.

The 1. Use then is, To let you see the absolute necessity of believing in
Christ Jesus, and that it is as necessary for the attaining of our
Justification, as Christ's dying is; For our Justification is an effect flowing
from several Causes, and the want of any of them will mar it; There must
necessarly be a concurrance of them all, to bring it about; And therefore,
though their be an excellent worth in Christ's Righteousness; yet there is a
necessity of Faith, to lay hold upon it, and to make it ours; Gods order in the
Covenant bears this out; wherein he has knit the Promise of Pardon of Sin, and
of Justification to Faith, and resting on Christ; and there is good reason for
it, As, 1. The Lord will have a Sinner to know what he is obliged to Christ,
which Faith contributs much unto; For Faith stands not in the way of the
freedom of Justification, but rather commends it; for the Lord would have us
know, that we hold our Life of Him; and not to receive Him by Faith, is an
evidence of highest presumption; Therefore it is said, Romans 4.16. It is by faIth
that it might be of grace; God has chosen this way, that the freeness of His
Grace, in pardoning of Sin may be seen. 2. The Lord by this, lets the
unbeliever know, that the reason of his own ruin is of himself; There shall
not be one unbeliever found, that shall have it to say, that the blame lay on
God, or on Christ; because the offer was made to them on condition of receiving
it by Faith, and they not performing the condition, their Guilt is aggreged by
their slighting of the offer: It Is true, that we are not now dealling with
them, who downright deny the Truth of this Doctrine; but, alace, what better
are they, who do in their practice deny it, and live senslesly and securely
under the Gospel? We conceive that there are Three sorts of Persons, that have
need of a Word to be spoken to them here. 1. Such as live carelessly, and
securely (as we just now said) as if God required nothing of them at all; as
they were born, they know not how, so they live, they know not how; and when
they are pressed to a change of their state, and way, they make excuses, partly
from the sinfulness of their Nature, that they can do nothing, partly from the
abundant Grace of God, that He must do all; But it will never excuse you, that
ye wanted Grace, and had a Sinful Nature, for whom I pray, can ye blame for it?
ye that make a bachel of His mercy, if ye continue to do so, shall never get
good of it; For He has said, that He will Justify, and save none but the
Believer, There is none other that has the promise of Pardon, it is not made
to any thing that is to be brought forth, or done by your own strength, or by
the strength of Nature, or of free will; But God has laid down this order and
method, and made it known that ye should believe, and receive the offer of
Christ in the Gospel; renunce your own Righteousness, and betake you to
Christ's Righteousness, otherwise ye cannot, on good ground, expect to be
Justified. 2. Others will set about many things that are good; but the Work of
believing they can never be brought to mind, or own, they will make a sort of
Conscience of Prayer, of keeping the Church, of reading the Scriptures, etc.
But to give obedience to the Command of Believing they mind it not, they can
live, and die without it; This was the woeful, and Soul-ruining practice of the
Jews of old, as we are told, Romans 9. They took much pains to come by
Righteousness, but they attained it not, because they sought it not by faith,
but as it were by the works of the law, for they stumbled at that stumbling
stone; when they had gone part of the way, as it were, and come to the Stone of
believing, there they fell and brake their necks; Hence there are many who
promise Heaven to themselves, and think that they have done something for it,
who yet never laid hold on Christ for their Justification; but let me tell you,
that though you could go the greatest length in Holiness that ever any did
since Adams fall, it will not avail you, if ye neglect Faith in Christ; I say
not this to dissuade you from the Duties of Holiness, God forbid; but to
divert you from seeking Justifi^ation by them; study the Duties of Holiness,
but seek always, by any means to be found in Christ, and in His
Righteousness, and not in the Righteousness of your Duties, as to your
Justification; It is true none that have any tolerable measure of Knowledge,
will prof^sse down right, that they lean to holy Duties; yet many are so
ignorant, that they cannot distinguish betwixt Faith and Works; and there are
not a few, who have a hope of Heaven, such as it is, who never knew any thing
of the exercise of believing. A 3d. Sort are these who because of some common
favors that they have received, as evidences of Gods care and kindness,
conclude their Justification; It may be some have had now, and then deep
convictions, or have win to Tears in Prayer, or at a Sermon; Others it may be,
have had some joy now and then, at hearing the Word; Others will, it may be
dream of such, and such Heavenly things, and have, as they suppose, a vision of
them in their sleep, and some joy will follow on it, when they are awaked;
Others may have met with many deliveries by Sea and Land, and God has dealt
well with them, and their Children, in external things, but, alace, these things
may befall unbelievers; not one of them, nor all of them together, if there be
no more, will Justify; ye would rather try these things whether they be found,
and evidences of special Love or not, by your believing; If they have Faith in
Christ carried along with them, It Is well; If ye can say, that after ye
believed, ye were sealed with the holy spirit of promise, and that your joy
followed upon your closing with, and resting upon Christ, ye have no reason to
question it; but where such tastes goes before, and are without believing; it is
suspect-like; there are many of you that have multitudes of things, that ye
lean to, beside Christ; and never seriously put your selves to the trial,
whether ye be indeed fled to Him.

2. Use, We would commend this to you, as a ground of Trial of your selves, if
ye be Justified; if ye have seriously taken with your sin, and embraced God's
offer of the Righteousness of Christ, and rested on it; make this once sure,
that ye have been sensible of Sin, that ye have been beaten from your own
Righteousness, and that ye have fled to Jesus Christ, and closed with His
Righteousness offered in the Gospel; then this will natively follow, that by
His Knowledge thou art Justified; His Word speaks it out plain to thee: It may
be that some think this to be a broad mark, and that others will think it
narrow; Yet it is a solid mark, and no other thing is or can be a mark, but as
it implies this; though some may presumptuously gather from it a broad
conclusion, yet it will be found to be as straining and searching a mark, when
well considered, as other marks and evidences are, that we cannot at first so
easily lay hold upon; and therefore we would say, that it is not every one that
thinks he believes, but it is such as really believe, who have this evidence;
and for preventing of mistakes, we shall follow this evidence of Justification,
to wit, Faith, to the very rise of it. 1. It supposes a Charge, and Summonds as
it were given to the Persons, to appear before God. 2. There is a Sentence
discovered, standing against them, and over their heads, by the Covenant of
Works, now what can ye say to these Two? where I desire you not so much to
speak your light, as your practice, and experience; what a Charge, or Summonds
was put in your hands? Have ye read the Lybel of your Sins? And have ye seen
the breaches of the Law, and your lyableness to the Curse of God for the same?
If so, then what means the good opinion that many of you have of your selves?
This is even the thing that the Apostle says of himself before his
conversion, Romans 7.9: Before the law came, I was alive, but when the
commandment came, sin revived, and I died; That is before the charge was put
in my hand, and I summoned to appear before Gods Bar, I had a good opinion of
my self, and I thought that all was well; but when I came to take up the Law in
the Spiritual Meaning, and broad extent of it, I saw my self lost and gone, and
that conceat fell; These Three then usually preceed Faith. 1. That a person
has had a good opinion of himself. 2. That this person is Summoned or Charged
to answer at Gods Bar. 3. That the person is made to pass Sentence on himself,
as lost and undone, by reason of the Laws Sentence, and Curse standing over his
head unrepealled; Now, how has it been with you, as to these? The most part
are quite of another disposition then Paul was; They think they are well
enough, because they never discovered their rotten condition; but try well how
it is with you; go in and see if ever ye discovered in your selves. 1. An
inclination to establish your own Righteousness. 2. Was ye ever under a work
of the Law humbling you? and 3. Was ye ever, in your own apprehension lost? If
so, then ye are such as Christ came to call. 2ly. In the next room consider
what ye betook your selves to, for answering that Charge, and for a remedy of
that lost condition; there is no remedy, but the offer of Christ's
Righteousness in the Gospel; Some being charged wirh Guilt, betakes themselves
to Prayer, and that is well done in so far; but if ye hold there, and go no
further, it is not right; It Is here, as it was with these, who lived under the
Law, who, when they had Sinned, made use of Sacrifices; and the greatest part
held there, and went no further; whereas the believer looked through the
Sacrifices to Christ; So, if ye hold at Prayer, and other Duties, and go no
further, these will not profit you; but know ye what it is to go to Prayer, and
in Prayer to go to Christ, and rest on his Sacrifice for your acceptance? I
fear there be great ignorance here; The most part know not what they have done,
when they were charged; or, if they did any thing, they prayed; or, if they
went any further on, they looked to the promise of Gods mercy; but that is not
far enough gone; How many such are there, who have made their Prayer their only
intercessour, and have presumed to step in on God's mercy, without a Mediator.
3. Suppone that ye have betaken your selves to Christ, as to the remedy; come
on, and try how your union has been made up with him; where did ye seek and
find him? Christ Jesus is to be found in the Gospel, in the Ministry of the
Word; Therefore that is put in on good reason in the definition of Faith given
to us in the Catechism, That its a resting on him, as he is offered in the
Gospel; but I fear and suppose that many have another Christ (to speak so) whom
they have gotten without knowing, or making any use of the Word, or offer of
the Gospel, which is the power of God for salvation to them that believe. 4.
Wherewith did ye take hold on him? or how did ye act on him? was it by Faith or
not? There are many, who act on him as they think by Prayer, not as the
meritorious Cause, but as the efficient cause of Justification, praying for
pity and pardon from Him; but this is not to take hold of Christ's
Righteousness by Faith; Others think, that if they can love and serve Him, and
please Him with Duties, they will engage Him to give them pardon; and in this
they have (to speak so) an under hand Covenant of Works; They will do something
to please the Mediator, and wherein they come short, they expect that he will
make it up; and this is very ordinary in practice; If ye ask some, what hope
have ye of Justification? They will answer, through Christ's Righteousness, and
that is good, in so far; but ask them again, how they will get it? they will
answer, that they will do what they dow or may, and they hope that He will pity
them; ye would look in upon your own hearts, and see whether it be not secretly
making something of this kind the ground of your title to Christ, and of your
Justification; And yet all this may be, and often is in them that will not
stoop to the way of Grace, nor submit themselves to the Righteousness of God:
They will speak of Christ's Righteousness, and yet they will needs give Him some
compensation; and so come never really to renounce their own Righteousness,
and to flee unto His, and to hold it up as their defense before God; Take but
an impartial view of these steps, and many of you, who suppose that ye are
believers, will not be found to be so, nor Justified before God; because ye lay
nor claim to it by Faith, but as it were by the works of the Law.

Use 3. There is here ground for all that neglect Christ, and do not by Faith
take hold of Him, to look for a most dreadful Sentence; and ground for others,
who seek Righteousness through Faith, to look for a most comfortable Sentence;
1. Then is this a Truth, that Justification is through Faith in Christ? then
many of you are not Justified; And if the Lord prevent it not, ye will never be
Justified; If so, then it must be a most dreadful thing not to believe; If ye
would know what is your condition, ye may read it, John 3.18, 36. He that
believes not is condemned already, and he shall not see life, but the wrath of
God abides on him; and Gal. 3.10. As many as are of the works of the law, are
under the curse; For it is written, cursed is every one that continues not in
all things written in the book of the law to do them: If ye really believed
this, many of you would be under horror, to hear what a sad condition ye are
in, even condemned already, and having the Wrath and Curse of God abiding on
you; because the Word curses and condemns all that are not in Christ by
Faith: This, I fear belongs to very many, who are altogether secure and
careless, and yet are in reputation amongst us; And is it not very sad to be
professing fair, to have the offer of life and to be treating with God about
your peace, and yet to be still in the State of enmity with Him; So that if
death were within twenty four hours march to you; you could have nothing to
expect, but the ratifying of this Sentence of Gods curse upon you; We are sure
there is as much in this, as might in reason put you by all means to study. 1.
To be Believers, for without Faith ye are never over the borders of Gods curse;
which may lay a chase to you, and put you to the necessity of fleeing to Christ
for refuge 2. To take some pains to try whether ye be in the Faith, as the
Apostle exhorts. 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves whether ye be in the faith,
prove your selves, know ye not your own selves, how that Christ is in you,
except ye be reprobats? His meaning is, know ye not, that this is a truth, that
ye are in a reprobat, or unapproven condition, except Christ be in you; and
Christ is in none, but in the Believer; If so, ought ye not to try your selves,
if ye be in the Faith, if ye be Believers; There is no ordinary way to win to
the sure and comfortable Knowledge of it but by trial; and if ye be not
Believers, is there not reason, and is it not of your concernment, to endeavor
by trial to come to the Knowledge of it: As this is ground of terror to the
unbeliever; so it is ground of notable consolation to the believer, who, if he
were even put to the reckoning with Paul, I was a blasphemer, a persecuter,
injurious, yet here is hope for him, that he shall be found in Christ, not
having his own Righteousness, but Christ's; believing in Christ will obtain
Justification to such a person; His Righteousness taken hold of, and put on by
Faith, is as pleasing, and acceptable to God, as the unrighteousness of the
Sinner is displeasing to him; This was it that made David to sing sweetly,
Psalm. 32. Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered,
blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no iniquity; to wit, through the
imputation of Christ's Righteousness; as the Apostle clears; Romans 4. As the
first branch of the Use show the necessity of Faith, for Chasing Sinners to
Christ; so this branch is a sweet motive to draw them to Him; and if there were
more sensible Sinners amongst us, whose own Righteousness misgives them, and who
are brought to that pass, that the Jailer and Peter's hearers were in, crying
out, what shall we do to be saved? This word believe in the Lord Jesus, and ye
shall be saved, would make them come in cheerful, as he did, from the brink,
not only of Temporal, but of Eternal Death; It Is this Faith, by which we have
access to stand before God; ye would therefore be earnestly entreated to betake
your selves to it, and to Jesus Christ by it, for your pardon, and peace, even
for your Justification before God.

2dly. Consider these Words, as they hold out the Object of Justifying Faith,
which is the great thing in them, even to discribe Justifying Faith, as to it is
Object, and Effect, and in it is concurring to produce this effect; And here
there are mistakes, and errors, both in the doctrinal and practical part of all
these. 1. The Object of it then is Him, Jesus Christ, the knowledge of him, or
the Faith of Him, or Faith in Him, as other Scriptures have it: Or, looking
more nearly to the words, it is Faith in Him, as Suffering, as Satisfying for
Sin, as in Soul-travel, bearing our iniquities; Hence Observe, That Christ
Jesus His Rightnousnesse holden forth in Gods promise of free Grace, is the
native and proper Object, that saving and justifying Faith takes hold of, and
rests upon; or to the same purpose, the saving Grace of Faith, that Justifies,
is that Faith that does peculiarly apply and rest upon Christ Jesus holden
forth in Gods promise in the Gospel, as the Righteousness of a Sinner that
believes on him; hence the Prophet calls it here, Not Knowledge more
generally taken, but the knowledge of him, and that, as He is holden out in
this Chapter, to wit, as surety for Sinners; and suffering for their Debt: This
will be clear, if we consider all these Scriptures, that make offer of the
pardon of Sin; for it is offered not in the condition of Faith, in a more
general Notion of it, but on condition of Faith, in him; So, Romans 5.22, 24, 25.
The righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and
upon all them that believe: being justified freely by his grace, through the
redemption that is in Jesus Christ; whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood. Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith, we
have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. John 1.12. To as many as
received him, he gave power to become the Sons of God, even to as many as
believe in his name; Where the Faith that has the Promise of Justification,
and the privilege of Adoption annexed to it, is called the receiving of
Christ, and believing on his name.

It may also be cleared, and confirmed by good reason, 1. Faith does not
Justify as it is considered in it self as an Act, but as it relates to, and
units with Christ, as the meritorious cause of Justification. 2. Neither does
Faith Justify as it looks to every Object which the Word holds forth; But as
it respects Christ, offered in the Gospel, whom it receives; because there is
no other thing that can bear the Souls weight and burden; Therefore he, as
offered in the Gospel, must be the Object of Faith, as it is saving and
justifying. 3. The terms of the Covenant, and Gods offer clears it also; For
Gods offer of Justification is not on these terms, that a Sinner shall believe
his Word in the general, but that he believe on His Son whom He has sent, and
receive Him as these Scriptures cited before, to wit, John 3.16.18. and Mark
16.16. Show where the terms are set down, whereon God offers Life to Sinners.
4. If we could imagine a man to have all Knowledge, and all Faith, if Faith Act
not on Christ as Redeemer, Cautioner, and Surety for such as come to Him, it
will not avail us, nor be counted to us for Righteousness; which may also
confirm this truth.

The Uses of this Doctrine are such as serve both to clear the nature of Faith,
and to direct us in our practice.

The 1. Use. Then serves, to clear the Truth; as the Papists corrupt many
Truths, so they corrupt this Truth concerning the nature of Justifying and
Saving Faith, in these Three, 1. In the Object. 2. In the Subject. 3. In the
Act of it: As for the Object of this Faith, they make it to be every thing that
God reveals; and sometimes they take in their own Traditions: the reason is,
because they give not Faith a Causality in Justification, nor the capacity and
place of a thing, acting on Christ particularly; but take it in as a common
Grace, or at the best, as a Grace that is Radical; and gives Life to other
Graces; but never as taking hold of Christ's Righteousness; which quite
overturns the way of Justification through Faith in Him; for Faith that lays
not hold on His Righteousness cannot Justify; and their making the Object of
Faith to be so broad, does enervat both the immediate merit of Christ's
Righteousness, and the exercise of Faith on it. 1. Then we grant that there is
a Historical Faith requisite, as to the whole Word of God; yet we say that the
Faith that Justifies, is properly that Faith that singles out the
Righteousness of Christ, and takes hold of it; So that it is not our believing,
that the World was made, that there will be a day of Judgment; nor our
believing that a Savior of Sinners is come into the World, and has suffered,
etc. that Justifies; but it is a closing with, a receiving of, and a resting on
that Savior, a singling out of the Promise that makes offer of him; (as for
instance, where it is said, If thou believe on the Lord Jesus thou shall be
saved) and pitching on that, and resting on him holden out in the Promise;
Faith gives the Soul footing here, whereas before it is case was very desperate.
2. We may clear what we are to look to, as the object of Justifying and Saving
Faith, by our putting in these Three Words, or Expressions in the Doctrine, to
wit, Christ Jesus his Righteousness holden forth in the promise of Gods free
grace in the Gospel; and which are needful to be taken in, though it be not
always necessary, that we be explicit ln the uptaking of them. 1. There is
need of taking in Christ's righteousness, because it is our defense at the Bar
of Gods Justi^e; even as a Debtor whose Debt the Cautioner has paid, has
that to answer when he is charged for it, that his Cautioner has paid it. 2.
There is need to take in this, Holden forth in Gods promise in the gospel;
because, though Christ be the Object of Justifying Faith, and His
Righteousness be the ground of the Souls defense before God; yet Gods Promise
must be looked on by Faith, for the use making of Christ, and His
Righteousness, and as a warrant to rest on Him, and to expect Justification
through Him; and thus Faith has Christ's fullness, or His full and complete
Satisfaction for Righteousness, and Gods Faithfulness impledged, that the
Believer shall be accepted through it; And its on this ground, that Faith
sometimes looks on God as Able, sometimes as Faithful; Therefore it is said,
Heb. 7.25. He is able to save to the uttermost; and Heb. 11. Sarah judged him
faithful who had promised: whereupon there is a closing with the offer in the
Promise, and a looking to obtain that which is Promised, as if they had a
Righteousness of their own; and this the Apostle calls the law of faith, Romans
3.27. Because to Justification there is beside the payment of the Debt, a Law
declaring the man to be absolved, requisite; and the Sinner having Gods offer
and Promise, that upon his accepting of Christ's Righteousness, he shall be
Justified, instructs that his Debt is paid by his Cautioner, and that
therefore he ought to be, and is accordingly absolved; And though Gods Promise
be not so properly a Law, yet the Apostle calls it so; and it is a solid
defense to the Soul that is fled to Christ; Who may thus reason, I have no
Righteousness of my own, but Christ's Righteousness by Proclamation, is
offered to me in the Gospel, and I have heartily received it, and closed with
it, and God is faithful to make good His Promise to me; and this looks to
Christ as He is revealed in the Gospel. 3. There is need to put in this word,
The promise of Gods free grace; because hereby the Sinner is made to see whence
the Promise came, and of what nature it is, and gives ground to take hold of
the Promise, and of that which is made offer of in it; the Promise is of free
Grace, therefore it is always called the Covenant of Grace; So Romans 4.16. It Is
of faith, that it might be by grace to the end the promise might be sure to all
the seed: For if it were not of Grace, the Sinner would never think himself
sure, nor would he know if such a Sinner might take hold of such a Promise; but
considering that the Promise is of Grace and His acceptance is of Grace, as is
often repeated, Ephesians. 1, 2, and 3. Chapters: These Three are the great warrant
that a Sinner has to roll himself over on, a complete Mediator; a faithful God
promising to answer all grounds of Fears* Doubts and Jealousness; and free
Grace which answers all Challenges that may come in to hinder his closing with,
and his resting on the Promise; for if it should be said, How dare thou lay
hold upon the Promise? The answer is, it is free, it is not the mount that may
not be touched, but it is Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, etc. It Is
Grace that is the Rise, the End, and the Condition of it: These are the Three
on which Faith yields it self to Christ, and which are the Object of it, on
which it dar hazard, and on which it does hazard; and these Three are revealled
in the Gospel of the Grace of Him that is Faithful, and cannot deny Himself:
May we not then say, O! Sinners, if ye will believe that ye have a good resting
place, a sure foundation, a tried cornerstone? as it is Isaiah 28. cited Romans
9. Where the Apostle has it, He that believes on him shall never be ashamed;
There is a suffi^ient surety, a full Mediator; there is a faithful God that
will keep His Word; and there is a free Covenant, and Promise, softer for a
bruised Soul to roll it self over upon, than any bed of the finest downs is for
a weary and crasie body; this is a chariot paved with love for the daughters
of Jerusalem; single out Christ from all that is in the Word without slighting
any part of it; and believe in Him, and lippen to Him; let Him have another
weight, and lift of you than ye give to any other thing, he is able to bear it;
and God will never quarrel you for so doing, but will keep His word to you that
do betake your selves, or that have betaken your selves to Him; He that
believes shall never perish, nor come into condemnation; O! know what a ground
ye have to rest upon, it is even the substance and marrow of all the Word of
God; ye have Christ and His Fullness, God and His Faithfulness; Grace and it is
Freeness: and are there such Three things beside? or is it imaginable, or
possible that there can be any beguile, or failure here? spare not then to lay
the weight of your Souls upon it; let it be the foundation of your peace, and
let it answer all challenges that may be, whether for many, or for great and
grievously aggravated Sins: only by Faith take hold of this Righteousness, and
rest upon Gods Faithfulness, and free Promise, to make it forthcoming to you:
but upon the other side, O! how great will it aggrege your guilt, that had such
a remedy in your offer; such a tried cornerstone, elect and precious, to rest
upon, and yet made no use of it; Let me exhort, beseech, and even obtest you,
That ye recieve not this grace in vain; but as Christ is laid for a sure
foundation, so come to Him, and build upon him, that ye may not be ashamed in
the day of the Lord, when all that believe not, how presumptuously so ever they
may hold up their heads now, shall be ashamed and confounded, World without
end; O! happy, thrice happy will they all be found to be then, who have trusted
in him.

SERMON LIX.
ISAIAH LIII.XI. Verse 11. -- By his knowledge shall my righteous servant
justify many, for he shall bear their iniquities.


THe Knowledge of Christ was wont to be much thought of by the People of God,
and to be in high estimation among them; and we may say, we wot well it was
deservedly so, considering that it is by His Knowledge, that Justification was
derived to them, and is deryved to us; This is that which the Lord is clearing
by the Prophet here; to wit, how the benefit of Christ's Sufferings, and
Purchase may be deryved, and communicate unto a Sinner; Which these words
(though but few) as purposly made use of, to clear; even that His Sufferings
should not be in vain, but that He should sow a Seed, and though that Seed
should not be all Men, yet they should be many; and the way how these many
should come by the benefit of His Sufferings is also held forth; and that is,
By his knowledge, who is the Righteous Servant: We show you, that this does
upon the matter look to Faith, and is meant of it; and confirmed it by other
parallel Scriptures, which say, that through faith in him, all that believe are
justified; we came also to speak of this Faith which Justifies, and did propose
Five things to be spoken of concerning it, (and indeed if any thing be of
concerment, this is; if a right to Christ and His purchase be of concernment,
then sure it must be of concernment to know how we come by that Right) 1. The
necessity of it. 2. The object of it. 3. The act of it. 4. The effects that
flow from it. 5. The manner of it is concurring in the attaining of
Justification; We spoke of the First, to wit, of the necessity of Faith; and
show that though there be a full Satisfaction laid down to merit and procure
Justification, yet it is applied to none but to Believers, and not till they
believe.

2. We spoke also to this, That Faith, as it Justifies, looks not to all the
Word of God, as it is Object, but mainly, and principally to Christ, and to the
Word only, in so far as it holds out Christ in the Promises and Offers of Gods
Grace, as it is here called the Knowledge of Him, or Faith in Him.

We now proceed to hint a Word for clearing of a Question, and it is a new and
very late one, to wit, whether Justifying Faith lays hold on Christ as a
Savior and Priest only, or whether it lays hold on Him not only, as a Priest
to save, but also as a King to command? though this does not look at first
blush to be of any great moment, and that such an inconsiderable-like
difference is not to be stood upon; yet we will find that this last wants not
it is own influence on altering the common and ordinary, and (as we conceive)
the solid received Doctrine, concerning the way of Justification; if we should
admit it: And therefore we answer the Question from the Text. That Christ
considered as suffering, and bearing our Sins, and so as offering Himself in a
Sacrifice, is the Object that Justifying Faith, as such takes hold of;
Therefore the connection of these two is clear in this verse, He shall see of
the travel of his soul and be satisfied; and by his knowledge shall many be
justified; and again it is subjoyned, as the reason why many shall by Faith in
Him be justified; Because he shall bear their iniquities; By the Knowledge of
Him that Offered Himself in a Sacrifice, many are Justified; and many are
Justified, because He bears their iniquities; which will infer this, that Faith
considers Him as satisfying for the iniquities of His People, in it is acting on
Him for Justification, and Pardon of Sin; it is true, Christ's Offices are not
divided, and it is not true Faith if it take not hold of Him, and make not use
of Him in all His Offices; but as there are several evils in us, which His
Offices do meet with, and are suited unto, so should Faith take hold of them,
and make use of them for curing, and removing of these evils; He is King,
Priest, and Prophet, and Faith takes hold of Him, as a King to command, and
subdue us to Himself, as a Prophet to illuminat us, and cure our blindness,
and as a Priest to satisfy Divine Justice, and to procure the pardon of Sin,
as we are not to seperat, so we are not to confound these, we use not to say
that Christ as a Prophet does Justify us, nor that as a Priest He does
illuminat us; no more should we, nor can we well say, that as a King He
satisfied Justice for us; The same blessed God is Wise, Righteous, Holy,
Faithful, Just, Merciful, etc. Yet He is diversely considered in respect of our
conceiving and use-making according to our need; so is it here. For clearing
whereof, take these grounds. 1. The Scripture speaks of, and points Christ out
in His Sufferings, as the Object of Justifying Faith, Romans 3.25. Whom God has
set forth for a propitiation through faith in his blood: where the Blood of
Christ, and He as Suffering is proposed as Faiths Object; so, 1 Cor. 1. We
preach Christ crucified, 1 John 2. We have an advocat with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, where He is
holden forth in His Sufferings, as the propitiation that Faith lays hold on,
John 3.14. As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of
man be lifted up, that whosoever believes on him, etc. Where Christ lifted up,
and as dying on the Cross, is made the Object of Justifying Faith; even as the
brazen Serpent lifted up was the Object that they looked to, when they were
stung, and cured. 2. It Is also clear from the Laws, lybelling and charging us
for the Debt of our Sin, that makes us liable to condemnation, and Faith being
the mean of our Justification, and absolution from the Debt, it must needs look
to the Cautioners paying of our Debt, and so answering the Charge; which was
done in His Death, for He paid our Debt, Satisfied the Penalty of the Law, and
came under the Curse in suffering Death; as is clear Gal. 3. the 10. v. being
compared with v. 13. So, Romans 8.34. Who shall lay any thing to the Charge of
Gods elect it is God, that justifies, who shall condemn? it is Christ that
died; which is brought in as Faith's answer to the charge; The charge cannot be
denied, for we are guilty of so many Sins, and therefore liable to
condemnation; but says Faith, Christ has died: It proposes Him dying as a
Satisfaction for answering the charge, and for obtaining of absolution. 3.
Christ as Suffering and Satisfying Justice, is our Righteousness, and
therefore must be the object of Faith, as it is Justifying whereupon it pleads
an absolution before the Throne of God; So that when we come to plead and found
our Defense before Gods Throne; it is not on this, that Christ is a King, and
has subdued us; but it is on this gro^^d; That He is our Priest, and has
satisfied Justice for us, and paid our Debt, and procured a discharge to us;
So the Apostle speaking of Christ's Sufferings, Col. 2. Says, That he blotted
out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, and took it out of the
way, nailing it to his cross; It Is Christ as Suffering that is the ground of
our Peace, and therefore Faith as Justifying must so consider Him: Though we
desire to move nothing needlessly, yet laying it once for a ground; That
Justifying Faith lays hold on Christ as a King, This will follow as a
consequence, and as we suppose, as a reason, That our obedience to Christ, as a
King has the same influence, and the same Causality in our Justification, that
Faith's resting on Christ's Satisfying for as a Priest has; because as Christ's
Priestly Office gives us a warrant to rest upon Him for Justification, so would
His Kingly Office, (if it were the Object of Justifying Faith as such) when
taken hold of for our obedience: We have touched on this. 1. That ye may see
the warrantableness of this Doctrine which is received in the Churches of
Christ, and that ye may consider Christ as the high priest of your profession,
and plead Justification from His Sacrifice, acting Faith, upon Him accordingly.
2. That we may put a Bar against the introducing of Justification by Works
under one pretext or another, how specious soever; seeing the Scripture so
directly opposes Faith and Works in our Justification; For if we once admit
that Christ, as King, is the Object of Justifying Faith as such, it would
overturn the distinct way of Faith's acting upon Christ's Righteousness, for
answering the Charge put in the Sinners hand by the Law; and when the soul
gets a challenge for Sin, would put it to look what obedience it has given
to Christ, as a King to answer that challenge, or charge by; and would in the
same manner also put the Soul to gather the ground of it is peace from the one,
as well as from the other, that is both from Christ's Righteousness, and from
it is own obedience, not only as an evidence, but a social cause, or not only to
it is own sense, but as to the effect: But we leave this as a thing to be
regrated; that when the^e is ground enough of stumbling, because of our
ignorance, and blindness; there should, and that very unnecessarily be such new
occasion of stumbling to Souls cast in the way of Faith.

We come now to speak of the Act of Faith as Justifying, called here Knowledge,
and the knowledge of him, to show that it points at Justifying Faith; for if it
were not so, it were the same with common Knowledge, whereby we believe any
History of the Bible; but this being Justifying Knowledge, it must be Knowledge
of another kind: We shall here clear, 1. Wherein the Act of Justifying Faith
consists. 2. Remove some mistakes about it, and make some Use of it.

For the First, we suppose there are these Four requisite, in, or to Justifying
Faith; though not always in the same degree. 1. That there be distinct
Knowledge in some measure of the Object; an antecedent that Faith presupposes,
and for which cause Faith gets the name of Knowledge here and elsewhere in
Scripture; the antecedent being put for the consequent; For Faith has always
Knowledge with it, though Knowledge has not always Faith. 2. That there be an
assent to the thing known; as when we know that we are Sinners, and that it is
the Blood of Christ that must cleanse us from Sin, we must assent to the truth
of these, as Christ says, John 8. If ye believe not Moses his writings, how
shall ye believe my Words? If ye assent not to the truth of that he has
written, how can ye believe my speaking? both these are in the understanding,
and if there be no more, this makes but Historical Faith. 3. When the Soul
knows it is a Sinner, and under the Curse, and that Christ is a Savior, and
that there is Salvation to be gotten by such a Mean, and that he an able
Savior, and has assented to the truth of these; there is a consenting of the
heart to that Truth conditionally proposed, and made offer of, that is to
receive Christ as he is offered in the Gospel; which in Scripture is called a
receiving of Him, John 1.12. To as many as received him, etc. And this is an
Act of the Will; respecting Christ as offered, and a bargain proposed that will
make the Soul happy where Faith accepts. 4. There is a resting on Christ
received as a good bargain; which is also an Act of the heart, or will, called
in Scripture a committing our selves to him, a leaning on him, or rolling our
selves on him; which we conceive to be the same that Paul has, Philip. 3.9.
That I may be found in him; When the Soul places it is safety here, and lippens
to Christ's Righteousness alone, as contradistinguished to it is own; These Two
last Acts are properly the essence of Faith as Justifying; and they are well
holden out in the Catechism, where Faith is described to be a saving grace
whereby we receive and rest upon Christ as he is offered in the Gospel; we
shall illustrat it in a comparison made use of before to this purpose; Suppose
there were a number of Rebels, that had incurred the Princes displeasure, and
were guilty of Treason by the Law, suppose also the Princes Son, or some
Courtier has satisfied for them, and procured their Pardon and Peace, upon
which there comes out a Proclamation, that if they will submit, and yield
themselves, and lay down their Arms, they shall be pardoned, and admitted to
friendship, as if they had never Rebelled; These Rebels must know. 1. That
there is an Act of Favor past, and a Proclamation made on such Terms. 2. They
must have a general Faith, and Assent to the thing, and that there is no
Question but such a thing is done. 3. There is a consultation by the
understanding with the will, if they will admit of, and receive it, and trust
themselves to it. And then, 4. There is the hearts consenting to accept of the
offer of Grace, on the Terms of the Proclamation, and a resting on it, which is
a lippening of their Defense to it, that if ever they should be called to an
account, they will make use of such an Act of Grace, and of the Proclamation
for their Defense, and safety, and lippen to it, and to His Faithfulness who
made the Proclamation, believing that He will fulfill His Word, and Promise: It
is just so here, in a Sinners acting Faith for Justification; We may instance
and illustrat it also in the example of the Prodigal, wherein we may find
something of all this; when he had been in the hight of his distraction and
madness, in his natural condition; It Is said, He came to himself, he knew and
believed that there was meat enough in his Fathers house, and resolved to go
home; upon his knowledge follows his resolution, and his will consents; I will
rise and go; which supposes his Faith of an offer of meat, on condition of his
going; and then there is that whereon he grounds his Defense; I will say,
father I have sinned; I will disclaim all, and betake me to thy Grace, employed
in the word Father; he resolves to table his Defense on this ground, and upon
this comes home.

More particularly; 1. Knowledge of the Object rested upon is necessary, Romans
10. How can they believe on him of whom they have not heard? It is not possible
we can believe what we know not: And as every other step has some doctrinal
mistake, and some practical, so has this; The Doctrinal mistake is that Error
of Papists, unworthy to be refuted; They say there is no Knowledge requisite to
Faith; Yea, some of their prime men have said, that Faith is rather Ignorance
then Knowledge; but surely then Faith would not be called Knowledge, if it
might rather be defined Ignorance; but this they maintain to keep the People in
Ignorance of the Gospel, and it is the ground of many more Errors, and much
Delusion; It Is even as a blind man could go well in a slippery place where are
many Pits, for Knowledge is no less necessary to Faith, then eyes are to such
a man: The practical Errors in this, are such as we find in many of you, who
think ye can believe well, but ask, and put you to it ye cannot tell what; many
of you are obstinat maintainers of implicit Faith, while ye say ye have Faith,
and yet cannot tell what it is, nor whereon it is grounded; but we say that
Knowledge is so necessary to Faith, that if it be not a part of it, yet it is
necessarly antecedanious to it, and presupposed; Therefore, if ever ye would be
accounted Believers, study Knowledge, and the Knowledge of Christ Crucified, at
least so far as to ground your Faith upon; It Is sad that so many will maintain
the reality of their Faith, and yet are grossly Ignorant of the Fundamenta^s of
Religion; Knowledge is the very use of, and first step to believing, and yet
it is hardly possible to brangle the vain confidence of many, whom it is as
impossible to bring to Knowledge.

2. There is an Assent requisite to the Object Known, which is that we call
historical faith, and this is to be confirmed in the general Truths contained
in the Gospel; as that Adam was made according to Gods Image, that he fell, and
brake the Covenant of Works, and made himself, and all his liable to Gods
Curse; That we are by that Covenant under Gods Curse, That Christ Jesus the Son
of God according to the Covenant of Redemption entered Himself Cautioner for
the Elect, that He really died, and paid their Debt, That His purchase is made
offer of in the Gospel, and that according to the Covenant of Grace, there is
an real absolution from Sin, and an eternal happiness to be had at the great
Day, through embracing of Him; There must be an assent to the Truth of these
things, for it is impossible, that they who think not themselves Sinners, and
that mind not a Day of Judgment, and a reckoning, will ever close with Christ,
and lippen to His Righteousness; I fear there are but few hearers of the
Gospel that come the length of Devils in believing; and yet all will needs be
counted Christians: we would here upon the one hand disclaim the Popish Error,
that pl^ceth all the essence of Faith in the understanding; which is somewhat
strange, seeing they scarce think Knowledge of the thing to be believed
necessary; The reason is, because they know, or at least own nothing more of
the concurrence of Faith in Justification then is obedience to a Commandment;
they think it is a duty, and obedience to a Commandment to assent to any Truth;
therefore they take this general historical Faith to be the only Faith, as they
take Holiness to be the only ground of their Peace, when they are called to an
account, and thus Faith, as a part of their Holiness comes in, but they admit
of no particular respect to Faiths, taking hold of Christ's Righteousness, as
the immediate ground of their Peace: Upon the other hand, we would seclude the
vain Faith of many Professors, who, some way believe all that is in the Bible,
so as they question nothing herein; They know no other Faith but this; yet if
this were Justifying Faith the Devil should have it, For they believe and
tremble, They believe there is a God, that Christ is the Son of God, that they
that believe shall not perish that God is Faithful, etc. But this Historical
Faith is not enough. 1. Because (as I just now said) it may be in Reprobats,
and Devils. 2. Because the Scripture expressly differenceth this sort of Faith,
from saving Faith, many were called Believers, to whom Christ would not commit
himself, as it is, John 2.24. For, though they believed it to be truth which He
spoke, yet they rested not on Him; So in the Parable of the Sower, Math. 13.
There are three grounds that receive the Seed, which imports in two of them, at
least a kind of Believing, but the fourth ground is only good. 3. Because this
Faith Acts upon every revealed Truth alike, and assents to all Passages
recorded in the Bible alike; as one, and to that, Paul left his cloak at Troas,
and the like; as it Acts on that, this is a faithful saying, that Christ came
into the world to save sinners, and such like; But according to the ground
formerly given, Faith as it Justifies Acts on Christ only; and therefore this
bare assent to the Truth of the Word, cannot be Justifying Faith; because it
Acts no otherways on Christ, then it does upon other things; ye would therefore
know a difference in your practice betwixt these two, The crediting the truth
of a thing, and your actual receiving, and resting upon that Truth; As for
Example, a man proposes Marriage to a woman, and she believes that he is in
earnest, and not in scorn, yet there is a great difference betwixt that, and
her actual consenting to marry him; So it is here, the man may believe that
Christ does really make offer of Himself to him, and yet be far from cordial
receiving of Him; or take it in the example made use of before, suppose that
some of the Rebels we spoke of, believe the Proclamation to be a Truth; yet
thinking it hard to be under the bands of Government they do not embrace it. If
it be Objected here; That the Scripture often calls Justifying Faith a
believing, that Christ is the Son of God, which is no more then this assent of
the Judgment, or Historical Faith; For Answer, it would be considered of whom
the Scripture there speaks. 1. It is of Jews for the most part, who had the
Faith of the Messiah generally among them; and no question, the Believers of
them, such as the proselyted Eunuch, Martha, and Mary had the Faith of the
Messiah, satisfying Divine Justice, and of their Justification through His
Satisfaction; But the great question of the Jews was whether Jesus the Son of
Mary was the Messiah or not, and it being revealed, and believed that he was,
the other followed, they rested on Him of will, (to say so) as the Messiah. 2.
Believing of Christ to be the Son of God, does not exclude, but include their
consenting to the receiving of Christ, but it holds forth also their assent to,
and persuasion of that Truth that was then debated, that He was indeed the
promised Messiah, and the Son of God; For the Devils confessed Him to be the
Son of God, and none will say, but there was more in their believing Him to be
the Son of God, then in the Devils believing it, who never believe unto
Salvation as they did. 3. Consider that as sometimes Knowledge is put for
Faith, so this assent may be put for Faith, where yet more is employed in it,
especially considering that, Romans 10. Faith is called, Faith of the heart, with
the heart man believes; Now believing with the heart being an Act of the will,
these Testimonies setting out Faith to be a believing Christ to be the Son of
God; must imply a lippening to Him following upon it, we are therefore never to
look on these places as comprehending a bare assent only, but as including
also, and carrying along with it, the cordial receiving Him, and of resting
upon Him.

For the 3. to wit, the receiving Act of Faith, which differs from the former,
as we show in the examples hinted at before; It looks to the Covenant of
Redemption betwixt Jehovah and the Mediator; it accepts of the Terms of the
Covenant, as they are proposed in the Gospel and consents to the bargain; and
as God, proposes the Righteousness of Christ, it submits to the same; which
Paul, 1 Timothy 1. calls a saying worthy of all acceptance, to be welcomed, and
believed as such; and the Believers mentioned, Heb. 11. are said, not to have
received the promises, but to have seen them afar off, and to have embraced,
(or saluted) them: This receiving is no Physical, or Natural Act, as if we were
to receive such a thing by the mouth, or bodily hand, It Is an Act of Faith in
the heart, proportioned, and suited to this Spiritual Bargain, or Marriage
proposed in the Covenant of Grace; and it is like a man's consenting to a civil
bargain, or like a woman's consenting to marry a man; As when it is said to
Sinners ye are naturally dead in Sins and trespasses, and under Gods Curse;
But, be it known to you, that we preach Remission of Sins to you through the
Blood of Christ; Faith considers this offer, accepts of and welcomes it.

The 4th, and last Act, is a resting on him; which is still the same Faith, but
another Act of it; Not as if there might be a receiving, and not a resting, or
a resting, and not a receiving; or as if we were to difference them in respect
of time; but Faith is said to receive, as it respects the Gospel offer, of
Christ, and his Satisfaction; and it is said to rest or rely, as it respects
Christ and his Satisfaction, the thing offered and received, with regard to the
charge to which it is liable; It Is here that it rests, and to this it betakes
it self, as to it is defense, when challenged: It Is difficult to difference
these two, or peremptorly to say whether Christ's Righteousness be received, or
rested upon; yet it is made our defense, because it is closed with, and we make
them two Acts of the same Faith, though it is hard to make the one of them to be
the effect of the other, or the one of them to be antecedent to the other, in
respect of time at least; As a Proclamation of Pardon being made to Rebels,
they say this Proclamation gives a freedom from the Laws pursuit, because they
have embraced it, and these Rebels make that the ground, if ever they be
challenged, whereon they found their Defense; they have this to lippen to, and
upon this they rest: Though none of these Acts can well be said to be before,
or after the other in respect of time: For clearing of this a little more,
consider that this resting may be looked on, either Passively, or Actively;
Passively, in respect of the Believers acquiescing in Christ, and assuring
himself that all shallbe well; This is not that Act of Faith that is called for
to Justification; but supposes the Person to be Justified, for he must be
Justified ere he can rest, or acquiesce in it; Actively, in respect of our
resting on him that we may be Justified, as the Apostle has it, Gal. 2.16. And
this Isaiah 5.6. Is called a taking hold of Gods covenant; It is an actual
committing of our selves to Him, that we may win to peace, or a leaning on Him;
as suppose one were to rest upon a Staff, it does not only imply the effect,
his having of ease, but also, and firstly, his leaning to or resting on it, in
order to ease; Therefore it is said, Math. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that are
weary and heavy laden, and ye shall find rest: The Act that Justifies, is this
last and active Act, the Act of coming, or leaning* or resting; and the passive
Act of acquiescing, or assurance is that which follows upon it, as a fruit and
effect of it: And therefore we humbly conceive, that it is not safe, to define
Justifying Faith by Assurance, or to say that wherever Faith is, there is
Assurance; It is rather a resting on Christ, that we may have rest; and a
ground of Defense, and reason to be proposed, if we should be quarrelled for,
or charged with the Debt of Sin.

The Uses are, 1. To remove the difficulties; as namely, it may be asked here,
is there no confidence not assurance in this Active Act of Faith which is the
Essence of it? we answer shortly, There are Three sorts of confidence pleaded
for, that are far from the nature of Faith; and yet Faith wants not it is own
Confidence, and Assurance, if it be taken in a right sense, The 1. is for a man
to believe, that Christ died for him in particular, at the first hand, and to
think that he has no more to do, but to believe that Christ Died, and Suffered
for him, and that thereupon he is Justified; For this lays a ground for
universal Redemption against the current of the Scriptures, and can never be a
ground of interest in Christ's Righteousness; It supposes that to be done
already, and admits not the Soul, to concur by believing for coming to the
application; and yet this is very rise amongst People, I believe that Christ
died for me, and shed His precious Blood for me, and so long as they can
maintain this presumption, and not suffer themselves to admit of any debating,
and questioning whether they have ground and reason for it, or not, they think
they have Faith enough; but this is no Act of Faith, nor of the nature of true
Justifying Faith, which is to take hold of Christ offered, that we may come to
be absolved through Him; Therefore, when ever the Scripture puts us to believe,
It commands us to take hold of Christ offered, and not at first hand to
believe, that he died for us in particular; I suppose many are carried away
with this presumption, that will to their cost, at last find it to be
otherwise. 2. Others think that all Faith consists in this; to believe that
God loved them from all Eternity, and that they are already Justified, which is
the Antinomian way; They believe not that they may be justified, which was
Paul's way, Gal. 2.16. but they believe that they are Justified; And this also
presuppons an universal Redemption, and to press it upon you, were to bid you
all believe that God has loved you, and pardoned you from all Eternity; which
were to bid you believe a lie; for we wot well from the Scriptures of Truth,
that God has not loved all from Eternity; and yet this is the Faith that many
of you presumptuously practices; we are all naturally some way Antinomians,
Papists, and Arminians in our practice; and the way of Error is more
consistent, and current with our nature, then the way of Truth: But, O!
presumptuous hypocrites, will ye darringly and without any ground believe Gods
Love to you? God shall shake you out of that confidence, and blow upon it, and
make it evanish; ye cry out on them that live in Error; yet ye practice these
same Errors (to speak so) as fast as ye can; we cannot by much Preaching, get
you brought to the Knowledge of the Truth, but ye can drink in Error ere ye
hear of it, and it will ruin your Souls, if Grace prevent not; and many of you
shall find that thus you have destroyed your selves. A 3d. Sort of rotten
confidence, is that which some have, who cannot say they are for the time
Justified, yet they have a persuasion to get Heaven, and to be Justified ere
they die, or that at death they will be sure of it; and they wot well they
shall not despair; This is also naughty presumption, and continued in, as
hazardous as outer disperation, and kills more Souls then despair does; for
such rest quietly in their hope of being fred from wrath, and having their
peace made with God, and yet never go to Christ to have it done; this is like
that man's presumption, that says, tush, I shall have peace though I walk in
the imagination of my own heart; God is gracious and merciful, and I hope he
will not be so severe as He is called; The Lord calls this a believing of
Him, for He says in His Word, that there is no peace to the wicked, and the
foolish presumer says, I shall have peace; shall His Word or theirs stand?
they say, Jer. 5.12. and 7, 9. The temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord
are these, they make a fair show of attendence on ordinances, and yet steall,
murder, and commit adultery, and say we are delivered to do all these things;
is not this a gross believing of the Lord? God shall beat back many of your
vain confidences in your faces, and your hearts shall tremble, and your faces
wax pale, when God shall cause your Charge, and Summonds to come unto
Judgment, sound in your Ears; These and such like confidences will never bear
you through; it is not these we speak of.

Yet 2ly. We say that the right exercise of Faith wants not it is own
confidence, comfort, and assurance, when taken in a right sense, much whereof
is attributed by by some to the definition of Faith, for some mistake Faith,
and others are mistaken; or misunderstood in their speaking, of Faith; Some
Divines that writ of Faith, speak of it is being an assurance; defining it at
it is hight; yet generally they take in, and presuppose the active Act of Faith
resting on Christ, others define it by these two Acts, a receiving of, and
resting upon Christ; Therefore we would never conceive of them, at least of
many of them, as making this assurance to our sense to be essential, and
absolutely necessary to the being of Justifying Faith; much less would we
think, that they mistaken, and pass by the true Acts of receiving and resting
upon Christ; only some of them (which we humbly think is their mistake) having
to do with Papists, who place Faith in the understanding, add an assurance of
Faith to the Former Acts; In which we say there is a ground of confidence, or a
conditional assurance upon supposition, that Souls receive Christ, and rest
upon Him, they may be confident, that, that is a ground that will not fail
them, They may be confident that He will not deceive them; a confidence in
this, that they may step to, or lean upon Christ, and not fear that He fail
them; or that they may without all fear of hazard cast themselves on Christ;
Therefore He is called a tried elect, precious cornerstone, a sure foundation;
and indeed that is no small ground of confidence, That when a Soul comes to
Christ by believing, it may be sure He will not fail it. 2. Being sure that we
have committed our selves to Christ (which supposes Faith's being put to
exercise and practice) there may be a confidence in this respect, we may be
sure He will not fail us in particular, 2 Timothy 1.12. I know in whom I have
believed, and that he is able to keep that I have committed to him, and that I
shall not be ashamed; He puts both these together, I know that He is able, and
that He will not fail me, I shall not be ashamed; So Romans 8. I am persuaded
that neither death nor life, etc. shall be able to separat us from the love of
God that is in Christ Jesus; If Souls have received the offer, they may be sure
it will not misgive them. 3. Add, that this actual, or active resting on
Christ may be seperat from the sense of it, or from the passive Act of Faith,
or quietness that follows on resting on Christ; for there is a resting on
Christ, which is very Faith it self, and not the effect; come and ye shall find
rest; coming is before finding of rest, to our sense at least, we are not to
knit this passive rest, with the other active Act of resting, as if it were
impossible to rest on Christ without present sensible ease; Beside it is this
active resting that gives us right to Christ, and not the passive, Gal. 2.16.
We believe that we may be justified; This necessarily goes before our believing
that we are Justified.

To close with a Word of more particular Use, let me exhort you to lay less
weight on your bare thinking that ye believe; on your present ill grounded hope
and peace; Aim, and endeavor to Act, and exercise Faith on Christ actively,
receiving and resting on Him for winning to Peace; This practice of Faith is
the over word (to say so) of the Doctrine of Just fication; That seeing there is
such ground of Justification laid down, the Righteousness of Christ, and that
it is proposed to you; and seeing this is the very Act of Justifying Faith, to
receive and rest on Christ, as He is proposed and offered; when this offer is
made to you, let your Faith receive, take hold of and consent to the bargain;
and ground and found your Defense here, for answering all challenges that the
Law and Justice may present against you; That there was a Savior offered to
you; and that ye received Him, and rested upon Him, will be a ground that shall
bear you out when ye come before God; and except this be made sure, our
speaking and your hearing of Faith will be to no purpose.

SERMON LX.
ISAIAH LIII.XI. Verse. 11. -- By his knowledge shall my righteous servant
justify many; For he shall be or their iniquit^e^.


THis is a great assertion, and of mighty moment, wher^in, to the Knowledge of
Christ, the Justification of many is attributed; and indeed, if we knew what an
advant^ge and benefit it were, there would be nothing more studied then how to
obtain it; For it is the v^ry in let, and opens the door to Glorification; and
if to be happy in the enjoyment of God be a benefit of great concerment, then
this of Justification must be so.

We proposed to speak of the way how this benefit is applied; and that is by
Faith, set out under this expression, His knowledge, or the knowledge of him,
and touched on the benefit of Faith, and the necessity thereof, for attaining
Justification, God having so ordered it in the Covenant, that none others
should be Justified, but such as have Faith. 2. We spoke also to the Object of
this Faith, Christ Jesus as our Righteousness, and Peace; So that Christ
becomes in a peculiar manner the Object of Faith, beside any other thing;
Because it is only in Christ, it can find a shelter; Therefore it is only to
Christ that it fl^es, when it is pursued. 3. We spoke likewise of the nature of
this Faith, or it is Act, it being the hearts trusting it self to Christ's
Righteousness, whereon it hazards the weight of it is Peace, and relyes here;
And as all the Terms of Justification are borrowed from Law, wherein there is
supposed a Charge, a Tribunal, and a Judge; So is this resting in like manner;
It Is in effect, an arraigned Persons making of Christ's Righteousneesse his
Legal Defense against all Challenges; The substance of the phrase is in that
of, Philip. 3.9. That I may be found in him not having my righteousness, etc.
Where presupposing a lybelling and Charge, where to does the Apostle betake
himself, and what is his refuge? It Is Christ and His Righteousness, even to be
found in Him; as if the question were proposed, Paul, what will thou do in the
day of Judgment, what will thou lean to for a Defense in that day? To which he
answers, not to my own Righteousness, but this is it, even to be found in Him;
which he expones to be, the having on His Righteousness by Faith, that is the
Righteousness of Christ by Faith taken hold of by me, which Faith shuts up as
it were Paul in that R^ghteousnesse, and hids him so, as he is past over, as if
there were no unrighteousness at all in him.

The Effect of this Faith follows, when a Person ^s chased and has fled into,
and laid hold on Christ; the effect, I say is, he shall be Justified; we may
consider this several ways, and for explication's sake I shall shortly put by
some of them.

1. Then, according to the exposition of the words, take this observation, That
there is such a thing as Justification distinct from Sanct^fication; That
benefit of Justification follows on Faith's taking hold of Christ because it is
such a benefit as follows Christ taking on our Sin; By his knowledge shall he
ju^tifie many, for he shall be^^ their iniquities; Now Sanctification is not
that, but the infusing of Hol^nesse in us, and is the work of Gods Spirit,
inwardly working a change in the man, we did some way clear and confirm this in
the exposition of the Words, and show you how Sanctification differs from
Justification; Now ye are justified, now ye are sanctified, Says the Apostle,
1 Cor. 6. Making them distinct benefits: To clear it a little further, Two
things are to be considered in Sin, both which are to be removed by Christ, but
differently: 1. Something that defils and polluts us, and makes at disconform
to Gods Image, hence Sin is in the Scripture compared to Boills and Sores, and
menstruous Clothes, and is called filthiness. 2. There is a guiltiness that
follows on this, whereby we are not only presupposed unclean, but are made
liable to the Laws Certification, wherein it is said, Cursed is every one that
continues not in every thing written in the book of the law to do it; Now if
we speak of the removing of these two, Justification takes away the guilt of
Sin, when the Sinner is pursued before God's Tribunal, he is discharged by the
imputation of Christ's Righteousness, to which he is fled for refuge; The Law
absolves him not because he wants Sin, but because the Mediator has sa^isfied
for his Sin; and that Satisfaction is by Faith laid hold of; Sanctification
takes away the pollution, and blot of Sin, the Person that had these Boills and
Sores is cleansed, or healled, or is a healling, and under cure, (for there is
no complete healling while on this side of Heaven) As suppone a man by
transgressing the Law, had wounded himself, in wounding or hurting another,
there is here both a guilt, and a deformity, a guilt in transgressing the Law,
by hurting his neighbor, and a deformity in wounding himself: Justification is
as if the penalty of the breach of such a Law were not exacted, by the
interposing of a Cautioner; and Sanctification is like the healling of the
Wound in a man's self, by taking or application of some Physic, or Plaster; So
is it here, Justification sets us free from the guilt, and Sanctification cures
us of the wound of Sin; man's fall was a guilt, and by that fall he wounded
himself; and by Christ both are removed from the Believer; by His Satisfaction
He j stifies, and by His Grace and Spirit, He Sanctifies him.

Use, We observe it only in passing, because it serves to clear all that
concerns Justification, and therefore when we speak of Justification by Christ's
Righteous^esse. 1. It Is not as if we had a Righteousness communicate to us, and
were made actu^lly holy; but it is the i^putation of Christ's Righteousness to
us; the confounding of these two does ill, and is very prejudicial, not only to
Papists, but to others, who think they are Justified, when they think they have
some good frame, which being wanting, they suspect their Justificat on. 2. The
meaning is not as if Christ's Righteousness were our Sanctification, which is
the Error of the Antinomians, who make all Sanctification to be Justification,
even as the Papists make all Justification to be Sanctification; therefore we
would learn to distinguish these two, yet not so as to separat them.

2dly, Observe, That this effect, Justification, is not only, nor mainly the
sense of being pardoned and absolved; but it is real absolution and pardon it
self; because this Justification that follows Faith, is that which Christ has
purchased by His Soul-travel, and bearing of our iniquities, and intitles the
Justified Person to Him, and makes him to be of His Seed; and that is not to
have the sense that we are Justified, but actually to be Justified: And here
there is another mistake to be adverted to, to think Justification to be the
evidence of that which is past before we were born, yea from Eternity; The
Justification here spoken of, is that which makes us stand before God; is
opposite to Works, and to the Curse; and frees us from it; But the sense of
Justification is not that, whereby we stand before God, and is opposite to Works
and the Curse; and therefore take this Advertisement, that Justification is not
to be sensible of our Justification, but it is really to be so, whether we know
and be sensible of it or not; and that by virtue of Christ's Righteousness
apprehended by Faith.

The Third, and main thing in this effect, is, That laying hold on Christ by
Faith, as He is offered in the Gospel, does before God serve to the Justifying
of a Sinner, and the absolving of him from the guilt of Sin; That is, when a
Sinner sensible of Sin, is brought to lay hold on Christ's Righteousness, then
follows Gods absolving of him, as if he had never had Sin; or had satisfied for
his own Sin; which is not only holden out here, but is frequently spoken of
through the Epistles and is the Justification that stands in opposition to the
way of Works; to wit, when a poor Sinner sensible of Sin, is persuaded by Gods
Spirit to flee unto, and rest upon Christ's Righteousness offered in the
Gospel, upon which follows Gods absolving of him; This Doctrine takes in the
substance of the Text, By the knowledge of my righteous servant shall many be
justified.

There are several things that will fall to be cleared in the prosecuting of
this, which we shall speak to shortly, for clearing of that Question of the
Catechism, what is Justification? because this Doctrine holds out the Form of
it, and deduceth it in this order. 1. A Sinner is here supposed to be lying
under Gods curse, according to that, Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things written in the law, This is man's condition by
nature. 2. It is supposed that Christ becomes Cautioner for elect Sinners, and
takes on their Debt, and satisfies for them; on condition that if they shall
believe on Him, they shall be Justified, and have His satisfaction imputed to
them, and that the Lord Jehovah accepts of the Mediators Satisfaction, and
ingageth to make out the condition.

3. The Lord, in the Word of the Gospel has revealed this; and has
comprehended the way of a Sinners Justification in the Gospel Covenant, and
promises, and makes offer of it to all that hear of it, saying, He that
believes in the Son shall not perish, but have eternal life, and all that
believe on him shall be justified from all things, whereby they could not be
justified by the law of Moses: This is the external instrumental cause of
Justification, that holds out the way to Life; which supposes the former. 4.
When this is made offer of in the Gospel, there is the o^eration of Gods Spirit
on the Soul illightning the Mind of the Sinner, convincing him of his hazard,
chasing him to Christ, and powerfully persuading him to take hold of His
Righteousness made offer of to him; whereupon the Soul comes to put forth the
Act of Faith, and to rest upon His Righteousness; as when it was said by
Philip to the Eunuch, Act. 8. If thou believe thou may justified; The Soul
answers, I believe in Christ the Son of God; whereupon it becomes a bargain;
and this is the inward mean, or instrumental cause of Justification. 5. Follows
Gods imputing to that Sinner, that receives Christ as He is offered, and rests
upon Him by Faith, His Righteousness, and Christ's payment and satisf^ction to
Justice is counted his, and according to this, his Sins are pardoned, for the
merit of that Righteousness, and he himself is accepted and accounted
Righteous, as if he had never sinned; and he has such a sentence past on him,
as is held forth in these words of Psalm. 32.1. Blessed is the man whose
transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered, to whom the Lord imputs to
iniquity; and in these, Romans 8.1. There is therefore now no condemnation to
them who are in Christ Jesus, etc. Even as before he fled to Christ, there was
a Curse standing against him: And this is an Act of God, the Sovereign and
efficient Cause, To declare his righteousness, that he might be just, and the
justifier of him that believes in Jesus, as it is, Romans 3.26. which is the
final cause.

We may confirm this either as to the positive part, that by believing a Sinner
is Justified, or as to the negative part, that there is no other way possible
whereby a Sinner can be Justified, but by believing; So that this great Effect
follows from a sensible Sinners taking hold of Christ's Righteousness by Faith:
Ye may look upon a few Scriptures to this purpose, as namely, Gal. 2.16. Where
the Apostle entering in the debate lays down this conclusion, Knowing that a
man is not justified by the works of the law, but by faith in Jesus Christ,
even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith
of Christ; as if he had said, we have taken this way for the attaining of this
end, believing that we might be justified; The Apostle speaks here, 1. Of a
Justification by Faith, which is opposite to Works, and as he ascribes it to
Faith, so he denies it to Works. 2. He makes it exclusive, and will have no
other thing to concur in the manner at least, but Faith; Knowing (says he)
that a man is not justified by works, but by faith. 3. He holds out his own,
and other Believers practice; Even we have believed, that we might be
justified; As if he said, we took this way of Faith to be absolved before God,
which by the Law, or the Works of the Law, would never have been; See also to
this purpose the Epistle to the Romans 1, 2, 3, 4. and 5. Chapters, especially
the 3, and 4. In the 3d. chap. v. 25. When he is summing the Doctrine of
Justification into a compend, he says, Whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation through faith, to declare his righteousness for the remission of
sins, etc. Where Christ's Righteousness is called a Propitiation through faith,
and Faith is holden out as the Channel in which Justification runs; and in the
words following the Believer is holden out as the Object of it; So Chap. 4.
It Is holden out in the instance of Abraham, particularly v. 5. To him that
works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly his faith is
counted for righteousness; Where the Apostle propones Two ways of a persons
aiming to be Justified; The 1. whereof is, when a man works, or works not on
that account to be Justified by them, and on that account seeks to be
Justified, and that way is rejected. The 2. is, when a man has no works, but
by Faith betakes himself to Christ's Satisfaction; and that way is established,
for that man's Faith is counted for Righteousness, and is the ground of his
peace before God; we gave some Scriptures before for this, and shall not
therefore now insist. There is also good reason, why it cannot be otherwise,
1. If we consider what man is in himself, ungodly, rebellious, having nothing
to present unto God; but when a Righteousness is presented to him by way of
offer, and he is through Grace brought to accept of the offer of Righteousness
of another, nothing can be conceived to be brought to receive it but his Faith;
and i^ Christ's Satisfaction be his Justification, and if it be Faith that takes
hold of it, we have a clear reason why Justification is attributed as to Faith.
2. Consider, That this contributs most to Gods end, which is to glorify
himself, especially in his Grace, in the Justification of Sinners, even to hold
forth the manifold riches of His Grace; and nothing contributs to this so much,
and so well, a^ that which speaks the Sinner to be empty; and nothing empties
the Sinner more then Faith; it being the great Act of Faith to bring the Soul
of it is own bottom, and to stop all boasting; to drive it out of it self to be
found in Him; Therefore, it is said to be of faith, that it might be of grace,
Romans 14.16. As if he had said, if it were by any other thing, it could not be
by Grace, but Faith claims nothing but the Righteousness of Christ to rest on;
He has paid the price, and made the Satisfaction, and that Satisfaction is
mine, says Faith, because it was offered to me, and I have been brought to lay
hold on it; and the nature of this pleading stops the mouth of the creature,
and proclaims Justification to be alone the effect of Gods Grace, and of
Christ's procurement. 3. Consider, That if it depended on any other thing, our
Justification could never be perfect; when we speak of Justification, and call
it perfect; It is not so to be understood, as if Faith were perfect, but
Christ's Satisfaction which is our Righteousness, and which Faith lays hold on
is perfect, though our Faiths grip be weak; Hence it is, that the weak Believer
is Justified, as well as the strong; all who look unto Christ, though with a
weak sighted eye, yet Salvation through him as well as Abraham; because His
Righteousness is perfect, which weak Faith takes hold of as well as strong
Faith: Now if Justification were founded on ought within us, it could never be
perfect, but by him all that believe are justified from all things from which
they could not be justified by the law of Moses: And one of them made at free
as another; It Is not here as if one part of the Debt were scored and blotted
out, and not another, but all is blotted out, because the Righteousness
presented before God's Tribun^l, and imputed to us; which is the Defense that
Faith gives in, is perfi^e? We may compare strong and weak Faith to two
Advocats, the one more able, and the other we^ker, pleading the cause before a
just Judge; strong Faith pleads more str^ngly, fully, and distinctly, weak
Faith pleads not so fully and distinctly; but both pleading on the same ground,
God the Judge Judges not according to the distinctnesse, or undistinctnesse of
the pleading, but according to the Defense, or Reason given in, and absolves
both alike, and the weak Believer is as fully pardoned as the strong is.

The Uses are many and comfortable, 1. It serves for our Direction; if any were
asking; how they may come to be Justified? This Doctrine answers by Faith in
Jesus Christ; by taking with your Sin, and taking hold of Christ's
Righteousness offered to you in the Gospel, and by making that your D^fence
before God; And is not this a Lesson worthy the learning? which the whole Word
of God aims at, even to instruct you how to make your peace with Him; It Is by
the knowledge of Christ, or by Faith in Him, by resting on Him, as He is
offered in the Gospel; and this cannot but be a solid and sicker way of
Justification, because we have Gods Word for it, it is founded on His
Faithfulness, and on the Transaction made betwixt God and the Mediator; we
have also the experience of all the Saints for it, Abraham before the Law,
David under the Law, and Paul, since the Law; all of them were led the same
way: ye would take no^ice of this, not only as the great question in
Catechizing, or Examination, but as ground whereon ye build your peace, if ye
were dying; There is a perfect Righteousness in Christ made offer of to you in
the Gospel, on condition ye will receive Him as He is offered; and if ye so
receive Him, it shall be yours, and ye shall at Gods Ear be absolved; the
Righteousness of Christ shall be as effectual for your absolution, as if it
were inherent in your selves, and Faith shall unite you to Him, and make you
one with Him: In a word, ye must all come before Gods Tribunal, and there are
but two Defenses to be proposed; either something in your selves, as your love
and charity, or good carriage and duties; or to take with your Sin, to condemn
your selves, and to flee to Christ, and present His Righteousenesse, as the
Righteousness of the Cautioner that has paid your Debt, and according as ye
take the one way, or the other, ye may expect to be Justified or not; and this
Doctrine rejects the one way, and own^ and confirms the other, which is by
Faith.

And therefore, 2. (which is the great Use of all this Doctrine) here there is
ground laid down to any that would be Justified, how they may win to it, and a
warrant to propose Justification, as a thing attainable through Faith in Him;
ye have it in your offer on these terms, and therefore let me earnestly entreat
you to accept of the offer; if this be the way of Justification, take this way;
seeing there is an absolute necessity of Faith in every one that should be at
Justification, make it sure that ye are indeed fled to Christ; and that it is
His Righteousness which ye make your Defense before the Bar of Gods Tribunal:
We shall branch forth this Use of Exhortation in these Two or Three words. 1.
When Christ is spoken of in the Gospel, let him be by Faith received; and if ye
would know what this is, labor 1. To know, and to take up the difference
betwixt self-Righteousnesse, and that Righteousness which is by Faith; For
many are so ignorant, that they know neither the one nor the other, or at least
not the one by the other. 2. When ye are come to know the difference betwixt
these two, and are soberly weighing what ye would lippen to, in your coming
before God; with indignation shuffle out, and cast by, disclaim, and renunce
your own Righteousness, and grip to the Righteousness of Christ; here Faith
will have a double Work, upon the one hand to reject Self-righteousnesse, and
upon the other hand to rest upon the Righteousness of Christ alone; according
to that, Philip. 3.9. 3. When ye have gotten your own Righteousness casten,
and Christ's Righteousness closed with, there is a necessity to cover and hide
your selves in it, that ye may never so much as in the vaging conceit of your
mind, be found out of it; It alluds to the City of refuge, wherein, when once
entered into, and abiden in, the person was safe, bu^ if he was at any time
found without, he was in hazard to be killed by the aveng^^ of blood; which
held out not only the Act of Faith fleeing to Christ, but it is abiding in Him,
being hide in Him, containing and keeping it self in Him, and continuing to
plead it is Defense on that ground; There may be in a fit of sad exercise a
renouncing of our own Righteousness, but when that is over, and we begin to
conceit something of that which we have done, we are ready to forget Christ's
Righteousness, and to lean to our own; and that it in a manner to come out of
Christ, and from our City of Refuge, if ever we were in Him: Faith, as it
betakes it self to Christ, so it States it self in Christ, where only it dare
abide the trial. 2. We would commend this to you, as the great ground of your
Peace and Hope, even that ye would put it to the trial, and make it sure
whether ye be in the Faith or not; It is true there are many beguiled in this,
and take themselves to be in the Faith when they are not; and others question
their Faith, and their being Justified without just ground; yet it is impossible
to win to clearness of interest in Christ, or to the having of any solid and
comfortable hope, of enjoying God, except there be some clearness that we are
in the Faith, and have indeed betaken our selves to Christ; which cannot be win
at, without putting it to the t^^al; Other evidences serve to clear our
Justification, as they clear our Faith; and as they pr^ve Faith so they
conclude and prove our Justification, and the out-gate promised; Now, if
believing be such an evidence of Justification, and of a well grounded hope of
H^aven, is there not reason we should put it in good ^ear^es^, and frequently
to the trial, and seek to know whether we be in the Faith or not; The Apostle,
2. Cor. 13.5. Doubles his exhortation to this purpose, Examine your selves if
ye be in the faith, prove your own selves, know ye not your own selves that
christ is in you except ye be reprobats. We do the rather press this, because
if we were serious in the trial, there would, through Gods blessing, be more
Faith in some, and less presumption in others; and these that have Faith;
would have more peace and comfort in it. But that which makes many content
themselves with a counterfit instead of Faith, is that they put it not to the
trial; and that which makes them who have Faith to want peace, and to live in
much anxiety, is, that they do not more prove themselves, as to their Faith;
These are then the Two main parts of a Believers Duty by Faith to take hold of
Christ, and to rest on and in Him; and by trial to make it clear and sure to
themselves, that they are Believers; and these Two are the great up shot of all
this Doctrine, to persuade us to believe, that we may be sure, and to persuade
us to study to be sure and clear in it, that we may be comforted thereby.

SERMON LXI.
ISAIAH LIII.XI. Verse 11. -- By his knowledge shall my righteous servant
justify many, for he shall bear their iniquities.


THe Doctrine of Justification through Faith in Christ Jesus was wont to be
much thought of among the People of God, it is called, Gal. 3.8. The preaching
of the Gospel to Abraham, when God foretold him of a way of Justification, and
Salvation through Christ's coming of him, That in him all the Nations of the
earth should be blessed; This was the telling of Good news to him; and we are
sure it is as good news now as ever it was, and would be so to us, if we could
look on it Spiritually as they did; For there is as great hazard in Sin, and
the Curse is as terrible and insufferable, and the love of God as fresh now as
they were then.

We have for some days been speaking of this Doctrine of Justification, and it
will be much to speak and hear of it profitably, we desire not to insist of
what may be unuseful; but we conceive there is some necessity in insisting in
this; It Is our own negligence, and ignorance that makes many things of this
kind to be very unuseful, evenso that we scarcely conceive them; and we are
made heartless in speaking of them, because to many they are, as if spoken in a
strange language, which is, and should be for a lamentation.

The last thing we proposed, was to hold forth the mean by which Justification
is attained, to wit, Faith; which we observed, to show how Faith concurres in
the attaining of Justification: Few or none ever denied Faith to be necessary
for the attaining of Justification, neither can any that read the Word of God
with the least consideration, but have that impression of it* But the great
thing wherein the difference lies, and wherein men miscarry, is, in attributing
to Faith the right or wrong manner of it is concurrence in the attaining of this
effect; Though these things may at first blush, look like merely notional
spiculations, and such as do not concern Christians practice; yet there is no
error in Doctrine about this matter, but there is something in folks practice
that looks like it, and is influenced by it; And it is men's inclination to error
in practice, that makes them as it were to coin errors in Judgment.

We shall Observe two generals further, and proceed, The 1. whereof is, That
Faith has a peculiar way of concurrence for the attaining of Justification,
which can agree to no other Grace, nor Work, nay nor to Faith it self,
considered as a Work; Therefore Justification of many is here deryved to them
by his knowledge, or by Faith in Him; that is by Faith in Christ, as secluding
all other things; It Is by Faith that Justification is deryved and applied to
us, and by Faith we come to have right to it, and an Interest in it.

The 2d. is, That however Faith concure for attaining of Justification; yet
it is not Faith of it self, or by any virtue or efficacy in it self; but as
taking hold of Christ as the Object of it, that it justifies, Therefore it is
said to be by the knowledge of him, or by Faith in Him, it is by receiving Him,
uniting us to Him, and resting on Him that we are Justified.

We shall shortly explicat both these branches, and then come to some practical
use of them together.

1. Then, we say that there is something in Justification attributed to Faith,
that cannot agree to any other thing; which is employed in many Scriptural
Phrases, and in this Text; in as far as it is said, that by his knowledge, or
by Faith in Him, Justification is attained: And therefore when we are said to
be justified by Faith, we affirm that Faith has a peculiar way of concurring
for the attaining of Justification, which can agree to no other Grace, as to
Repentance, Love, Meekness, Patience, etc. not to Prayer, Almesdeed, or any
other good Works or Work; For confirming of this, consider, 1. That we are said
to be Justified by Faith in opposition to Works, and that there is something
attributed to Faith, which is denied to Works: Generally this is clear in these
Epistles written to the Romans and Galatians; Particularly, Romans 4.2, 3. If
Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof to glory, but not before God,
for what says the Scriptures? Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him
for righteousness, now to him that works is the reward not reckoned of grace
but of debt, but to him that works not, but believes on him that justifies
the ungodly, his faith is committed to him for righteousness; where most clearly
and convincingly, believing and working are directly opposite the one to the
other; and, Gal. 2.16. We who are Jews by nature, knowing that a man is not
justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, (or as the
word is, no not but by Faith, that is, a man is not justified by Works, but by
Faith) Even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the
faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law; Where the Apostle cannot more
purposely and pressingly make a difference betwixt any two things then he does
betwixt these two, Justification by Works, and Justification by Faith: And in
all this discourse, it cannot be said, that the Apostle only excluds Works in
respect of merit, or Works, as they look to the Works of the Ceremonial Law;
For he opposes Faith, and all sorts of Works, or Works in whatsoever respect,
as inconsistent; It Is not one or two sorts of Works; but all sorts of Works of
the Law; and there can be no Works but such as are commended by the Law, which
are excluded. Now if the Apostle seclude all these, what are the Works that we
can be justified by? 2. Consider the peculiar Phrases, that the Scripture uses
to this purpose, and where we are said to be Justified by faith; There is a
sort of causality attributed to Faith, that can be attributed to no other
Grace, nor Works; Hence the Righteousness of Christ is called the
Righteousness of faith, and we are said to be Justified by faith in his blood.
So Phil. 3.8, 9. I count all things to be but dung that I may win Christ, and
be found in him, not having my own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that
which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God b^
faith, and Romans 3.25. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through
faith in his blood; many more such Phrases there are; And truly it would look
very unlike the Scripture, to expone these Scripture Phrases of a
Righteousness of Works, or by Works. 3. Consider how the Apostle opposes the
two Covenants, The Covenant of Works made with Adam, and the Covenant of Grace
made with Believers in Jesus Christ, Romans 10.5, 6, 7. Moses describes the
righteousness of the law, that the man which does these things shall live by
them; The Righteousness of the Law speaks of doing, by which we come to be
Justified; But the righteousness of faith, or the Covenant of Grace, Speaks
on this wise, The word is near thee, even in thy mouth and in thy heart, That
if thou confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy heart
that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved; Where the Apostle
opposes these two Covenants, not in respect of merit only, as if the one were
inconsistent with Grace, and not the other, but he opposes them in this, that
the Righteousness of the one Covenant is in doing, and the Ri^hteousness of
the other Covenant is by believing; And therefore, according to this
opposition, wha^ever is a man's doing is not the ground of his Peace, and
Justification before God; because the Righteousness of his doing is the
condition of the Covenant of Works; and the Righteousness of the Covenant of
Grace is quite of another nature; to wit, Believing in him who justifies the
ungodly. 4. Consider that the thing that is the ground of our Justification
before God, is Christ's Righteousness inherent in Himself, and imputed to us,
for the covering of our nakedness; because He is as our Cautioner has paid
our Debt; Hence it follows, that Faith has another way of concurring in
Justification then any other thing can have; because it is Faith which receives
and pu^s on that Righteousness, which no other thing does; That I may be found
in him, says the Apostle, Philip. 3.9. not having my own righteousness, but
the righteousness which is by the faith of Christ; So that to be in him is to
h^ve His Righteousness, and this Righteousness is put on by Faith: Only take
two words of Adverisement ere we come to clear the other branch of the
Doctrine. The 1. is this, when we speak of the peculiarness of the way of
Faith's concurring in Justification, so as no other Grace or Work does, we
design not to weaken, or cry down the necessity of Repentance, and of other
Graces, nor of good Works, the very thoughts whereof we abhore, but to give
every one of them their own, and the right place; and therefore it is a gross
calumny to say, that we affirm, that the study and practice of Holiness and
good Works is not necessary; we only cry them down on this account, that when
we come before God, our Works, or Holiness a^e not to be presented to Him as
the ground of our Justification and Absolution, but the Righteousness of
Christ that Faith takes hold of; and in this we say, that Faith peculiarly
concurres as no other Grace does, because i^'s fitted with an aptitude to
receive and apply Christ's Righteousness, which no other Grace is as we say,
i^'s by the eye that a man sees, though if he had not a ^ead, and brains he
would not see; So though Fai h and Hol nesse, or good Works be not sep^rat, yet
Faith is as it were ^he eye of the Soul, that discerns and takes hold of
Christ's Righteousness. The 2. is this, That when we speak of good Works, we
speak of t^^m as the Apostle does, Tit. 3.5. where (...) says, not ^y the
works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved
us; and by good Works denied in the point of Justification, we understand all
that is our own doing, not excluding ^nly some things that were so accounted i^
the time of darkness, as almesdeed^ and the like, but (as we have said) all
that is our own doing.

The 2d. Branch is, that this peculiarness of Faiths concurring in
Justification, is not from any efficacy in Faith or from Faith considered as
our Deed or Work, but as it Acts on Christ, as the Obj^ct of it; and therefore
when it is said, Romans 4.3. That Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to
him for righteousness; The meaning is not, as if God had accepted his
believing, as an Act or Work for his Righteousness, and that it was accounted
as a perfect Grace; but the meaning is, that Christ Jesus the promised Seed
received by Faith, or his betaking of himself to the Ri^hteousness of Christ
holden out to him in the Promise, was accounted his Righteousness; as if he
had had an inherent Righteousness of his own; and so Faith is imputed not in
respect of it is Act, but in respect of it is Object; By his union with Christ
through Faith, Christ's Satisfaction becomes his: To clear it a little, take
these consider^tions. 1. Consider Faith as a Grace in us, and so it cannot be
imputed for Righteousness, for in that respect it is a Work, and is excluded by
the Apostles opposition, made of Grace and Works; It must therefore be Faith
considered as acting in it is Object. 2. Consider that in Scripture, to be
Justified by Christ, by his blood, and by Faith, are all one; because when it
is said we are justified by Christ, or by His Blood, it takes in Christ and His
Blood laid hold on by Faith, therefore sometimes Christ, sometimes Faith, is
called our Righteousness because, as Christ considered, as suffering, and
satisfying is the meritorious cause of our Justification, so Faith is the
instrumental cause taking hold of His Satisfaction, which is our
Righteousness; both are necessary in their own way, and Christ's Righteousness
implies Faith, and Faith implies Christ and His Righteousness, the one implies
the other necessarily. 3. Consider the Phrases used in Scripture to this
purpose as where we are said to be justified by faith, it ever respects Christ*
and where we are said by faith to put on Christ, It is not Faith considered as
Righteousness of it self, but it is Faith considered as Acting on Christ and His
Righteousness; Therefore it is the Righteousness which is by Faith, the
Righteousness which is in Christ, and by Faith, taken hold of by us, and
becoming ours.

The Uses are several, 1. For information and conviction, and we would, 1. be
informed in, and understand well the meanining of this Doctrine, when we say
that Faith is necessary to Justification, and concurreth in attaining of it as
no other thing does, that ye may give it it is right place, and may make no
confusion of these things that are distinct, 1. We deny not Works,
notwithstanding of all that we have said, to be necessary, more then we do
Faith; but the great difference is anent the giving of Faith and Works, or
Faith as it is a work on equal share in respect of causality in our
Justification; And therefore we would beware with Papists to attribute a sort
of condignity to Faith, as if it merited eternal Life, which flows from their
ignorance of Gods Covenant; For they think, that since He commands us to
believe, and promises Life to believing, that there is a merit in believing;
as they fancy, there is in Prayer, Almsdeeds, and others Duties, or good
Works; but in this respect, as it is a Work in us, the Apostle excludes Faith,
and makes our Justification free; whereas, if Faith in Justification were
considered as a Work meriting our Justification, it should not be free; and
although there be no Papists in profession here amongst us, yet it may be there
are some, and that not a few, that think God is obliged to them because they
believe, and that expect Heaven, and life Eternal on that ground, even as when
they pray, they think they should be heard for their Praying, and when they
give Alms, that they should be rewarded for the same, as a meritorious Work.
2. Neither do we understand, when we say that Faith is necessary to
Justification, and concurreth in the attaining of it; That by believing we are
disposed to be holy, and so more enabled to Justify our selves; which is also
a Popish Error, wherein I fear many professors of the Gospel amongst us ly, who
think they are obliged to their Faith, because it disposes them to hear, read,
pray, and the like, and so enableth them to work out a Righteousness to
themselves, whereby they expect to be Justified; This is another fault, and
Error to be guarded against; For though we give Faith a radical virtue to keep
Life in other Graces, yet so considered it is still a piece of inherent
Holiness, and pertains to Sanctification, and not to Justification. 3. When we
say that Faith concurres in the attaining of Justification, we do not say that
it concurres in the same manner, that Repentance, Prayer, and good Works do
concur: But it may be said here, seeing we grant that good Works and Duties are
necessary, what then is the difference? I answer, in these two. 1. Faith is the
proper and peculiar condition of the Covenant of Grace, and not our Works, or
Holiness; whereof Faith considered as a Work is a part; Works is the condition
of the Covenant of works, for it says in this manner, The man that does these
things shall live by them, but the Covenant of Grace in opposition to it,
says, If thou believe with thy heart in the Lord Jesus, and confess with thy
mouth, that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved; as it is, Romans
10. What Works, is in the one Covenant, Faith is in the other Covenant, and
that as it is opposed to Works, and to Faith it self, as it is a Work in us. 2.
There is a peculiarness in Faith's concurring for the attaining of
Justification, in respect of it is instrumentalness in taking hold of Christ for
our Justification, or in receiving and resting upon Him (as we said before) for
that end; For when Christ is offered in the Gospel; Faith flees to Him,
receives Him, takes hold of Him, and rests on Him; neither Repentance, nor
Prayer, nor any good Work, has an aptitud, and fitness to receive Christ and
present His Satisfaction to God as the ground of the Sinners defense, as Faith
has; And therefore it is so often said by Divines according to the Scripture,
that Faith is the instrumental cause of our Justification; which we shall clear
in two or three similitudes, which the Scripture makes use of, 1 Christ
compares Himself to the brazen Serpent lifted up in the wilderness, John 3.14.
Man by Sin is stung deadly, as the Israelites were by the fiery Serpents,
Christ Jesus as suffering, and hung, or lifted up upon the Cross, is proposed
to our Faith to look upon, as the brazen Serpent was proposed to them that were
stung, and put up on a poll for that end; and as there was no healling to the
stung Israelites except they looked to it, and the cure followed to none but to
these who did behold it; So Christ Jesus proposed as the Object, and
meritorious Cause of Justification, Justifies none but such as look to Him by
Faith; and although they were to look to the Brazen Serpent, yet their look
gave no efficacy to the cure, but it flowed from Gods ordaining that as a mean
of their Cure; even so it is not from any efficacy in Faith considered in it
self, that Sinners are Justified, but it is from Jesus Christ the Object, that
Faith eyeing Him lifted up, as the Savior of the elect, and His Satisfaction
as appointed of God for that end, does Justify: and therefore it may well be
called an instrumental cause, because it is not Christ abstractly considered,
that Justifies, more then it was the Serpent considered abstractly, without
their looking to it, that did cure, but Christ considered, and laid hold on by
Faith; and in this respect Faith is said to Justify, even as the e e looking
to the Brazen Serpent put them in capacity of the Cure, though the Cure flowed
from Gods appointment, and not from their looking; So is it in Faith's
concurring for the attaining of Justification. A 2d. Similitude is that of
miraculous Faith; We find it often said by the Lord, in His working such Cures,
Thy faith has made the whole; There was no efficacy in Faith it self for
producing the Cure, but it was the mean by which the Cure was transmitted to
the Person under such a disease; So it is in believing, in order to our
Justification; It is by believing on Christ, that our Spiritual Cure in
Justification is transmitted to us, and we are said to be Justified by Faith,
as they were said to be cured by Faith, because, by Faith it is convoyed to us.
A 3d. Similitude for clearing, that Faith may well be called the instrumental
Cause of Justification, may be this, even as the Advocats pleading may be
called the instrumental Cause of the Clients absolving; As suppose a man whose
Cautioner had paid his Debt, were cited to answer for the Debt, his Advocat
pleads his absolution, and freedom from the Debt, because his Cautioner has
paid it; although the Debt was paid, yet the man had not been absolved, if it
had not been so pleaded on this behalf; So the concurrence of Faith in the
Sinners Justification, is to table Christ's Satisfaction for his defense before
God, and to plead his absolution that ground; The believing Sinner's Faith
says it is true, I was own so much Debt of Sin, but Jesus Christ my Cautioner
to whom I am fled has satisfied for it, therefore I ought to be absolved; and
the Law allows of this sort of pleading, and upon this ground; in which
respect Faith concurreth in attaining, and may well be called the Instrumental
Cause, of our Justification: I shall say no more on this Use, but these two
words; we may partly regrat our great ignorance, that we know so little of the
use of Faith in our Justification; And partly we may lament the great confusion
that is in these times, wherein men are set to overturn such a clear truth, as
if Faith had no instrumentality in our Justification, but as if it, and other
Duties and Works were equal sharers and alike in it: Which, 1. overturns the
nature of Gods Covenant of Grace, in making Works the condition of it; as if
there were no difference betwixt the two Covenants of Works and of Grace. 2. It
has this miserable ill attending it, that it shoulders out Christ's
Righteousness, and shuffles in an inherent Rrighteousnesse of our own, as our
defense when we come immediately before the Throne of God; whereas the Gospel
puts us to a Righteousness without us, and imputed to us: This way leads us to
seek Righteousness in our selves; whether Works, or Faith, as a Work be made
the ground of our Justification, it is all one: For if Faith considered as a
Work in us disposing us to Holiness, and as a part of sincere Holiness, be the
thing presented to God, as the ground of our Justification, it is still
something within us, and such a thing, as is still imperfite; which would
miserably mar poor Souls comfort; whereas the Righteousness of Christ laid
hold on by Faith, being made the ground of our Justification, it affoords solid
consolation; For though Faith in us be weak and imperfite, yet His
Righteousness is perfect; and as it was not the Israelites looking, as we
said, that was the ground of their health and cure; but Gods appointing of such
a mean for their cure looked to; Otherwise they that were weak-sighted, and
had bleared eyes might think themselves not in such capacity of healling, as
these who were strong and more clear-sighted, whereas they were all alike
cured, if once they looked; even so is it here.

A 2d, Use of this, and the other Doctrine formerly spoken of, is for
Direction, and practical Information; would any know how to get Justification
by Christ, here is the way; It Is by Faith in Him; when Christ Jesus and His
Satisfaction is made offer of in the Gospel, for Justifying all self-condemning
Sinners, that lay hold on Him; Sinners by Faith fleeing to Him, and resting on
Him, get a title to His Righteousness, that cannot but save them; So that if
it were, 1. asked, what is that which a man appearing before the Throne, dare
hazard to present to God, as the ground of his defense? It Is answered, Christ's
Righteousness, His Satisfaction. 2. If it were asked, How comes one to have
Title and Right to that Righteousness, so as he may, own and present it for
his defense? It is answered, that it is attained by believing in Him; If it be
asked, how comes Faith to get a Title to that Righteousness, is it by any
virtue, or efficacy in Faith, as a Work in us? It Is answered, no, but it comes
to get Title to it, by going out of it self, by receiving, and taking hold, and
making use of the worthiness that is in Christ's Righteousness, which is as a
Garment, able to cover the Sinners nakedness, and to hide all his spots, and
as a complete Ransom to pay all his Debt: And this we see here upon the one
side, a necessity of Faith in order to Justification, and upon the other side,
a warning, not to count Grace, and the Righteousness of Christ, the less free;
that Faith has an instrumentality in the application of it; Faith having Two
things that it pleads upon. 1. Emptiness, and need in it self, whence it
arrogats nothing to it is own pleading, but 2. founds it is defense on the good
ground it has to propose; And therefore, as upon the one hand, we would know
that there is away to come by Justification, by taking hold of Christ's
Righteousness by Faith; So upon the other hand, we would be afraid to let any
thing stick to us from our Faith, as if we had a meritorious, or efficient hand
in, or were to be thanked for, our winning to Justification; For as a Beggar,
in receiving an Alms, can allege no merit to be in his receiving, or calling
for it, so no more does Faiths receiving, mar the freedom of our Justification,
by any merit in it.

Use 3. Seeing Faith concurres instrumentally in the attaining of Justification,
there is here clear ground to exhort you, by Faith to receive Christ; and to
commend to you the exercise of believing, because, without it ye cannot be
Justified, and by it ye shall certainly be Justified.

Use 4. Here, O! here is ground of consolation to poor Sinners, sensible of
Sin, trembling at Gods Bar, as being obnoxious to the Curse; that by receiving
of Jesus Christ, they may be absolved from the Debt of Sin, and fred from the
Curse; Therefore, if there be any such here, put forth your hands, and receive
what is in your offer; open your Sou^s mouth wide, and let in Christ, and He
will fill it; Faith having, as to our Spiritual Life, the same place, that the
mouth has to the body, as to the entertaining of the natural and bodily Life,
it opens and receives what is needful to keep in the Life of the Body; And were
not this good news to poor Souls burdened with Sin, loathing themselves, and
their own Righteousness, seeing it all to be but as filthy Rags, and crying out
with the Jaylour, what shall we do to be saved? Paul would say to such, and we
say it in the Lords name; Believe in the Lord Jesus, and you shall be justified
and saved; for Justification is derived by Faith in Him to the Sinner.

Use 5. This serves exceedingly to humble a Sinner; whether it be a Sinner
aiming, and seeking to be Justified, or a Sinner that has attained
Justification; in so far as there is no ground of boasting here; If ye be
aiming to be Justified, it may humble you; for what can ye contribute to it?
being enabled, ye can indeed receive what is offered, and that is all; neither
can ye receive except ye be enabled, as is said; It serves also to humble such
as are Justified; Have ye Righteousness? it is not your own, but Christ's; It Is
He only that did the turn; if it should be said, ye beli^ved, and may boast of
that? I ask, what did ye when ye believed? did ye any more but this? ye pleaded
guilty, and did consent to take Christ's Righteousness, and the pardon of Sin
through Him freely; and what matter of boasting, I pray is here? none at all;
Thus, this Doctrine contributes both to make these who are seeking pardon, and
these who have gotten pardon, humble; Where is boasting then? (says the
Apostle) it is excluded, by what law? by the law of works? no, but by the law
of faith, as it is, Romans 3.17. The believing Sinner does nothing, and has done
nothing toward the procuring of His own Justification, but gets all freely: We
can never think, nor speak aright of Justification, but it lays our vain
humor, and stops the mouth from boasting, while it says, What have thou O!
man, but what thou have received? and if thou have received it, why do thou
boast, as if thou had not received it? We shall close and shut up the whole
of this Doctrine by proposing some few considerations, as conclusions from it;
1. See here a necessity of being acquainted with the Truths of the Gospel, and
with this Truth in particular, concerning Justification, (whereof, alace, many
are very ignorant) seeing there are so many ways to go wrong, and so many do go
wrong about it, we had need to be the more clear in the right way; If there
were more knowledge of this, and of other Truths, we might speak and hear with
more profit, and if ye did not please your selves with mere and airy notions,
but sought to be settled in what ye hear of other Truths, and of this in
particular, it would contribute much to your peace, and rid you of many doubts
and difficulties: A 2d. Consideration is, That there is much need to walk in
holy fear, in studying this, and other Truths, there are so many ways to err,
and a wrong step here is very dangerous; It were exceeding profitable to be
more in the study of Justification, that is of the very marrow of the Gospel,
and is deservedly accounted to be articulus stantis, aut cadentis ecclesiae;
but ye would come to it in fear, being jealous of your own ignorance, and
shallowness of capacity rightly to take it up, especially, when new questions
are rising, and started concerning it; And as Paul and David studied this way,
and held it forth to others, as the way whereby they went to heaven, and
whereby others must come to it; So we commend it to you to follow them. A 3d.
Consideration is, If Faith be so necessary to Justification, as without it ye
cannot be Justified, is there not reason that ye should study to be distinct,
and clear that ye have Faith, and that ye are indeed Believers? This is one of
the great Uses of all this Doctrine; If there be no way but Faith, and if, in
studying this one way, many go wrong, then as ye would make your calling and
election sure, study to make this sure, by putting your selves to the trial, if
ye be taking this way as the Apostle most pathetically exhorts, 2 Cor. 13.5.
Examine your selves if ye be in the faith, prove your own selves, etc. It Is
truly matter of wonder to think how so many men and women are so soon satisfied
in the matter of their believing, which yet is so tickle, and difficult a
business; we would have none to be jumbled and confounded about it, who desire
to be serious in the thing; yet we would have all wakened, and put to
diligence; many men have taken pains to be wrong in this matter of
Justification, and how few of you have taken pains to go right in it? and how
is it that many of you win so easily at it? Seeing the Apostle, Romans 9. calls
it, a stumbling stone to many, and a rock of offense; Surely, (...) it be so,
your coming at it by guess, and ignoranly is to be suspected; And therefore on
this consideration ye would be awakened, to put your selves more seriously to
the study of it; and to try your selves, if ye be come well to it, for it is the
special, yea the only-ground of your peace before God; There are many of you,
who in a manner, think it impossible to miscarry in this; For ye know that
there is no way to be Justified but by Faith; and yet if many of you were put
to it, ye know not the manner nor way how Faith Justifies, which shows that it
is not so easy a matter as ye take it to be. A 4th Consideration is this, That
in speaking of Justification, and Faith's peculiarnesse, or peculiar way of
concurring in it, ye would beware of crying down Works, as to their usefulness,
or necessity; This was an error that soon entered in the Church; as soon as
Paul cleared and pressed the Doctrine of Justification by Faith, some arose,
who, (as James shows in the 2d. Chapter of his Epistle,) affirmed, that Works
were not needful, but Faith would save them, no says James, that faith is dead
and vain that wants works; And therefore remember 1. That although we tell you
that Works are not properly the condition of the Covenant of Grace, yet we say
that Faith and Works are never separat in a Justified Person; sound Faith
cannot but work, and put on to the study of Holiness; 2. We say, although
Works concur not in the obtaining of pardon of Sin, yet we say they are needful
to Salvation, and to folks entry in to Heaven; For the Apostle says, Heb.
12.17. That without holiness none shall see the Lord; Though it is Faith that
makes our friendship, yet it is by holiness that it is entertained; and it is
holiness whereby our communion is kept up with God; Therefore, Col. 1.12. We
are said by it, to be made meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the
saints in light; For it transforms us to Gods Image. 3. Works are necessary,
though not to procure our peace, yet for the entertaining of our peace, and
except we have Works, we cannot have a solid proof that our Justification by
Faith is real; and in this respect, James says, Chap. 2. that Abraham was
Justified by Works; That is, by his Works he was declared to be a justified
person; As to the Justification of his person, he was justified by Faith,
before Isaac was born; but by his offering up of Isaac, and other Fruits of his
Faith, he was declared and manifested to be a Justified man, and made suitable
to the Covenant that he was engaged in with God; Therefore, as the sum of all,
be exhorted to study the exercise of Faith and Holiness, so as every one of
them may have it is own room and place; for that will be your advantage, and
without this no other thing will advantage you, Now God himself that calls
for both, Sanctify, and enable us for both.

SERMON LXII.
ISAIAH LIII.XI. Verse. 11. -- For he shall bear their iniquities.


It Is a thing that can neither be easily believed, nor yet understood, how, by
Christ's knowledge, or by Faith in Him, many shall be justified; In these Words,
the Prophet adds a Reason that both confirms and clears it; It shall be, says
he, that many shall be Justified through Faith in Him, For he shall bear their
iniquities; He shall take on, and pay their Debt; And so, (as I said) it is a
reason confirming the former Truth, and showing that it cannot be otherwise,
but they must be absolved through Faith in Him, because He bears the punishment
due to them for their Sin; It serves also to clear how Justification is
attained by Faith, to wit, not by any virtue, or efficacy that is in Faith,
abstractly considered, as if believing of it self did the turn, but by virtue
of Christ's bearing their iniquities, and making Satisfaction for them, which
Faith lays hold on; So that when he said, By his knowledge shall many be
justified; It is not by any efficacy attributed to their believing, but by
virtue of Christ's Righteousness, and Satisfaction which only Faith gives a
Title to; and is the midse, and way by which a Believer comes to it; and so (as
I have said) it serves for explication of the former Truth: So that if the
question be asked, how can Sinners be Justified by believing? It Is here
answered, because Christ shall take on their Debt, and the Righteousness
purchased by Him shall redound to them, and be reckoned theirs; It Is the same
on the matter, with that which we have, 2 Cor. 5. ult. He that knew no sin, was
made sin for us, and what follows? That we might be made the righteousness of
God in him, which clears that this way of Justification which the Gospel holds
out, is not as (I just now said) by any efficacy, or worth in Faith it self,
nor by any inherent qualifications in the person that believes; but this is the
ground of it, Christ's bearing of our iniquities; The Elect were Sinners, and
Christ has taken on Him their iniquities, Therefore they cannot but upon their
fleeing to Him by Faith be Justified, when they plead His Satisfaction for
their Defense before God, their Absolution must needs follow; This is the scop
of these Words; which are as it were the bond knitting all the rest together,
and containing the foundation whereon our Justification is founded; There are
only Three Words here that need a little of explication. 1. By iniquity is not
meaned Sin formally taken; We show when we spoke of the 6. v. That Christ was
not the Sinner formally considered, that being inconsistent with His holy
Nature, and with the personal union of the Man head with the Godhead; But the
meaning is, that He took on Him the punishment due to our iniquities; or the
punishment that our iniquities deserved. 2. When He is said to bear their
iniquities; it imports a burdensome bearing, or His bearing of it with a
weight, and that there was a weight in it, as it is said, verse 3. and 4. He was
a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief; surely he has born our griefs,
and carried our sorrows; And therefore the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.24. says, He his
own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree; when He was made a curse
for us; as it is, Gal. 3.13. He did bear our Sins, by coming under the Curse
that was due to us for them; In a word, His bearing of our iniquities is a real
satisfying of the Justice of God for them; by interposing His own blessed back,
and taking on the strokes that were due to us. 3. When it is said, Their
iniquities, It relats to the many that in the former Words, are said to be
justified through His Knowledge, it is spoken of the iniquities of the Elect,
and Believers, who through Christ are made friends with God; And therefore
these being the many, they cannot but be Justified, because Christ has come,
and paid their Debt, according to His Engagement. These Words as almost every
other verse of this Chapter contain the substance of the Gospel; Take shortly
Five or Six Observations from them, which we shall put together. The 1. Is,
That the Person who is to be Justified by Faith in Christ, is naturally lying
in iniquities; this is supposed, while it is said, that Christ shall bear their
iniquities; ^ven the iniquities of them who are to be Justified, through Faith
in Him; So it is said before, The Lord has laid on him the iniquities of us
all; and we all like sheep have gone astray; These, and many other Scriptures,
nay the whole current of the Scriptures, confirm the point, and put it beyond
debate.

I observe it for these Ends and Uses, which will show why it is so frequently
marked. 1. That the freedom of Gods Grace may kyth the more in their
Justification; They are Sinners even as others are; and it is Grace that makes
the diff^rence; Therefore their Justification must be free; If then any would
have good, or have gotten good by the Gospel, and by Christ offered to them
therein, let them know that it is freely. 2. That a Believer who is Justified
should be very humble, for he was a Sinner as well as others, and is still a
Sinner in part; Therefore it becomes him to walk fortly, with a stopped mouth,
and to be tender and compassionat toward other Sinners; There is not a
Believer, but the weight of his iniquities would have born him down to H^ll,
had not Christ interposed, and taken them on him; and therefore he ought to be
both humble, and thankful. 3. That Sinners, who have the offer of Christ's
Righteousness in the Gospel, may not despair how great soever their Sins be;
Indeed if they resolve to continue in Sin, or to Sin that Grace may abound,
they have no ground to expect pardon; the Apostle does, with abhorrency reject
the drawing of such conclusions from the Grace of God, Romans 3. But for a guilty
Sinner, that has no good in himself to commend him to Christ, to lean to, and
to believe in Him who justifies the ungodly, is a Doctrine which the same
Apostle approves, and gives an open door to them that desire to abandon Sin,
and to expect Justification through Christ's Satisfaction; Thus a door is set
open to you, to b^lieve in Him who justifies ungodly Sinners, to betake your
selves to Him who is the Savior. 4. To confound and stop the mouths of all
Self-righteous men, as having nothing to do with Christ; He came to take on
iniquity, and to bear it; He came to seek and to save that which was lost, and
has not a commission to save Self-righteous Folks; For he came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance; and so long as they continue in that
condition; they cannot look on themselves, as persons whom He came to call,
neither can they take any comfort in, or from His coming.

The 2d. Observation is, That wherever iniquity is, it is a burden, a heavy
burden, There is nothing more heavy then Sin, it being that which presses the
guilty person to the lowest Hell, It brought the fallen Angels out of Heaven,
to the pit: ye may t^ke an instance or two of it is weight on a Sinner, when he
becomes sensible of Sin, Psalm. 38.4. My iniquities, says David, are gone over
my head, as a heavy burden they are too heavy for me: It Is true, Sins are not
always weighty to Folks sense, yet in themselves they are weighty, and
sometime they will be found to be so, by the Sinner. So, Psalm. 40.12.
innumerable evils says the Psamist, have compast me about, my iniq^ities have
taken h^ld of me, so that I am not able to look up, th y are more then the hairs
of my head* therefore my heart fails me; In a word, if the wrath of God, and
His curse be heavy, Sin must be heavy; Is not that heavy, which damned, and
drowned the old World; and will burn and bury in ashes, this World that now is
standing? Is not that heavy, that has brought on so many weighty curses on the
Creatures, and subjected them to vanity? Is not that heavy, that brings by it is
weight so many thousands and millions to Hell? and that made our blessed Lord
to cry, yet without all sinful anxiety, My God my God why have thou forsaken
me; and my soul is heavy to the death? And is it not that which makes the Lord
say, that He is pressed, with his professing peoples Sins, as a cart is pressed
with sheaves; all the indignation, and opposition of the men of this World is
nothing to Him, in comparison of the Sins of His people; He can break through
briers and thorns, and consume them together; But the iniquities of His people
are said to press Him; to show the abominable loathsomeness and weightinesse
of them.

Use, 1. It may make us wonder that men and women think so little of Sin; There
are many that will tush at a challenge or threatening for Sin; but let me say
it, that mountains of Leid, yea, though all this World were turned into one
Mass, or Lump of Leid, it should not be so heavy, as Sin should be to you; your
Drunkenness, Filthiness, Covetousness, Lying, the vaging of the mind in private
Duties of worship throughout the Week, and in public Duties on the Lords Day;
your neglect of Prayer in Secret, mocking at Piety, etc. shall (however light
now) one day be found to be weighty; when as it is, Revel. 6.6. Ye shall cry to
the hills and mountains to fall upon you, and hide you from the wrath of the
Lamb; A mountain would be thought light in that day; but the Face and Wrath of
the Lamb shall be terrible; Therefore, either give up with Sin, and study
Holiness, or make you for this dreadful postour, that ye would wish to have a
hill or a mountain tumbling on you; and yet shall not get that wish granted;
what mean ye, O! Atheists, and desperately secure pleasers of your selves, with
your idols, that ye dare thus to ly and live under this burden? Will ye be able
to come before the Throne of God with it upon your back? It Is a truth, that Sin
is such a burden as will sink you to the pit, if ye seek not in Gods way to
shake it off in time.

2dly. If it be such a burden, make this twofold Use of it. 1. Beware of
keeping still upon you the burden of bygone Sins; but take with them, seek to
be suitably affected with them; betake your selves with all speed to Christ,
and cast your selves, and your burden on Him; It Is for this reason that Faith
is called a leaning on Christ, because, when the burden of Sin is like to break
the Sinners back, Faith casts himself, and his burden over on Christ. 2. For
the time to come study holiness, and take on no more of this burden; always
remembering, that when ye take on the Debt of the least Sin, or seek to
hood-wink (as it were) the conscience, and to put out the eyes of it, that ye
may Sin the more securely, and with the greater liberty, ye are all the while
but hightning your burden, and making the weight of it the more intolerable;
and is that wisdom, think ye, to be taking on a burden of that which will
press, crush, sink and drown you eternally under its grievous and
insupportable weight.

3dly. Observe, That for as heavy a burden as Sin is, Christ stooped down, and
took it on His blessed back, John 1.29. Behold the lamb of God that takes
away, or bears, and by bearing, takes away the sins of the world. 1 Pet.
2.24. He him own self bear our sins in his body on the tree, So the just
suffered for the unjust; Heb. 9. ult. He was once offered to bear the sins of
many: Whether it was the same very burden that the Elect should have born, or
the equivalent of it, we will not now Debate having spoken somewhat more
particularly to it before; either of them being according to the terms of the
Covenant of Redemption, and accepted of the principal Creditor; yet it would
seem that He did bear the curse in the essentials of it, and in that respect
came under the same burden; He died, because it was threatened, The day thou
eats, thou shall surely die, and the soul that sins shall die; and He died a
cursed death, because a cursed death was threatened, as it is Gal. 3.10.
compared with 13. And so come under the curse: Here is love indeed, and a true
friends kind turn, that when Sin was such a heavy burden, Christ came in
betwixt the Elect and it and took it on Himself, and stood at the Bar of God,
as chargeable with our Debt, which was really charged on Him, as it is, Isa.
50.6. He gave his back to the smiters and his cheeks to them that plucked off
the hair; he bide not his face from shame, and spiting; all these buffetings of
profane soldiers, were but little to that weight of wrath that was laid on
Him, to the making of Him groan; to that cup which in the Garden He drank out,
and which made Him sweat Blood; and cry our, My soul is exceeding sorrowful and
heavy even unto death; And, Father if it be possible, let this cup pass from
me, yet not my will, but thine be done: O! what a weight was it that made Him
so cry out? There needs no more to prove that He bare our Sins, and that there
was an exacting of Him what we were owing, and that His Sufferings are indeed a
Satisfaction to Justice, for them, even for the Sins of all the Elect.

The Uses are two, 1. It serves to hold out and confirm this truth, That our
Lord Jesus His Sufferings were a real Satisfaction to Justice, for the Sins of
the Elect; and that by His Sufferings He was indeed put to bear their
iniquities, and that they were not only, nor mainly for example, though we may
well make that use of them; but He was made liable for our Debt; we Sinned, and
He suffered, and Satisfied for our Sin, we debauched our our Stock, and played
the bankrupts, He paid our Debt. 2. It serves hudgly to commend to us the Love
of God, that gave His Son, and of the Mediator, that came to buy and redeem
Elect Sinners, at so dear a rate, and to take on such a weighty burden to ease
them of it; Were there any here (as we hope there are) that know the weight of
Sin, O! but they would think much of this; even of Christ's taking on the burden
of Sin, and casting it by, having Satisfied Justice for it, and loosed the knot
of the Law, and of the Curse that tied it to them; To become Man was much, but
to bear the burden of our Sins was more; Angels wonder at this, that He, who is
their head should become so low, as to fist Himself before Gods Tribunal, and
to undergo the Suffering of Death, and to take on the weighty burden of the
Elects Debt, and to Satisfy for it; If we were in a right frame of Spirit, we
could not hear this word, but it would ravish our hearts, and put us to a
pause, and holy nonplus; but the most part, alace! walk lightly under the
burden of Sin, without ever considering what Christ has done to remove it from
off His People; nay, I am afraid that Believers, who have ground to be
lightened, through Christ's condescending to bear their burden, do not as they
ought acknowledge Him, who has taken the burden off them.

4ly. From comparing these words with the former, Many shall be justified; for
he shall bear their iniquities, Observe, That Christ's bearing of our
iniquities, and His Satisfaction for our Sins, is imputed to us as the immediate
ground of our Absolution, and Justification before God; So that if it were
asked, what is the ground on which a Sinner is Justified before God? The Text
answers, Because Christ has born their iniquities, He has paid their Debt,
even as (to make comparison fore clearing of it) when a Debtor is pursued, and
has nothing to pay, yet he pleads that the Debt cannot be exacted of him,
because his Cautioner has paid it; and the ground on which that Debtor is
absolved, is his instructing that the Cautioner has paid that Debt, which
being done, he is set free; So is it here, The Believer he is Gods Debtor,
Christ Jesus is his Cautioner, who has paid his Debt; who, when he is brought
to the Bar of God and somewhat is laid to his charge, he pleads upon the ground
of Christ's Satisfying for his Debt, and that therefore he ought not to be put
to answer for it himself; according to that Word, Romans 8.34. Who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that justifies, who shall condemn?
and the ground fol ows, It is Christ that died, He has paid the Debt.

Use, Among other things, there are two consequences that follow upon this
Doctrine, that serves to clear the Doctrine of Justification. 1. That the
Righteousness whereby we are Justified, is imputed to us and accepted of God,
as if it were our own: ye are sometimes hearing of imputed Righteousness, and
it is of great concernment to you to know it well, yet I am afraid, that many of
you are very ignorant of it: I shall therefore, in a word or two explicat it,
by comparing the two Covenants; The Righteousness of the Covenant of Works is
an inherent Righteousness, as it is, Tit. 3.5. Not by works of righteousness
which we have done; It Is a Righteousness of our own doing, made up of our
Praying, Hearing, and other Duties, as they are Acts of ours; The
Righteousness of the Covenant of Grace, is an imputed Righteousness, that is,
when Christ's doing and Suffering is accounted ours: Take both in this
comparison; The Righteousness of the Covenant of Works is like a Debtor, or
Tennent, his paying of his own Debt, or Rent, by his managing his business
providently, and dexterously, and none other is troubled with it; The
Righteousness of the Covenant of Grace is like one that has spent up and
debauched all, and has not one penny to pay his Debt or Rent with, but has a
worthy, able and responsal Cautioner, who has paid for him; Both being
pursued, and brought before the Judge; The first man is absolved, because what
he was owing he paid it at the term precisely, The other man grants, that he
was owing the Debt, but pleads that his Cautioner has paid it, and the Law
excepts of the Cautioners payment, and pursues the Debtor no further, but
absolves him; So is it here, when the Believer comes to stand at Gods Bar, it
is nothing in himself that he pleads upon, but it is Christ's Sufferings; who
said on the Cross, it is finished, The Debt of my People is fully paid, and
Faith pleading for Absolution on that ground, according to the Law of Faith, he
is absolved, as if he had paid the Debt himself, or had been owing none: If
then it should be asked, Believers, what ground have ye to expect to be
Justified? The Prophet answers here, Christ has born our iniquities, and this
is the Believers Defense; and therefore see here a possibility to reconcile
these Two, that some men scorn and flout at, as irreconcilable, to wit, how
one can be a Sinner, and yet Righteous, he may be sinful in himself, and yet
Righteous through the imputation of Christ's Righteousness, So, 2 Cor. 5. ult.
He was made sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might made the righteousness
of God in him, Romans 4.5. To him that works not, but believes on him who
justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness; The man
ungodly in himself is justified through the Satisf^ction of Christ, imputed to
him for Righteousness, and laid hold on by Faith; as if he had not Sinned, or
had actually satisfied himself.

2dly. This consequence follows, That it serves to clear how Faith Justifies;
as when we say Faith is our righteousness, and is imputed to us for
righteousness, we are not to look on Faith properly, as a Grace in us, and
divided, or abstracted from the Object; no, by no means; but as it is a laying
hold on the Object, It Is Faith in him that justifies; and Through his knowledge
shall many be justified, because he shall bear their iniquities; Faith
Justifies by virtue of Christ's Satisfaction, and as taking hold of it; Faith
does not Justify, as it is an Act of Grace in the Sinner, but as closing with
Christ the Object of it; even as in the similitude we made use of before; It Is
not enough that the Cautioner has p^yed such a man's Debs, but the man must
instruct it by producing the Discharge; the production whereof is the cause of
his Absolution in Law; yet the virtue that makes the Discharge so to concur, is
not the Discharge it self, but the Cautioners payment, or Satisfaction
mentioned, and contained in the Sinners Discharge; even so is it here, It Is
Christ's Righteousness that concurreth, as the meritorious cause of the Sinners
Absolution, and Faith concurres as the Instrumental Cause, in the pleading of
that Defense, whereon Justification follows, as an effect of these Causes: We
know not when, or if ever hereafter we may have occasion to speak so much to
the Doctrine of Justification; Therefore let me press the ^^udy of it upon you
again and again; Seek to know what this imputed Righteou^nesse is, and how
different from that which is in your selves; What is the true meaning of it, as
a main thing of the Gospel, without which the Covenant of Grace can never be
understood aright; the Ignorance whereof makes many live in security upon the
one side, and keeps many in much anxiety upon the other.

5ly. Observe, That although Christ Jesus has born the iniquities of many,
even of all His own people, yet not the iniquities of all men and women, but
only the iniquities of them that shall be Justified, and brought to the actual
possession of that which He has purchased: This may be made out from these
Three in the Text, 1. The relative Their, It Is their iniquities, which are born
by Christ, that shall be Justified; and who these are, the former Words tells,
Through his knowledge shall he justify many. 2. The connection made by the
Prophet betwixt these two, Many shall he justified; for he shall bear their
iniquities; All whose iniquities Christ has born shall be Ju^^ified; It could
not be an argument to prove their Justification; if Christ should bear the in
quities of others or of all men and women multitudes of whom are never
Justified; for it might be objected, That Christ bears the iniquities of those
many who are never Justified, which would be qui^e contrary to Gods Covenant,
and exceedingly man the consolation of the Believer; Beside that, it would make
the Prophets reasoning here inconsequent, and impertinent. 3. Consider these
Words, not only as they stand in connection with the former, but as they are a
reason why in Ju^^ice such should be absolved; and so they will also clear the
Doctrine; for so considered, they imply that it is Just, that the Believer
should be Justified; even as when the Cautioner has paid the Debt, it is just
that the principal Debtor should be absolved; and upon the other hand, it is
not just that the Debtor for whom the Cautioner has not Satisfied should be
absolved; The Words will bear these twofold consequence, for he knits these
two, their being absolved, and Christ bearing their iniquities, and being made
liable to their Debt; and He consequently disjoyns the^e two, Christ's not
bearing the iniquities of others, and their not being ab^olved; and so although
Christ has born the iniquities of many, only that is of the Elect, and has
Satisfied, and Suffered for them, yet not for all, but for the many, who in due
time shall thro^gh His Knowledge, that is through Faith in Him, be Justified;
and these who are left to pay their own Debt, Christ never died for them, it
were very unlike the Prophets reasoning, to say that such a man is in Hell, and
yet Christ bear his iniquities.

Use, 1. It serves to confirm the former truth, would ye know whose iniquities
Christ ^ath born? It Is of as many as are Justified, the in^quities of such He
bare, and of no more.

2. It serves to provock you that have gotten in Christ, this privilege, to be
very thankful; This is it, that makes the Song of praise heartsome, Revel. 5.9.
Thou have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, tongue and
nation; Because it is not a common, but a peculiar special mercy, if any be so.

6ly. From the connection, Observe, That although Christ has not born the
iniquities of all Men and Women, yet He has born the iniquities of all that
believe, and none ever believed on Him, but they may conclude that He has born
their iniquities; and on that pleads their Justification, through His
Satisfaction; although there be a restriction upon the one side, yet there is
none on the other; all are not Justified, but these only whose iniquities He
has born; yet all who through His Knowledge, or Faith in Him, are Justified,
their iniquities He has born: And hence it will follow, That never a Person
believed but Christ has born His iniquities; Not that the man's believing is
the cause of Christ's bearing, for His bearing 'of the man's iniquities is the
cause of His believing; But it is to show the connection, betwixt His bearing,
and the man's believing; and that His believing, is the evidence of Christ's
bearing of His iniquities: And this is more comfor^able then the Doctrine of
universal Redemption a thousand times; For it joins Christ's dying, and the
Justification of all that believe on Him; So that there are none, that by Faith
betakes themselves to Him, but they may expect freedom from the Curse, and
Absolution before the Throne of God; Whereas the Doctrine of universal
Redemption, says Christ has died for all, yet all shall not be saved; and I
wot not whether I shall be saved or not; and what ground of anxiety is that?
but this Doctrine has solid consolation in it; Christ has not died for all
simply, but for all Believers, he has born all their Sins; But I have betaken
my self to Him by Faith, therefore He died for me, He has born my iniquities,
and I shall never bear them my self, but be Justified.

I suppose we need not to stay on the confirmation of this, 1. It Is impregnably
proved from the reasoning of the Prophet in this place; All that are Believers
cannot but be Redeemed and Justified, because He has born their iniquities,
who by Faith betake themselves to Him. 2. If Faith in Christ be a saving Fruit
of His Death, and if none can believe but these, whose iniquities He has born;
then wherever Faith is, the person may conclude, that Christ has born his
iniquities, and that he shall be justified; But Faith in Christ is a saving
Fruit and Effect of His Death, for He has purchased it among the rest of these
Spiritual blessings spoken of, Ephesians. 1.3. Where we are said to be blessed with
all spiritual blessings in him; and it being a Promise of the Covenant of
Grace, it cannot but be purchased by the Death of the Testator Christ Jesus;
Therefore, etc. 3. It Is clear also from the Apostles reasoning, Romans 5.10. For
if when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much
more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life; Will he not, who has
paid such a dear price for us, to purchase reconciliation to us, make it out
by bestowing on us the Fruits of His purchase?

The 1. Use Serves to vindicat this our Doctrine concerning Christ's dying for,
and bearing the iniquities of Believers only; which is most unjustly loaded
with reproaches, and debated against, by men's cavillings, as if it were a
comfortless Doctrine; sure it is more comfortable, more sure, and more agreeable
both to the Wisdom and Grace of God, then the Doctrine of universal Redemption
is, For put these together, That all Believers are redeemed and justified; That
Christ has born their iniquities; that Faith is a saving Grace, and a Fruit of
Christ's Death, that such as believe may conclude their Justification; and that
Christ will make out the benefits of His purchase to them, what want Believers
that may be for their comfort? Whereas, if we should lay it for a ground, that
Christ died for all, what comfort were in that? For all are not Justified, and
Saved, but only Believers; yea, by the Doctrine of universal Redemption, though
ye were even new Believers, ye could not conclude that ye should be saved,
because ye might fall from it again: But our Doctrine of Justification has
solid consolation, For, Romans 1.16. It is the power of God unto salvation to
every one that believes: And, Romans 3.12. It Is unto all, and upon all that
believe; And it makes the Believer sure of his perseverance, for it is an
express Article of the Covenant. We shall only say this; That ye will find
that all that, in Doctrine, or Practice make the way to Heaven wydest, they
make it most unsicker, and unsure, and they are in great confusion; and indeed
it is impossible it can be otherwise; For if men go once out of Gods way, which
is the strait and narrow way, they can never be sicker and solidly sure,
because there is no solid ground of confidence in it.

The 2. Use, serves, to answer a Question, that some out of curiosity pussel
themselves with, which if well, soberly, and wisely followed, would be do
curiosity, and it is this; How shall I know if Christ died for me? Answer, make
it sure that ye believe, and then ye shall be sure of the benefits of His
Death; For if He has born the iniquities of these that believe, and if there
be no way to make it sure, that He has born our iniquities but by believing;
it is a needless stir and noise that is made about the knowledge of Election,
and of Christ's intention in His Death, for though we would say that He died for
all, it would not comfort, except we said also, that all go to Heaven; But are
ye burdened with Sin, and have ye by Faith fled unto Christ? and do ye actually
rest upon Him? Then ye may on that ground conclude your interest in Christ's
Death, and from that ascend to Election; That which makes many Believers to be
in hesitation as to this, is their never throughing, and making it clear to
themselves, whether they have believed; and therefore, if ye would see your
Election, and Interest in Christ's Death, put the matter of your believing to a
point; For it is the door whereby ye win in to other secrets of God, such as
Election is; and there is no other way to win to it; Therefore these two are
knit together, John 6.39, 40. This is the will of him that sent me, that of all
that he has given me, I should lose nothing; And if it should be asked, How
shall I know, who are given to Christ to be redeemed by Him? The next verse,
answers, This is the will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the
Son, and believes on him may have everlasting life, and I will raise him up at
the last day: would ye then know who are given and redeemed? They are
Believers; I mean of such as are come to Age; for none will make the question
concerning Infants; And therefore if ye would know the way of the coming to
Knowledge of your Justification, Redemption, and Election of God; begin at the
lowest step of believing, and make that sicker and all the rest will follow of
will; but if ye misken and overlook this, and will go up to the top of the
ladder, per saltum, and at the first; it will be just with God that ye never
win at the Knowledge of these secrets which were in His heart before the World
was.

Use, 3. It Is matter of Consolation to the Believer; who may as certainly
conclude an interest in Christ's Death, as if he had heard the Transaction of
Redemption read over, and had seen his name in the Book of Life, For our Lord
says, John 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son,
that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have eternal life: If
thou be a Believer thy name is there, Christ has born thy iniquities; and what
Consolation is that to them who are clear anent their Faith? But, alace! it
says there is much Rotten, Unsound, and Slippery Faith among us, and also much
Faith that is but little lively, that there is so little solid comfort
following it.

Use, 4. It serves to demonstrat the nec ssity of believing the advantages of
it, and the necessity of our endeavoring to be clear that we do believe; If
these two go together, Justification and Believing, then there is a necessity
of Believing, and if these two go together, clearness about our Believing, and
the Knowledge that Christ did bear our iniquities; then there is in some
respect a necessity, that we know we believe; otherwise we can have little, or
no comfort in Christ's bearing of our iniquities, and of our being given to
Christ to be redeemed by Him; From these two the advantages of Believing may
appear, Therefore to make all sure, Justification, Christ's bearing of your
iniquities, and ^our being given to Christ, make it sure that ye are in the
Faith, and this way give all di^igence to make your Calling and E^ection sure;
And the Lord Himself prevail with you to do so.

SERMON LXIII.
ISAIAH LIII.XII. Verse 12. Therefore I will divide him a portion with the
great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong: because he has poured
out his soul unto death: and he was numbered with the transgress^urs, and he
b^re the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors.


THere has been a compendious Sum of the Covenant of Redemption delivered by
the Prophet, in this C^apter, wherein, what is required as the Price for Elect
Sinners from the Mediator, is ho d n forth on the one side, in a l ge
desc^iption of H^s Suff^rings; and ^^at is p^oposed as the Fruit that should
follow, and as the Satisfaction that the Mediator should have for His
Sufferings, is on the other side also laid down; as, that He should see his
seed, and prolong his days, and that the pleasure of the Lord should prosper
in his hand: That he should see of the travel of his soul and be satisfied, and
that by his knowledge many should be justifi^d. In this verse, we have a
summary re-capitulation, and repetit^on of this mutual bargain; only it is
proposed in a dif^erent method; For before what was req^ired, and undertaken by
the Mediator, was first set down; and then the Promises made to Him were next
set down; Here the method is altered, and the Promises made to the Mediator are
first set down, and the conditions required of Him last set down; it is like to
show the oneness of the Covenant, and the mutualnesse of the Terms of it; and
that though, as to our conceiving, and up-taking of it, there be something
first, and something last, yet with God there is no such thing, but it is one
present Act. The promises made to the Mediator are in two expr^ssi^^s, with an
inference in the Word, Therefore, knitting this to what went before; I will
divide him a portion with the great; and he shall divide the spoil with the
strong; In short the similitudes here used, are taken from Conquerours, and
Victors, who having been in a War and fight, and having defeat, and routted all
their Enemies, and put them off the Field, have a notable Out-gate, Victory,
and Triumph, and a great Spoil, as the F^^i^ of the War; And so the meaning is,
That the M^diator by His undertaking to S^t^ fie for the Elect, should have a
great F^ght, and Combat with many Enemies* but He should loss nothing by it,
He shou d have a notable Our gate, an excellent Victory, and glorious Triumph,
great glory and spoil; So that as there was never War like H^s, nor Enemies
like these that He had to encounter with, so there should never be such
Victory, Triumph, and Spoil, as our Lord Jesus should have. The word Portion is
not in the Original, bu^ well supplied, It is only, I will divide him many, as
the Word is often used, and He shall divide the spoil with the strong, That is,
He shall i^ dividing the Spoil, be above the strongest.

The Words infer, and take in these Three, 1. A great defeat of, and Victory
over all the Mediators Enemies, the Devil, Death, and the Curse; He gets a
great victory over them, and gives them a great defeat, so that they are quite
beat off the Field, as dividing the spoil imports, Psalm. 68.12. She that
remained at home divided the spoil; and, Isa. 9.3. As men rejoice, when they
divide the spoil. 2. The great number of Captives that our Lord in His Victory,
and Triumph takes, and brings off; that is, He gets a great booty; which is
that spoken of in the words before, By his knowledge shall many be justified;
and it is that which is expressed in that Psalm. 68.18. Thou have ascended on high,
thou have led captivity captive, that is, these that were formerly captives
thou have redeemed from their capivity, and led them captive that carried
others captive; as the people of God pray, Psalm. 126.4. Turn again our
captivity. 3. It takes in the excellent Victory, the great Triumph and Glory,
that the Mediator should have by this means; He is exalted above every name
that is named, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of thing in
heaven, of things in earth, and of things under the earth: For further clearing
of it, we shall recommend to you Two or Three places, in which it is like there
is an allusion to this; as that, Col. 2.14, 15. Blotting out the hand writing
of ordinances that was against us, and contrary to us, taking it out of the
way, and nailling it to his cross; tearing as it were the Obligation that the
Law had over the Elect, by His paying of their Debt; And having spoiled
principalities and powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing over them
in it: There is His Victory, and Triumph; He combats with, subdues, and trods
under foot, all His, and His peoples Enemies, by satisfying the Justice of God
for the Elects Debt, and spoils them of many Souls that were led captive by
them; and triumphed openly over them, declaring Himself to have gotten the
Victory in a most Majestic manner; A 2d. place is, Phil. 2.8, 9. Being found
in fash^on as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto the death,
even to the death of the cross, wherefore God has highly exalted him, and
given him a name, which is above every name, that at the name of Jesus, every
knee should bow, of things in heaven, in earth and under the earth* and that
every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the
Father; This is His Victory, Triumph, and Glory, such as none in Heaven or
Earth ever had, or shall have the like: A 3d. Place is that, Ephesians. 2.21. H^
^al^ed him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand, in the heavenly
places, far above all principalities, and powers, and might, and dominion, and
every name that is named, not only in this world, but in that which is to come,
and has put all things under his feet, and given him to be head over all
things to the church; Whether they be Devils, or good Angels, or Men, S^ints
militant, or triumphant, He is above them all, all are made subject to Him, and
He is the head of His Church.

The expressions run in different Persons, The first is in the First Person, I
will divide him a portion: It Is a Promise of God the Father, to the Mediator,
for His attaining the Victory, as it is said, Ephesians. 1.20. God raised him from
the dead; The 2d. Expression is in the 3d. Person, He shall divide the spoil,
To show that the Mediator, God man concurred in the attaining the Victory,
Therefore, Romans 1.4. He is said to raise himself; and in that it is said, I will
divide, and He shall divide: It is to hold out the Mediator His attaining, and
possessing of what was promised, and to show that there is nothing promised to
the Mediator but actually He is, and shall be put in the full possession of it.

The last part of the Words holds out the conditions on the Mediators side, in
Four Expressions, 1. Because he has poured out his soul unto death; That is,
because He willingly condescended to die, He yetted, or poured out His Soul to
death. 2. He was numbered with the transgressors: He had a reproached and
shameful Life, and a reproached and cursed Death; He was thought the worst of
the World, so that Barrabas a murderer was preferred unto Him, It also points
out the respect that His Death had to a Satisfaction for the Sins of the Elect,
He was legally numbered, and counted amongst transgressors, though He was no
Transgressour. 3. He bare the sins of many, which expones the former; and says
this much. That no^ only He simply died, and died a sh^meful Death, but that He
died for this end, to bear, and by His bearing to remove the Sins of the Elect,
for it relates to the many, that in the former Words are said to be justified
by his knowledge; And it cannot be but these many shall be Justified, because
He did bear their Sins, as to the Punishment, and Curse due to them; and
whosoever Sins are born by Christ, these are, and shall be Justified; and
therefore He must be Victorious, and have a glorious triumph and out-gate,
because He lays down His Life for His Sheep, as it is, John 10.17. Therefore
does my Father love me, because I lay down my life, and take it up again: And
by the way, it is a strange thing, that the only begotten Son of God, should be
loved on this account, accepted, and glorified in this Work, even because He
poured out his soul unto death, out of zeal to His Fathers Glory, in
prosecuting the Work of Sinners Redemption: 4. And he made intercession for the
transgressors: Which points out His making application of His Death, and the
benefit thereof to the many, whose Sins He bare, He died to take their Sins
away, and interceeds to have His purchase made effectual; For though this be
applied usually to His Prayer on the Cross, yet that is but one particular of
His intercession, which is of larger extent; and therefore, it is noted as a
condition required of the Mediator, that He must not only die, but also
interc^ed, that the benefits of His death might be made forthcoming for them,
for whom He died.

Thus ye see we have the sum of Gods Covenant here, as if the Lord were
proposing to the Mediator; Now Son, if thou will pour out thy Soul unto death,
and thereby bear the Sins of my Elect People, and make intercession for them,
thou shall loss nothing by it, thou shall have a notable Victory, and Triumph,
and a great Spoil; In the Words before, The Mediator having accepted the Terms
of the Covenant, and performed them, though not actually at that time, but in
the Purpose and Decree of God; which now are actually performed, therefore the
Promises are turned over in a concluded Covenant, and in an absolute Right to
Him.

What needs further explication, we shall endeavor to reach it, as we speak to
the Observations, and because the Words for the most part yield the same
Doctrines that have been spoken to before, we shall not insist in them.

1. Then from the repitition, Observe, in general, That the nature and terms of
the Covenant of Redemption betwixt God, and the Mediator, is a profitable
Doctrine, and useful to be understood, and believed by the People of God;
Therefore it is so clearly proposed, and again and again repeated, and laid
before their eyes; and summed and repeated in this verse, to keep them in mind
of it; These that know the Covenant of Redemption, as that which has in it the
sum of all the Foundations of our Faith, and the ground of our access to God,
and of our peace with Him; they will easily grant that, that it is very
necessary to be studied, known, and believed; For First, by it we know what we
may expect from God, because what we are to expect, is promised to Christ in
this Covenant, as to our head; This portion with the great, and this dividing
of the spoil with the strong, He has it as our head. 2. Because we know by
this Covenant, how we come by these things promised: And that is by pouring out
of his soul into death, bearing of our sins, and interceeding for us; Which
supposes, and includes our betaking of our selves unto Him by Faith. 3. Because
by this Covenant, the rich and free Grace of God has it is due Glory; For there
is nothing considered here, as the reason of setting captives free, but Christ's
paying of the Price; it comes freely to us, as a gift bestowed.

2dly. And more particularly, Observe, That though our Lord Jesus Christ, in
the Work of Sinners Redemption, had a sore Combat and Fight, yet He has a
glorious Out-gate, Triumph, and Victory; It was the greatest, fairest, and most
serious onset, and assault that ever was heard of, that our Lord Jesus
encountered with; As the remembrance, and consideration of what has been
spoken, of His being in an agony, and sweating drops of blood, of his praying,
that if it were possible, that cap might depart from him; Of His crying, my
God, my God why have thou forsaken me, etc. Will most convincingly make out,
the Justice of God pursuing Him for all the guilt of the Elect, Principalities
and Powers being in His tops; The Devil, the Prince of this World, having all
His Instruments yocked, and at Work, some to nod the head, some to mock and
scourge Him, etc* Yet He did abide it all out; He gave his back to the smiters,
and his cheeks to them that pulled of the hair, and hid not his face from shame
and spitting; And had a most glorious Victory, and Triumph over all; what we
said in exponing of the Words clears it somewhat, and that Word, John 12.31.
Now is the judgment of this world, now shall the prince of this world be cast
out: to point out His Victory over the World, and the Devil; and that Word,
Col. 2.14, 15. He spoiled principalities and powers, He uncloathed them, and
left not, (as we use to speak) a whole rag on them; He, by a strong hand pulled
all the Elect from them, and left none of them in their possession; He brake
open the prison doors, and set them all at liberty: This was indeed a great
Victory; He has also a great spoil of many Captives; and great Glory, being
exalted in our nature, At the right hand of majesty on high; having a name
above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee might bow: and that
passage, Ephesians. 1.20, 21. Is to the same purpose, He has put all things under
his feet, etc. If we look to Reason, it cannot be otherwise. 1. If we consider
what our Lord Jesus was in His Person, being the Son of God, He cannot but be
glorious, John 17.5. He proves, Father glorify me with the glory which I had
with thee before the world was; Though by being Man, He became of no
reputation; and a vail was drawn over the declarative Glory of the Godhead in
His Person for a time; yet He remained still the Son of God, and Glorious in
Himself, and it cannot be but He that is God must be Glorious in His
Ex^ltation, when that vail that obscured His Glory is taken away. 2. His
Office, as Mediator, and head of the Elect proves it; He that wa^ appointed
head ov^r all things to the Church, could not but be great and glorious, and
therefore when that of, Psalm. 16.10. Is cited by the Apostle, Act. 2.24. and
13.35. It Is said, That it was impossible that death could keep him. 3. It will
be clear, if we consider the Work it self wherewith He was entrusted; it being
a Work that was so well liked of, and approven by God, He could not but have a
Glorious Victory, and Out-gate; Therefore says He, John 10. My Father loves
me, because I lay down my life for my sheep, and Philip. 2.8. It Is said,
Because he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, therefore God has
highly exalted him: It was the contract betwixt God and the Mediator, that He
should first become low, and then to be ex^lted, and therefore He behoved to be
exalted, and made very Glorious.

Use, 1. Learn not to under^^lue, nor to vail and obscure the Glory of (...)
Mediator, from the consideration of His Sufferings; for though He was low, yet
He is now exalted, He had a most noble, excellent and glorious Victory, and
Triumph over all His Enemies: There are none of us all, but shall at the day of
Judgment, when He will be seen to be Judge of quick and dead, (which is a part
of His Triumph) having so many Redeemed Slaves, (to speak so) at His back, have
a confirmation of this Truth in our bosom: And indeed it is no little part of
Religion to get this point deeply impressed on our hearts; That our Lord Jesus,
who was once low, is now exalted to such Glory; Look to it, and we will find a
great part of our deadness, and unsoundness here, That His greatness bulks not
suitably in our eye; alace! we do very much undervalue Him; but His humiliation
being for us, it should not make us think the less of Him, nor make us lessen
the high esteem we should have of Him, but should in reason make us think the
more of Him, and put the greater price on Him.

Use, 2. It is a most comfortable Doctrine, in reference to all ups and downs
of the time, and to all the straits that His Church and People can be put to;
It cannot be ill with Christ, and it shall not be ill with them: He may have
contests, but He shall get, yea, He has gotten the Victory; He once died to
die no more; all that He has now to do, is to make application of His
purchased Redemption, and to divide the Spoil; to notice, (which He does most
narrowly) what of His purchase is yet in the Devils possession, and to rescue,
and set it free; He has gotten the Possession and Government of the Kingdom,
and it must, and it shall go well, let the World rage, and let the Sea roar;
and the floods lift up their voice, and the mountains be cast in the Sea;
whatever confusions and overturnings come, or whatever troubles be, Our Lord
Jesus has gotten the Victory, and is dividing the Spoil; He will take no other
division, then what Jehovah has made, and carved out to Him; It will not be
what Devils, or Men, what great Men, Kings* Princes, Parliaments, Potentats,
Arm^^^* etc. Are pleased to give, or allow to Him, but He must needs have the
Portion promised Him with the great, and the spoil with the strong; He shall
certainly get that, and none shall be able to bereave Him, or take a bit of it
from Him; yea, none shall possess a Foot broad of ground bestowed on Him, and
His followers; He shall have a Church, and Ordinances dispensed therein, where
He intends it; and Souls shall be gathered to Him, from all quarters, as they
were given to Him; and maugure all the malice, and proud opposition of Devils
and Men, all that the Father has given to Him, shall come to Him, without all
peradventure, or possibility of misgiving; they shall not, by all their
opposition, and persecution, be able to keep any one of the gifted ones, from
coming to Him, in the season agreed on, betwixt Jehovah and Him. And 2dly. It Is
comfortable to Gods People, as to their own particular case; corruption is a
strong, and formidable enemy, the Devil is a restless enemy, and goes about
like a roaring Lion seeking whom He may devour; The World is a deceitful,
ensnaring enemy, and does often, in a manner even overwhelm them; but Our Lord
Jesus has the Victory, and parting of the staiks, (to say so) or the dividing
of the Spoil; These that remain at home, the fecklessest Boy, or Girl, Lad or
Lass shall divide the Spoil; This is it that Job comforts Himself with, Chap.
19. I know that my redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day
upon the earth, to wit, as sole and absolute conqueror, the Victory being
entirely on His side, with these eyes shall I see him, and no other for me,
though worms destroy this body: Believers, O! Believers there is a good day
coming, He has gotten the Victory, and so shall ye: The God of peace shall
tread Satan under your feet shortly; And whatever wrongs ye suffer, and
whatever straits ye be under now, while the wicked are in prosperity, there
will be a new decision, yea, new a division ere long; all shall be snatched
from wicked men, but your cup shall run over; There shall be no more fighting,
no more parties to give you battle, or to oppose you, when He shall have beaten
all Enemies off the Field; It will be a poor and sorry portion that many will
get in that day, who did not lippen and trust to Christ's Spoil, when ye
Believers shall be sharers with Him in it.

Use, 3. This says that it is both hard, and sad to top with Christ, and to be
found in opposition to Him; I speak not so much of public contests, such as
Pilate, Herod, the Scribes and Pharisees had with Him, and which many great
Ones of the Earth still keep up against Him, who will find the smart of their
opposition ere long; but of all that contend with Him in His Ordinances, and
who say by their practice at least, Let us break his bands asunder, and cast
away his cords from us, as it is Psalm. 2. And we will not have this man to
reign over us, as it is, Luke 19. He will say, Bring out these mine enemies and
slay them before me: Beloved hearers, this day is coming, when all of us will
stand before Him, and shall see Him divide the Spoil; and woe woe will be to that
Person that day, that would not submit to His Government; O! what a dreadful
thing will it be to be slain before the Mediator, to have the Prince of Life
taking holy pleasure in thy death, because thou sided with the Devil, and the
lusts of thine own heart, because thou resisted and quenched His Spirit, and
barracaded the way of His access to thee, and would not let Him in to reign in
thy heart, nor yield thy self as a Subject to Him? But it shall be well,
unspeakably well with Christ, and all that are His in that day, He, and they
shall triumph most gloriously: The splendour, spiritual state, and majesty of
that Triumph, shall infinitely transcend all that has been looked at, with
wonder in the most glorious Triumphs of the greatest Emperors, Kings, or
Captain-generals in the World.

3dly. Consider what this Spoil is, even to see his seed* and to justify many,
and to get them brought in to Him, and made partakers of His Grace and Glory:
Observe, That it is a part of Christ's Victory, Triumph, and Glory, to get the
Devil defeat in, and dung out of Souls, and to get them Converted, Justified,
and Saved through His Blood; when He is Triumphing over Enemies, as it is, Col.
2.14, 15. What is He doing? He is even tearing the Bond that was above the
Elects head, and blotting out their Debt, in that He triumphs most gloriously;
So, Psalm. 68. Thou have ascended on high, thou have led captivity captive;
There is His Triumph and Spoil, even a company of poor Slaves, Redeemed by Him:
The weapons, says the Apostle, of our warefare are not carnal, but spiritual,
and mighty through God, to the bringing down of holds, and leading every
thought and imagination lifted up against God captive unto the obedience of
Christ: There is Christ's Victory and Triumph; What are the strong holds that He
batters, storms, and takes in? He makes some proud hearts to stoop, and yield
to Him, and carries some that were Rebels to Him, captive to His obedience: O!
happy Captivity! It is not meant in respect of Thraldom and Bondage, but in
respect of Voluntary Subjection to Him: This is a most noble, notable, and
lovely Victory, and Triumph, and a Glorious Day indeed, which is ours, as well
as His; it being the redeeming of poor Captive-sinners, and bringing in of many
followers to the Lamb; and therefore, v. 11. It Is called Satisfaction for the
travel of his soul, and the justifying of many: That Is the Spoil and the Prey;
verse 10. It Is called the pleasure of the Lord; and in this v. His portion and
spoil: What does our blessed Lord Jesus take to Himself, what does this David
claim, or take to Him, as His Spoil, who is alone the the Monarch of this great
Universe? It Is a number of poor Sinners; Come to me says he, ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you, He has no more, He seeks no
more, but so many Souls as He minded to do good to; When the Lord divided the
Nations, as it is, Psalm. He choice Jacob for his portion: If we consider a
little more particularly, we will find the Justification, and Salvation of
Sinners to be our Lord Jesus His Victory, Triumph and Spoil; because herein He
is Victorious, and Triumphs, and gets the glory of His Obedience,
Faithfulness, Grace, Power, and Love; The Glory of the Mediator shines
manifestly, and conspicuously in all these here. 1. The Glory of His Obedience,
when He has it to say, as it is, John 18.9. Of all that thou have given me, I
have lost none; He gets so many Souls committed to Him of the Father to redeem,
and when He has done, and performed the Work, and brought them in, He has the
Glory of His Obedience to His Father, who says to Him: Thou art my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased. 2. The glory of His Faithfulness, according as
He did engage, and undertake to Jehovah, He has kept His Word, and there is
a necessity lying on Him, that it should be so, that of all committed to Him,
He should loss none, but present them without spot or wrinkle, or any such
thing; Therefore He is called the Faithful shepherd, because He losses none of
the Sheep that are given Him. 3. The glory of Grace, and infinite love, the more
that are saved, the more Grace and Love shins forth in paying their Debt, and
Ransom, and in bringing them in to be partakers of His Love; Therefore, John
17. He says, That the love wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them, and I
in them; He would have the love communicated by the Father to Him, to be in
them, that it may be known that He has loved them, as the Father has loved
Him; There cannot be such a proof, and demonstration of Love as this; It is
evidenced in His exaltation, as their head; and in their being brought where He
is.

4. The Glory of Power shines forth here, that trampled upon, and triumphs over
all difficulties, that are in the way of saving Elect Sinners; And, O! what
difficulties there are in the way of saving Sinners? He having the Devil and
the World without, and a deceitful heart, and a tickle humor within themselves
to encounter with: So many Sins to mortify, and Snares to lead through; yet
none plucks His Sheep out of His hand, Therefore, 1 Pet. 1. They are said to be
kept by the power of God, through Faith unto Salvation; In a Word, as it was
the manner of old for Conquerors to ride in Triumph, and all their Prisoners
led after or before them, at their back: So our Lord, for manifesting the Glory
of His Grace, Faithfulness and Power brings so manny Sinners through, to
Glory, and has so a greater train, then ever any Conqueror had; and He counts
it His Glory, and Triumph to get many lost Souls saved, John 17. Thine they
were, and thou gave them me, and I am glorified in them; How is that? I have
given them thy word, and they have received it; He counts himself glorified in
Sinners submitting to Him, in their believing on Him, and in their taking
pardon from Him: Now let me say, that if we were wailling and making choice of
a Doctrine, to warn the heart of a sensible Sinner, to shame unbelief out of
the World, and to give impregnable ground to hazard on Christ; here it is, That
our Lord Jesus places His Victory, Glory, and Triumph and Spoil in this, even
in doing good to Sinners, and in having Sinners getting good of Him; It Is His
Portion when (to say so) the World is dealt, that He gets a number of lost
Sinners to save as His share; And though He be the Heir of all things, and the
first born, yet He loves that better then a thousand Kingdoms; When He has His
Spoil, and Prey at the taking, this is it, and He choiseth no other; O! Sinners
do ye think this little? Or do ye think little of this? Had He placed His
Glory, in crushing under foot all the prisoners of the Earth, or in bringing
the World to nothing, who could have said, what do thou? But when He places
His Glory and Triumph in this, to overcome the Devil, to cast him out of Souls,
to relieve poor Sinners, and to bring them in to acknowledge Him, as the Author
of eternal salvation, and as the author and finisher of their faith; If ye
would have something to wonder at, is it not here? He will burn the World into
ashes, and leave it, and will cast many Kings and great Men into Hell, and yet
He gathers poor Elect Sinners out of that burnt heap, as it were, as the thing
He has designed for His Spoil; He has no more, and He seeks no more, (as I
said) and yet He gets no ga^n of these poor Sinners for all this.

And therefore, as the, 1. Use of it, wonder at this, will it not be a glorious
day, when Christ is Crowned, and has all redeemed Sinners at His back, with
harps in their hands, Singing, Salvation, Glory and Power, to the Lamb? O!
wonder, that there is not only a Savior, and Life and Salvation to be had
through Him; but that it is such a Salvation, as is wonderful in this respect,
that He counts it His Glory, and Triumph to have many Sinners saved, when He
might have glorified Himself in sending us all to hell; May we not wonder at
this? and yet we ought to believe it, and the little Faith of it makes it be so
little wondered at; Ah! Sinners for most part believes not that Christ thinks
so much of the saving of sinners; and therefore they wonder not at it, are not
suitably affected, and taken up with it.

Use, 2. There is here a sweet and solid ground for quieting, and settling the
Faith of sensible Sinners, who would have footing to their Faith; Christ counts
it His Glory and Triumph to save such as ye are, and if ye perish that would
fain be at Christ and His Righteousness for Life; Christ shall want His Glory
and Triumph, and may not that serve and satisfy you? that your Salvation is
His Glory and Triumph, which He will not come short of; The Father has here
promised it; and He shall not, He cannot want it; Sinners, He must have, and
shall have to be saved, because His Victory, Triumph and Spoil depends on it; A
wonderful condescension of Grace (which is not easily believed) that all these
are linked and coupled together, and through other, as it were, Sinners
Salvation, Christ's Victory, Triumph, and Spoil, and Gods Glory in His Grace
Love, Faithfulness, and Power; ye reflect, no doubt on Gods Faithfulness, who
suspect, and are jealous of your Salvation, if indeed ye do by Faith betake
your selves to Jesus Christ.

Use, 3. Does Christ think so much of the Salvation of Sinners, that He counts
it His Victory and Triumph, His Portion and Spoil? Then, 1. All that give not
Christ their Souls to be saved, do what they can to lessen Christ's Portion, and
to frustrat Him of His Glory. 2. If ye would do Christ service that is most
acceptable to Him, give Him your Souls to be saved by Him; frustrat not His
Grace, lay your Sins on Him, and look for Salvation through Him in His own way;
He came to fight with Principalities and Powers, and to vanquish them, and by
the strong hand to rescue Souls from them; and step ye to at His back, for that
is His Satisfaction, His Portion and Spoil; We wot well, there is here a
strong and effectual motive to persuade to Faith in Christ; and a stronger and
more effectual cannot be thought upon; It will be Christ's Triumph, to pull you
out of the claws of the Devil, and if He do it not, ye on the matter allow the
Devil, some way to get the victory over Christ, which is yet impossible, but
the Devil will certainly have Victory over you; to whom ye will be Slaves, and
Druges for ever; There is also here ground of great terror, and of dreadful
warning to such as yields not to Christ, because they do what they can to
impede His Victory; when He comes by His ordinances to turn them from darkness
to light, and from the power of Satan to God, they thwart with Him; The day is
coming, when this Doctrine will be comfortable to some, and terrible to others,
when there shall be none of us, but we shall see it confirmed with our eyes,
when He (as a man sorting and sharing His Spoil after the Victory, shall say to
these on His right hand, Come ye blessed of my father inherit the kingdom
prepared for you; and to others, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire
prepared for the devil and his angels; Even as if a Conqueror should take some
Prisoners, and make them Sons, and Heirs, and set them upon Thrones, and should
cast others into perpetual Prison, who loved not liberty: And indeed it will be
a fearful Prison who loved not liberty; And indeed it will be a fearful Prison
to be in Hell with the Devil, and His Angels; either we will be part of Christ's
Portion, and Spoil in that day, or He will refuse, disown, and reject us,
leaving us to be an everlasting prey to the Devil; happy they whom He choiseth,
and woe to them eternally whom He casts, as refuse wair God give us wisdom to
lay these things to heart.

SERMON LXIV.
ISAIAH LIII.XII. Verse 12. Therefore will I divide him a portion with the
great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong: because he has poured
out his soul unto death: and he was numbered with the transgressors, and he
bare the sin of many, and he made intercession for the transgressors.


THis Covenant of Redemption is a great bargain; there was never such parties
as the Lord Jehovah, and the Mediator; and we may say there was never such
Conditions, and Articles in any bargain, as are in this; The verse now read
does contain the sum of that which was agreed upon, betwixt these Parties; The
promises upon Jehovahs side made to the Mediator, and what He shall have on His
accepting of the offer, and performing of the Condition required of Him; And
what are the terms proposed to the Mediator, and the Conditions which He is to
perform, or rather has performed.

1. There are two things promised to the Mediator, I will divide him a portion
with the great, a fair and large Victory, and a good and glorious Out-gate; And
He shall divide the spoil with the strong; As these that are Conquerours and
Victors use to share most largely, and deeply in the Spoil, so our Lord Jesus
shall have a rich Spoil, a large booty, many redeemed Souls, a Bride whom He
shall present blameless to the Father; These are the Spoil, the Jewels that He
fights for, and the Prey He choiseth; when the World is burnt, and the rest are
sent to hell, He gathers out so many for Himself. 2. The Conditions on the
Mediators side are four; He comes to this Victory, and Triumph, because He has
poured out His soul unto death; because He was numbered with transgressors;
because He bare the sins of many; and because He made intercession for the
transgressors, Therefore shall He be sure of all this.

Although there be no express name of a Covenant here; yet ye see the thing;
because as in Covenants amongst men there are two parties, and their
engagements are mutual, and the performance of these engagements in the one
depends on the performance of them in the other; So is it here. 1. The Parties
are Jehovah, and the Mediator. 2. There are two things promised to the
Mediator, a glorious Victory, and a rich Spoil, the justifying of many. 3. The
Conditions on the Mediators side, on which the performance of the promises
depends, He condescends to die, and to die willingly, to be numbered with
transgressors, to bear their Sins; and to make intercession for them; This
Jehovah condescends to accept of, and upon this many, to wit, all Elect Sinners
are justified through faith on him, as it is, v. 11.

1. From the promise made to Christ (where the Person is changed) I will divide
him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong, I
will grant Him such a thing, and He shall obtain it, Take this general
Observation, as the reason of it; That all the Promises made by Jehovah to the
Mediator are certain, and shall actually be performed, I will grant this to
Him, and He shall get it; The connection does also confirm it; Because he has
poured out his Soul unto death: So, Psalm. 89.34, 35. Once I swear by my
holiness, that I will not lie unto David; my covenant will I not break, nor
alter the thing that is gone out of my lips; And indeed it cannot but be so; If
we consider either the Person that makes the Promise; He is God unchangeable in
Himself, absolutely faithful, and cannot deny Himself, Once have I sworn and I
will not lie unto David; Or the party to whom the Promise is made, He is the
Mediator God-man, in whom the Father is well pleased; And the Mediator having
performed what He undertook for the Elect, There is no ground to question the
performance of the promises made to Him.

Use, And it is a very comfortable one; look, whatever is promised to the
Mediator in reference to Particular, Private, or Public Mercies, all shall be
most certainly and infrustrably performed: Christ is the Party, to whom the
Promises are made, and Jehovah cannot fail to perform what is Promised to the
Mediator, more then the Mediator has failed in performing what He undertook:
Now it is promised to the Mediator, Psalm. 110.3. Thy people shall be willing in
the day of thy power, in the beauties of holiness, from the womb of the
morning, tbou have the dew of thy youth: Where there are these things promised
to Christ. 1, That His People shall be made willing, in the day of His power;
which is exponed in that, John 6.44. No man can come to me; except the Father
who has sent me draw him, God takes away the stubbornness, and frowardness
that is in the Elect, and makes them pliable to embrace, and receive, and give
up themselves to Christ. 2. That His People shall be numerous, the youth of His
womb shall be numerous, as the dew in the morning. 3. They shall be holy, and
shining in holiness, In the beauty of holiness; Again, it is promised to the
Mediator, that all Believers in Him shall be Justified, as it is verse 11. By
his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, and this is according
to that, John 6.39, 40. This is the will of him that sent me, that of all that
he has given me, I should loss none, and this is the will of him that sent
me, that every one that sees the Son, and believes on him, may have
everlasting life: The poor Sinner that by Faith betakes himself to Gods Promise
the Promise cannot fail him, because the Mediator is considered as the party,
to whom the Promise is made; and the absolute Salvation and Redemption of
Believers is in the same place Promised; Though they be in hazard through many
Sins, indwelling Lusts, Tentations and Snares, to be drawn away, yet they shall
have eternal life, they shall never perish, none shall pluck his sheep out of
his band; He shall see his seed, of all that are given him, he shall loss none:
This would commend believing to us, as a sure and sicker bargain; because the
ground of our Faith is Articled betwixt God and the Mediator, and it is as
Impossible that it can fail, as it is impossible that God can be unfaithful, and
that the Mediator can fail, in that He is engaged. Again, if ye look to
promises of public mercies, as that He shall have a Church in the World, and
that she shall be continued and preserved, etc. These Promises shall certainly
be performed, as that, Psalm. 2.6. I have set my king upon my holy hill of zion,
ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thy inhe^itance, and the
uttermost ends of the earth for thy p^ssession: A fruit of which promise, is
our Preaching, and your Hearing the Gospel here this day; and the Promises,
Psalm. 89. from verse 20. and forward, With him my hand shall be established,
and my arm shall strengthen him, the enemy shall not exact upon him, nor the
son of wickedness afflict him; I will beat down his foes before his face, and
plague them that hate him, I will set his hand on the sea, and his right hand
on the rivers; I will make him my firstborn higher then all the kings of the
earth, my mercy will I keep for him, his seed shall endure for ever, if his
children forsake my law, then I will visit their transgression with the rod;
nevertheless my loving kindness I will not utterly take from them, nor suffer
my faithfulness to fail. There is, Hos. 3. A promise of the ingathering of the
Jews: And, Isa. 9.6. It Is said, that The government shall be upon his
shoulders, and of the increase of his government there shall be no end: And,
Revel. 11.15. It is proclaimed, The kingdoms of this world are become the
kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ: All these, and many the like Promises,
shall be accomplished; though the World should be turned upside down every
month once, let be every year; The ground of the Churches continuance, and
preservation is not, because such and such persons govern: otherwise, what
would have become of the Church when Antichrist prevailled, but the promises
made to the Mediator: Here lies the Christians peace, when he has to do with
challenges, it is impossible that the Believer in Christ can perish: And here is
insured the Churches preservation, even by Gods promise to the Mediator, that
He shall have a Seed, and that many shall be Justified, that He shall divide
the Spoil: And though we see but very little appearance of the spreading of the
Gospel amongst the Jews, and Pagans, or where Antichrist reigns; the visible
Church being now for many years rather incroached upon then extended; yet there
is not one Word here promised, but it shall be accomplished; And this is both a
ground of our peace, and of our confidence in prayer, as it is, Psalm. 7.2.
Prayer also shall be made for him continually, and daily shall he be praised:
Two sweet exercises, daily to be praying for that which is in the pattern of
prayer, Let thy kingdom come, and daily to be praising Him for the coming of
His Kingdom.

But 2ly. What is spoken of Christ the Mediators part, we take it for granted,
that there is nothing spoken of, but it is, or shall be performed; The Father
ingages to perform to Him, whatever Promises are made to Him, because He has
performed whatever He undertook; and although Isaiah, long ere the Messiah came
in the Flesh, spoke of it as a thing done in the preterit, or bypast time,
when as yet it was not actually done; yet He does so, because it was as certain
as if it had been already done: Observe, hence, That there is no part of
Christ's undertaking, as Mediator in the Covenant of Redemption, but it is, and
shall be actually performed; O! but there are two responsal and faithful Par
ies in this Covenant; it is not God and Adam who brake the Covenant, and played
the Traitor; but it is God upon the one side, and the Mediator Immanuel God with
us, on the other side: Therefore there is faithfulness in the Mediators
performing according to His undertaking, as well as there is faithfulness in
Gods performing whatever He has spoken of Him, or promised to Him: Ye shall
only take two or three testimonies for this; The, 1. is Matthew. 3.14. and 17.5.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased; He undertook to satisfy for
the Elects Debt, and has accordingly performed it, so that the Father is well
pleased, A 2d. is, John 17.4. Where He appears before the Father, and uses
it for an argument for His Glorifying him with the same glory he had with the
father before the world was: I have glorified thee on earth, I have finished
the work which thou gave me to do; I have gotten a task, and piece of Work
committed to me, and now it is performed; And that other Word which He has on
the Cross, is remarkable to this purpose; It Is finished: Now the task and work
is ended, and I have no more to do, but presently to pass to the Victory, and
to the dividing of the Spoil: And a 3d. Testimony is our Lord Jesus His
ascension to Heaven, and the glory that He will appear in, at the day of
Judgment, when His Kingdom shall be consummat; That shall be a proof and
testimony, that He left nothing undone, that was given Him to do, that He bare
the Sins of many, that He gave His back to the smiters, and His cheeks to them
that pulled of the hair, and that He satisfied justice freely, and ascended to
Heaven, as it is, 1 Timothy 3.16. Great is the mystery of Godliness, says the
Apostle, God was manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, fully
absolved, as having performed all whatsoever He undertook, Seen of Angels and
raised up unto glory.

Use, This is also, though a general, yet a very comfortable Doctrine, to the
People of God; in as far, as from it, they may know that there is no more to be
paid to the Justice of God for the Sins of the Elect; It has gotten full
Satisfaction, The Cautioner has paid all their Debt, and is now exercing His
Offices, for applying to them His purchase; making intercession for them,
overseeing them, proving a Tutor to them, guiding them, and all that concerns
them, and His Church; even doing all things well, managing the affairs of His
Fathers house, as a Son, and He cannot but guide all well, Other sheep, says
He, I have, which are not of this fold, them I must bring in, and they shall
hear my voice, and I give them eternal life, and they shall never perish; A
most pregnant ground of comfort to the Believer, that his eternal well-being
cannot but be sure, and sicker, because it has the Father and the Mediator
their faithfulness engaged for it; If Jehovah perform the Promises made to the
Mediator, and if the Mediator perform His engagement, to Jehovah, and raise up
Believers at the last day, then it must follow, that their Salvation is sure:
This is the main ground on which Believers peace is founded; and here we may
allude to that, Heb. 6. He has sworn by two immutable things, wherein it is
impossible for God to lie, that the heirs of promise, who are fled for refuge
to lay hold on the hope set before them, may have strong consolation: even so
here, There are two immutable things, to wit, Gods promise to the Mediator, and
God will, and must keep His Word to Him, and the Mediators engagement to God,
and He will and must keep His Word to Him; And indeed we have good proof of
both already: For it was this engagement that made the Father send the Son of
His Love, out of His bosom, to be incarnat, and to undergo the work of Elect
Sinners Redemption; and it was this engagement that made the Mediator die; of
whom the Father exacted the Price, till He declared Himself Satisfied, and well
pleased: Now when these things that seemed most difficult are accomplished,
what can fail?

1. Then there is here ground to fix our Faith upon, and indeed there is need
to fix it rightly; The ground that our Salvation, and Perseverance in the Faith
is founded on, is not our continuing to Pray, to Believe, and to Love God, but
this engagement betwixt the Father and the Son; and it is the cause procuring
the other, as an necessary and infallibly certain effect; It Is mainly on this,
that believers should rest quiet and confident. 2. It should make Believers
humble and cheerful, seeing, though they be weak in themselves, yet here they
have a grip, and hold for every hand, as it were; Jehovah's Word, and the
Mediators Word for their through bearing. 3. It should much commend believing,
and the state of a Believer, who have such ground of assurance; The greatest
Monarch on earth has not such ground of assurance for his Dinner or Supper, as
the poor Believer has for eternal Life; For the Word spoken by Jehovah to the
Mediator, and the undertaking of the Mediator to Jehovah, cannot fail; and the
Believer has that to rest upon, as the ground of his assurance.

More particularly, The Articles on the Mediators side are (as I said) in these
Four expr^ssions, He has poured out his soul unto death; He was numbered with
the transgressors, he bare the sins of many; and made intercession for the
transgressors: 1. He must die, expressed in these Words, He poured out his
soul unto death; Which implies Three things. 1. That it is an Article of the
Covenant of Redemption, and of the Mediators undertaking that he should die for
Sinners; And so it is a needless, curious, and unwarrantable dispute, whether
fallen man might have been redeemed any other way, or whether a drop of His
blood was not enough to redeem man? because we see here it is Determined, and
Articled in the Covenant of Redemption, that He should die, Jehovah will have
the Mediator dying; And be possible what may to Gods Soveraignity (which we
would not make to clash with His Justice, nor His Just ce with His
Soveraignity) this may bound and limit us, that it is concluded in this Covenant
of Redemption, that the Mediator shall lay down His Life, and it being
concluded; It Is certain. 1. That God has given man a Law, threatening him, that
if he should break that Law, he should die. 2. That all Mankind, and so the
Elect have broken that Law, and so are liable to the Threatening and Curse. 3.
That the Mediator became Cautioner, and undertook to satisfy for the Elects
Debt; it was necessary that He should die because He undertook to pay their
Debt, and to satisfy for their Sin, which was death by the Law to them; and so
the Justice of God is vindicat, He cannot be called unjust, nor partial, nor
unholy, though He do not actually punish every Sinner, that has Sinned in his
own Person, because Gods holiness and Justice appears conspicuously, that He
would rather execute what was due to the Elect on His own Son, then that their
Sins should go unpunished: And considering the nature of the Mediators death,
that it was a violent and cursed death, that which had extreme anguish and
sorrow going before, and along with it; It shows that the Lord has purposly
taken that way, to make it known how bitter a thing Sin is, how terrible a
thing His Wrath is, and how holily severe His Law is; and to let all know that
it is a dreadful thing to come in topes with Him, who did so put His own Son to
it.

Use, 1. This Doctrine, though it has been spoken to before, is a sovereign
Doctrine, yea, the Sovereign Doctrine, and the corner stone of all Religion;
That Christ has died for the Sins of His People; It gives us access to preach
the Gospel, which is therefore called, the preaching of Christ crucified; know
therefore, and believe that the Mediator died; and that it behoved Him to die:
For it was required as a condition of the Covenant of Redemption, to be
performed by Him, to which He yielded, and consented; O! what love is here to
article such a thing before Sinners had any Being; It was more then to be
hungry and thirsty, and weary, He behoved to die, and to be made a curse; when
Sacrifices and burnt Offerings will not do; He says, Lo I come in the volumne
of the book, it is written of me, I delight to do will, O! my God, I hearitily
accept of the bargain.

Use, 2. It speaks an sadly alarming Word to all you who are secure Athiests,
and care not for the Wrath of God; O! what will become of you, when the Wrath
of God and you shall meet; If Sin brought the Cautioner to death, O! what Wrath
shall ye come under, when ye shall be put to reckon for your own Sins? The
smitting of the Sheperd was more then if all the Sheep had been smitten; and
though now ye think little of Sin, yet the day comes wherein ye shall know to
your cost, that it is an evil and bitter thing to depart from God, and that it
is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

Use, 3. See here the necessity of making use of Christ's Death, either ye must
do it, or die, and come under the Curse of God your selves; there is not a
midse; If ye have Sin, how will it be gotten put by and satisfied for? not by
your Prayers; let be by a laughter or smile; nor by your living of an honest
life, as ye call it, Christ had infinitely more of this then any of you, and yet
He got not Sin so put by; we may here allude to that, Eccles. 8.8. There is no
discharge in tbat war, neither shall wickedness deliver these that are given to
it; Death when it has a commission, and Gods Terror backing it, O! how will
it handle the secure stubborn Sinner, when the hand of God shall pursue him
eternally? Alace, what are many doing that never fear the Wrath of God, that
suspend, put of, and delay the closing of their accounts, and all endeavors to
die to Sin, and to live to Righteousness; and either pass over their days as
Athiests, or as formal Hypocrites; and such are some of you, that hear me this
day, who never seek to be found in Christ, nor to improve His death to the
mortifying of Sin; What will ye do in the day when ye shall be called to a
reckoning? ye will curse the day that ever ye heard the Gospel, and that this
was concluded that Christ should die, it will be the savor of death to you,
through all eternity; and will be the most Soul-searching, and tormenting Word
that ever ye heard; and ye will wish that the Work of Redemption had never been
heard of, nor resolved upon.

Use, 4. It Is a comfortable, and encourraging Word to sensible Sinners; such
betaking themselves to Christ, may be sure to get good of Him; for He has
paid the Price already, and has given His Word for it, That such as believe
in him shall never perish, but that he will raise them up at the last day: Ye
would not think that it will be displeasing, or dissatisfying to the Father, or
to the Son, that ye come to Him, and take hold of Him; for it was for that end
that God sent Him, and that He laid down His Life, and died, (but He dies no
more) It will be no trouble to Him, but satisfaction to His Soul, for all the
travel of it, to make application of His purchase to you; And seeing it will not
displease, but be most acceptable to Him, that ye believe on Him, and be saved
by Him, and since not believing rubes shame, in a manner upon Him, why do ye
not betake your selves unto Him by Faith, for His satisfaction, and your own
Salvation?

2dly. He not only died, but it is said, He poured out his soul unto death,
which implies two things. 1. The intensness of it, it was an uncouth and
strange Death, not only was His Body afflicted, but His Soul was poured out. 2.
It looks to His good will, readiness, and cheerfulness in dying; Father, (as
if He had said) must I die? and will thou have my Soul sorrowful, and heavy? I
am content to be so, thou shall have my Life, He comes not prigging to die, (to
speak so) but casts down His blessed Life at His Fathers feet, and plentifully
gives it out to the uttermost, so that He will not, as it were, leave one drop
of His Blood, but will needs pour and yett it out in abundance, even all of it.

Hence, Observe, That our blessed Lord Jesus was most hearty in laying down His
Life for Sinners, was most cheerful in undertaking, and most willing and
cheerful in executing what He did undertake; He makes not two Words of the
bargain, (to speak so) but when Sacrifice and Offering will not do it, as it
is, Psalm. 40. Then says He, Lo, I come in the volumne of the book, it is
written of me, I delight to do thy will, O my God: There is no standing nor
disputing here on the Mediators side, but a present willing and heartsome
undertaking, Therefore, Prove. 8. He says, Though he was continually with the
father, even from everlasting; yet his delights were with the sons of men,
rejoicing in the habitable parts of the earth: Ere ever the World was made, ere
there was a Sinner in being to be redeemed, He rejoiced before hand, thinking
there would be such an opportunity to manifest His good will, grace and mercy;
And if we look through the Gospel, how often will we find this made good? No
man takes my life from me, but (says He) I lay it down of my self, and I take
it up again: and when they came to take Him and Peter drew his sword, he said,
Could not I command twelve legions of Angels; but all that is written of me
must be fulfilled: I have bargained to lay down my Life, and it must be; and I
have a baptism to be baptized with* and how am I straightened till it be
accomplished? and when it came to be accomplished, though He gave evidences of
His power, in making them fall backward, who came to apprehend Him, yet He
raises them again, and goes with them; And when they mock Him, and buffet Him,
and nod the head at Him, and bring Him to the Bar, and question Him, and when
they said, If thou be the king of Israel come down from the cross, and we will
believe on thee; which we may think He could have done, though they were but
tempting Him; yet in all these He is silent, and never opens His mouth, till He
come to that, It is finished: He never spoke a repyning word: It was
wonderfully much to suffer, and to die so cheerfully, but to pour out His Soul
unto Death, to take His Life in His own hand, and to be so holily prodigal of
it, as to pour it out, there having never been such a precious Life, and so
precious Blood poured out; this was much more.

Use, It shows what esteem ye should have of Souls, and every one of you, of
your own Souls: Our Lord Jesus poured out His Soul unto Death for Souls; He
values Souls so much, that He gave His precious Life for them: Therefore it is
said, 1 Pet. 1.19. We are not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and
gold, but with the precious blood of Christ* If He esteemed so much of Soul^,
what will it be thought of when ye waste your Souls, and ye know not whereon?
He bought Soul^ dear, and ye sell them cheap, for a little Silver or Gold, or
for that which is worse, and far less worth: what an unsuitableness is here
betwixt Christ's estimation of Souls, and yours, betwixt His buying them at so
dear a rate, and your casting them away, for that which is very vanity? What do
the most part of you get for your Souls? Some a bit Land, some a House, some a
fecklesse Pleasure, some a Sport, some the satisfaction of their Lust, or a
moments sinful mirth; O! pitifully poor bargain; what will become of that
mirth, or lust, or pleasure, of this house, or of that land, when Kings, and
great Men will lie crawling, like so many worms before the Lamb? ye will not
get your House or Land with you, ye will not get leave to wear your brave
clothes, ye will have no Silver nor Gold in your Purse, in that day; And
suppose ye had it, the Redemption of the Soul is precious, and cease for ever
by any such Price: It Is a wonderful thing, that when Christ esteems so much of
Souls, that Sinners should esteem so little of them; Is it not just that such
Souls should go to hell, when they esteemed them so little worth?

Use, 2. It should teach you to love, and heartily to welcome this Lord Jesus
Christ; what argument of Love, and of Trust, what motive to welcome Him, can
there be, if this be not? That He spared not His Life, but poured it out unto
death for Sinners; How long shall we halt betwixt Christ and Belial? We dow not
endure to mortify a Lust, to want our Sport and Laughter, or a bit of our
credit or honor, though it should cost us the want of Christ: But, O! ingrate
fool, is that a becoming requital to Him, that took His innocent Soul in His
hand, and poured it out for Sinners, and when it was some way melted, like leid
in the fire of Gods Wrath, was content to yett it forth abundantly, out of love
to their Salvation? Should it not rather call for love to Him, for trusting and
welcoming of Him; and to Suffering for His sake, if He call you to it? Will ye
skar to hazard your life for Him, that poured out His Soul for Sinners? It
would do a Soul good to think how willingly, and cheerfully He Suffered; But,
Alace! how reluctantly, and unwillingly come we under Suffering for Him?
However, let me commend these three Words to you. 1. Love Him, For even
Publicans will love these that love them, and give Christ love for love. 2.
Credit and Trust Him, do not look for ill at His hand, what ground is there to
suspect Him? It is His glory to do good to Sinners, and He counts them His
triumph and spoil; and to make conquest of them, He poured out His Soul unto
Death, or as the Word is, Phil. 2. He emptied himself; Which seems to look to
this Word of the Prophet, and is not that warrant sufficient for you, to trust
and credit Him, and to lay the weight of what concerns you upon Him? And 3.
welcome Him, which is a fruit of Faith and Love, He is a sweet wooer, He is
that good shepherd that laid down his life for his sheep, he gave himself for
his church, as it is, Ephesians. 5. Therefore, I say, welcome Him; This is the
great thing the Gospel aims at, such expressions are a great deepth, and it
would require time to read, to ponder them, and to wonder at them; and we would
be much in praying for a right uptaking of them.

3dly. From the connection, Because, He has poured out His Soul unto death,
Observe. That our Lord Jesus His willing condescending to die, is most
acceptable to the Father; Therefore He says, I will give him a portion with
the great, and be shall divide the spoil with the strong, because, He has done
so and so, and all the Promises made to Him confirm this; That is a wonderful
Word, John 10.17. Therefore does my father love me, because I lay down my life
for the she^p: The only begotten, and beloved Son of the Father, cannot but be
loved; Yet He says, Therefore, or on this account, does my father love me;
That is, as I am Mediator, the F^t^ers Minister, Steward, or Deput, in this
Work of the Redemption of Sinners; and because I so willingly and cheerfully
lay down my self for them, He has given me this Victory and Glory; So well
pleasing to God is the willing and cheerful death of the Mediator, that it
should be admired by us: and should have this weight laid on it by us, that
seeing cheerfulness in obedience is so acceptable to God, we would study it, for
He loves a cheerful giver, and cheerfulness in any duty: It Is much we have
this word to speak of to you, many Nations never heard it, and ye would make
some other Use of it, then if ye had never heard it; O! but it will be dreadful
to such as have heard it, and do slight it, their Souls shall be poured out
into Hell, even squized, and wrung eternally by the Wrath of God; Therefore
look not lightly on it; do not think all this transaction of Grace to be for
naught; If we were serious, we would wonder what it means: Alace! we think
little or nothing, to make our peace with God; and yet all this business is ere
the matter can be brought about; It Is a great evidence of the stupidity,
senslessenesse, and absurd unblief of many, that they think nothing of Sin and
Wrath, and of the hazard that their Souls are in; and that they look at peace
with God as an easy business; But one day it will be found to be a great matter
to be at peace with Him, that Sin is bitter, and Wrath heavy; and that to be in
good terms with God, is better then a thousand Worlds, God Himself make you
wise to think seriously on it in time.

SERMON LXV.
ISAIAH LIII. XII. Verse. 12. Therefore will I divide him a portion with the
great and he shall divide the spoil with the strong: because he has poured out
his soul unto death: and he was numbered with the transgressors, and he bare
the sins of many, and he made intercession for the transgressors.


THere was never bargain so seriously entered in as this, betwixt Jehovah and
the Mediator, never bargain was of such concernment, and weight; It is
therefore no marvel it be insisted upon.

The Prophet has been holding forth the terms and conditions of it on both
sides, and now he sums them up in this last Verse, that the business may be
left cle^r, and distinct, setting forth what the Lord Jehovah ingageth for to
the Mediator and what the Mediator ingageth for to Jehovah; only with this
difference that in the former part of the Chapter, the Mediators ingagment is
first set down, and then what are the Promises that the Lord Jehovah made to
him, But in this Verse where the Covenant is resumed, what the Lord ingageth
for to the Mediator is first set down, and then what the Mediator is to
perform, in the last place; To show (as I said) the mutualnesse of the Covenant
of Redemption; and that it is but one bargain, one link whereof can never be
loosed on either side.

In the last part of the Verse, what the Mediator is to perform, is set down in
Four Expressions as past and done, because of the certainty, and efficacy of
the Mediators Sufferings, and of His performing what He undertook; and of
divine Justice, It Is acceptance thereof. The 1. is, because, He has poured
out his soul unto death; It was proposed to the Mediator to die, which he
undertook, and in the execution goes che^rfully about it; He poured out his
soul unto death, without any prigging; grace and love (to speak so with
reverence,) were so liberal and prodigal of the Life of our Lord Jesus, for the
Salvation of lost Sinners, That His blessed Soul was separat from his Body, and
he made obnoxious to the Curse, which most willingly he underwent, his Life or
Soul was poured out unto death. The 2d. is, He was numbered with the
transgressors; which implies Three things, 1. It suppons that he was indeed no
transgressour, there was no guile found in His mouth, yet he behoved to stoop
so low, as to be reckoned among, or numbered with transgressors; as the former
expression holds out the painfulnesse of his Death; So this holds out the
ignominy of it; he not only died, and behoved to die, but he was looked on as
a despicable person, even so despicable, that Barrabas a thief and robber was
preferred unto him; and of this we spoke from verse 3. He was despised and
rejected of men. 2. It implies men's ingratitude, that when our blessed Lord
came to redeem them, they did not count him worthy to live, but looked on him
as a transgressour; This was also fulfilled in the History of the Gospel, as,
John 18.30. They say unto Pilat, If he were not a malefactor, we would not have
delivered him unto thee. 3. It implies the low condescendence and depth of the
love of our Lord Jesus Christ which has no bottom; he will not only die, but
die a shamful and cursed Death, and take on reproach and ignominy with the Debt
of Sinners, when they are dispysing him; The Cautioner must not only die, but
die a shamful death; some deaths are creditable and honorable; and men will
with a sort of vanity affect them; but it behoved not to be so with our Lord
Jesus; when he entered himself Sinners Cautioner, he must not only die, but be
despicable in his death, as it is, Chap. 50.5. He gave his back to the smiters,
and his cheeks to them that plucked off the hair, he hid not his face from
shame, and spitting; because it was so articled, and agreed upon; when he was
reviled, he reviled not again: O! what condescending-love shins forth here, in
the Mediator; It was much to pay the Debt, and die, but more in his dying to be
counted the transgressour; much to be Cautioner, but more to be counted the
dyvour: As if some wicked and perverse Officer, ceazing on the Cautioner,
should not only arrest him for the Debt, and exact it of him; but account and
call him the dyvour Debtor; yet he bears all patiently. It would learn us to
bear reproach for him, he bare much more for us then we can bear for him; he
was railed on, and reviled, bufferted, and spitted on; they, in derision said
unto him Hail king of the Jews; they mocked him, nodded the head at him; hanged
him up betwixt two thieves, as the most eminent malefactor of the three; and
Mark says, Chap. 15.28. That this scripture was fulfilled, which says, and he
was numbered with the transgressors; God had appointed it, and the Mediator had
condescended to it; and therefore it behoved so to be; We spoke to the matter
of this before, and will not now insist on it any further.

The 3d. is, He bare the sins of many; which is also causal, as the former are;
It Is put in here. 1. To show the end of his dying, and the nature of his death;
His death was a cursed death; but not for his own Sin, but for the Sins of
others, even to pay the Debt, that was owing by his Elect; the many here are
the same many spoken of in the former verse who by his knowledge are justified,
It Is not the Sins of all that Christ bare, but the Sins of many, and the many
whose Sins he bares are the many that are justified; and all who are justified,
their Sins he bare, and of no more; So that as many as have their Sins born by
Christ are justified; and whoever are justified, had their Sins born by him. 2.
It shows also, how the Sins of these many are taken away, It was by Christ's
bearing the punishment due for their Sins, this it that which we spoke to from,
verse 6. The Lord has laid on him the iniquities of us all: In a word, it is
this, The Mediator articleth, and agrees to take on the guilt of the Sins of
the Elect, though not their Sins, themselves formally considered; he took the
deserving, or burden of their Debt; Of this we have also spoken before, and
will not therefore insist any more particularly on it.

The 4th. and last Article, or part of the condition required of the Mediator,
is, He made intercession for the transgressors; There was more required of him
then to die, and to die such a death for the Elect's Sins; He must also make
application of his death; and he will do that likewise: whereupon is founded
his intercession, that the benefit of his death and satisfaction, may be
applied, and made forthcoming to them; which is set down in these Words, He
made intercession for the transgressors; wherein also we are to carry along
the thoughts of his condescending love; who not only will satisfy for the
Elects Debt, and procure to them Righteousness and eternal Life; but when they
continue in opposition to him, will make intercession for the application
thereof to them, He having a number given to him, not only to pay their Debt,
by dying for them, bat also actually to apply the benefits of his death, and
purchase to them; according to that, John 6.39. This is the will of him that
sent me, that of all that he has given me, I should lose nothing, but raise
them up at the last day: These Four do plainly, and summarly comprehend the
Mediators ingagment in the Covenant of Redemption, as to his priestly Office;
and having spoken somewhat to the first three; we shall insist a little on this
last, concerning his Intercession.

For clearing whereof; when he prayed on the Cross, Luke 23.34. Father forgive
them, for they know not what they do: this was in part fulfilled; But his
Praying, or making Intercession for transgressors, is to be considered Two
ways, 1. As he was a man under the Law, and so he was to pray for other
transgressors, then the Elect only: as Stephen following his example did, Acts
7.60. When he said, Lord lay not this sin to their charge: 2. As he is
Mediator, and so he prays only for the Elect: as is clear, John 17.9. And his
Intercession thus considered is always effectual, and runs in the channel of
the Covenant of Redemption, and is commensurable, and of equal extent with his
Death; His Intercession in the First sense is more largely extended, he might,
considered as man under the Law, have interceeded for his Enemies, that were
not Elected; Therefore we take his Intercession here in the Second sense, as he
is Mediator: and as Matthew, chap. 8.17. applies his bearing of our griefs, and
carrying of our sorrows spoken of, verse 4. of this, chap. To his carrying of
our temporal bodily infirmities: So there may be an allusion to this, in the
Lords Prayer on the Cross: We mark this distinction, because Arminians, that
pretend to an universal Redemption, plead also for an universal Intercession:
and on this ground they say that Christ prayed for many that went to hell: But
we answer, that our blessed Lord Jesus did not there, if he prayed for any
such, interceed as Mediator properly, but as man under the Law; even as in his
prayer in the Garden, when his holy humane nature sinlesly skarred at the
bitter cup, He prayed, Father, if it be possible let this cup depart from me;
and it was agreeable to the humane nature to seek innocently to eschew the
drinking of such a cup; But, when in the same Prayer, he speaks as Mediator: He
says, not my will but thy will be done: And for this cause came I into this
hour; So when he preached as man, and a Minister of the circumcision, he says,
O! Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thee, and thou
would not: Whereas, if we consider him as Mediator he does what he will; and
calls none but they come, and calls none to be gathered, but such as are
gathered: The Intercession here meaned is that, which is an Article of the
Covenant of Redemption, aed a piece of Christ's Priestly Office, To which the
promise in the first part of the Verse is made; and therefore we have here
clear access to speak of it according as the new Testament holds it out to us.

1. Then we Observe this Doctrine from it, That according to the Covenant of
Redemption, our Lord must nor only die, but also interceed for transgressors,
or sinners; or, it is a part of our Lords Office agreed upon, in the Covenant
of Redemption, that he should be Intercessour for transgressors; It Is on this
ground, that it is said, Psalm. 110.4. The Lord has sworn, and will not repent;
thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedeck; He is a Priest a
ter Melchisedeck's order, and not after the order of Araon, and Romans 8.34. He
is said to be at the right hand of God, making intercession for us: It is said
likewise, Heb. 7.25. That He is able to save to the uttermost all that come to
God by him: Seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them: So, 1 John
2.1. It Is said, If any man sin we have an advocat with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous: and frequently else where, it is in Scripture attributed to him:
If it be asked, why behoved Jesus Christ the Mediator to be an intercessour? we
answer, for these Three reasons, 1. It was suitable to the glory of God, that
the great Lord Deputy appointed for the ingathering of Elect Sinners should be
furnished with this Office; and his intercession is derived from it, Heb. 7.25.
He is able to save to the uttermost, seeing he ever lives to make intercession
for us: He cannot sit up, nor fall in proving himself to be an able Savior,
because he lives for ever to interceed. 2. It Is suitable and meet for the glory
of the Mediator, and of his Priesthood, that he should not be a Priest for a
time only, but for ever; Therefore, when he is brought in as a Priest, Psalm.
110. compared with Heb. 7. He is preferred to the order of Araon, and said to
be a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedeck; by so much as he is
surety of a better Testament: They were many, because they were not suffered to
continue; But this man, because he continues for ever, has an unchangeable
priesthood. 3. It was meet, in respect of the consolation, that Believers in
him have from this his Intercession; there had been a defect in the consolation
of Believers, if he had not been Intercessour; but seeing, as it is, Heb. 10.19.
We have such an high Priest over the house of God, we have boldness to enter
into the holiest, by a new and living way and may draw near with full assurance
of faith, And that which gives us this boldness, is that (as it is Heb.
4.15.16.) We have not an high Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling
of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are: Then follows,
Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of geace, that we may obtain
mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. 4. We may add, That it is
suitable for this reason, to wit, if we consider, and compare the Type with the
Antitype, Exodus 30.10. and Levit. 16. compared with, Heb. 9. The high Priest
had Sacrifices prescribed to him for himself and for the people, when he went
once in the year, into the most holy with the blood of the Sacrifice, which
signified, that Christ after the laying down of his Life, was to enter into
heaven, there to appear in the presence of God for us, Heb. 9.24.

This is a point which may yield us many and great Uses, as 1. For Information,
to clear us about Christ's Intercession. 2. For Consolation; To show us the
advantages that flow to Believers from it. 3. For Direction in duty, to learn
us what use we should make of it. And 4. For Reproof and Conviction, for, and
of the Sin of our much slighting, and neglecting this part of Christ's Priestly
Office.

As for the First, It serves, we say, for Information; and to let us see that
we have an excellent high Priest, who is not only answerable to the Type, in
dying, but also in interceeding, who died, that he might make application of
what he purchased by his death.

For further clearing, and prosecuting of this Use, we shall speak a little to
some few questions, As 1. What this Intercession is? 2 Who Interceeds? 3. For
whom? 4. For what? 5. How this Intercession is performed? 6. What are the
grounds on which it is founded?

For the First. What this Intercession is in general? and for clearing it, ye
would consider what it is not; and, 1. There is here no humbling of the
Mediator in way of Supplication, as he prayed when on earth; or as we pray, or
as one man entreats, or interceeds with another; That way of Interceeding is
inconsistent with his exaltation; his humiliation being perfected and by, and
he being now exalted at the right hand of God. 2. It Is no verbal thing, no
bringing forth, or uttering of Words; There is no such language in our Lords
Intercession; and so we are not to conceive of his Intercession, as if he made
a formal prayer: That manner of dealling, or proceeding is not now betwixt God
and the Mediator. 3. Neither does this his Intercession consist in any new
particular act of his will, as if he did act, or will something that he did not
before; therefore he is said to Live for ever, to make intercession, and to
abide a Priest continually: His Intercession is continual, as is clear, Heb.
7.3, 25. His being in Heaven, and appearing there in our name, is his
Intercession: And therefore, 2. Let us see in the next place, what i^ is; And
more generall^, we may take it up in such expressions as the Scriptures make
use of to hold it b^; and in the similitude, and analogy whence it is borrowed;
for it is a borrowed thing; as the Covenant of Redemption is, from compacts
among men, because we cannot take up divine, and misterious things, except they
be expressed after the manner of men for our capacity: Such is this, as if a
Kings Son were interposing for a person not in good terms with the King, or,
for whom he would have some benefit from the King his Father; The similitude
seems indeed to be drawn from this, yet it must not be astricted thereto:
Therefore, 1 John 2.1. He is called an advocat with the Father; and yet he does
not advocat our cause verbally as we said before; And 1 Timothy 2.5. There is one
God, and one Mediator between God and man: Where the Apostle is speaking of
praying; And here he is said to make Intercession for us, as the high Priest
did in name of the People; in a word, it is our Lords Jesus Christ his m^king
of what he has purchased, and has engaged to him in the Covenant of
Redemption, effectually forthcoming for the behove of his People, as if he were
Agenting their cause, as an Advocat in Heaven; which is so held forth, for the
help of our Faith; that the Mediator having made his Testament, and confirmed
it by his death, is looking well that his death, and the benefits purchased to
Elect Sinners thereby, may be made effectual; and is as it were lying as Agent,
and Advocat at Court, to procure and bring about this business, according to
that, John 17.19, 20, 24. For their sakes I sanctify my self, that they also
may be sanctified, etc. Neither pray I for these alone, etc. and Father I will
that these whom thou have given me, may be with me, where I am: It Is even that
all may be made good to them for whom he S^nctified himself, and the effectual
making out of that which he has purchased to them; that is called his
Intercession.

2dly. Who makes Intercession? It is not enough that Christ* as man makes
Intercession; but it is Christ Mediator, God and M^n in one Person: It being an
error of the Papists, to make the Intercession of Christ, to be a thing
performed by the humane nature only, which lesseneth the consolation of
Believers, and is inconsistent with the Union of the two natures, and detracts
from the weig^t that his Godhead gives to his Intercession.

3dly. For whom does he interceed? There are here extremes on both hands to be
eshewed. 1. Some make his Intercession over broad; as if he interceeded for all
the World; this he expressly denies, John 17.9. I pray not for the world: and
his Intercession being grounded on his death, and satisfaction, it must be of
equal extent therewith, and must relate to the Covenant of Redemption; wherein
so many were given him to be redeemed by his death. 2. Others make his
Intercession too na^row, in making it only for them that actua^ly believe; He
also refuts this opinion, John 17.20. By saying* Neither pray I for these
alone, but for all that shall believe on me through their word. And it is
always on this ground that he interceeds, to wit, because they are given; So
that it is for the Elect converted, or unconverted, that he interceeds; The
reason why we mark this, is, to overturn thereby Two corrupt distinctions, that
are made use of, to bring in an universal Intercession, as well as an universal
Redemption. 1. Some make his Intercession common to all; but we, according to
the Scripture, acknowledge no such Intercession to belong to Christ, especially
as Mediator; however he might, as man, under the Law, have prayed for some that
shall not be actually saved, as he commands one man to pray for other men, yet
not for all men simply. 2. Others make a conditional Intercession for all, as
they make a conditional Redemption of all; and make both absolute for Believers
only, which is also corrupt; For considering the object of his Intercession as
Mediator to be only the Elect, as indeed they are; it overturns both this, and
the former opinion; if he prayed not for all, he died not for all: the one
whereof is grounded on the other.

4ly. For what does he interceed? In general, for all that is conditioned to
him, in the Covenant for the behove of his people; He prays for the fulfilling
of all the Articles of the Covenant, as, that all the Elect, who are not
regenerat, may be regenerat, and made Believers; That many through his
knowledge, may be justified; That these that are regenerat, and Believers, and
by Faith have be taken themselves to him, may be justified, pardoned, and
received in favor; friendship and fellowship with God; that Believers may be
kept from tentation, that tentations may be prevented, and they made to
persever; That Satan may not make their Faith to fail them, as he designs, and
the Lord gives account of his design, Luke 22.32. Satan has sought to winnow
you, but I have prayed that the faith fail not: That they, and their prayers
and service may be accepted; that the suits and supplications that they
present, and put up in his name may get a hearing; That they may be armed
against the fear of death: That they may be carried on in the gradual advances
of Sanctification to the end of their Faith, the salvation of their Souls; that
they may be glorified, and be where he is, to behold his glory; In a Word, he
interceeds for every thing needful, and for every thing promised to them; his
Intercession being as broad as his Purchase:

5ly. How does he perform this part of his Priestly Office for his People? it is
performed by his entry into the most holy place, in our nature and name, as
having satisfied Justice, and vanquished death, where he appears before God for
us; So that we are to look to Christ's being in heaven, not simply as
glorifying himself or as glorified in himself, for himself; but as our head,
and forerunner, to answer all that can be said against his Elect, for whom he
suffered, and satisfied; as it is, Heb. 9.23, 24. It was therefore necessary
that the patterns of things in the heavens should be purified with these, but
the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices; for Christ is not
entered into the holy places made with hands which are the figures of the true,
but into heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us; So that
our Lord Jesus by his entry into heaven does declare (I mean materially
declare) his victory in our name, and appears there, as a public, and not as a
private person; His entry into heaven is not to be looked on, as the entry of
Moses or of Elias, but as the entry of him who is head of the Elect, whose
entry there is a Declaration of what he would be at; As by the power of his
Godhead, he conveyed himself in thither; So he has taken possession in our
name, and according to the Covenant declares, that these whose room he
sustains, may and must be admitted to glory; And we must conceive an special
efficacy in his being there, for procuring to them what he has purchased. 2.
His Intercession is performed through the efficacy of his blood and
satisfaction flowing from the nature of the Covenant; which has a moral real
cry, for making effectual, what he by his death has procured; As the Apostle
speaking of Abels Blood, and of making application of Christ's Blood, Heb.
12.24. Says, It speaks better things then the blood of Abels; For Abels
Blood had a dmereit in it to cry guilt, and could not but have a Curse
following it, because God had cursed the shedder of Blood; But Christ's Blood
considered, as the price of Redemption for the Elect; has an invaluable and
unconceivable merit, and worth in it, and must have a cry for the blessings
purchased to them by it. 3. He performs this his Intercession by his constant
care, and by his continual willingness, and actual willing, that what he has
purchased for his Elect people may be applied to them; that such and such
persons may be brought to believe, that upon their believing they may be
pardoned; delivered from snares and tentations; kept in favor with God; may
be accepted in their performances, etc. For he had that prayer, John 17.20.24.
And he continues to have that same Sympathy; His way on earth was always
sinless, but now is glorious and majestic, suited to his glorified state; He
continues to interceed according as he intended; and his actual willingness is
a main part of his Intercession, which is not in renewing of acts (to speak
so;) but in his continuing desire, and willingness, that what good he has
purchased, may be conferred according to the Covenant; For Christ in heaven is
still a true man, and has a will, as he had on earth, continuing to seek that
they may be glorified with him, for whom he satisfied; and this actual willing
desiring, and affecting, that such a thing should be; is called his
Intercession; because it cannot but be so esteemed, as to have the effect to
follow, according to the Covenant, as he says, John 11.41, 42. I thank thee
Father, that thou have heard me, and I know that thou hear me always: This
as to his actual willing, cannot but be in heaven: However, we are sure that he
is there, and in our name; and that his death, and blood shed has an efficacy,
to bring about what he has purchased; and that his will and affection are the
same, and have an efficacy with them, and the effect certainly following; so as
nothing can go wrong there, more then the man that has a just cause in a Court
of Judicature, and an able Advocat, with much moyen, to agent and plead it
before a Just Judge, can be wronged, or loss his Cause.

6ly. The grounds of his Intercession are, 1. The excellency of his person,
who, though he be man, yet is he God also, equal with the Father; the
brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person, and upholding all
things by the word of his power, As it is, Heb. 1.2. Which cannot but add
weight to his Intercession, as well as to his Satisfaction; the Person that
interceeds being God. The 2. is his Satisfaction; which is the ground of his
Intercession; for upon his Satisfaction he makes Intercession; even as if a
Cautioner would say, I have paid such a man's Debt, and therefore he ought to
be absolved; Therefore 1 John 2.1, 2. These two are joined, We have an advocat
with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: and, he is the propitiation for
our sins: So, Romans 8.34. They are joined, It Is Christ that died, who is at the
right hand of God, and makes intercession for us. 3. The Covenant of
Redemption is the great ground on which his Intercession is founded; Such and
such persons are given to Christ, and such privileges, and benefits offered to
be conferred upon them, on condition the Mediator would undertake, and satisfy
for them; and he having undertaken, and paid the price; there is good ground
for his interceeding, for the making application of the purchase; Therefore he
says, John 17. Thine they were, and thou gave them me, etc. This gives him
right to plead, and interceed for them; seeing he has endured Soul-travel for
them, he ought to see his Seed, and to have many Justified, and fred from the
curse and condemnation that they were obnoxious to; as the fruit of that sore
Soul-travel.

In, and from the consideration of these; we may gather what is the nature of
Christ's Intercession, and how we may make use of it: And how particularly we
should beware of a carnal mistake in many about his Intercession; as if he were
praying in heaven, as a distinct party from God; It Is true, he is a distinct
Person of the glorious Trinity, but not a distinct Party in interceeding, as
some ignorantly conceive of him; and therefore think him easier to have access
to then the Father; and therefore will pray him to pray the Father for them; as
if, when they prayed to him, they were not praying to the Father; or as if
there were not on object of Worship; This flows from ignorance of the nature of
Christ's Intercession* and ^s unbecoming a Christian; for supposing ^ man to
rest by Faith on Christ, the Father is content, and well pleased to pardon him,
as well as the Son is, because he is engaged in the Covenant of Redemption so
to do; and if he be not a Believer neither the Father nor the Son will respect
him; our use making of Christ's Intercession does consist rather in the founding
of our hope of speeding with God on it, as on his Satisfaction; then inputing
up words of prayer to him, to interceed for us; as if he were to pray in
heaven, as ^e did on earth; or as one man interceeds for another; The point is
sublimly spiritual, and some way tickle; and I indeed fear to enter on more
Uses, at least for the time, only remember, that he is an Intercessour; And
learn to make right use of him, as an Intercessour; And the Lord himself make
the benefit of his Intercession forthcoming to us.

SERMON LXVI.
ISAIAH LIII.XII. Verse 12. -- And he made intercession for the transgressors.


IF Christ were known in the greatness and vast extent of his worth, O! how
lovely would he be? How incomprehensibly full are his Offices of grounds of
consolation to his people? But the mean and low thoughts we have of him; and
the poor consolation we feed on, do evidence much ignorance of him, and much
unbelief of the solid worth and fullness that is in him, and in his Priestly
Office in particular; and yet, O! how full of consolation is it? Such a high
Priest became us, Heb. 7.26. Even such a High Priest ^s Sinners had need of:
There has been much spoken of one part of his Priesthood, to wit, his
Sacrifice, and offering up of himself, in the former verses of this Chapter;
Now ere the Prophet close, he gives a hint of the other part of his Priestly
Office, to wit, of his Intercession, a main commendation of Christ's fullness;
It Is that which evidenceth him to be a Savior, able to save to the uttermost
such as come unto God through him; because he lives for ever to make
intercession for them: as it is, Heb. 5.25. And it is a piece of the consolation
of Gods People, that Jesus Christ has this Office by the Fathers allowance;
and that it is Articled in the Covenant of Redemption betwixt the Father and
him; That as he shall pour out his soul unto death, be numbered with
transgressors, bear the sins of many: So he shall make intercession for the
transgressors: Therefore, Heb. 7.21. He is said to be made an high Priest with
an oath, by him that said unto him, Psalm. 110.4. The Lord swear, and will not
repent; thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melhisedeck: He was a
Priest on earth by offering himself in a Sacrifice, and by interceeding for
Elect Sinners, and he is a Priest in heaven by his Intercession; and therefore
is preferred to all the Priests on earth, Who did not continue by reason of
death; but he continues for ever; and none can start him wrong, to speak so
with reverence of him.

We show in our entering on this verse, that this his intercession is not to be
a stricted to his prayer on the Cross; that was but an evidence, or particular
instance of it, but it tak^s in his whole Intercession: Because the Scope of
the Prophet here is to hold out, as what God promised to him on the one hand in
the Covenant of Redemption, so on the other what he interceeds for; and so his
Intercession looked on in the Covenant of Redemption, takes in his whole
Intercession, especially as it is gone about in heaven, by virtue of his
Sacrifice once for all offered up when he was on earth.

We Observed the last day, That according to the Covenant of Redemption, our
Lord Jesus Christ behoved not only to die, but to be an Intercessour, or that
it belongs to our Lords Priestly Office, agreed upon in the Covenant of
Redemption, not only to offer up himself in a Sacrifice, and to die, but to
make intercession for his people; He made intercession for the transgressors:
or as all the rest may be read in the future time, so this; He shall make
intercession for the transgressors; but for the certainty of the thing, it is
set down in the preterit, or bypast time, The Father did take his word, and so
it past as done in the Court of Heaven.

We cleared this point, and proposed Four Uses of it, The First whereof was to
inform u^ anent Christ's fullness, to discover his insearchable riches, and to
let us see what an excellent high Priest we have, that continues an
Intercessour: Not only has he once for all offered up his Sacrifice, as the
high Priest under the Law did once a year, but has entered within the vail to
interceed, and thereby to make the benefits of his purchase effectual, and
forthcoming to them, for whom his Sacrifi^e was offered: Even as Levit. 16.
(where the rules for the high Priests offering are given) after he had offered
the Sacrifice, he took the blood and entered within the vail, and by the
Sacrifice, and his going in to pray, he made atonement for the People
typically; answerable to this, our Lord Jesus, by his once offering has
perfected for ever these who are sanctified: and by his going within the vail,
he executes this part of his Priestly Office, in interceeding for transgressors.

In prosecuting this Use, we answered some Questions, which now we shall not
insist to repeat: Only there is a short Question or two, that further may be
asked (which will clear the former ere we go to the next Use, And the 1. is, if
our Lord before he came in the flesh, discharged this part of his priestly
Office? The reason of the question or doubt is, because in the new Testament
his intercession is always, at least very ordinary, subjoyned to his
Ascension. The 2d. is, How his Intercession now difers from his Intercession
before his Incarnation, or in what respects the consolation of Believers, that
flows from his intercession is stronger now, then the consolation of Believer^
flowing there from was before he was Incarnat? As for the First, It cannot be
denied, but Christ was Intercessour since he had a Church in the World, for
it is a part of his priestly Office, and he was made a Priest, by the eternal
oath, in the Covenant of Redemption, Psalm. 110.4. The Lord has sworn and will
not repent, thou art a Priest for ever: And hels said to have an unchangable
Priesthood; And there being but one way of access for Sinners to Heaven, by
Christ, who is called the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world; it must
be holden for a sure conclusion, that his Intercession is as old as his
S^crifice; And he was intercessour before his Incarnation in these three
respects. 1. In respect of his Office, being designed to be Intercessour; For
(as we said) being designed to be Priest, and being Mediator before his
Incarnation, he behoved to be Intercessour also: For that way he did Mediat,
and the benefits that came to Sinners from the beginning, were the effects of
his Intercession: Therefore 1 Timothy 2.5 It Is said, There is one God, and one
Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, and there was never another
real Mediator, however Moses might be called a typical one. 2. He was
Intercessour before his Incarnation, in respect of the merit of his future
Sacrifice: He did not before his Incarnation Interceed by virtue of his
Sacrifice actually offered, as now he does yet there was virtue which flowed
from his Sacrifice to be offered, to the people of God, as well then as now,
when it has been long since offered: The Sins of all that ever were pardoned,
were pardoned on the account of his S^crifice: And so also the spiritual
benefits that did redound to them, did redound to them through his Intercession
then, as now, by virtue of the same Sacrifice, because of the nature of the
Covenant, wherein it was agreed, that his Sacrifice should be of the same
efficacy before his Incarnation, as after: For the day and hour was agreed
upon, when he should offer that Sacrifice, Therefore it is said, that in due
time, and in t^^ fullness of time, he came and died. 3. He was Intercessour
before his Incarnation, ^s after it, in respect of the effects that followed on
it, to the People of God, then and now: The People of God before his
Incarnation had communion with God, and access to him; though not generally, in
that degree of boldness, they presented their Prayers through, and were
beholden to the some Christ, for a hearing, as we are; and therefore, his
Intercession, before his Incarnation extended to them, as to us in these
respects, but with this difference that he procured these benefits to them by
virtue of the Covenant, and the efficaca^ of his blood to be offered; and now
he procures them to his People since his Incarnation and ascension, by virtue
of the same ascension, and by virtue of the efficacy of his blood offered.

As to the 2d. How his Mediation, and Intercession now differs since his
ascension, from his Intercession before it, as to the strengthening of the
consolation of the people of God? For answer, 1. We lay down this for a
conclusion; That though our Lord Jesus was Mediator both before his
Incarnation, and now, yet since his ascension, he has a new way of Mediation,
and Intercession, that exceedingly abounds to the strengthening of the
consolation of his People: therefore it is ordinarily subjoyned to his ascension,
because of his new manner of discharging that his Office; It is time, there is
no addition to that grace which is infinite in him, as if he could be more
gracious, or as if, in respect of the Covenant, there could be larger promises,
as to essential things contained therein; but by taking on our nature, he has
a new way of being affected, and a new way of venting his affection to us; and
is capable of another manner of touch with the infirmities of his people now,
that he has humane bowels, though glorified, and glorious; and the Faith of
his People has a ground super^dded, whereupon to expect the communication of
that grace, mercy, and goodness that is in him; though all the effects that
followed to his people, before his Incarnation, had respect to his future
Incarnation; So these effects had respect to his future Intercession, in our
nature, as well as to his dying, and laying down of the price; for these that
were admitted to heaven ere he came in the Flesh, were admitted the same way
that we are.

But, 2dly, and more particularly, if it be asked wherein this addition to the
consolation of God's People, by his Intercession, after his Ascension kythes,
or manifests it self? We may take it up in these Six steps, which will also
serve to illustrat the manner of his interceeding. 1. It kythes in this, That
he appears in heaven in our nature; now the man Christ is in heaven
interceeding, and as Advocat, answering for pursued Sinners, or as Ambassador,
and Legate agenting the affairs of them that are given to him of the Father, as
it is, Heb. 9.24. He is not entered into the holy places made with hands, but
into heaven it self, to appear now in the presence of God for us: Where the
Apostle having been speaking of the excellency of his Priesthood before; and
comparing him with the Type; he tells that he is not entered into the typical
tabernacle, but into heaven it self, to appear there in the presence of God for
us; And this is a solid ground of consolation to a poor believing Sinner, that
he has Christ in his own nature in heaven, interceeding, that what he
performed before, by virtue of his Office and of the efficacy of his Sacrifice,
to be offered, when he should be incarnat; He now being incarnat, and ascended
performs it; we having God in our nature become a man like unto us; to care for
the things of his people; and if any new question arise, or debate be started,
to entertain the treaty, and to effectuat, and make out their business, that
nothing that concerns them misgive. 2. Their consolation is stronger in this
respect, That he is in heaven, by virtue of the efficacy of his Sacrifice
already offered; As the High Priest, when he had offered the Sacrifice, took
the blood with him within the vall, and interceeded for the people: So our Lord
Jesus is not now interceeding by virtue of his Sacrifice to be offered, but by
virtue of his Sacrifice already offered; having entered into heaven, and taken
the efficacy of his Sacrifice with him, to enter it (to speak so) in the book
of God, to stand on record; nay he stands there himself, to keep the memory
of his blood fresh; and by each appearance of him there, who is never out of
the sight of the Majesty of God; there is still a representation of the worth
and efficacy of his Sacrifice, and for whom, and for what it was offered. 3.
There is by the man Christ his being in heaven, this ground of consolation
supperadded, That he has a sympathy with Sinners, otherwise then before, not
as to the degree, nor as to the intensness of his grace and mercy, (as I hinted
before) but as to the manner how he is affected; so he has the true nature,
and sinless affection of a man; and so has bowels to be wrought upon, which
kythed while he was on earth; although we cannot take up the manner how he is
touched, yet he is touched otherwise then God abstractly considered can be:
and otherways then an angel in heaven can be touched: as we may see, Heb. 2.17.
and 4.15. We have not an high priest, which cannot be touched with the feeling
of our infirmities, but was in all things tempted as we are, yet without sin:
And it behoved him to be like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful,
and faithful High Priest, and have compassion on the ignorant, and them that
are out of the way: He is Sinners friend, that is Intercessour; and such an
Intercessour, that interceeds from the impression that the holy, and
inconceivable sympathy which he has with his members, has upon him; as his
expression to Paul speaks forth, Act. 9. Saul, Saul why persecuts thou me,
counting himself a suff^rer with his people, which cannot but have it is own
influence on his Intercession, and add to the consolation of his People; that
what he interceeds for the procurement of to them; is some way on this ground,
as being a favor to their glorified head. 4. Beside this sympathy he has a
longing (to speak so) to have all the wants and d^fects of his people supplied,
and made up; and to have all the promises made to him, in behalf of the Elect
fulfilled: Not any such longing, as may in the least incroach on, or be
inconsistent with the glory, and glorified state of our blessed Lord Jesus; but
considering, that there is a near relation betwixt him and his followrs, he
being the head, and they the members, and that he has a sympathy and affection
according to that relation: It is answerable, and suitable that he should
desire, and some way long for the perfyting of his body the Church, which
Ephesians. 1. is called The fullness of him who fills all in all; And he has no
question, though a most pure and regular, yet a most kindly and strong desire,
and longing to have his Body perfyted, to have the Elect gathered and brought
in: As he had on earth a longing to have the work finished, which was given him
to do: And this cannot but be a weighty part of his Intercession, and very
comfortable to his people; his longing to have such and such a person
converted, such and such a person more mortified, and more perfyted, and made
more confirm to him: There is a word, Heb. 10.13. that gives ground for this,
From henceforth expecting till all his enemies be made his footstool: And what
is spoken of this expecting of what is there mentioned, may be applied to other
things; He is sure expecting till all these promises concerning his seeing of a
Seed, and the justifying and glorifying of many be fulfilled; because that was
promised him in the former verse: and expecting till he divide the spoil with
the strong, as is promised in the former part of this verse; Now our Lord Jesus
having laid down his Life, what is he doing in heaven? even longing till these
promises be fulfilled; Not that he has any longing that implies a defect in
him simply; for he is absoutly glorified, and gloriou^; yet such longing as is
consistent with his glorified state, as (if we may make the comparison, though
in every thing it be not suitable) the Souls in heaven are perfytly glorified,
yet they have a longing for the union of their bodies, for the perfyting of
Christ's body mystical, and for the union of all the members in a Soul and Body
with the head; So Christ considered as Mediator, God-man in heaven has a
longing and holy desire which agrees with his Office, and is a qualification
thereof, and does no ways interrupt his happiness, that what concerns his
Elect may be perfyted; Therefore it is said in the verse before, He shall see of
the travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied: importing that it is a kind of
new satisfaction to him, to get a Sinner brought in to believe in him, and that
he was waiting and longing for it. 5. He has an actual willing, and continuing
desire, that what he has purchased to such and such persons may be applied:
And this is not simply to will, for he had that on earth but a declaring of it
in heaven; that such and such things may be forth coming, and made effectual
for the behove of his members, that what he intended, in laying down his life,
may be brought to pass: It Is the Mediator God-man willing; whose will, as man,
being perfytely conform to the will of God, cannot be (to speak so) gainsaid in
whatsoever he wills for the persons given him, and this is answerable to
that, John 17.24. Father, I will that these whom thou have given me, may be
with me, where I am, etc. I will that such and such things engaged to me for
them may be made good, That such and such persons be pardoned and brought
through, that they may be preserved from tentation, may have their prayers
heard, that they may be made to persevere, and may be glorified; So that we
cannot imagine a case wherein Gods People have need, and a promise in the
Covenant, but there is an actual willingness in Christ to have the need suppl
ed, and the promise applied, according to the terms of the Covenant. 6. We may
take in here, not only Christ's willing that such a thing be done, but his
effectual doing of it; And as this is a piece of his Intercession, so it holds
him forth to be a notable. Intercessour; compare John 14.13.16.26. and 15.26
and 67. In the 14. Chap. verse 13. he says, Whatsoever ye ask in my name I
will do; which we suppose respects Christ as Mediator, to be trusted as great
Lo d D^puty in our nature, to answer the prayers of his People, when put up
according to the will of God: The 16. Chap. verse 26. Speaks of the Fathers
sending the Comforter, and Chap. 15.26. Of the Mediators sending the Comforter,
So does Chap. 16.7. In one place it is, What ye ask I will do, and in another
place it is, that the Father will do; It Is all one, but it is to show, that
what the Father does, he will do it by the Son the Mediator, and he will actually
perform it; And these three expressions, I will pray the Father, And I will
send, and the Father shall send, hold out this, That as the Father does by the
Son, so that this is a part of Christ's intercession, effectually to procure and
send out to us, what we have need of. 7. In all this there is in the Men
Christ, an adoration of the Father, which, though it be not such as is
unsuitable to his exalted and glorified state, yet is it becoming well him that
is Man, and in that respect, is at his right hand, to give to God: I shall only
say further here, that though we cannot tell how he interceeds to satisfy our
selves fully, yet this is clearly held forth to us, that whatsoever is needful,
by his being in heaven we may confidently expect it will be performed from the
man Christ, from him who is God-man in one Person; and so his Intercession with
the Father is his actual procuring, and doing such a thing, and that not as God
simply, but as Mediator; Therefore these two words are put in the forecited
expressions, Whatsoever ye ask in my name, I will do it, that the Father may be
glorified in the Son, and wh^m the Father will send in my name: That is by
virtue of my procurement, by virtue of my Sacrifice and Intercession; and the
sending of the Comforter, shows that it is performed by him that is God-man,
out of the respect he has to his members, and on the account of his Office,
which he pursues for their edification; And so there is enough to answer the
question, and abounding consolation to his people, which is the next Ufe.

Use, 2. To show the notable consolatioon that flows from this part of Christ's
Office: O! What savourinesse, and unsearchable riches are in this part of his
name? That our Lord Jesus, as Intercessour, appears in the presence of God for
us; We shall speak here to these Five things. 1. Wherein this is comfortable,
or to the extent of it. 2. To the advantages that follow on it. 3. To the
grounds of this consolation which are confirmations of it. 4. To this, at what
times, and particular occasions the People of God may, and ought in a special
manner to make use of, and comfort themselves in it: And 5. on what terms this
consolation is allowed, that they grow not vain, and proud of it.

For the First, Our Lords Intercession gives a Fourfold extent of consolation,
that makes it wonderful. 1. In it is universality, as to the persons to whom
it is extended; Not indeed to all men in the World, but to all that will make
use of it; And though it were simply of universal extent to all men in the
world, yet it would comfort none, but such as made use of it: And that vanity
of the Arminians, that extends Christ's Death, and Intercession to all can truly
say no more for so in comfort; for they are forced to say that Christ died, and
intended his death for many that will never get good of him, but we say all
that he intended should get good of his death, do get the intended good of it;
yea, we say, that whoever will make use of him, shall get good both of his
Death, and of his Intercession; So, Heb. 7.25. He is able to save to the
uttermost, all that come unto God through him; Though the cause seemed to be
desperate, and the sentence pronounced; Cursed is he that continues not in all
things written in the law, yet he is able to save them, Therefore, 1 John 2.2.
It Is said, If any man sin: O! strange word, We have an Advocat, what, an
Advocat for any man? yea, for any man that will make use of him: For as we show
before, though it is true that his Intercession is bounded to his Elect, yet
it is as true, that he refuses no cause that is honestly given him to plead; If
any man sin, we have an advocat: He will not say to such poor Souls, I will not
be for you, I have done all that I may, but it is gone against me; neither will
he prig (to say so) with you, he will not say, I will have this or that ere I
undertake your cause for you; but if any man sin, If any man see his need, and
will employ him; whether he be a great man, or mean man, whether he be poor or
rich, bound or free; whether he be an old sinner that his lived long in
security, hypocrisy or prophanity, or be a sitten up professor, whether he be
young or old; If any of you all that are here will come to him, he will not
refuse to be employed by you: By him therefore (as the Apostle exhorts, Heb.
1^.15.) let us offer praise to God continually: And as praise, so the
sacrifices of other duties, and they shall be accepted; as the offer o^ the
Gospel runs on an universality, and excludes none, but these, that by their
unbelief, exclude themselves: So his Intercession runs on an universality, If
any man sin, and will employ him he is an Advocat at hand: And seeing it is
Christ, and Christ as Intercessour for transgressors, that we are speaking of,
as the ground of Sinners consolation; let me in passing desire you to remember,
that he is pointing at you, men and women; and if there be any of you, that
have a broken cause to plead, any debt that ye would fain be fred of, any Sin
to be pardoned, or your peace to be made with God; here is an Advocat, and the
very best, offering himself to be employed: Such an Advocat, as said John 11. I
thank thee Father, for that I know thou hear me always: This was true while
he was on earth, and will be true to the end of the world. 2. The extent of
this consolation appears in respect of all cases, as his Intercession secluds
no person, that will make use of him, so it secluds no case, though it looked
like a lost cause, and though the conscience had pronunced the Sentence, God is
greater then the Conscience, and can louse from it, though the Act were past in
the Law; he can cancel it: And here comes in the triumph, Romans 8.33, 34. Who
shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? it is God that justifies; Will
the Devil, the Law, the Conscience, or any thing lay ought to the charge of the
man whom God justifies? No, why so? It is Christ that died: But that is not
all, alas! may the Soul say, How will I get good of Christ's death? I cannot
apply it, and make use of it, He answers that; He is also risen again, and
sitten down at the right hand of God, and there makes intercession for us; to
wit, that his purchase may be applied, and there needs no more, ye will get no
more, ye can seek no more, and that closes the triumph. There is no sin before,
nor after Conversion, no sin of ignorance, no sin against light, no enemy, no
tentation, whatever it be, but that word answers all; Who can lay any thing to
the charge of Gods elect? Where Christ takes the sinners case in hand, who will
stand up against him, he is too strong a party; If Satan stand at the High
Priests hand, it is the Lord that rebukes him; Zach. 3. That as it were boasts
him from the bar. 3. The extent of this consolation appears, in respect of the
degree, and hight of the perfection of the Salvation that comes by Christ's
Intercession, to all that make use of him in all cases: Heb. 7.25. He is able
to save to the uttermost: The word is very significant, he is able to save
perfectly, to perfection, and to perfection at the hight of perfection; and
what more would ye be at? He can save from corruption, and put without the
reach of it; He can save from wrath, that it shall not come near you, He can
save from all the effects of sin and wrath; He shall not leave a tear on the
cheek of any of his own ere all be done; and that is the ground of it, For he
lives for ever, to make intercession for us: If any should say, he may save
from one sin, but not from another, or he may bring me a piece of the way to
heaven, and then leave me there; It Is folly says the Apostle, to think to; For
he is able to save to the uttermost, because he lives for ever to make
intercession: Although his death seem to be transient, once for all perfyted,
yet that cannot mar the application of the benefits purchased by it; For he is
Intercessour; and he that procured thy entering in the way, will carry the on in
it; he that procured a sa^tified conviction to come in, will through it; h^
that procured thy justification, and pardon of sin, will also apply it to thy
conscience, and bring forth an intimation of it, when he thinks fit, and
sanctify thee thoroughly; and this is indeed great consolation to a sinner,
that he who has begun the work will perfyt it, and he will not leave it, till
it be at such a hight of perfection, as it can be desired to be no higher. 4.
The extent of this consolation is such, that it reaches to all times: There it
is not a Believer in any place or case, that is wrestling with any difficulty,
that can come wrong to Christ: He is ever in readiness to be employed: There
is never an hour nor moment that he has his door shu, He died once, but now
lives for ever, to die no more, and he lives for ever to make Intercession, he
is entered into immortality, to make effectual, what he has undertaken in
favors of his people; He is always at the Bar; and when his own are but little
employing him, he is minding their affairs night and day, watching over them
every moment: See Luke 22. where the Lord says, Peter, satan has sought to
winnow you, but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not: Satan gave in
a Bill against Peter, when he had no mind of it, but the Lord repelled it, The
greatest cheat, or the most subtle adversary, that steals out Decreets cannot
circumveen him, He is still waiting on at the Ear, that nothing come in against
his people to their prejudice; and if it do come in it is that he may crushit in
the first motion: O! how does the consolation of Believers stream out here? He
will not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard on high; a bruised
reed will he not break, and the smoking flax will be not quench, until he
bring forth judgment unto truth: He will not contend, nor say, man or woman,
how is this, that thou have put thy self in the mire, and would have me to take
thee out of it, that thou brings a broken Plea to me, and seeks of me to right
it? He will not ask whether ye have money, all his employment is free; nor will
he put you back till the morrow, nor bid you wait on till another time, morning
and evening, and at midnight he is ready; and when the Elect Sinner has little
thought, He is watching over his need preventing many tentations, keeping from
many ill turns, casting many challenges over the Bar, that the Devil, and the
Law put in: Therefore study his Offices more, and this among the rest, we much
wrong him, in not studying of them, and acquainting our selves with them, that
we may feed upon them; himself open up his name to us, and to him be praise.

SERMON LXVII.
ISAIAH LIII.XII. Verse. 12. -- And made intercession for the transgressors.


O! That Sinners were seriously considering how much they are obliged to
Christ; He has in the former words Poured out his soul unto death, for
Sinners, and was wounded for transgressors, and yet that was not all, though
Sin was our Lords death, he has not casten out with Sinners, but having gotten
the Victory over all enemies, and sitten down at the right hand of God; He
makes intercession, and to make it the more full; It Is said, He makes
intercession for transgressors: All his Offices have an eye to Sin, and
Sinners, and this part of his Office among others.

We began to speak of an Use of comfort that flows from this; and truly, if any
Doctrine be comfortable this is; That Sinners have an Advocat with the Father;
what would Sinners do, when their peace is broken, and there is a door shut
betwixt God and them, and his back is turned on them, and the Concisence is
wakened, and they cannot think on God but it is troublesome to them, if they had
not a friend in Court, with whom the Father cannot but be well pleased?

This Consolation being a main part of the use of this Doctrine, and the ground
of Believers boldness with God: In the following of it forth, we proposed Five
things to be spoken to. 1. To show the largeness and extent of the consolation
that flows from this ground, and of this we spoke. 2. The particular advantages
that the Scripture attributs to Christ's Intercession, and the consolation that
is in them. 3. The particular times, when especially Believers are called to
make use of this consolation. 4. Some grounds warranding them to make use of
it. and 5. Some caveats, or advertisements to them that would warrantably
comfort themselves from it.

To proceed now, and to speak to these last Four things. 1. The particular
advantages that the Scriptures attribut to Christ's Intercession, and if we look
through them, we will find that there is nothing, that may be useful to a
Believer, either as to a particular or public mercy, but it is knit to Christ's
Intercession.

1. For private mercies. 1. Look to the beginning and growth of our spiritual
life, and to the pouring out of the spirit, It is made the fruit of Christ's
Intercession, John 14.16 I will pray the father, and he shall send the
comforter: and John 16. If I go not away the comforter will not come: This is
the Consolation of a Believer laboring under deadness of spirit, barrenness,
and unfruitfulness, That the pouring out of the spirit, is a remedy of that,
and the pouring out of the Spirit is a fruit of Christ's Intercession; It Is this
that procures the first conviction of the spirit to an elect lying in nature;
It Is this that continues there convictions, and procures the spirits quickening
of them, John 16.8. If it should then be asked, how a person lying in black
nature gets any good? It Is answered, that it is Christ's Intercession that does
the turn, 2. I^'s from Christ's Interc^ssion tha^ (...) kept from many (...),
or when they asault, tha^ they prevail not ut^erly over us; The Devil lye^
always a^ the wa^ and we are often secure; but our Lord Je^us, (to say so)
watch ^n the stor, or rebound of the tentation, and (...) it off as to the
designed prejudice, Luke 22 32. Simon, Simon, Satan has desired that he may
have you, that h^ may winnow you but I have prayed for thee, that thy says
fail not: There are many tentations that he keeps off; that they beat not on
us, and when they assault us, he breaks the power of them, tha the Believer
succumbs not under them; Hence it is, that we are kept on our feet otherwise
what would become of us? when David fell in adultery, and Peter denied his
Master, what would have become of them, had it not been for this? there would
be no living for us, in the multitude of tentations, if he were not
interceeding for us; what could we forsee of Satan's snars? what strength have
weak and witless we to resist tentations? what could we do with the spear of
corruption, when it rises like a flood, upon us, and Satan inforceth his
assaults upon us, a if he were speaking with man's voic^, or mouth, hiding us do
this and that? But there is an Intercessour that pleads our cause. 3. We have
by this Intercession the preventing of many Judgments temporal and spiritual;
when the ax is laid to the root of the tree, and it is found barren and ju^^ice
cries and the command comes out; Cut it down, why cumbers it the ground? How
comes it, that the ax strikes not? why is it not hewed down? There is an
efficacy in Christ's Intercession for paring of it a while longer, as it is,
Luke 13.6. The dresser of the vineyard says, spare it for this year; and it is
granted; O! but we would have a most sinful and miserable life, if there were
not an Intercessour at Gods right hand. 4. Disposition for duty, and help in
the performance of duty flows from his Intercession, It Is this that makes us
pray, and that gives us boldness in prayer, and in other duties, that there is
such an high Priest over the house of God, as it is, Heb. 10.19, 20.21. I^'s
this that gives us ground of approaching to God, and to expect a hearing: and
as it is Luke 13.7, 8. It is his digging and pains that makes the barren fig
tree fruit^ul. 5 It flows from this, that our prayers are heard, though there
be much I firm^^ in them; and that they are not call back in our ^aces as dung,
but are made s voury to Go^; it is through the efficacy of his Intercession; We
have a type of his, Revel. 8.4, 5. where John sees an Angel come and ^and at
the Altar, having a golden censer, and there was given unto him much incense,
that he should offer it up, with the prayers of all faints, and the smoke of
the incense which came up, with the prayers of the s^ints, ascended up before
God: It was savoury and acceptable to God and made the prayers of all Saints
accepta^le, for the weight of Gods accepting their prayers is laid on the smoke
of his incense; It Is he that takes the ^^^gled, and half prayers of his
People, and presents them to God: and when they would be cast back, as the
supplication of an enemy, He as great Master of R^quists through the
acceptance that he has with God, makes them acceptable; We should have no
ground to pray with confidence, nor acceptance to be heard, if there were not
a golden censer in his hand. 6. We have from his Intercession, an answer to all
challenges: There is much debt on our score, the Law pursues h^rd, and curses
us for our habitual enimity, and all the particular Acts of it and his
Intercession is the last defense, on which the triumph of Faith rises, by the
other step^ Rom 8 43. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? Is
it because they want a change? No, for there is the Devil, the Law, and the
Conscience to charge them But it is God that justifies, who shall condemn? It Is
Christ that died, yea, rather is risen again, who is at the right hand of God,
and makes intercession for us: We have a high Priest there, that has paid
our Debt, and pleads that the application of his purchase may be made
forthcoming; and, who I pray, will lay any thing to our charge in that Court,
where God is Judge, and Christ is Advocat? 7. More particularly, our Lord, by
his Intercession, takes away the guilt of our holy things, for when we
approach to God in worship, there is a carnalness, and pollutedness in the best
things we do, much irreverence, much unbelief, much want of humility, zeal,
sincerity, and tenderness; So that all our righteousnesses are but as filthy
rags: But the high Priest, Exodus 28.38. has on his forehead, Holiness to the
Lord: And his O^^ce is, to bear the iniquity of the holy things of the
children of Israel that they may be accepted before the Lord; and in this he
was a Type of Christ the great high Priest going in unto Heaven, to make
Intercession for his People; who bears not on^y their iniq^^ties, but the
iniquity of their holy t^in^s; Aaron answers for them, as the Type, Our Lord
Jesus as the anti-r^pe, He being em^nently holiness to the Lord: and having
holiness on his forehead: and being so well pleasing to the Father, however our
prayers, an^ praises, and other parts of service, be but little worth, ye^ he
makes them acceptable, and procures that they be not rejected, when he is, for
this end employed, and made use of. 8. We will find that strength to bear
through under a Cross, and a good o^tgate from under the cross comes from him
as Intercessour; O! so advertant as he is, when his own are under the cross;
his bowels are then moved, though not as they were on earth, yet certainly they
want not their own holy motion, suitable to the glorious estate whereunto he is
exalted: Therefore, Acts 9. He cries from Heaven, Saul, Saul why persecuts thou
me? And Stephen, when a stoning to death, sees him standing at the right hand
of God, executing this part of his Priestly O^^ice; One part whereof, is to
keep off a cross, and another part whereof is to help to get it honorably
born, and to a victory over it. 9. Our perseverance in the Faith, and perfect
glorification is a fruit of Christ's Intercession, so that his own cannot but
persevere and be glorified because he interceeds for them; This is it that is
spoken to several times, John 17. especially verses 15. and 24. In the 15. v. I
pray for them that they may be kept from the evil* He prays for them, that
they may be kept from the evil of sin especially; he prays for them that
they may be kept, that they fall nor from the truth: And v. 24. Father, I
will that these whom thou have given me, be where I am, to behold my glory:
That longing and eff^ctual desire and will of his, presented by him in heaven
is continuing still effectual for all the Saints in the Church militant; There
is ground of quie^nesse, an^ comfort from his Intercession; and by ver^ue of it
to have hope, that not only present but coming snares and tentations shall not
prevai^: Therefore the Apostle Romans 8.38. ^o his speaking of Christ's
Intercession, ^ubjo^nes his highest triumph, I am persuaded, that neither
death, nor life, principalities, nor p wers, things present nor things t^ come;
and because it is impossible to num^^r all things; h^ says, nor any other
creature shall be able to separat us from the love of God, which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord: Now, if all ^hese be put together, beside many more, that may be
gather^d from Scripture, what wants a Be^iever for his own private and
particular consolation, which this one word, That Christ is an intercessour,
does not answer?

But 2. There is not only consolation for a Believers particular condition from
this ground, but also in reference to the public case of Gods Church: Th^re
are Four things especially, that seem very he^^ to the Church, and public work
^f God; in reference to all which we will find consolation from this ground.
The 1. is the fear of a scarcity, or weakness of the pu^^ick Ministry; that
being the great gift which he has given, for the edifying of hi^ body, and it
being a prejudice to the Church, when she has not Pastors, according to Gods
own heart: But compare Psalm. 68 18. with Ephesians 4.8 12, 13, 14. and we will find
that his Intercession answers that fear; In the Psalm, it is said, Thou have
ascended on high, thou have led captivity captive* thou have received gifts for
men; which suppo^es his seeking of or making suite for them; or as the word is,
thou have received gifts in the man, that is, being in our nature, he procured
them: And, Ephesians. 4. It Is said, he gave gifts to men; and compare these Two
places with a Third; to wit, Acts 1.4. Where he bids his Apostles tarry at
Jerusalem till he send the promised spirit; and immediately, after his
ascension, as it is, Acts 2. He poured it out, which abode on them, in the
likness of cloven tongues of fire: It Is likewise said, John 11.39. That the
spirit was not given, for Jesus was not yet glorified; All which show an
influence that Christ's ascension has on the pouring out of the Spirit, and on
the gifts given to men, whether Ministers, or others: There is nothing amongst
men readily less cared for, then a Ministry; some would have none at all;
others would have them of such a stamp, as would please and humor them; But
our Lord ha^h received gifts to give unto men; And he that poured out such
gifts on the Apostles and others; ha^h what gifts he pleases, and sees needful
for his Churches edification yet to give; And that he gives such gifts to men,
that his people are not praying much for, whence is it, but from his
Intercession? Therefore, Revel. 1. we will find that he delights in this
property, as a piece of his spiritual state, and grand our, That he holds the
stars in his right hand: such is his respect to them, and his it is to dispose
of them. 2. It Is a greatly exercising difficulty to the Church of God; to
think of the mighty opposition that is made by enemies: Mahomet, Heathens,
Antichrist, false Brethren, threatening to swallow up the little flock, the
Church of Christ, which is like a bush burning with fire, and not consumed: But
for this there is a consolation in Christ's intercession; according to that
word, Heb. 10.13. He sat down on the right hand of God, from henceforth
expecting, till his enemies be made his footstool; He has this for his suite
at the Fathers Bar, and is backing it; upon this it followed, and as a fruit of
it, that all the first persecutions were broken; On this it has come to pass,
that Antichrists kingdom is tottering; and it is on this ground, that his
bearing down, and utter breaking wi l be accomplished; Hence it is most
emphatically said, 1 Cor. 15.24. That He must reign till he has put all
enemies under his feet: According to the promise made by Jehovah to him, Psalm.
110. 1. The Lord said to my Lord, sit on my right hand, till I make thine
enemies thy footstool: He cannot be an Intercessour, but his enemies must down;
For who, I pray, will be able to stand, when he gives in his complaint against
them? who will plead Antichrists, and other persecutors cause when he appears
against them? and he is so certain of his enemies being m^de his footstool,
that he is waiting till he see it done; he must reign till then, maugre all the
malice and might of Devils, and Men.

3. It Is a difficulty to the Church and people of God, to think on such great
confusions as are in the world; there are but few Judicatories that are for
Christ; but few Governors higher or lower that do consult his honor or regard
him; It Is others that have the Throne and Court, and the guiding of things,
th^^ friends and f^vourers of his interest, for most part; But here the
consolation lies; that there is a Court in Heaven that gives out orders, where
the Church has an Agent constantly lying; where the Devil and the World has
none: Jesus Christ is the Churches Agent, and Intercessour there: Daniel Chap.
10.13. Has a word to this purpose; The prince of the kingdom of Persia
withstood me one and twenty days, but Michael the chief prince came to help
me: And v. 21. There is none in all the court of Persia that holds with me in
these things, but Michael your Prince: The great Intercessour was at Court,
looking that nothing went wrong, seeing that no decree were past to the
prejudice of the people of God, and his work; in the time when they were
building the Temple, He, Zech. 6.13. is said to build the temple of the Lord,
to bear the glory, and to be a Priest, sitting and ruling on his throne; having
the government committed to him; what hazard then is there here, when heaven
guids all, when the Church has an Agent at the Court to see (as I said) that
nothing go wrong, when Michael the Prince is there, and sees all the Acts and
Decrees of the Court, and reads them, yea draws them, and looks well that
there be nothing in them hurtful to his Church: And, O! may we not, and should
we not thank God for this? 4. A Fourth thing that troubles the Church of God,
is the abounding of offenses in her self, and the spreading of error, which
like a flood threateneth to drown the Church; and great stormy winds come, that
are like to blow down the house of God; offenses and stumblings abound; and
error which (I just now said) as a flood is like to drown all, when the Devil
is put from the Throne, and gets not violence ^cted, he turns about, and
falls on another wa^, and ^pe^^s out this flood of error, to devour the
Woman and her Child; But our Lord has a voce here also: After the persecution
of the Heathens is over, Revel. 7.1, 2. John sees an Angel ascending from the
east, the great Lord Keeper, or Chancellor of the Fathers Council; the supreme
Deputy over all un^er Officers, that has the keeping of the great Seal of the
living God, and there is nothing relevant, nor valid till it be sealed by him;
And mark the time when he appears: It Is when the winds are holden, and ready to
blow, as v. 1. but he cries with a loud voice, Hurt not the earth, nor the sea,
nor the trees, till we have sealed the Servants of God in the foreheads: Stay,
says he, a little; ere these winds blow, that will take the most part off
their feet, ere that delusion go forward, there are some servants of God that
must be marked; and put without the reach of the hazard; and then the wind
shall get leave to blow: what reason then of anxiety is there, or could be
here, if the solid, and lively faith of this Intercessour, and Advocat, his
being in heaven, and thus interceeding, were in our hearts?

2dly. As to the particular times, and occasions when the people of God should
more especially make use of this ground of consolation, and comfort themselves
in it, (I speak not of Christ's Intercession simply, but of the consolation that
flows from It,) 1. In their most languid and lifeless conditions; when the body
of death comes in on them, like a wave of the Sea, and is ready as it were to
drown them; they ought to comfort themselves in this, that they have an
intercessour that can rebuke that; when tentation is violent, and a person
fears he be undone, he has a grip here to hold himself by: Jesus Christ is
intercessour; He prays that my graces sail not; That my Faith, and Patience be
not undone; that the Devil get not his will of me, the man would be desperate,
if he were not in heaven, and interceeding; but he gathers confidence from this
ground, and says, I shall not die, but live, and see the salvation of God; For
he is able to save to the uttermo^t all that come unto God through him: Seeing
he evee lives to make intercession for them: And therefore, although I cannot
win out of the grips of this tentation, yet he can rebuke it, and break the
force of it: And hence is that comfortable word, Heb. 2. last. For that he
himself suffered, and was tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted:
Sometimes it will not meet with Believers condition, that Christ suffered, but
this does; when he comes on and finds that he was tempted: It Is true, there was
no corruption in him, and tentations had no sinful influence on him, and the
more comfort to us; He is the stronger to overcome in us; yet he was set on and
assaulted by the tentation, he was tempted, and that is a consolation; when
Joshua the high Priest is in his duty, Zech. 3. And the Devil is at his right
hand to resist him, and mar him in it, and he can do, or say little himself, he
boasts him with authority from marring his servant in his work: A great
consolation it is, when the tentation is strong, and we weak; when the Devil is
violent, and we are dispairing to resist him; that there is a high Priest at
h^nd whole office is to do it. A 2d. time is, when challenges are very fresh,
when the charge of ones Debt given in, is long, and large, and the Law i^
severe in exacting, and Justice in pressing, and pressing hard, and the
conscience cannot deny, nor resist; and the man has nothing to pay his Debt,
and he ^s ike to be dragged to the Prison, and there is none to undertake for
him; There comes in that word, 1 John 2.1.2. I writ these things to you, that
ye sin not: I give ^oot a dispensation to sin, but if any (...) sin, we have an
Advocat with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: And this is the gr^^^d of
Paul's triumph so often mentioned, Romans 8.34. Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods elect? it is God that justifies, etc. Though the charge should
be given in, what is the matter,, there is a way to be fred of it, there is an
Advocat at the right hand of God in heaven, who became Cautioner for, and paid
the Elects Debt, and is now interceeding for them; and who can loss the cause
when he pleads it? and here he quiets, and comforts himself, giving a defiance
to challenges, and all that can be lybelled against him. A 3d. time and
occasion is, under a Cross-condition, when Christians have the world in their
tops, and their is confusion in public things, and there is darkness and
indistinctness in our private condition, It ought to comfort us, that we have
an Advocat in heaven, who pleads our cause, and will not despise the suite of
the poor and needy. A 4th. time is, when we our selves cannot interceed for our
selves, when we pray, but our prayers are much mangled, and little worth, and
we think shame to look upon them; we would then look on what account our
prayers are put up, If on the account of Christ's Intercession, a sigh, a groan,
a broken word, nay a breathing will be accepted; the Intercessour has his own
incense to perfume it with and it is accepted on the weight that it has from
him; and though our prayer, be but as the shadow of a prayer, if there be
honesty in it, it is a comfort, it will be accepted on that account; Whatsoever
ye shall ask the Father, in my name I will do: And Revel, 8. He accepts the
prayers of all Saints, the weakest as well as the best; for the best goes not
up but by his censer, and incense, and the weakest goes up that same way: And
there is in some respect, no distinction of Believers, and of their fervent, or
not fervent prayers there, if honest; the fervor of Christ's Intercession, and
the favor of his incense makes all go up, and be accepted; because the reason
of Gods hearing of our prayers is not in us; else he should hear none of them;
but it is in his intercession, which is of equal worth, and extent to all honest
prayers of sound Believers; He is able to save to the uttermost, all that come
unto God through him; though there be no ability nor worth in themselves;
because he lives for ever to make intercession for them; but the two last
things will clear this yet more.

3dly. Though this may seem strange like; yet it is true, if we consider the
grounds warranding us to make use of his Intercession, and to draw this
Consolation from it; And they are Four, 1. That his Intercession suppons a
defect in us, a libel and charge given in against us; else what needed we to
have an Advocat, and Intercess^ur? if our Plea were just and good as from our
selves we needed not one to undertake for us; the Judge would absolve us, but
the defects that are in us, give access to this part of his Office; which
supposes us to have infirmities, else we needed not an high Priest, if we were
like Adam in his innocence, for he needed not an Intercessour; and therefore in
the Text, it is for the transgress^urs that he makes Intercession; and 1 John
2.2. If any man sin, we have an advocat, etc. 2. All the weight of Christ's
Intercession, and the grounds whereon he pleads, are in himself; and therefore
none need to stand a back, because there is nothing in themselves; We have an
advocat with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the
propitiation; Christ has in him a fullness to pay the Debt himself, and he
pleads on that, and on nothing in the creature: He says not, let them be
pardoned, because they have not sin, nor because they have such and such
qualifications, but because I have been a propitiation for them, I have paid
their Debt; Therefore he is called the righteous, because he has reason for
that which he seeks. He has paid for what he seeks, and therefore it cannot
but be granted. 3. There is a freedom in the application of all, the
application is free Grace every way, and that is clear from the parable of the
barren fig tree; what could the tree say, when Justice pleaded it should be cut
down? There is nothing in it to procure a delay; but the Gardner stands up and
bids spare it, and he will take pains on it, and apply what is needful; causes
are not here cast back, because the party is poor, nor because he has much
Debt on his score; No, If any man sin he has an advocat, the thing is obtained
without money; and without price; would ye then have a Priest that suits you
well? ye shall have him, and have him freely; if ye employ him to undertake for
you, he will do it freely, and it is his honor so to do. 4. It Is free and
effectual, It cannot misgive; for who pleads? is it not the Son? before whom
pleads he? It Is before his own Father, who hears him always; for whom does
he plead? It Is for them who are the Fathers own Elect, and his also; Thine they
were, and thou gave them me; and all mine are thine, and thine are mine: It Is
for them whom the Father loves as well as he; wha^ does he seek and plead for?
for that which is covenanted; and he pleads for it, according to the terms of
the Covenant; Therefore it is sure, that though heaven and earth may be mixed,
and overturned, yet none can louse a link here; It Is impossible, but what he
interceeds for, he must obtain; and for whom he interceeds, he prevails, and
that is for all that employ him.

4ly. For Advertisement, or caveat; It may be asked here, may all comfort
themselves in Christ's Intercession? Some will think, that were good, but in
truth it would make the consolation of all unsure; Therefore there are Four
qualifications of a person that may, and only may warrantably take the
consolation whereof we have spoken 1. It Is a Person that has betaken himself
to Christ's satisfaction; for there are two parts of the Priestly Office, His
Satisfaction and his Intercession, and there is no dividing of them; nor making
use of them, but in the right order: First he satisfies, and then he
i^terceeds; and he must be taken, and m^^e use of in this order. 1. In his
Satisfaction to divine Justice, and it is on this ground that we must found our
righteousness, and plead for absolution, and who^ver have (...) thi^ (...) of
his ^^^faction may, (...) ^^^^selves in his (...) ^^^ed on his Satisfaction, 1
John (...) he interceeds, for these he is a (...), and he is a propitiation for
all who by (...) have betaken themselves to him; This is the very hinge of our
Consolation, (...) to take with our Debt, and to betake (...) selves to him,
according to the (...), lippening for salvation on that ground. (...). It Is
these who are essaying and practicing themselves in the duties of holiness,
wrestling with a body of death, and exercising themselves to Godliness, that
they may warrantably comfort themselves in Christ's Intercession; as Paul, who,
Romans 7. being put to it in the conflict with his corruption, comforts himself
thus; I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord: Though they be sorly harassed
with a corrupt nature, yet they may expect an outgate, through virtue of his
Intercession; Therefore, Revel. 8. Christ's incense (as I have often said) and
the Saints Prayers go, and go up, together; Laziness and security has not
this consolation, but if a person be praying, and be serious though weak in it,
he has an Advocat, who, when it comes to he asked, what shall be thought of
such an ones Sacrifice? pleads that it may be accepted. 3. It Is the person that
not only is aiming, and minting to do duty; but is denied to it, laying no
weight on it, disparing ever to get victory over corruption in his own
strength, or to come by the hearing of his prayers through any worth that is in
them, and not daring to step forward his alone; but leaving all he does at
Christ's feet, to make it acceptable; which leads to the 4th thing requisite,
(viz.) when persons, whether their doing and duties be of worth or not; Jesus
Christ is made by them the upshot of all; they lay weight on him to get them
done; and to get them accepted when they are done; and without him all would be
desperate in their esteem; this was typified in the peoples giving the
Sacrifices to the Priest to be offered, and though it were but two Turtle
doves, or two young Pigions, they were brought to the Priest, as well as other
Sacrifices: But such as consider not the enimity, and sinfulness that is in
themselves, and adventure to step into God without him, cannot lay claim to
this consolation; which runs always on this ground: Heb. 7.25. He is able to
save to the uttermost all that come unto God through him, Seeing he ever lives
to make intercession for them: Is there not then ground of Consolation here?
and such as there is reason to bestow a preaching upon it, to teach us how to
clear our selves in it, and make use of it, and how to cheer our selves in it;
Ye that seclude your selves from this Consolation; O! but ye spil and mar a
good life to your selves; and hazard your own cause, that will most certainly
go against you; because ye put it not in the right hand; which the Lord give
you wisdom to amend; and give us all the right use of this through Jesus Christ.

SERMON LXVIII.
ISAIAH LIII.XII. Verse 12. -- And made intercession for the transgressors.


IT were a very great Consolation, and a main furtherance in all Religion, to
get this solidly believed; That Christ Jesus, who is the express image of his
Fathers person, and the brightness of his glory, is now in heaven in our
nature, and has it for his work to be interceeding, and interceeding for
transgressors; we are every day reaping the good of this Intercession, in
reference to many evils that are kept off us, and in reference to many
mercies bestowed on us, that we pray not all, or but little for; and we come
never to hear a preaching, but we are beholden to it; it being a peculiar fruit
of his intercession that gifts are given to men, and that the Gospel is sent
through the earth; and if ever any get good of a Sermon, it is by virtue of
this Intercession; seeing he has said, that he will pray the Father, and that
he will send the comforter; and when ever we come to hear a preaching, there
would be (to say so) a revising of the thoughts of Christ's Intercession and a
stirring up of our selves to get the faith of it lively in it is exercise.

That which we spoke to the last day, was concerning the comfort that flows
from this, and indeed, if any Doctrine be comfortable, this must be
comfortable; that we have such a friend in the Court of Heaven, invested in
this office of an Advocat, and Intercessour for us.

Use 3. Of exhortation, seeing there is such an Office wherewith Jesus Christ is
invested, and such an Officer that bears this Office, to be an Advocat for
sinners; then sinners would be exhorted to learn to improve, and to make use of
this Advocat, and of his Office, since he has this Office of an Intercessour;
O! do not despise such a mercy, neglect not such an advantage, but learn to
make use of him, and in your worship applications to God to approach by, and
through him: The ground of this Use of exhortation is clear in the Words; and
from the nature of the thing; For if Christ Jesus bear these Offices, and if he
bear them for us, then sure we should improve them: If he be a King, we should
make use of him, for subduing sin in us; If a Prophet, we should improve that
Office, for attaining of Light, and saving Knowledge from him; And if he be a
Priest to sati^fie divine Justice, and to make intercession we should improve
both parts of that Office: The necessity of our improving Christ's Intercession
appears from this, if we consider in what terms we stand with God; have we any
boldness, or access of our selves? is not the door shut on us? and is there
not a stated controversy standing betwixt God and us? And have we any access
but by his moyen? The necessity of it is further clear, from the order that God
has laid down in the way of his Administration of grace; why, I pray, has he
appointed a Mediator, and Intercessour? is it not for good reason? even for the
consolation, and encouragement of sinners to draw near, who, if they be in
earnest, cannot but be affected with fear to approach unto God; and is it
possible to come unto God, and not by this door? and were it not ingratitude to
neglect it; seeing he has contrived this new and living way of access unto him?

But to descend to more particular discoursing of this matter, which is as
difficult a thing to speak of a right, and to practice suitably, as any part of
Religion; if especially he himself teach us not; for sometimes we will make use
of his Sacrifice and Satisfaction, when we know not how to make use of his
Intercession; For either we do all our alone, and misken the Intercessour; or
we will do nothing, and give it over as desperate, as if our business were
quite broken, and hopeless, and as if it were needless, or useless to lay any
weight on Christ's Intercession; And thus whether we apprehend our selves to be
in better, or in worse case, he is much miskent, and neglected: That therefore
we may the better know how to make use of Christ's Intercession; We shall, 1. in
the general, show what it is to improve it. 2 Speak to some particular cases
wherein it in a special manner is to be improven. 3. Satisfy and remove some
objections, or answer some questions that may be moved about it. 4. We shall
give some characters of one that is serious and tender, in improving of his
Intercession.

For the First, It is indeed a thing so difficult to improve Christ's
Intercession aright, that we cannot easily tell how to conceive of it, being a
considerable part of the mystery of Faith, to go to God by a Mediator, and
Intercessour; However, we shall 1. show some mistakes that are to be eshewed.
2. We shall show wherein it more properly consists; which is, in the exercise
of Faith in him, with respect to his Intercession; And 3. We shall illustrat it
by some similitudes, for the further making out of it. 1. Then, when we spoke
of improving Christ's Intercession, and of going to God by him, we would have
these mistakes eshewed. 1. Beware of thinking that there is a going to the
Mediator in a distinct, or in a different manner from what is, in going to God,
for he is God; or that we may go to God at one time, and to the Mediator at
another time; as if we would first speak a while to the Mediator, and then
speak to God, or would first make our moan to the Mediator to pacify God, and
when God were calmed to speak to him; as if he were to make moyen with God for
us, as a Courti^r makes moyen with the King, the offended party for a Rebel;
we would beware of this: For it divides in our apprehension the Godhead, that
is indivisible; for if we consider the Mediator as the object of our worship,
he is to be considered as God; though we may, and are also jointly to consider
him as Mediator, and on that account make use of him: And if we consider him as
God, we must consider him as the same God, with the Father, and the holy Ghost;
But to have this imagination of him, that we are to speak to him, as to another
Party, or not as God, is to make him another thing, which is unbecoming that
apprehension, and estimation that we ought to have of the unity of the blessed
Godhead. 2. Beware of thinking that there is a greater facility or easiness to
have access to the Mediator, then to have access to God; or that it is more
easy to have access to the Second Person of the Trinity, then to the First, or
Third Person; we are afraid that there be mistakes here also, as if the
Mediator were more easy to be dealt with, then the Majesty of God; or, as if
there were more easy access unto him; whereas he being the same God, and so
considered; there are the same grounds, whereon sinners may have access to the
Father, as to the Son; For if we look on a sinner repenting, and believing, he
is as welcome to the Father as to the Son; but if we consider the sinner ^s not
repenting, and believing, he is so, neither welcome to the Father nor to the
Son: It is true, the Son being considered as man, there is a sympathy, that the
Second Person united to our nature has, which is not in God, abstractly
considered; yet this is not so to be understood, as if the mercy of the
Mediator, having the two natures ^o united in his person were of larger extent
then the mercy of God; or as if he could be merciful when God is not: For there
cannot be greater mercy then that which is infinite, and that is the essential
attribut of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; only this sympathy in the Mediator
is to be considered, to strengthen and confirm our Faith, in our application to
God, that we have him to approach to in our nature; but it is not to give us
any new ground of having access easier to Christ then to God; but (as we said)
only to confirm our Faith, in having access to God: Hence it is, that Jesus
Christ is always propo^ed as the midse whereby, and through whom a sinner
comes to God, so that we have access with boldness not to the Mediator, as a
distinct party, but to God through and by him: Therefore there is the same
common way of application to God, and to Christ, the same Covenant and
Promises; the same exercise of Repentance; of Faith and of Prayer, which gives
us access to God, and that gives us access to the Mediator. 3. Beware of
placing this improving, and use making of the Mediators Intercession in words,
or petitions directed to the Mediator; which I apprehend, is the use that the
most part make of his Intercession: to put up such Petitions, as I am afraid to
speak of, as namely, O! Mediator at the Fathers right hand plead for me, as if
the Mediator were a distinct party from the Judge, to whom we must speak for
interceeding with the Judge, which still leads us to look on the Mediator, as
another different party, or as having other terms whereupon he dealleth with
Sinners or as if there were another way of making, use of him; and of
application to him; And on other grounds, then of, and to God; The contrary
whereof we have showed; whereas the use making of his Intercession consists
rather (as after will appear) in Faiths application to God in him; and laying
weight on his Intercession for access, and acceptance of our persons and
services; when we make it the ground of our adress to God, the ground on which
we draw near; and this we may and should do, when we name Christ, or pray to
him as God, with respect to his Office of being Intercessour; even as when we
look to him by Faith, to get sin pardoned; there is a looking to him as God,
with respect to his offering, and satisfaction to the justice of God, on which
account we expect to be pardoned.

But, 2ly. to explicat this a little more, we shall show wherein this exercise
of Faith in making use of the Mediators Intercession, does mainly consist; And
for the more clear following forth thereof, we shall speak to these Two, 1. To
somethings presupposed. 2* To some things wherein more properly it consists; To
both which we would premit this word, that when we speak of making use of
Christ's Intercession, there are Two extremes to be avoided; One is, when
persons go to God miskening Christ; and do all that they do, as if they were
constantly friends with God, and in good terms with him, and had need of none
to make their peace, or to keep up, and maintain their peace with God; which is
in effect, the way laid down in the Covenant of Works, when Adam was a friend:
Another extreme is in the defect, and that is, when persons go to God by
Christ, yet do not lay weight on his Intercession as becomes; when not only
they want confidence, which the other has, though on a wrong ground; but do
not lay the burden on the right ground; but go to God faintingly, and
discouragedly, as fearing to trust or lippen to Christ's Intercession; There is
necessity to guard against both these; For there must be such an use-making of
Christ's Intercession, as we dare not go by him,, and yet a concurring act of
Faith, putting us to go to God by him, and to lay the weight of what we seek and
expect, on him, and on his Intercession: Now the things that are presupposed to
the use-making of Christ's Intercession, guard against the first extreme; and
these things wherein the use making of it properly consists, guard against the
other extreme.

First, Then these things presupposed are, 1. A conviction of our natural
sinfulness, not only of the distance that is betwixt God and us, but of the
quarrel and enimity, and that by our deserving, we may justly have the door of
access to God shut upon us; That is it that puts the sinner to ask for an
Intercessour, and to make use of him; ^s these who have provoked a great
person, fear to go their alone to him; but seek for the Mediation of some
special friend or favourit. 2. There is presupposed a consenting to, and
acceptance of Christ's Satisfaction, as the ground of our peace with God; For
there is no access to his Intercession till this ground be laid; because all
the efficacy that is in Christ's Intercession, results from, and is sounded upon
his Satisfaction* 1 John 2.2. If any man sin, we have an^ ^vocat with the
Father Jesus Christ, the righteous, who is the propitiation for our sins: He
procures nothing by his Intercession, but through the virtue of that blood
which he offered in a Sacrifice to satisfy Justice, and therefore in improving
of his Intercession, this method must be followed; There must first be a
betaking of our selves to his Satisfaction, as the ground of our peace, and
whereupon we plead for peace, and for any other thing that we stand in need of;
except this be, all the imaginations that we can have of Christ's Intercession
(as if we would first prevail with Christ, conceiving that he will soon be
engaged, and then have hopes of prevailing with God) if his Satisfaction be
miskent, will be to no purpose; For as we show in the First use of this point;
He interceeds only for his own people, who are believers in him; and have
closed with his Satisfaction; and as we show from Revel. 8. It Is only the
prayers of all Saints that are offered up by him; I mean, none can comfortably
conclude, that he interceeds for them, but Believers and Saints: And therefore,
till his Satisfaction be relied on, as the ground of our peace; we can look for
^o benefit by his Intercession. 3. There is beyond this required, the
conviction, and impression of our own un^u^^ablenesse, to keep up friendship,
and fellowship with God, through our remaining corruption, and the prevailing
of tentation, without a Mediator; and withal, an approbation of Gods way, who
has appointed a Mediator for that end; and a loving to keep up communion with
him by a Mediator; So that suppose we were clear, that our sins are pardoned,
yet we would know that this coviction and impression is necessary to put us to
make daily use of this part of the Mediators Office; for we may have conviction
of the First part; that is, that we cannot make our peace without Christ's
Satisfaction; and yet we may be defective, as to our walking under the due
conviction of the Second, that is, of a necessity of keeping up of our
communion with God, by virtue of his Intercession; which is as if a Rebel,
being reconciled, and made a friend, by the procurement of some great Person,
yet having to do with the King, should not dare to go unto him, without the man
that was instrumental, in making his peace; or we may allude to Absaloms coming
home by Joabs procurement, who was three years thereafter at Jerusalem ere he
saw his Fathers face, and had a new dealling with Joab for that end; So it is
very suitable to the way of grace, and shows that our being, and standing in
grace is free, not to dare to go in to God, even when our peace is made,
without the Mediator. 4. Upon the back of all this, there is a necessity of the
Faith of the Mediator, or Intercessor, his being at the right hand of God,
ready to agent our cause; through whom we may have access, when there is reason
enough in our selves, why we should be kept at the door; and though we dar
not go our selves alone, yet to adventure to go through him to God: And though
this be but the doctrinal Faith of the thing in general, yet it is necessarily
presupposed, as well as the rest, That when a challenge rises, and the
Conscience says, how ^a^ thou go to God? Faith may answer; Because there is a
friend there in our nature; when the sinner is convinced of sin, the Conscience
challenges, and the Law condemns, and there is some sad expectation of the
drawing forth of the Sentence; The^e is an act of Faith that convinces of a
Savior; whose satisfaction, if it be made use of, and improven, all will be
well: This we say is necessarily presupposed to the use making of Christ's
Intercession.

2dly. These 4. being presupposed; it follows, that we show what properly it
is, to make use of Christ's Intercession, or, wherein it consists, And 1. when
Faith has laid hold on Christ's Satisfaction for peace with God; in the
improving of his Intercession, there is an act of Faith whereby we actually
bestir our selves to approach unto God, upon the weight we lay on his
Intercession; that when the Soul sees it self secluded, considered in it self;
yet it will go forward lippening to that; so that if a challenge come in its
way, and say, what ground have thou to look that thou will be welcome to God?
the Soul says none in my s^l^, but there is a friend before me, with whose
satisfaction I have closed for my peace, and I lay this weight on his Office,
and on Gods call to make use of him, that on the ground of his moyen with God,
I dar h zard to go forward; even as if a Rebel after his peace were made, had
some business to do with the Prince, and hearing that there is a friend at
Court, yea the same friend that made his peace; he thinks that a good time, and
fit season, to go in, and present his suit, expecting to come speed through his
moyen: And this keeps always the weight, and honor of our obtaining any thing
we seek, as a prerogative to Christ, and stops the persons own mouth, from
looking to any thing in it self to boast of; even as the Rebel has no cause to
boast of his getting a hearing from the Prince; but gives the thanks to him,
who, as he made his peace, so also procured him a hearing; and it is according
to that word, Heb. 10.21. Having an High Priest over the house of God, let us
draw near with full assurance of faith, expecting a hearing: and that, Heb.
4.15, 16. Seeing we have an high Priest, who was tempted in all things, like as
we are yet without sin; Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace,
that we may obt^in mercy and find grace to help in time of need: This is the
First step of improving Christ's Intercession, when the ju^^ified sinner is at a
stand, on some new challenge for guilt, and dar not go forward, nor adventure
to approach unto God; on this account, and ground that there is a Mediator, and
Advocat at his right hand, to hazard (if we may speak so) or rather with
confidence to go forward, and present his suit to God. 2. There is an act of
Faith, as in undertaking, so in expecting and on-waiting upon God, for
obtaining a hearing of our suit, on this account, that Jesus Christ is an
intercessour in heaven for such as employ him; And this guards against both the
faillings before mentioned, to wit, against anxiety on the one hand, (...)
presumption on the other; against anx^^ty and fainting, when as there is not
only a proposing of our desire, but an on-waiting for, and expectation of a
hearing from God; against presumption, and turning carnal when the expectation
of a hearing is not founded on our own righteousness, but on the Intercession
of Christ; This is it which we have, Dan. 9.17. compared with Jonah 2.4. In the
2. of Jonah 4. v. He says; Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight, yet will I
look again toward thy holy temple; The which look was in effect, a looking
toward the intercession of Christ the Messiah; The Temple with it is Sacrifice
having been typical of him; and the Mercy-seat that was there, being typical of
his intercession; It is, as if unbelief had suggested to Jonah, now Jonah, what
will become of thee? thou art a gone man, and needs not pray any more; yet
says he, I will look again toward thy holy temple: and though he knew not
well, now being in the belly of the Whale, where the Temple stood; yet his Faith
having an suitable exercise on the Messiah signified by the Temple, and his
looking, being an act of Faith, carried in his suit to God, which was accepted;
and Indeed this is a main thing, by which a poor Believer cast down, wins to
his feet again; The other place is, Dan. 9.16, 17. Where, when he is serious,
and doubling his petition; he has these words, Cause thy face to shine upon
thy Sanctuary, which is desolat, for the Lords sake; and to let it be known
what he meaned, by saying, for the Lords sake, which looks to him who was to be
intercessour in our nature, he expones it in the following words, O! my God
incline thine ear, and hear, open thine eyes, and behold our des^lations, For
we do not present our supplications before thee for our righteousnesses but for
thy great mercies: That is an improving aright of Christ's intercession, not to
pray directly to him, as a distinct party, but to pray for mercy upon the
account of his Intercession; For what is for mercies sake, in the latter, is
for the Lords sake, in the former, viz. because, by him, and by virtue of his
Intercession, mercy comes out unto us: And this is a main use to be made of
Christ's Intercession, to wit, to have upon that ground an expectation of a
hearing, or to found our expectation of a hearing on that account; and let it
bear the weight of it, as well it can. 3. The right improvement of Christ's
Intercession has this act of Faith; That although there seem to be many
difficulties, and long off putting, yet Faith upon the account of his
Intercession, will continue it is expectation of a hearing and it is looking for,
of what the person has sought, and stands in need of; whatever cross
dispensations thwart it is expect^tion, and whatever signs of anger appear in
the way of it is obtaining it wai^s on for all that: Though Jonah be in the
belly of the W^ale, and the weids wrapped about his head, yet will he look
toward his holy Temple; So though a Soul have no life, nor sense, no inward
^^isting, nor arguments in the mouth; yet acting on Christ's Interc^ssion by
Faith; it will not leave, nor give over it is suite, considering, that though it
has no ground of expectation of good from it self; yet from Christ's
Intercessi^n it has; which is the improvement of that, Heb. 7.25. He is able
to save to the uttermost, all that come unto God through him, etc. If there
were never so strong objections from unbelief, and carnal reason; and if it
should be suggested, ye have such and such difficulties, that cannot be
overcome, lying in the way of your Salvation, and there is nothing in you
concurring to make out your Salvation; yet Faith says, He is able to save to
the uttermost, or, as the word i^ he can save to the full, or to the yond
mos^^; and what is the ground? because he ever lives to make intercession; And
this is the main thing to be taken notice of, in improving of his Intercession,
when the sinner has presented his suit, or request to God through the
Mediator; to get his mind quieted, on the account of Christ's Intercession, that
it shall be answered; even as a man, who having a Cause to plead, and geting an
able Advocat, who says to him, I will warrant your cause; quiets himself,
because of his undertaking: So proportionably there is a weight laid on Christ's
Intercession by Faiths lippening to him, which makes the Soul to be without
anxiety: And this continued act of Faith does not at all fo^ter sin, but
strengthens rather to oppose sin; quiets the mind, and makes more humble, and
keeps a tranquillity in the Soul, in bands, as well as in liberty; because it
lays the weight of it is coming speed with God, not on i^'s own argumenting,
but on the Mediators Intercession: For as we show from, Revel. 8. The prayer^
of all Saints go up from his censer; the weakest, as well as the strongest,
because it is his incense that makes them savoury. 4. There is an improvement of
Christ's Intercession, when any thing is obtained, whether it be a mercy in
preventing such and such a stroke, or the bestowing of such and such a favor;
and that is, when Faith derives not, that mercy from, nor attributs it to, it is
own praying, though it did pray, and pray somewhat seriously, but derives it
from, and attributs it to the virtue and efficacy of Christ's Intercession, and
counts it self obliged to that, as the rise of all the persons good; and again,
by him returning thanks to God for it; And this is a little proof of improving
Christ's Intercession: Sometime when we want what we would have, and are
restrained, we will improve all means to obtain, yet when we have obtained,
there is but little acknowledgment of him therein; which acknowledgment is our
duty, insinuat John 14.13, 14. Whatsoever ye ask in my name, I will do; that
the Father may be glorified in the Son: And in this sense, we ought to walk in
the use of every mercy, as be^^i^g the acknowledgment of C^^ists Intercession;
and to be affected with love to God, and should withal have a new impression of
it is obligation, to be forthcoming for God, upon the account of his
Intercession; Whereas the most part of fo^k take their mercies, and think not
themselves to be in his common for them; neither do they own him with thankful
acknowledgment of them, when they have gotten them; even as a man who had
gotten a favor through the mediation of another, and should forget him, would
be very ingrate; The making use of Christ's Intercession in this respect, is the
improving of it, for the awaking of our thankfuln^ss, and the confirming of our
obligation to him: If we look through our life, is there any day, or hour, but
we will need something, and be enjoying something? and the improving Christ's
Intercession thus, would make the thoughts of Christ always fresh, and lovely
to us; but we seek, and get, and enjoy, as if a Mediator were not in heaven;
but as we acknowledge him in praying to him, when we have need; so when any
thing is gotten, we should acknowledge, that we have received it, and do enjoy
it on the account of his Intercession, who obtained it for us.

3dly. We said, That this may be illustrat by similitudes; And there are these
Three whereby it may be illustrat. The 1. is (if we may call it a similitude)
the comparing of the use-making of his Intercession, with the use-making of his
Satisfaction; (wherein there is a resemblance) we make use of his Satisfaction,
when we are convinced of our natural sinfulness, and enimity, and that we
cannot make our own peace our selves; yet hearing of his Satisfaction, and
having an offer of it, and believing that His able to do our turn, we hazard
(...) that ground, to close with God in the Covenant: And through the sense of
peace come not for a long time, yet we, with confidence wait for it, because
the ground we lean on for it cannot fail; proportionably to this, we (...) use
of Christ's Intercession; when under a challenge, we are convinced of a (...),
and da^ not approach to God; yet hearing tell that there is an Intercessou^ in
heaven; who will undertake for them that employ him: we hazard confidently on
that ground, to propose our suits unto God, and notwithstanding of
difficulties, expect and wait for an answer: It may be Objected here, that it
seems, there is no difference betwixt the improving of his Satisfaction, and
the improving of his Intercession, Answer, There is no difference, in respect
of the things fought, nor in respect of the acts of Faith, whereby we make use
of the one, and of the other, nor in respect of the grounds whereupon; for
Christ has paid the debt of them, for whom he interceeds, he has purchased
the same things for which he makes Intercession, they are the same acts of
Faith, that make use of both, It Is the same Covenant, and offer, that warrands
us to come to his Satisfaction for peace, that warrands us to make use of his
Intercession for the application of peace; There is only this difference that
by his Satisfaction he procures us peace, and a right to it, and our peace is
made by his laying down before God, the price, which we by Faith take hold of;
but when he interceeds, he has nothing to pay, but interceeds for what he has
purchased; Therefore the Scripture hangs the application of his purchase upon
his Intercession; He has bought peace, and every good thing that we stand in
need of by his death; and by his Intercession, he procures and makes the
application: Therefore it is on this ground* that the Spirit is poured out; As
among men, it is one thing to make peace, and another thing to bring the
offending person into familiarity with the offended party; So it is the same
Faith acting on Christ's Satisfaction, for being brought in to Covenant with
God, as the meritorious cause that acts on Christ's Intercession, for
application of that which he has purchased; but under a different
consideration, looking on his Satisfaction as procuring; and on his
Intercession, for application of the same things. A 2d. Similitude to clear it,
is the people under the Law, their making use of the high Priest; There were
two parts of the high Priests Office, or two things, wherein the people made
use of him. 1. For offering Sacrifice; 2. For Intercession; The high Priest
went into the most holy once a year, and sprinkled the blood, and prayed for
the people; in which time they were standing without praying, in the hope of
having their prayers made the more acceptable: This was by Gods appointment
typically to prefigure our Lords Intercession in heaven; It is true, the high
Priests praying for them was nothing to the Souls advantage, of him or them, if
Christ was not made use of, both by him, and by them; yet it was typical, and
to show this much, that they were to improve Christ's Intercession, as well as
his Sacrifice and Satisfaction; Therefore, Luke 1.10. When Zacharias went in to
pray, the whole multitude of the people was without praying. A 3d. similitude
(which we have hinted at in our going along) is drawn from that way that is
used among men, for bringing two parties that are at ods, and variance, to be
reconciled, and at one; which though we are not to conceive in that carnal
manner, yet it holds as to the substance of the thing; as if the offending
party durst not go his alone, to the party offended, but should carry along
with him a friend, that has place, and power to prevail with the other; when
he undertakes to go along with him contrary to his deserving, he will expect
confidently to get a good hearing; and if any should say to him, how dar you go
to such an one, whom you have so provoked? he would answer, because I have a
friend before me, that will make moyen for me; and when by that friends moyen,
he gets a favorable hearing, and his suit granted, he comes away rejoicing,
professing his great obligation to that friend; So is it here as to the thing,
though as was said, we would guard against carnal conceptions, of taking up
God, and the Mediator as distinct parties to be made application to, we shall
insist no further for the time, O! that there were seriousness to improve his
Blood and Satisfaction, for washing us from the guilt of sin, and for making
our peace with God, and his Intercession, for upholding our peace and communion
with God, and for the attaining of every good, that he has purchased and
promised, which is the sum of all, God help us to the practice of it, and to be
conscientious in it.

SERMON LXIX.
ISAIAH LIII.XII. Verse. 12. -- And he made intercession for the transgressors.


ALthough this be a most necessary thing, and that whereof we have daily and
hourly use, even to be improving Christ's Intercession; and although it be one
of the most excellent, and most comfortable things that a Christian has to
look to in his walk; there being no condition, but there is a ready help for it
here; yet this is our sinful misery, that either through our blindness, or our
indifferency, we are much out of capacity, to improve aright so rare a
privilege: For as much as we have heard of it, are there many of us that can
tell how Christ's Intercession is to be improven? Sure we may know that if ever
we do it, there is no th^nks to us for the doing of it; And indeed it is of
such a nature, that we even cannot well tell whether it be better to speak of
it or to be silent, being so little able to make any thing plain, of such a
misterious, yet very concerning thing.

Ye may remember the Doctrine that we proposed to speak to was this; That our
Lord Jesus has this for a part of his Office, to make Intercession for
transgressors; Being a real Priest, he not only offers a Sacrifice, but goes
in, and has gone within the vail, with the virtue of his Sacrifice, to appear
before God in heaven for us; as all the Offices of Christ are advantageous, and
would be studied by us, and we would study them well; this has many advantages
with it, and we would improve it, least we frustrat our selves of the cluster
of privileges that is in this one Doctrine, That Jesus Christ makes
intercession for transgressors, or sinners.

We show the last day wherein the improving of Christ's Intercession does
consist; we shall now instance some cases wherein Believers, in a special
manner are to make use of it. 2. We shall give some directions for clearing
some questions, or for answering some doubts about it. And 3. We shall assign
some Characters of such as are rightly improving Christ's Intercession.

For the First, Christ's Intercession ought to be made use of in as many cases
as are possibly incident to a Believer; and therefore we are not to restrict it
to one case more then to another; although indeed there be some wherein more
especially we are called to improve it; Now to clear it, that there are some
cases wherein, in a special manner, the Believer is to make use of this Office
of Christ's interceeding for transgressors; It may be instanced in these, 1. A
Believer has either liberty, or he is in bonds; and there is a special
watchfulness called for in both these cases, that the Intercession of Christ be
not slighted.

1. When he has liberty, and his spiritual condition thryves, he prays, and
his heart melts in prayer, he has what he would have, the exercises of
Religion become pleasant, and he has no will to come from them: In this case
the Believer is to beware, least he be stolen off his feet, and misken Christ's
Intercession; for then he is ready to think that he cannot but be well, and his
prayers cannot but be heard; because he gets liberty to put them up, and it is
then often that there is hazard to lay least weight on Christ's Intercession: To
improve Christ's Intercession aright in such cases, these Two are to be adverted
to. 1. That his Intercession be acknowledged as the fountain, and procuring
cause of that liberty and liveliness, and so we are to carry a stoped mouth
before God, and not to boast of it; For (as we show) the pouring out of the
Spirit is a special fruit of Christ's Intercession; It being by virtue thereof
that gifts are given, and grace to worship God in a spiritual manner. 2. That
we beware of thinking that our prayers are in a fitness, or that they put us in
a fitness of access to God, because of that liberty, except by virtue of
Christ's Intercession, more then if we had not a word to say; There is in our
unbelief, and presumption, a secret inclination to lay the weight of our
acceptance on our own liberty, Whereas, Revel. 8. the prayers of all Saints
must come up before God, having the smoke of his incense to make them
acceptable; In which respect, in a case of liberty, Christ's Intercession is
made use of, and improven, when we are denied to our own liberty, and it is not
made the ground of our confident application to God, but Christ's Intercession
on^y: Again 2. when the Believer is in bonds, in some eminent manner, so that
he cannot pray, he scarce has a word to speak to God; he goes, it is true about
the duty, but he comes not speed; his prayer relishes not to himself, he is
like one speaking, but not praying, his heart is not warmed, neither is there,
at least to his own apprehension, any connection betwixt his words, whereupon he
is ready to think that his prayer is as good as no prayer, because of that
inclination that is in all of us, to rest on our own praying without making use
of the Intercession of Christ; The reasons why, in this case we would press
the use-making of his Intercession, are these. 1. L^a^t we faint, and grow wear
in prayer, which cannot but befall us, if his Intercession be not made use of.
2. Least we loss the estimation of the excellent worth of Christ's Intercession;
which is exceeding derogatory to him that is mighty to save, and on whom help
is laid: and it is especially for such a time and case, that he is holden forth
for an Intercessour: Now there is a twofold improvement of Christ's Intercession
called for in this case; when the Believer is in bonds, and cannot so much as
sigh; but it is called in question whether it be accepted; though yet the man is
serious. 1. There is an improving of it for obtaining of that which we have
been aiming at, though we cannot tell our own teal (to speak so) nor open our
cause, nor make known our requests to God; yet to expect what we have been
aiming at, and seeking after, by virtue of Christ's Intercession, for as ill set
together, as our prayer has been, because it is founded upon the Intercession
of the Mediator; and we expect a hearing on that account ala^erly, it being his
Intercession, that makes our prayers acceptable, it can make such a poor prayer
acceptable also; whereupon the Soul rests quiet, and expects a hearing on this
ground; because, as was said, the prayers of all Saints go up from his Censer,
and with his Incense, and none are cast back, that are put up through him, and
by virtue of his Intercession; Hence sometimes looks, sometimes thoughts,
sometimes broken words, and groans come up before God, are acceptable, and get
a return; The reason is, because, through the Intercession of the Mediator, the
prayers of all Saints are acceptable: This is even as if a man should credit
his able Advocat with the managing of his Cause, although he cannot, (to speak
so) ^outh-band his own teal, nor express himself satisfyingly to himself in
it; H^nce, we have these words often, John 14. and 16. Whatever ye ask in my
name, believing, ye shall receive; and whatever ye ask in my name, I will do
it; that is, when ye ground the expectation of your hearing, and speed-coming
in prayer on me, and my mediation: when folks, because of their short-comings
in prayer give over the expectation of a hearing, and a return; they give over,
in so far, the laying of due weight on his Intercession: only ye would remember
the terms on which a person is warranted to make use of his Intercession; for
when we follow not his way, in the improving of it, we cannot expect to come
speed, or get good by it. 2. A Believer in his bonds, would expect a lousing,
through the virtue of his Intercession; And this is another way, how we would
improve it in this case, when we are bound up, and (to speak so) langled, that
we cannot stir in prayer, then we would have an eye to the efficacy of Christ's
Intercession, (that is of continual vigor and efficacy, even when we are very
dead, indisposed, and lifelesse,) for the attaining of liberty and liveliness;
This is indeed to cast a look to him, and singly to improve the efficacy of his
mediation; when we cannot speak on word to work up our selves to a disposition
for that work: And these two go well together, to be improving his
Intercession, for obtaining what we need for the time present, and for the time
to come; and when we are in bonds, to be improving it for liberty and freedom.

2dly. There is an use-making of Christ's Intercession called for; both when we
aim to obtain any thing; and when we have obtained that which we would be at.
1. In our aiming to have, or obtain; we would improve it, that our addresses to
God may be in his name, and our Faith of obtaining may be founded on Christ's
Intercession, and not on our own, and that our Faith may be stayed, and fixed
in expectation of the thing: The improving of Christ's Intercession in his
respect, leads us, 1. To the right way of prosecuting our suits to God, and 2.
It quiets and fix^s us in expecting of an answer; and when this is wanting,
Christians are either discouraged, and know not how to pursue their cause, or
else they are carnally secure, and presumptuous, which is very ordinary; for
either, as I have said, we are under an anxious fear, so that we know not how
to go about duty with any hope of success; or else we grow secure and slack,
and careless in duty.

2ly. There is an use-making of Christ's Intercession, when we have obtained any
benefit, which keeps the Soul in his common and debt, and in acknowledging it
self to be his Debtor; This makes Christians, when they have gotten any thing,
to be humble, and helps them to a sanctified use of the thing received;
whereas, when this is forgotten, though Persons may be seemingly humble when
they are praying for a thing in his name, yet when they have gotten it, they
grow carnal, and some way wanton, and he is forgotten, as if the benefit had
never come from him; But on the other hand, when there is an acknowledgement of
Christ's Intercession, when any thing is obtained; it keeps, as I said, the
Person humble, and holily afra^d, when it has gotten, as well as when it was
seeking; and it makes warrie in using, and fearful to abuse any benefit
received; least it be found a wrong and indignity done to Christ and his
Intercession.

3dly. We may instance the improving of Christ's Intercession, both in a most
sad, and in a most cheerful condition; In reference to both which we should
make use of Christ's Intercession, and it being readily one of these conditions
that we are in, either a more sad, or more cheerful one; we would think our
selves defective and faulty as to our duty, when we suit and conform not our
way to our condition.

1. If it be a more sad condition, whether we be spiritually sad, the Soul
being heavy, and refusing to be comforted, or whether we be under a temporal
outward di^consolat condition; there is an use-making of Christ's Intercession
called for in both; For a Believer cannot be in any so disconsolat a condition;
but he may draw refreshing from this Fountain, in reference thereto; and when
we make not use of his Intercession in each, as it occurs; either anxiety, and
discouragement grows, or we turn to some unwarrantable, and crooked mean, or
way for an out-gate from such a disconsolat condition.

Now to make use of, and to improve Christ's Intercession aright, in such a
disconsolat condition, and case. 1. The Soul would gather, and compose it self,
to search and see what is useful in Christ's Intercession for it is case; seeing
that sad case cannot be imagined, but Christ's Intercession is a cordial for it,
upon which, as a solid ground, the Soul may be quiet, that it cannot miscarry
in that for which it is now in so much bitterness; seeing Christ Jesus has the
managing of it is case and cause: Hence it may reason thus, although I was
unwatchful, and this condition came on me unawars, and I was surprised with it,
yet it is not any surprise to him; He was not sleeping, though I was, he knew
what was coming, though I knew not; therefore this will not hurt, nor prejudge
my main cause, because it comes through his hand. 2. There is an improvement of
his Intercession in this case, when the out-gate, though desperate, as to us; is
yet hopeful by virtue thereof; and when this is made the only, or main ground
of our hope, to wit, That there is a friend at the court of heaven, who can
order our cause, and make such a thing work for our good; It puts spirits in us
to pray, and actively to go about the use of the means; whereas, when we use
not the means, or use them without due respect to Christ's Intercession, the
business becomes heartlesse, hoplesse and desperate.

2. If our condition be, or seem to be more solacious, and cheerful, there
would be an improving of Christ's Intercession, least our cheerfulness; grow
carnal, which it cannot otherwise be; but when he is acknowledged to be the
author of our solace, and cheerfulness; when he is depended upon for the
continuance of it, and when the praise of it is returned to him, it bounds the
heart, that there is no acce^^ to grow carnal; in which respect, these things
wherein others grow carnal, such as health, strength, meat, drink, apparel,
commodious dwelling, the recovery of themselves, of their children, or of other
near relations, or dear friends from sickness, etc. A^e thus spiritual^zed, and
made spiritually refreshing to the people of God; because there is an up taking
of them, as coming through Christ's Intercession, and a returning of thanks to
him for for them; Hence, Heb. 13.15. It Is said, By him therefore let us offer
the sacrifices of praise to God; There being the same access to praise in our
spiritual cheerfulness, that there is to pray in our heaviness, and
difficulties; He that is the ground on which we ought to found our prayers; is
also the ground on which we ought to bui^d our praise; And it is he that puts
life in, and value upon, the one and the other.

4ly, We may instance it in this case, when the Believer is under challenges;
it is then a special season to make use of Christ's Intercession, and to put the
Lybel in his hand to answer it; which is done by Faith's resting on him as a
Priest, for the obtaining of an absolution from that charge, although we cannot
answer it our selves, yet expecting an answer through him, according to that
famous place, Romans 8.34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect?
Who will lybel them? among other reasons of the interrogation, which has the
force of a negation; this is one; It is Christ who died, yea rather who is
risen again, who is at the right hand of God making intercession for us: This
furnishes an Answer to the Charge put in their hand: Or, when the Believer is
under calmnesse, and tranquillity, his Intercession would be improven; for there
cannot be a sanctified calmnesse without depending on him, by virtue of whose
Satis^action, and Procurement we have it, and by virtue of whose Intercession
it is continued.

The Reasons, why we have hinted at these things, are. 1. To hold out to you
the concernment of Christ's Intercession; for we cannon be in that case; but the
Believer has therein to do with it. 2. To show our great obligation to God,
who has given us such an Interc^ssour for all these cases; In this one word,
there is stored up a treasure of consolation, for all cases that a Christian
can be in. 3. That we may be helped to our duty of improving, and making use of
him according to the several cases we are, or may be in; For though his
Intercession be mainly to be made use of, when we come to pray; yet not only
then but at other times, and in other cases, as when we fear any hazard, when
we need any good thing; when we expect it, or would be cheerful on the receipt
of it; and when we are in any difficulty, and know not what to do, we will find
something called for from us, in reference to his Offices; and to this in
particu^ar. 4. Because this use making of Christ's Intercession commends Christ,
and makes him lovely to us; And indeed that which makes Believers think so
little of him, is in part at least, the little improving of ^is Intercession,
which should be made use of in the least things, if it were when we need any
thing, in our thought to look up to God through him, and to found the hope of
our getting it on this ground; bebecause there is an Intercessour; If this were
the practice of Believers daily, they would see a necessity of thinking much of
him; O! when will we be serious and constant in the use-making of this part of
his Office? 5. Because it may serve also for ground of conviction to many that
are called Christians; and who go through many cases and d ffi^ulties, and yet
know not what it is to acknowledge him, in his intercession: O! It Is a sad
thing for folk to bear the name of Christians, and yet if they want any good
thing, and can get it another way they neglect and misken him; And if it be
well with them, and if they obtain what they would have, they sacrifice to
their own net, and he is sl^ghted. The next thing in order, is to remove some
Objections, and to answer some Questions, con^er^ing this improvement of Christ
intercession, in the manner that we have spoken of; And there will readily be
store of them in our carnal minds; Now for the removing of these Obj^ctions, or
Doubts, I shall lay down some grounds for direction, that may answer any Doubt
of that kind, which may arise partly from the Doctrinal, partly from the
practical part of this Doct^^^. It being a puzling piece of exercise to ^om^,
that they think they know not how to improve Christ's I^tercession; or that they
never did it aright; or possibly both these man ^e their exe^cise.

The 1. groun^ I would lay down, is this; That ye would remember that there is
an unsearchablenesse in this mystery of the God head, in the mystery of Gods
becoming man, and in the mystery of the Mediator his taki^g on of these
Offi^es, to exercise them in our nature; and in speaking, or thinking of them,
there is a necessity to silence that which our curiosity would propose for
Satisfaction about them, as namely, how there are, or can be three Persons in
the God head, and yet but one God? how one of these Persons can be man? and how
it is, that by him we have access to God the Father, Son and holy Ghost? There
is silence required in the how of these things; which leads to the next
derection. 2. We would study Satisfaction in the matter of the truth it self,
rather then to be poring into the m nner, or how of profound Mysteries,
especially such as concern the blessed Godhead; Which is higher then the
heavens, broader then the earth, and deeper then the sea: That is, (as we
hinted before) we would study rather to know that there is such a thing, then
how it is; as in this particular, we know that the Son of God became man, took
on our nature, and in our nature died; rose again, ascended to heaven, sat down
on the right hand of God, and makes Interc^ssion for us; These are clear; But
if we ask how these things can be? That God can be man, and that two natures
can be in one person, and how God can interceed? they are things much above our
reach, and not to properly the object of our Faith, (I say, as to the how of
them) ^^d our consolation lies not so much in knowing how such a thing is, as
in knowing that it is; and I make no question, but there are many who pray in
Faith, because there is an Intercessour, who, if the question were asked, how
he performs that work? They could not tell well, if at all; These that can tell
most of it, are very ignorant of it, and can tell but little: The Lord in his
goodness has so ord^red the matter, that he has given grounds for the Faith
of his people, to walk on in their duty; but will not satisfy their curiosity;
and truly if we will seriously reflect, we will find that these things which
most read^ly vex us, are questions about the manner, and not about the matter
of things; we do not doubt that the Son of God is God, that the holy Ghost is
God, and that he proc^e^s from the Father and the Son; that the second Person
of the Trinity became Man, etc. But the perplexing question is, how these
things are or can be? The Lord has made it necessary to be believed, that
there is one God, and three Persons in the God head; but to be in reason
satisfied, as to the how, or manner of their subsistence, and operations that
is not required as necessary; So is it here in this matter of Christ's
Intercession; And therefore this second direction is, that ye would study
clearness in the grounds that ye are to go upon, in the use-making of his
Intercession; but ye would not be curious in seeking satisfaction about the
how, or manner of it.

3. In our addresses to God, and in our improving of Christ's Intercession, we
would beware of imagining, or framing in our imagination representations to our
selves of him, who is the object of our worship, or of the manner of the
Mediators Intercession; as if we had seen him, or heard him with our bodily
eyes, or ears; a thing that sometimes is fashions and troublesome, as well as
it is sinful; and which we are not called to; yea, if it were possible to
attain to any representation of this kind; yet it is but a representation of our
own forming, and so a breach of the second Command: And therefore in going to
God through the Mediator, never represent to your selves one party standing
beside, or by another; For that is but a diverting of the Soul from the
exercise of Faith on a purely spiritual, and simple object; and derogatory to
the majesty of God; and when ever such representations are made, or rise in the
imagination, or in the mind, God would be looked to, for crushing of them; It Is
from this that many of our doubts, and questions arise; and there is no loosing
of them, but by ^he abandoning of them; If there were a-possibility to conceive
something like God; yet the Lord abhors that and; Deuteronomy. 4.15. and 12.30. All
Similituds and Representations of God are discharged.

4 In our addresses to God through the Mediator; we would rest our Faith on
what is revealed in the Word, seeking rather to take up God, and Christ ^s they
are revealed in it, then without the Word, to seek Satisfaction to our
curiosity; we would from the Word study to take up the attributs of God, his
omniscience, omnipotency, omni presence, wisdom, grace, and mercy, purity, and
holiness, soveraignity, and absolute dominion, in guiding all; and as being at
such an infinite distance from and infinitely above all creatures; that thereby a
right impression of God may be wrought in the heart; we would likewise study
clearness in the promises; and concerning Christ and his Offices; And in
applications to God, we would fix our Faith on these known grounds; believing
we shall be heard, and being quiet on that: Moses Exodus 33. Is under a vehement
longing to see God, I beseech thee, says he, show me thy glory: The Lord tells
him, that he cannot see it, and live; but he will make his goodness pass before
him: He will let him see as much as is meet; and Chap. 34. When he gives him
his answer; It is not any glorious visible brightness he lets him see, but he
proclaims his name to him; The Lord, the Lord gracious, merciful, etc. And
comparing the words with the scope, It says that there can be no saving
uptaking of God, but as he is revealed in the word; and that way we are to be
fixed in the Faith of the excellency that is in him; and in going to him by
prayer, through the Mediator, we would guard against any representation; and
fix our Faith on clear Promises, and attributs as Scripture holds him forth.

5. We would endeavor rather to have a composed frame of Spirit, with holy
reverence in the exercise of fear, faith, and love, and of other spiritual
graces; then to fill our understanding with things merely speculative; and
less practical and profitable: And supposing that we are in some measure
clear, in what is revealed of God; and of his attributs, and promises in the
Word, in as far as may found our Faith, and warrant us to put up such and such
suits to God through the Mediator, and that we come to him in holy reverence;
we are rather to exercise our graces and have an ^ve downward, in reflecting on
our selves, ^^eking to be clear, in what is called for in a worshipper of God,
then to be curiously poring, and prying into the Object of our worship himself;
And therefore let this be well studied; even to be up at that wherein we are
clear, and which we do not question, not make any doubt of; as namely, that we
should be in a composed frame of Spirit; in holy reverence, and under the due
impression of the Majesty of God; and then there will be the less hazard, if
any at all, of going wrong; whereas, if we divert from this, and seek to
satisfy our selves in the how, or manner of up-taking of God; we will but mire
our selves, and man the frame of our own Spirits, and bring our selves under an
incapacity of going about duty rightly.

This much we have spoken on the Third part of the Use of Exhortation; wherein
we allow a sober and solid up-taking of the things of God; and in as far as may
be profitable for founding of our Faith, and for guiding of our practice; but
not to satisfy curiosity; For if we once go to chase, and follow question upon
question, in what concerns the Doctrinal, and speculative part of this
Doctrine, we will run our selves a ground; and therefore, God having made these
things wherein our duty necessarily lies, clear, that there is no hazard to go
wrong in single following of it; we would study these things that are clear;
(which might be another direction) and hold us with, and at what we are clear
in; and not suffer our minds to run out on either groundless, or unprofitable
speculations; God himself help to the suitable practice of these things; and to
him be (...).

SERMON LXX.
ISAIAH LIII.XII. Verse 12. -- And he made intercession for the transgressors.


It Is a great mercy that God has bestowed such a Mediator on Sinners; that He
has given such an high Priest, that can be touched with the feeling of Sinners
infirmities, so as to make Intercession for them; And O! but it is a great mercy
to be helped to make right use of him: When these two go together, to wit, a
Savior offered, furnished with all these Offices, of King, Priest and Prophet;
and a Soul sanctified, and guided by the Spirit of God, in making use of him
according to these Offices, It Is a wonderfully, and inconceivably gracious
dispensation; And it is no doubt a very valuable mercy, to be hepled to make use
of this part of Christ's Office; to wit, his Intercession; This is that whereof
we have begun some few days since to speak to you, and for the better clearing
of it, we endeavored to answer some doubts, or questions, that it may be, have
arisen, and been tossed in the minds of some while we have been discoursing of,
and opening up this matter: That which we would now speak a little to, is a
subject of that nature, that considering our shallowness in uptaking of these
things, we cannot easily tell whether it be better to speak of, or to forbear
the speaking of, any doubt, or question, least one occasion, ^n another; And
therefore most certainly there would be much sobriety here, and an abandoning
of all sinful curiosity, least unseasonable, and intemperat desiring to know,
either what is not to be known, or what we cannot know, mar and obstruct our
improvement of what we do, or may know; several things doubted of, may be
moved, and objected here; but we shall only speak a word to the clearing of
these Four. 1 Some thing concerning the Object of worship, and particularly of
prayer in general. 2. We shall consider how the Mediator is the object of our
prayer; or how he may be prayed unto. 3. A word more particularly, in reference
to the form of some particular petitions, and to what seems most warrantable
from the word, in these. 4. We shall answer some practical doubts that have, or
may have some puzling influence on the consciences of some Christians; But as I
said, we had need, in speaking, and hearing of these things, to be awed with
some deep impression of the Majesty of God on our hearts, least we meddle
carnally with matters of a most sublimely spiritual and holy nature: For
clearing of the First then, we lay down these assertions, The 1. whereof, is,
That as there is one worship, so there is no formal Object of worship, but God;
This is clear, because the worshipping of any with divine worship, as namely
with believing in them, or praying to them, supposes them to have such
Attributs of Omni-science, Omni-potency, Supremacy, etc. As are only agreeable
to the Majesty of God; For we cannot pray to one, but we must believe that he
hears us, and so that he is Omni-scient; that he is able to help us, and so
Omni-po^ent^; that he is above all, and so Supreme; as it is, Romans 10.14. How
shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? There can be no divine
Object of worship to settle the Soul upon, but where the essential attributs of
the Godhead are; and it is on this ground, that we reject invocation of Saints
and Angels; Adorability being the essential property of the Majesty of God, as
well as Eternity, and Immutability are; There can be no Adoring, or Worshipping
of any, but where there is Adorability in the Object that is worshipped by that
worship; and there is none capable of worship but God, Supremacy being due, and
Essential to him only: 2. That though there be three Persons in the glorious
and blessed Godhead, distinct, yet there are not three distinct Objects of
Worship, but one Object of Worship only; The Father is not one Object of
Worship, the Son another, and the holy Ghost a third; but the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost are that same one Object of Worship; And when we pray to one, we
pray to all. The reason is clear; Because, though there be three Persons in the
Godhead, yet there is but one Essence in the Godhead; and the divine
essential Properties (which are the grounds on which we adore God) are
essential, and agree to all the Persons of the Godhead; the Father has not
one Omnipotency, and the Son another; neither are there two Omnipotents; but
one Omnipotent God; and so in other Attributs, they are the same essential
properties of the Godhead, and incommunicable; And therefore, though the
Father be another Person, and (as they use to speak) alius, yet he is not
another thing, or aliud, but the same God, with the Son, and holy Ghost; And
although the Persons have a real distinction amongst themselves, yet none of
them are really distinct from the Godhead; and so there is but one Object of
Worship; and therefore, though sometimes all the Persons be named, yet it is not
to show any distinction in the Object of our worship, but to show who is the
Object of our worship; To wit, one God, yet three Persons, or i^ three. 3. That
though in prayer to God, we may name either the Father, the Son, or the Holy
Ghost; yet whomsoever we name, it is always the same God, Father, Son and Holy
Ghost that is worshipped: And this follows well on the former, and may be the
use of it; For if the Father be God, and if we worship him as God, we cannot
worship him, but we must worship the Son, and Holy Ghost with him, because they
are the same God, having the same essential Attributs. And therefore 4.
Whenever we pray to, and name one of the Persons, we would not conceive that
he is less worshipped, that is not named, or that we pray less to him that is
not named, as it may be in the same prayer, when a Person begins at first, he
names the Father, and when he has proceeded a little, he names the Son, men
would then beware of thinking that there is a difference in the Object they are
praying to; or, as if they began to pray to one of the Persons, and now they
are praying to another, as a distinct party; for it is still the same God, who
is the Object of worship; We observe it, to teach you calmness, soberness, and
composedness of frame in approaching to God; wherein folks would beware of
curious tossing in their mind, and imagination, what may be the Object of their
worship, and of suffering it to run in an itchingly curious way on the
distinction of the Persons; but would stay their mind upon one God in three
Persons, and seek after no more.

The 2d. is, How the Mediator is the Object of our prayers, or may be prayed
unto? and for clearing of this, we would propose these considerations. 1. That
it is a certain truth, that the Person that is the Mediator, is the Object of
our woriship, and may be prayed unto, because he is God, the second Person of
the Godhead: And therefore, Act. 7. at the close, a direct prayer is put up to
him by Stephen, Lord Jesus, says he receive my Spirit. 2. We say this, That
the Adoration and Worship that is given to the Mediator, is not of any distinct
kind from that Adoration, and Worship that is given to the Father, and the Holy
Ghost, but the same supreme divine worship, for he is the same God with the
Father and Holy Ghost; and although he be Mediator, it derogats nothing from
his Godhead; and the Scripture speaking of no divine Worship but one, we are
therefore not to conceive him to be worshipped with less confidence, fear, or
reverence then the other Persons of the Trinity: For there is no such worship
in Scripture; and to give him less, would derogat from the Majesty of Jesus
Christ, who is God equal with the Father, and the Spirit: For, although, as
Mediator, he be inferior to the Father, yet the Person whom we worship, is God
equal with the Father, and the Holy Ghost. 3. The worshipping of Jesus Christ
Mediator, and the giving of him divine worship, is not the worshipping of any
other Object, but of the same, to wit God, who is made flesh, and is manifested
in our nature by the union of the second Person of the Godhead, with the
humane nature, which he has assumed, and taken to him; upon which it follows,
that Jesus Christ must be the same Object of worship, and that our worshipping
of him, is the worshipping of God, and that our praying to him, is praying to
God the Father, Son and Spirit: And there is reason to take heed to this,
because, when we in prayer are speaking to the Mediator, thoughts may steal in,
as if we were not so immediately and directly speaking to God, as when we name
the Father. 4. Consider, That Christ Jesus being worshipped with this divine
worship, as the one Object of worship (for as we show, there cannot be two
Objects of divine worship) it will follow, that Christ Jesus as God is
worshipped, for though it be the Person that is Mediator, and Man that is
worshipped; yet it is not the Person as Man, but as God, that is worshipped; And
the reason is clear, because it is not Christ Jesus as Man, but as God, that
has these properties of God, to be Omni-scient, Omni-potent, Infinite, Supreme,
Adorable, etc. And therefore, as upon the one hand, we say that Christ God
died, and suffered, because he being God and Man in one Person, the Person that
was, and is God died, and suffered, though the Godhead did not, neither can
suffer: So upon the other hand, we say, that Christ Man is prayed unto, because
he who is God Man is prayed unto, as God; But though there be an union of the
two natures, in the Mediators Person, and though the properties of the one
nature be sometimes attributed to the other, because of the straitness of the
union, yet we must still keep the properties of each nature distinct, and in
our worship-application to him, consider him accordingly; As to be finite,
agrees to his humane nature, and is to be attributed to that; and to be
infinite agrees to his divine nature, and is to be attributed to him, in
respect of that: To clear it a little, (if it be possible for us to clear it)
we must conceive in our worshipping of God, in the Person of a Mediator, A
threefold Object of our worship; (for so Divines use to distinguish, and we
hold us closse by them) 1. The Material Object, or the Object which we worship,
that is the Person we pray to. 2. The Formal Object of our worship, or that
which is the ground, or account on which we worship that Person. 3. The Object
of our Consideration, in our worshipping of that Person; on that a^^ount; As
for instance. 1. The Man Christ Jesus is the Person whom we worship, or pray
unto; but 2. The formal Object of our worship is Christ's Godhead; and we pray
to him on that account; because He is the Eternal, Infinite, Omni-potent,
Supreme, etc. in respect of his divine nature. 3. In our worshipping of this
Mediator, on this account, or ground, the mind may be swayed to it, on
consideration that the person whom we worship as God, is also Mediator and Man;
and this proposes no new Object of worship, but gives a motive to induce us to
worship him, and warms the heart with love to him; as when we go to pray to
him, the mind may consider him as one that died; now so considered he is not
the Object of our worship, because it holds him out as humbled, and suffering;
yet our so considering him strengthens Faith, to expect what we need from him;
and it induces to pray to him, and engages to love him: even as the People of
Israel, in prayer to God, sometimes used that Title, Our redeemer that brought
us out of Egypt: Yet the ground, and account on which they worshipped him was
his being the Eternal, Infinite, and Omnipotent God, and the consideration of
his Works were but motives to induce them to worship him, and to strengthen
their Faith, in expecting what they stood in need of from him: So is it here,
For if it were possible to conceive, that the Mediator that died were not God,
we would not pray to him, for God is the alone Object of divine worship; yet to
consider that he is God, and yet died, is an inducement to us, to pray to him,
and it strengthens our Faith to consider, that as he is God, so also Man; one
that died, and has also entered himself in this near relation to us.

For the 3d. (which will help to clear the former) That is, the forms of such
Petitions as may be used, in petitioning the Mediator; we need the less to
stand on it, if (as has been said) we hold us by these grounds. 1. That there
is but one Object of worship. 2. That this one Object of worship is God. 3.
That in worshipping the Mediator, we do not divine that Object of our worship:
Yet we shall speak a word for clearing, 1. What form seems most allowable here?
2. For clearing of somewhat which we hinted at the other day anent one
particular form of petition.

First, then, This is clear, that we may pray directly to the Mediator, by
naming him, as Stephen does, Act. 7. at the close. 2. That the Mediator, when
prayed to, may be considered as such by us; For there is a differenee betwixt
that which is considered by us, in the act of our worship, and that which is
the Object of that Act; and (as we said) the motive that induces us to that
Act, is the uptaking of him as Mediator. 3. That he may be designed Mediator
and Redeemer; and may get these Names and Titles, because they serve to
strengthen our Faith, and to warm our affections to him; even as when the
people of Israel prayed to God, they remembered that he was their Redeemer and
Deliverer, and had wrought so and so for them, and these were motives to induce
them to pray, and served to strengthen their Faith in praying to him; yet the
ground and account on which they worshipped him, was his own infinite glorious
Majesty. 4. It Is clear, that when the Mediator is prayed unto, something may be
sought from him, that agrees to the Office of the Mediator, For instance, he
may be prayed unto, to take to him his Government, and to exerce it, to give
gifts unto men, to gather his own Elect, to make his will effectual for the
ingathering of them, etc. yet even then a difference would be put betwixt the
Object of our sutie, and the matter we suite for, which belongs to him as
Mediator, yet as God he is the O^ject of our suite and prayer. This seems to be
^^lured at, Psalm. 45. when the Psalmist speaking to the Son the Mediator,
says, Gi^d thy sword upon thy thigh, ride prosperously; let the kings arrows
be sharp in the hearts of his enemies: Which upon the matter seems clearly to
relate to Christ's executing his Office as Mediator; yet look to the Title he
gives him, and the ground, or account on which he puts up his prayer, It Is the
consideration of him as God; Therefore, he says, O! thou most mighty; a divine
attribute pointing him out to be God; And thy throne, O God (says he) is from
everlasting, etc.

Now, as for the 2d. thing, If all this be granted, it may then be asked, why
we seem not to be satisfied with that manner of expression, or form of
petition, which we hinted at the other day, Lord Jesus make intercession for
me, plead for me with, or before the Father? Seeing we allow such a Petition as
this, Lord Jesus make me partaker of thy intercession, and the like, As
warrantably, when put up with reverence, and faith, The same Object of worship
being invocat with them both? Answer, 1. We say, that the use-making, and
improving of Christ's Intercession, is not to be restricted to this manner of
expression, or form of Petition; and it was for this end that we observed it:
For it cannot be said, that only we make use of Christ's Intercession, when we
use this form; and so it is not essential, nor necessary to the use-making of
Christ's Intercession; This is the fault that is in it, as if there were no
use-making of his Intercession, but when this form of Petition is used; whereas
we show, that it is mainly the exercise of Faith, resting on his Intercession,
whereby it is improven, and one may be us^ng this form of word, and yet not be
improving his Intercession; And another may not use this form of words, and yet
be improving it, when Faith is exercised on it; and th refore to improve his
Intercession, is rather by the exercise of Faith to rest on it, then in any
such form of words to pray to him; and we would not think that Christ's
Intercession is not made use of when the Father is prayed unto; or when such a
form of words is not used, but place it in the exercise of Faith alone. 2. We
say, if such a petition be well understood and qualified, it is not simply
sinful or evil, if so be that our meaning in it amount to this much; Lord Jesus
let me be partaker of the benefits of thy Intercession, even as we may pray,
Lord Jesus let me be partaker of the benefits of thy Satisfaction; yet we say
it would be well understood and qualified; and a person in putting up such a
petition would advert well, that he be not praying to any other Object of
worship but God, and that his meaning be the same, as if he were praying to the
Father, and said, Father, let me be accepted through the Intercession of the
Son; And thus the one is an improving of Christ's Intercession, as well as the
other; for although the altering the nomination of the person may strengthen
Faith, yet it is never to be so understood, as if they were a different Object
of worship, or as if there were less access to Christ's Intercession, or to
the benefits thereof, in the one form then in the other; Yet 3. we say there is
often a readiness to miscarry in this form of Petition; For ye would consider
and examine. 1. If it does not often flow from a misinformed judgment within;
and if it has not a tendency in it, to obscure the nature of the unity of the
Object of our worship; and readily disposing to, or flowing from this opinion,
that praying to the Mediator is not the same, that praying to God is, as if
there were two distinct objects of worship. Or, 2. If there be not a readiness
to consider the person that is Mediator to be of less Glory and Majesty then the
Father, and to consider the Father to be of less loving kindness and
tenderness to sinners then the Son, and other things of that kind, which move
people to put up a suite in such a form, which makes it more difficult to keep
the thoughts of one Object of worship under such a form, then otherwise: Yet
4. we say it may be used by, and accepted of God, from, many that have not that
distinctions, and clearness in the ridding of their thoughts, in this Mystery
that is requisite; because there may be real faith under such a form of words,
(though infirmity in the use-making of Christ's Intercession) and God respects
that wherever it is, And under such a form there may be these two things, 1. A
Soul-sensibleness, that the person has no access to God, but through a
Mediator. 2. A resting on the Mediator for acceptance, and where these two are
though the form be used, it may be accepted; although, if Faith be though this
form be not, it mars not the persons acceptance; For no question many of the
people of God both before Christ came and sometime after, had not that
distinctness in use-making of the Intercession of Christ as now is holden
forth, as Christ says to his Disciples, John 16.24. Hitherto ye have asked
nothing in my name; and Cornelius mentioned, Act. 10. and others, their prayers
were accepted of God, though they rested by faith on the Mediator in a more
confused dark way, and had not that distinctnesse in them, of use-making of
him, which was afterward more clearly revealed; And therefore, 5. and lastly,
Though we will not be peremptory in condemning such a form altogether, yet we
think it largely as safe to abstain from any such form of words, in the
use-making of Christ's intercession, as may have in them any appearance of or
tendency to the dividing of the Object of our worship, or the Mediator from his
Godhead, especially in praying with, or for others, where it may stumble more
then edify; and when it is used, it would be very warrily, and well guarded,
remembering always that the improving of Christ's Intercession consists more in
Faiths resting on it, and in making address to God through him, and according
to the usual manner of the Scripture then, in any other thing or way whatsoever.

The 4, thing we proposed to speak a word to, was some Practical Doubts, or
Questions, that may puzle some Christians who having observed, what has been
spoken on this subject, may be ready to think and say, That the improving of
Christ's Intercession is to them a greater mystery then ever it was, many times
they have prayed and minded it not, and when they mind it, they are not
distinct in their improving of it, and they are never like aright to mind it:
For Answer, 1. Ye would look to what is essential to the improving of Christ's
Intercession, and make that sure; And if ye ask, what it is? It takes in these
Four, which, where they are, His Intercession is made use of, though there may
be unclearnesse, in many other things, 1. That a person pray to God, that he be
called on, and worshipped. 2. That our addresses be not founded on any thing in
our selves, but that there be a renouncing of our own righteousness, as it was
with Daniel, Chap. 9.18. We do not present our supplications unto thee for our
own righteousness, etc. 3. That there be a believing of our acceptance through
Jesus Christ, though there be a distance betwixt God and us, yet that there is
a way through use-making of Christ to come over that distance, and to win at
nearness to Him. And 4. Upon that account to enter our suite, and to put up
our prayer to God; with the one word disclaiming our own righteousness, and
with the other pleading on the account of Gods mercy, through Christ, as Daniel
does, Not for our righteousness, but for thy mercies sake, and for thy names
sake; Now I suppose that Souls should not be able to answer several questions
about the Object of worship, and the way of improving of Christ's Intercession;
yet if they call upon God; if they renounce their own righteousness, not
knowing any ground in themselves to lean to, or to put up their suite on, and
make use of Christ for the ground of their acceptance with God; and if it were
asked them, what gives you ground to expect a hearing of your prayers? they
would answer, even the same that gives us ground to expect pardon of Sin; and
we would never expect to win to either without a Mediator; they are amongst
them who are improving Chris^s Intercession, and such would silence and ush
other questions, if they be clear in this. 2. We answer, That there may be a
real use making of Christ's Intercession, and it may be accounted so, where
there is much indistinctness in the uptaking of it; as these instances clear,
of Cornelius, Act. 10. And of the Disciples, John 16. who prayed not on the
account of their own righteousness, or of the Covenant of works; (for they
made confession of their sin) yet the Mediator, and his Intercession was not so
distinctly as such, considered by them in their so doing; For they did not
distinctly take up; him as Christ says, Hithereo ye have asked nothing in my
name; yet there was an actual resting on him by Faith, and their prayers were,
no doubt accepted of God; He not being so distinctly known to be the
Intercessour as now he is; and therefore there is required a more distinct use
making of him now; and not a resting on him indefinitly, but particularly, and
distinctly, He being clearly revealled now, to be the Mediator. 3. We answer,
That Believers may sometimes be making use of Christ's Intercession, in
approaching to God by him, and yet they themselves not know distinctly, that
they are doing so; As we see in the Disciples, John 14.4. Christ says, Whether
I go ye know, and the way ye know: And v, 6. speaking of coming to the Father
by him, He says, I am the way, the truth and the life; and yet, v. 5. Thomas
says, Lord, we know not whither thou go, and how can we know the way? And
the Lord turns it over to him, and says, that they have both known him, and
the way. As also Believers may sometimes, through want of clearness and
distinctness in this, what it is to make use of Christ's Intercession, or,
because they want that measure of distinctnesse they would be at, think that
they are doing nothing, as to the use-making of his Intercession; and yet the
work of Gods Spirit, though they know it not well, may be leading them; For
it is in this, as it is in use-making of his Satisfaction; a Believer may be
making use of Christ's Sa isfaction, and be justified by it, when he knows not
that it is so, or possibly cannot well tell what it is to make use of it; which
may quiet any risings, and reasonings that may be in their mind about this
matter. 4. We answer that explicit thoughts of Christ's Intercession, are not
always necessary nor requisite for the use-making of it; even as we are to
design Gods Glory, as our main end in all our undertakings; so we are to pray
in the name of Christ; but as it is not requisite that there be always, and all
along the action, an actual minding of Gods Glory, but that being laid as our
principle, which we walk by, and the strain of our walk, and conversation
tending to that end; it is, and will be accepted before God, although there be
not in, and along every thing we do, explicit thoughts of His Glory; So it it
in our praying in Christ's name, and in improving of His Intercession; there may
be a virtual, though not an actual, and explicit resting on it; the Soul having
laid down that for a ground and principle, that it is not for any thing in me,
that I do expect a hearing, but it is through Christ, and all the confidence
that I have to be heard, it is through him. 5. We answer, That a poor Soul, that
wotes not well what to do in this case, would eye Gods promise, to be guided in
the use-making of Christ's Intercession without anxiety, as it is, John 16.26.
In that day ye shall ask in my name: As if he had said It has been you fault,
that ye have not hitherto prayed in my name, at least with that distinctness
that ye ought; but I give you my word for it, ye shall pray in my name; and
when through confusion, we are ready to faint, we would eye this promise to be
guided in the use-making of his Intercession. 6. We would learn rather to hold
us in our worshipping of God, with that which is practical, and serves to bring
us under an awe, and reverence of the Majesty of God; then give our selves to
that which does indispose, and disquiet us: And I shall close all with this
word, that we would even admire, how Souls are carried and brought to heaven,
that we should be suffered to pray, and that God breaks not out upon us; and we
would study to be deeply humbled for our ignorance of God, and of Christ; and
would think our selves to be much in his debt and common for teaching us to
make right use of Him, seeing we are so ready to miscarry, even when we desire,
and endeavor to make use of him.

SERMON LXXI.
ISAIAH LIII.XII. Verse. 12. -- And he made intercession for the transgressors.


THe greatest privileges that we have by the Gospel, do often hold forth the
greatest aggravations of our Sin; as being against so great and excellent
privileges; Now that the Lord has given us a Mediator; and that this one part
of his Mediation, to wit, to make Intercession for Transgressors, or Sinners;
is one of the great privileges of the Gospel, is beyond all doubt; and
therefore, we had need to fear, least by our abusing, and not improving aright
of this privilege it prove an aggravation of our guilt: And this is the last
thing that we would speak a word to, from these Words; That seeing our Lord
Jesus is invested with this Office, to be an Intercessour, then it must be a
ground of expostulation with, and reproof of these, who shall be found
slighters of His Intercession; For, if it be a Duty to improve his
Intercession, and if it be a Mercy that we have it, and if many advantages be
gotten by it; then it must be a grievous Sin, a matter of just challenge, and
great shame, that Sinners should have such an Advocat and Intercessour provided
for them, to take and plead their cause so freely, and to manage it so
dexterously as He does; and yet to slight Him, and not to put that trust in
Him, as to commit their cause to Him.

In prosecuting of this Use, we shall 1. Show, that there is such a Sin as not
improving of Christ's Intercession, and how it is fallen into. 2. The causes of
it, or whence it comes, that folks so much misken this part of Christ's Office.
3. The great inconveniences that follow on it, and the prejudices that are
sustained by it. 4. We shall hint at some symptoms and evidences, where this
Sin is. And 5. speak a word to the remedies in opposition thereunto.

For the First, That there is such a Sin, it may be clear from a few
Considerations, that may be obvious to every one of us. 1. It may be clear from
the effect, what is the cause that so many come so little speed in prayer, that
they pray, and yet get not a hearing, so that in the day of Judgment, it will
be found that many prayed, and that their prayers were cast back as dung upon
their faces, They sought to enter, and were not able, as it is, Luke 13. And
this will be found to be the reason of it, that they went to God, but misken'd,
or took not notice of him, who is is the way, the truth, and the life: For
where Christ's Intercession is improven, there is an effect following; For God
has laid it down for a solid ground, that whosoever believes in him shall not
perish; and, Whatsoever ye ask in my name, it shall be granted: And therefore
where there are many Petitions put up to God, and no answer at all; There is
sure a crack and default in folks making use of Christ; For God is faithful,
and will perform His promise. 2. And more particularly, all the Members of the
visible Church may be reduced to these Three Ranks; and we will find a defect
as to the use-making of Christ's Intercession, in them all, though not of the
same degree, or rather not of the same kind. 1. Either they are profane, and
have not so much as a form of Religion, and such do slight Christ, and his
Intercession altogether, Or 2. They are Hypocrites, that make a fashion of
prayer, but come not to God by Him, but at the short cut proudly step forward,
and put up their suits upon the account of their own righteousness; As they
ground their Justification on it, and not on Christ's Satisfaction, so they put
up their prayers to God, on the account of their own righteousness; and not on
the account of Christ's Intercession, Or 3. They are such as have something of
God in them, and so are Believers, and even in such there is often a great
defect, as to this; as Christ says to the Disciples, John 16.24. Hitherto ye
have asked nothing in my name; He charge them not simply for not praying, he
grants that, but ye have not asked in my name, That is, ye have not made use of
my Intercession, as ye should have done; although there be not such a defect in
them as there is in the former two sorts, yet there is a great short-coming,
and not an improving of Christ's Intercession, as they should: And therefore. 3.
It will be more clear, if we consider the particular cases incident to
Believers; wherein we will find, that but very scarcely Christ's Intercession is
improven in any of them; As, 1. If the Believer has liberty in prayer, he is
ready to sit down on it, and to conclude that he cannot but be heard, because
he has liberty; and there is not so single an eye had to Christ's Intercession;
and often it is more difficult to hold off this Sin, when liberty is enjoyed,
then when it is wanting; because, though liberty be good and desirable in it
self, yet through our corruption, and pride it is often abused; even as when
Christians win to some good measure of holiness; it is in some respect more
difficult to rest upon Christ's Righteousness, then if that measure were not
attained; So is it here more difficult, some way to rest upon Christ's
Intercession when we have liberty in prayer, then when we are in bonds, and
under restraint. 2. Upon the other hand, if we look to a Believer when he is
straightened and it goes not well with him in prayer; there is then ordinarily a
great defect, in making use of Christ's Intercession, as if it could not in that
case avail us, and upon this follows anxiety and fretting; and the Believer is
ready to conclude, he will be nothing the better of prayer, and that it is
better to pray none then to pray so; whereas an eye to Christ's Intercession
would give the mind some quietness. 3. If there be an ill and very necessitous
case; or if there be challenges, and some commotion, discomposure and disquiet
be in the spirit, there is readily little respect had to Christ; If quietness,
and calmnesse be, there is also hazard of sitting down on that, and we readily
forget that we hold it of him; And indeed it will be found difficult, either to
have or to want, and in either the one case or the other to be making right use
of his Intercession: Now when I speak of this Sin, it not only reproves them
that pray none at all, which smells of gross Atheism, but also these who
shuffle by Christ, and step forward at the nearest, as if they were not to come
to God by him; As it is, Heb. 7.25. and John 14.6.

2. The Causes of this Sin, and whence it comes to pass, that folks so slight
the use-making of Christ's Intercession. 1. There is a great difficulty in the
thing, it is tickle. 2. There is an natural averseness from, and enmity at that
thing in us, 3. There is a readiness to pitch on some other thing, and to
misken, and over look this; now let all these Three be put together; and we
will see the reason and way, how folk slide and fall into this fault.

1. I say, There is a difficulty in the thing, It being one of the most purely
spiritual, sublime and denied things, in all the Gospel; one of the greatest
exercises of Faith, and we know that all such things have to our nature a great
difficulty. 1. It Is a difficulty to bring a man to be but formal in Religion,
2. There is a difficulty, when he is made formal to make him serious even in a
legal manner, and to be any thing affected in the exercise of Repentance, and
of other duties; So that he be not grossly dessembling. 3. When he is made thus
serious, it is a difficulty to bring him over that seriousness; and to draw him
from resting on these duties, which he has been drawn to; I say, it is a great
and difficult work to get a man brought to the performance of holy Duties; and
as great a work to get him brought over them, and from resting on them, to rest
on Christ's Righteousness for his Justification, and on Christ's Intercession,
for the acceptance of his prayers; And therefore when the Lord has once gotten
His Disciples to pray, and honestly yoaked and engaged therein; He trains them
on to pray in His Name, and so to get their prayers rightly qualified. 2. If we
consider our nature, we will find that there is an aversness, and backwardness
therein to it; as there is an averseness in us, to all things that tend to the
making us deny our selves; and lay the weight of every thing on Christ; That
which thwarts with our pride, stands and sticks at our stomachs (to speak so)
and goes not well down with us; of such nature is this; For our use-making of
Christ's Intercession implies, that we of our selves are at a distance with God,
that we have broken Covenant, and are not to be trusted without a Mediator; and
there is in our nature, a secret sort of disdain at this; We cannot naturally
endure it; Hence, Romans 10. It Is said of the Jews, that being ignorant of Gods
Righteousness, they did not submit, nor stoop to the same; but sought to
establish their own Righteousness. 3. There is a readiness to pitch, and
condescend almost on any other Sin, rather then on this; And therefore folks
may be longer under it, then under many, and yet not be challenged for it; They
will readily be challenged for Lying, Swearing, Sabbath-breaking, and the like;
but they sleep more securely in this Sin then in most others; It is a Sin
easily fallen into, and a Sin not easily recovered from, or win out of; Because
it is a Gospel-sin, that the light of nature reaches not, and that the
Conscience has not such an aw i^ convincing of, It Is against natures light to
neglect prayer, or to take Gods name in vain; but this runs in the Channel of
the Gospel, to pray in the name of Christ, and to make all our addresses to God
through Him? The sinful neglect whereof cannot be discovered, but by
Gospel Light: And we find by experience, that many will be convinced of, and
have challenges for out-breaking Sins, who yet will have no challenges for the
neglect of this duty; Even as it is easier to convince folks of a breach of the
Law then of not believing in Christ; many will grant that ignorance of God is a
Sin, and that irreverence, and wandering in prayer are Sins, who yet will stand
and stick at this, and cannot be gotten convinced, but that they still believe
in Christ, and make use of his Intercession.

For the Third, To wit, the inconveniences and prejudices of this evil, they
are very many; we shall only hint at them, for they are dierectly opposite to
the good that comes by the improving of Christ's Intercession. 1. It makes many
prayers to be fruitless, and frustranious, though folks should weary themselves
in prayer, yet it is all but lost labor, and the Lord will say as it is,
Isaiah 1. Though ye make many prayers, yet I will not hea^ them, if Christ's
Intercession be neglected; but one word put up in Christ's name has a
gracicious hearing. 2. It makes many prayers, and other duties also to be
lifelesse; No duty goes with folks, neither can it go with them when Christ is
slighted; Seeing it is by Faith in Him, that we have Life derived to us, whereby
we are made lively in every thing. 3. It has much anxiety following on it; To
be praying, and to have no expectation, nor ground of expectation of a hearing;
For if we look no further than to something in our selves, it is but a poor
foundation of quietness and peace. 4. It has this prejudice, that it inures,
habituats, and accustomes us to a low esteem of Christ, and makes us want many
sweet experiences that we might have of his usefulness, and worth, and it
fosters a disrespect to Christ; whereas the use making of his Intercession,
keeps always up an esteem of him, and m^kes the thoughts of him fresh, and it
is ever well with the Soul while he is esteemed of, and it is impossible it can
be well when he is not in request.

Now, ye may easily gather what all this aims at, even that ye may not satisfy
your selves wi^h the form of Duty; but that ye may look that it be rightly
discharged, so as Christ in his Offices, and particularly in His Priestly
Office, and more particularly in this part of it, be made use of: It may be,
there are some here that have been called Christians these 20, 30, or 40.
years, But I would inquire at you, what use have ye made all the while of
Christ's Intercession? The neglect of this is a Sin against mercy, a Sin against
your own Souls, and the cause of many other Sins; therefore take it among your
reproves, that not only ye have neglected prayer, lived in ignorance, and
taken his name in vain, but that ye have also long professed Faith in Christ,
and yet have not made use of Christ's Intercession; This will be amongst your
saddest challenges when ye come to sickness, and to your deathbeds, and ye
will have it heavily charged on you, That there has been great slighting, and
miskening of Christ, even when ye thought what ye were praying to him.

In the 4. place, To clear it yet further, we shall 1. Hint at some symptoms,
or evidences of neglecting of Christ's Intercession. 2. At some Characters of a
Person that is making use of Christ's Intercession aright. 3. At some Directions
that may help to the suitable performance of this duty, And 4. At some Motives,
and Encouragements to it.

First, For the Symptoms, or Evidences of miskening, and slighting of Christ's
Intercession. 1. This is one, when there is little walking under the impression
of the need of His Sacrifice, when folks walk whole-heartedly (to speak so) and
without due conviction of the distance that is betwixt God and them; For
Christ's Intercession flows from His Satisfaction, and the improving of His
Satisfact on flows from the conviction of our natural distance from God; when
folks are not sensible of their enmity, and of their vileness, and see not
their need of washing, when they have a heal heart, few challenges, little
exercise of repentnce, and of self-loathing, it is a great evidence* that there
is little or no use made of Christ's Intercession. The 2d. Symptom is deep
security, and much self-confidence; where these are Christ's Intercession, is
little, or not at all made use of; When a Soul makes no question of, nor nor
has any doubt about it is own peace, or about it is praying or getting a
hearing, This is indeed self-confidence and does flow from the former, to wit,
Ignorance of our distance from God; which is clear both from experience, and
from Scripture; They that make least use of Christ's Intercession, and have most
carnal confidence, have readily fewest challenges: Thus the Pharisee stands,
Luke 18. and prays, saying, Lord, I thank thee, etc. The greatest part of such
folks prayers is thanksgiving on carnal grounds, Whereas the poor Publican dare
not come near, but when the Pharisee comes boldly forward, He stands a far off,
and says, Lord be merciful to me a sinner, Who, (as if he had said) have a
respect to the Covenant of Grace, and so to the improving of Christ's
Intercession; It Is certainly an ill token, when folks sit down with confidence
to their prayers, and rise up from them without all fear of being denied, and
said nay. A 3d. Symptom of not making use of Christ's Intercession, is, when
folk have too much anxiety, which is a fault that a Believer may easily fall
in, when he has no ground from himself to propose to God for a hearing and
when he cannot answer his own challenges, and is therefore discouraged; which
says, that he lippens not much to Christ, and to His Intercession. A 4th
Symptom is, When duties of worship become burdensome, when it wearieth folk to
pray, to sanctify the Lords Day, etc. when these are fashions, and cumbursome
to them; The reason whereof is, because they take the burden wholly, or mostly
on themselves, and lay it not over on Christ; Whereas, were he rightly made use
of, it would be found to be a truth, That His yoke is easy, and his burden
light, as himself says, Matthew. 11.30. A 5th Symptom is, When folks are not
thankful for any mercy they receive, and are not wondering how it comes that
they get such mercies as they have; when they think little of their daily
bread, of Ordinances, of access to Pray etc. Souls that are improving Christ's
Intercession think much of any mercy, because the least mercy is quite without
the reach of the merit of ought they can do, and must come to them by the
Mediation of another; Thus every mercy becomes a double mercy, as it is
considered in it self, and as it comes to them by virtue of Christ's
Intercession, therefore the Believer Improving Christ's Intercession, wonders at
every thing he meets with from God; that he is admitted to pray, or to praise,
for he knows, that it is from free grace thus admitting Sinners through, and by
a Mediator.

As to the 2d, To wit, The Characters, or evidences of a persons making use of
Christ's Intercession, The 1. may be this, A constant use-making of Christ's
Satisfaction; when the Soul is never quiet, but when it has a respect to that,
And this use-making of Christ's Satisfaction, has in it, always either more
implicity or more expressly an use-making of his Intercession and leaves the
weight of duties and mercies upon Him; Hence a Soul will be under through
conviction of it is enmity; and very much edged and eager in it is desires after
peace, and will have expectation of obtaining it through Him. A 2d. Evidence
is, When folk in their approaches to God, have Faith and Fear going together;
Anxiety and Fear without Faith are not good, and Self-confidence without Fear
is as ill; But when Faith and Fear go together, it is good; Fear arising from
the impression of our own unworthiness, and discovered distance; and Faith
from the discovery of Christ's fulness, keeping the mind quiet, looking over
it is own unworthiness, to His worthiness, like to that spoken of Noah, Heb. 11.
By faith, Noah moved with fear, prepared an ark; Presumption will not hold up
with Fear, and therefore, when the Hypocrite is staggered, he turns anxious,
because the ground that he leans to is shaken; neither is that which is
supposed to be Faith, good without Fear, for it turns to security, but Fear is
good, having confidence mixed with it, for it says, that there is a lippening
to somewhat else then any thing in the Soul it self. 3. They that make use
aright of Christ's Intercession, betake themselves to it, when in a manner they
have given over, and been formerly hopeless, like these spoken of, Psalm. 107.
Then they cry in their distress, etc. Many have a confidence, because they were
never brangled nor shaken, and have win to quietness this way, even as it is
in the matter of making peace with God, many will profess that they always had
it, even from their youth up, they never doubted of it, which speaks it is
unsoundness; but it is a solid evidence of Faith, when the Soul has once been
brangled and shaken, and this gives it confidence, that Christ has Satisfied,
and makes Intercession, and they betake themselves to that. 4. Where Christ's
Intercession is improven and made use of, it will be ground of rejoicing, and
comfort to think on it, when Souls themselves can do little: being bound up,
and under bonds, yet they cheer themselves, and bless God, that they know they
have an Advocat; I apprehend there are many to whom it was never refreshful,
nor matter of gladness, that He is an Advocat, or that He stands in such a
relation to plead for Sinners, surely such have not made use of Him. A 5th
Evidence is this, When any thing is attained, the improving of Christ's
Intercession makes thankful and humble; If the Soul have liberty, it is not
puffed up with it, because it considers that it is a mercy come through Christ's
Intercession, it has received it, and therefore should not boast; it is not of
it is own procurement, but it is obliged to Free Grace for it. 6. The Soul that
is improving Christ's Intercession, when it obtains not, it gives not over, but
continues adhereing, and waiting for attaining of that which it is seeking; the
cause of such a Person is never quit desperate; if it be a thing conditional
it is submissive, if it be simply necessary, it is dependent, and will not quit,
nor give over, because, though it obtain not to day, it knows it is possible to
attain it, and that it will in due time be attained; it lays not the weight of
it is obtaining on its own prayers, but on Christ's Purchase and Intercession;
And though the Believer may be sometimes assaulted, and set upon to quit his
suit, and then his Faith is brangled, yet he leaves it not so. 7. It is a
difficulty to the Believer, to g^t Christ's Intercession rightly depended on,
and made use of when he prays, this is as great a difficulty to him, as to
get words, and greater; As it is one piece of his exercise in prayer to get
words, affection, and reverence; so it is another piece of his exercise, to get
his prayer accepted through Christ's Intercession; it is here as in
Justification, it is one part of his exercise to do Duty, and another part of
his exercise to be denied to it, and made to betake himself to Christ's
Righteousness allanatly for his acceptance; but other Persons that make not
use of Christ's Intercession, if they get words, and any bit of tenderness,
they think all is well enough; But it is a Believers exercise to see that his
mind miscarry not in the use-making of Christ. 8. Souls that are improving
Christ's Intercession, their confidence is not up or down according to their
liberty, Words or Reasons, they win to make use of in prayer, but they are up
or down according as they win to get the thing they seek committed to Christ;
Hence a word, or look will sometimes quiet the Soul, when at another time many
hours prayer will not do it; For this is sure, so long as the thing rests on
our selves, the Soul get^ never a kindly lair, and that which puts it off our
selves over on Christ, is the exercise of Faith, and nor Liberty, nor the
multitude of Words; At another time a Believer will rise from prayer, and not
seriously look whether Christ have been depended on, or not, but is quiet,
because he has prayed; Whereas, when Christ's Intercession is improven, he is
quiet on that ground, that it is God that is prayed to; through Christ; it is
that which gives him ground of confidence to expect a hearing, and on that his
Soul rests when he has done praying: And therefore we would commend this to
you, in place of many questions that might be moved on what ye have heard, Even
to carry a distinct answer in your bosom to these Two, whether when ye are
going to pray, or when ye have done with prayer, 1. To whom are ye to pray, or
have ye been prayIng? That it is the great God, that one God, the maker of all
things, who ought alone to be worshipped, that being properly, and formally the
Object of your worship, and particularly of this your prayer. 2. Upon what
ground do ye hazard to put up a suit to this great God, and what is it that
gives you confidence to expect an answer? It Is that, not for any righteousness
or worth in your selves, or in your prayers, but for Jesus Christ, for His
Satisfaction, and Intercessions sake; When ye can give a distinct answer from
the Conscience in reference to these Two, though there be not such
distinctnesse in other things, to wit, That it is God ye pray to, and that ye
expect a hearing on Christ's account, it is right.

For the Third thing, What is it that will help us to make use of Christ's
Intercession? First, consider that it is our duty; Souls often mind not, that
God has not simply bidden them pray, but commanded them to pray in the name of
Christ; He has nor bidden us simply approach to him, but to approach to Him,
in and by Christ; This would be remembered, else we forget the half of our duty,
to wit, the manner how we should come to God, which is a main, if not the main
part of it. 2. We would remember and think upon our condition by nature, that
upon the one side, God is a consuming fire, and we on the other, like dry
stubble; and that there is no approaching to Him without a Mediator; There were
the less hazard of going wrong, if folk were walking under the suitable
impression of their sinfulness and misery by nature; the want whereof makes too
much forwardness, in steping into God without Christ; Therefore we commend to
you all, and especially when ye go to prayer, to endeavor, to be under deep
impressions of your own sinfulness and baseness; As we see it was with Abraham,
Genesis 18. Behold now I have taken on me to speak to the Lord, who am but dust
and ashes. 3. Mind the promise of Gods hearing you through Christ, and His
promise of leading you in all necessary truth, and so to perform duty in this
manner; Mind I say, 1. The promise of hearing, that it is not a promise to hear
us simply in what we pray for, but in wh^t we pray for with other requisite
qualifications of prayer, and with this in particular, That it be in Christ's
Name; Hence is Asking in his name, so often mentioned, John 14. v. 13, 14, and
16. v. 23, 24, 26. To mind that there is a promise of hearing, draws a Soul to
pray to God, and to mind that the promise is made to praying thus qualified,
to wit, that it be in Chris^s Name; binds the Soul to this way, because
otherwise it forfaults the Promise, if it observe not the due qualification; I
fear there are too many, who look on the Promise as absolute; It Is true. Though
there are absolute Promises in the Covenant, yet there are other Promises that
have qualifications and conditions, whereof this anent hearing of prayer is
one, and we are to expect the performance of the Promise, when we seek after
the qualification and condition. 2. M^ne Christ's Promise whereby he has
engaged, as to lead us in all necessary truth, so in this part of it, to put up
our prayers in His N^me, John 16.24. In that day ye shall a^k in my name; To
consider aright of this promise, gives some ground of confidence to win at the
performance of it, an^ holds the Soul in dependence on him, and makes it to be
quiet in the duty of improving Christ's Intercession; and indeed this is a main
part of Religion: Learn therefore to put these things together, First, think it
a mercy that ye have a warrant and access to pray, 2. That ye have a promise to
be heard. 3. That ye have a Mediator to interceed for you. 4. That a promise is
given you to learn how to make use of Him, and that though the use-making of
His Intercession aright be difficult, and many do misken and mistake it, yet
that by the eying of the Promise, ye may win to the right use-making of it; ye
would by any means eye the Promise, that ye be not mistaken; It may be there is
a look now and then to liberty, and it is good in it self, but there may be a
defect here; That ye look not to Christ to be helped to pray with liberty, and
to be guided to pray in His Name, so as to lay the weight of your being heard
on Christ's intercession.

4ly. When there has been an eying of the Promise, not only for the thing we
seek, but also to be guided in the seeking of it; ye would be often taking a
review of your selves in, and after prayer, whether ye be indeed praying, and
have prayed in Christ's Name, that when the Soul looks back, and sees it has
much miskenned and neglected Christ, it may take it self in this evil, and
disclaim it, and settle it self on a right ground; In a word, there would be
looking well on the one side, that Jesus Christ be the ground we build on, and
on the other side, that when we eye Christ, and build on him, we be not afraid
to hazard on Him; For into one of these extremes we readily run, either to
lippen and lean to some other thing then Christ, or, if we see no other thing
to lean and lippen to, and be necessitate to eye Him, we distrust Him, and are
loath to hazard on Him.

5ly, And lastly, if we consider well, we will see good ground, 1. To press, 2.
To encourage us to, this way, not to be doing duty only, as men under the Law,
but as Christian men under the Gospel, with respect to Christ's Satisfaction and
Intercession; And, First, For pressing it, consider, that there is a necessity
of it in reference to as many prayers as are accepted of God; If it be
necessary to get a hearing, fit's necessary to pray in Christ's Name; It a may
be many think it to be but an indifferent thing that we have been pressing ll
the while that we have been speaking of Christ's Intercession; but indeed it is
of more moment then our pressing you to any external duty; for the external
duty of prayer, though it must needs be gone about, is yet but the carcass, this
is the Soul and Life of Prayer; And therefore let me exhort and obtest you,
never to sa^i^fie your selves with a legal performance of the most spiritual
duties in themselves, except ye win to a Christian way of perfo^ming them, that
is, That they be done in Christ's strength, and that ye rest on Him, for the
acceptance of them; It Is as necessary to worship God in and by a Mediator, as
it is to worship the only true God, and not to worship a false, or strange God.
I make no question, but most part of the hearers of the Gospel, do destroy
themselves here, by resting on their legal performances, and not making use of
Christ 2. For your encouragement, consider that it is most advantageous and
profitable; These words in the Promise are broad and full, Whatsoever ye ask in
my name, I will do it, And the Promise is frequently repeated in these
forecited Chapters of John; O! what calmness, tranquillity, peace, victory over
anxiety, what patience in waiting, whether, when in bonds or in liberty, do
flow from the exercising of Faith on this ground, to wit, That we have an
Advocat in Heaven with the Father; further consider the great ground of
confidence that he has given us, that we shall come speed in this way, which
should stir us up, hearten and encourage us to it, which will manifestly appear,
if we join these Two together. 1. That this blessed Advocat is our Brother,
that He was made like unto us in all things except sin; that He is a
fellow-feeling high Priest, that is touched with our infirmities, that He
refuses to grant no suits of His People that are for His glory, and their
good, that He saves all to the uttermost, that come unto God by Him; none could
ever say that He refused to take their Cause in hand, when they indeed
committed it to Him. 2. That when a Cause is committed to Him, it cannot but
carry, and be succesful, for as He is Man, so He is God, and He is heard
always; Thi^ blessed Mediator (as I said just now) refuses the suit of none,
and no suit is refused Him: And now, what can we say more to you, for your
up-stirring and encouragement to make use of Him? It is no stranger we have to
go to, and there is good ground of confidence, that when we go, we shall come
speed; Therefore let Him ever be gone unto more and more; and bless God
heartily, that He has given such an high Priest unto Sinners, Who is able to
save to the uttermost, all that come unto God through him: Now to this God, who
can effectually teach us to make use of the Mediator every way, and particulary
in His Intercession, suitably and succesfully, And who is able to do exceeding
abotnaantly above all we ask, or think, according to the power that works in
us, be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus throughout all ages, world without
end, Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Courteous Reader,
A Great many Errata has crept into the Impression of this choice Book, mostly
through the absence of the Publisher from the Press, and partly otherwise; not
to load the Printer with them all, whereof there are not a few literal ones;
as, fair for far, may for many, did for died, antecedamus for antecedanious,
abuse for a bussle, punished for pinched, valid for veiled, rather for either,
close for class, except for accept, binder for burden, gnash for quash,
greatness for greatest, rouring for rouzing, stop for step, seriously for
furiously, serious fer furious, simply for singly; arm for army, error for err
or, commit for count, particulary for peculiarly, and practically, being for be
in, warn for warm, proceeding for producing, case for cause, warrantably for
warrantable, distinctions for distinctness; and many others such, which thou will easily perceive as they occur, and I hope pardon; several grains also,
must be allowed for mispointings for some very few misplacings of Parenthesees,
and mistakes of numbering Figures of Chapters and Verses.

Please to correct these following with thy Pen.

PAge 6. Column 2. Line 40. read believes. p. ^4. c. 1. l. 14. dele ye. p. 55.
c. 1. l. 55. d. or. p. 65. c. 2. l. 1. r. it would, l. 4. r. and culpable. p.
75. c. 2. l. 14. d. out, p. 77. c. 1. l. 45. r. will be. p. 80. c. 1. l. 20.
read not only. p. 117. c. 2. l. 40. r. loaves. p. 118. c. 2. l. 28. r. is for
was. p. 126. c. 2. l. 48. read wakeneth up. p. 131. c. 2. l, 49. d not. p, 134.
c. 1. l. 11. d. of. p. 140. c. 1. l. 17. d. he. p. 145. c. 1. l. 25. d. that.
c. 2. l. 3. r. 4. for 3. p. 147. c. 2. l, last d. and. p. 164. c. r. l. 24. r.
to for would, p. 165. c. 1. l. 45. r. on the sinner. p. 169. c. 2. l, 40. r.
and of. p. 173. c. 2. l. 3. r. report for respect, p. 175. c. 2. l. 23. d.
that, l. 42. r. hate God, p. 180 c. 2. l. 32. r. for the debt, l. 41. r. 2ly,
p. 184. c. l. 6, r. 2. for so, p. 185. c. 2. l. 50. r. 2. that, p. 190. c. 2.
l. 31. d. the, p. 191. c. 1. l, 40. r. sentence only; p. 194. c. 2. l. 24, r.
his interposing, l. 32 r. a matter, p. 195. c. r ^. l. 30. d. who, p. 300. c.
2. l. 31. r. more then in. p. 301. c. 1. l. 17. d. not, p. 302. c. 1. l. 7. r
as he became, l. 15. r not only not, p. 304. c. 2. l. 13. r. when thou shall
make his soul, p. 309. c. 2. l. 45. r. bringing, p. 312. c. 1. l. 44. d. in. p.
317. c. 1. l. 13. r. he be, p. 342. c. 1. l. last. and c. 2. l. 1. r. you for
them, l. 36. taste of death, p. 349. c. 1. l. 10. r, strick in with, p. 350. c.
1. r. in your hearing from John 17.4. and in part by us from v. ^0. p. 357. c.
r. l. 30. r. he for and, p, 358. c. 1. l. 21. r. 4, for 5. p, 359. c. 2. l, 5.
r. satisfaction for salvation, l. 20. d. not p. 362. c 2. l. 33. r. rise of
them which was, p. 363. c. 1. l. 15. d. making, p. 371. c. 2. l. 46. d. two
sorts, 1. p. 373. c. 1. l. 22. d. thereupon, p. 374. c. 1. l. 12. r. to be
clear. p, 376. c. 2. l. 11. d. 2dly, p. 382. c. 2. l. 20. r, the meaning, p.
389. c. 2. l. 29. r. and 4 lie, p. 394. c. 2. l 35. r. Gospelway, p. 396. c. 1.
l. 48. r. curse is, p. 402. c. 2. l. 49. d. that, p. 405. c. 2. l. 36. r.
righteous servant, p. 417. c. 1, l. 44. d. were. p. 421. c. 1. l. 13. r.
condemnation. p. 426. c. 1. l, 2, d. of. c. 2. l. 47. r. sin is expelled: p.
428. c. 1. l. 48. r. oppose Popery: l. last. r. error or heresy: p. 432. c. 2.
l. 20. d. in: p. 435. c. 2. l. 6. this twofold consideration: p. 436. c. 2. l.
31. d. an: p. 442. c. 2. l. 42. r. as it is: p. 445. c. 2. l. 16. r. on such
terms: p. 447. c. 1. l. 22. r. it is: p. 449. c. 2. l. 39. d: I. p. 455. c. 2.
l. 29. r. not at all: p, 473. c. 2. l. 10. r. for us: p. 474. c. 1. l. 39. r.
as an: p. 483. c. 1. l. 34. 35. d. or works not on that account to be
justified by them. l. 38. r. or works not on that account to be justified by
them: c. 2. l. 5. d. as, l. 19. r. get, p. 484. c. 1. l. 7. r. the same cause:
l. 42. r. the ground: p. 485. c. 2. l. 30. d. a: p. 488. c. 1. l. 11. d. is: p.
491. c. 2. l. 1. r. 3dly, if: p. 493. c. 1. l. 11. r. go wrong: p, 497. c. 2.
l. 6. d. only. l. 14. r. but only: p. 500. c. 2. l. 42. r. greatest: p. 501. c.
1. l. 48, 49. r. of coming to the: p. 508. c. 1. l. 22. r. before or after
them: p. 509. c. 2. l. 27, 28. d. and indeed it would be a fearful prison who
loved not liberty: p. 519. c. 2. l. 39. r. wills for calls: p. 521. c. 1.
l. 22. r. held it out by: p. 553. c. 1. l. 19. r. of the Godhead.

Notice, That the 25. Sermon in number contains in it two distinct Sermons.


