THE ACCOMPLISHED COURTIER.

Consisting of Institutions and Examples.

BY WHICH, Courtiers and Officers of State may Square their Transactions
Prudently and in good Order and Method.

Quis enim non vivit in Aula? By H.W. Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring, and are to be sold at his shop at the George
in Fleetstreet, near Cliffords-Inne. 1658.

HONOmo VIRO JOHANNI FITZ-JAMES, De Leweston in Agro Durotriges (vulgo) Dorset
shire, Armigero, ad (hujus aevi) Comitia Parliamentaria foeliciter cooptato.
Domine, perquam colende.
SUb Tui-ipsius Vexillo me dimicare (quanquam indignum) non dedignatus es olim.
Nunc, sub Tuis auspiciis opusculum and Enchiridium hoc, usui publico destinatum
and adaptatum, in lucem proferre haud dubitavi. Et (quia indignus est dandis,
qui non est gratus de datis) Gratitua dinis et Observantiae ergo, tibi
dedicavi, ut, tuo Nomine et Patronatu, Momi acerbitudinem Zoilique livorem
evadat, aut reprimat. Ex Musaeo meo, prope Bangor-howse, prim^ Januarii 1658.
Stylo novo.

Tibi devinctissimus, observantissimusque, H. W.

To the Reader.
IT is an approved Axiom, Omnis praxis, fine praevia theoria, imperfecta and
incerta est. All practice, without the Theory first known, is imperfect and
uncertain. Experience has taught many (and doubtless my self) this truth
possibly, in Arms, as well as Arts. Therefore I conceived, it would not be
unworthy acceptance to publish the ensuing Treatise, wherein there will be
found instruction not only for Courtiers, but others who are eminent in
public imploiments at this time, or shall be hereafter. If it find acceptance
with thee, 'twill encourage me for future to compose somewhat of another
nature, who in the Mean while will not be wanting in studyes and endeavors
further to serve thee and the Public.

Farewell.
Books Printed for Thomas Dring, at the George in Fleetstreet.
Law Books.
THe Pleader, containing perfect Precedents and forms of Declarations,
Pleadings, Issues, Judgments, and Proceedings in all kinds of Actions; by Mr.
Brownlow, Mr. Mayle, Mr. Gulston; and Mr. Covy.

The Reports of that reverend and learned Judge, Sir Richard Hutton, in folio.

The twelfth Part of the Reports, by Sir Edward Cook, in Fol.

The Reports of that, Learned Judge Owen, in Fol.

The Reading upon the Statute, touching Bankrupts, by John Stone, in Octavo.

The Law of Conveyances, of all manner of Assurances, with directions to sue
out and prosecute, all manner of Writs, by John Hern, Gent.

An Abridgement of the Common Law, with the Cases thereof, drawn out of the old
and new Books of Law, for the benefit of all the Practicers and Students; by W.
H. of Grayse-Inne, Esquire

An Abridgement of the Acts and Ordinances of Parliaments by W. H. of
Gray's-Inne, Esquire

The Reports of Sergeant Bridgman, in Fol.

The grounds of the Laws of England, extracted out of the fountain of all
Learning, and fitted for all Students and Practitioners.

An exact Abridgement of that excellent Treatise, called, Doctor and Student.

A profitable Book of Mr. John Perkins, treating of the Laws of England.

The Interpreter, or Book, containing the signification of Words, by John
Cowell.

Artamenes, or the Grand Cyrus; a Romance, complete in five Volumes, by
Monsieur de Scudery, in Fol.

Cloelia, an excellent Romance, by Monsieur de Scudery, in three Volumes, and
translated by J. D. Fol.

Astrea, an excellent Romance, full and complete in three Volumes, in Fol.
Translated by a Person of Quality.

The History of Philosophy, in two Volumes, by Thomas Stanley, Esquire

The History of the Wars betwixt Swedland and Poland, by John Fowler, in Fol.

Anti-Socinianism; or, a Confutation of Socinian Heresy, with a description of
the lives, and true relation of the deaths, of the Authors and promoters of the
Sect, and when it was that brought into England, by H. Chewney, M. A. Quarto.

Mr. Cragge against Tombs, with a Conviction of Anabaptism. Octavo.

The life and death of Freeman Sands, Esquire by R.B.

An Exhortation for desperate Sinners, written by that honorable, the Lord
Grandison, prisoner in the Tower. Small Octav.

A Sermon, preached at the Assize at Huntington, by John Gaul.

Mr. Sands Paraphrase upon the Psalms, in large Octavo.

Good Thoughts for every day in the Month, by D. S.

God's House, with the Nature and Use thereof, as it ought to be understood and
respected, by Christians under the Gospel; by Simon Gunton, M. A.

Eight Sermons, by Mr. Cragge, with a Treatise, concerning the Lawfulness of
Marriage by the Minister.

Mirza, a Tragedy, really acted in Persia, by R. B. in Octav.

Five new Plays, written by R. Broom, in Octav.

Amorous Poems, by Edw. Sherburn Esquire

Pocula Caestalia, by R. B. Esquire

Poems, by William Hammond, Esquire

An Apology for Paris, by R. B.

A Catalogue of the Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, that have compounded for
their Estates, with the Sums that paid their Composition.

The second part of Massiniello, with a continuation of that tumult; by J. H.
Esquire

The Natural and Experimental History of Winds, written by the Lord Bacon,
and Translated into English by R. G.

A Panegyric of the Queen of Swodland.

Letters of Affairs, Love and Courtship, written to several persons of Honor
and Quality, by the exquisite Pen of Monsieur de Voyture, a Member of the
famous French Academy, established at Paris, by Cardinal de Richlieu.

Londinopolis. An Historical discourse of the City of London; whereunto is
added another of the City of Westminster, with the Courts of Justice,
Antiquities, and new Buildings thereunto belonging; by James Howel Esquire

A Trance, or a Mercurius. Acherontius, by James Howel Esquire

Modern Policy, taken from Machiavel, Morgia, and others; by an Eyewitness.

Sapientia Justificata, or a Vindication of the fifth Chapter of the Romans, or
an Answer to Doctor Taylor's Deus Justificatus.

The History of Polindo and Flostella, by John Harrington Gent.

The History of the Goths, Swedes, and Vandalls, by the Bishop of Upsall,

The Minister of State, wherein is shown the true use of Modern Policy.

The Accomplished COURTIER,
CHAP. I.
The Argument.
The various end and aim of Courtiers. The way by which they may ingratiate
themselves with the Prince, whatsoever disposition he be of. To this, end it is
needful, that a man be notified to the Prince. Some are known by the splendor
of their Family, others by their own Industry.

IT behooves every man, who desires rightly, and in order, to institute his
actions; first, to consider the end, or aim of such his enterprises.

2. They who are drawn to Court, prefix not to themselves the like end; for
some are led thither by hope of gain, others by ambition, and hope of honor.

3. Some are drawn thither by a desire of commanding others; some also (as
Seneca says) by a desire of destroying, hurting, and procuring business to
others. Few propose and intend the advantage and safety of the Prince.

4. The way of obtaining this (whatever their ends be) is common to all
Courriers (to wit) the favor of the Prince. In the prosecution hereof, every
one sets his wits on work, and is very industrions.

5. To get the Princes favor, its needful that you be both known to him, and
also approve your Manners and Actions, and by some laudable way please him.

6. There are some the Splendour of whose Family and Authority by reason of
their office (whether more ample or mean; whether purchased by Money or
descended by Inheritance) has fortified their admittance to the Prince. These
are exempted from laboring addresses; and are, as it were, in the midway to
further promotion.

7. They to whom these things are wanting in the beginning are put to more
labor. But when once they come to be known to the Prince so that he judge them
fit for his service, are often mounted above others, because they being raised
from a lower place (at least from a matter fortune) become more subject, and
more attained to the will of the Prince; whom they more submissively reverence
and esteem, as the sole Author of their Dignity and Promotion.

8. The means and way of Nobles (so born) is very different and has much
disparity. The Dignity of their Office or Family puts a kind of necessity on
them to maintain their own honor, and sometimes to prefer their own opinion
before the Prince's; who is also oft-times more difficult to promote them, out
of a kind of Emulation or fear, lest their Authority should insult against the
Author thereof, which to repress would be hazardous to himself and his
dominion. On the contrary, the suppression of one raised from baseness is more
proclive; so that if the Prince turn his back on him, or suffer him to be at
the will of great Ones (who for the most part have an evil eye on such) he
soon fails. I speak of Princes discreet and prudent, and who know how to limit
and circumscribe the power of those whom they love and advance, not conferring
on One the whole stresse of Command, but even holding under the very Peers; yet
this course has not been expedient to some Princes.

CHAP. II.
The Argument.
Two ways to a^cupate the Favor of the Prince.

THere are two ways especially and most common and frequent whereby Courtiers
procure to themselves Authority and Favor with the Prince.

1. One is the course of such who go about to procure to themselves and hunt
after public Charges, Offices, and Dignities; and, in the interivalls of such
Dignities and Employments more near, content themselves with such as are lower
and at greater distance from Supremacy.

2. The other, is of such as follow the Court continually seeking to be
employed in the Prince's most secret businesses and extraordinary solicitations
for others.

3. The last of these is the most compendious, and bears the impresse and
footsteps of such as have been in the most flagrant and flourishing favor and
acceptance with their Prince. Such was Mecoenas with Augustus, and Salustius
with him also and Tiberius his Successor. Of whom Tacitus in his Annal 3. says
thus: Although Salustius emulating Mecoenas by a prompt and ready entrance to
honor, yet without the dignity of a Senator, out-stript many in power, who had
triumphed and were of Consular dignity; being diverse from the institutes of the
Ancients by his trimnes and sprucenesse, and by wealth and abundance more
prone to luxury; had nevertheless such vigor of mind as was fit for great
negotiations, and so much the sharper by how much he did ostentate and brag of
sleep and sloathfulnesse.

The like to whom was Mella, of whom the same Tacitus in the twelfth of his
Annals, says: Mella being descendred from the same Lineage with Gallio and
Seneca abstained from the desire of honor through a prepesterous ambition,
that being a Roman Knight he might equalize the power of a Consul, and also
believed that it was a shorter way to get riches by procurations and soliciting
for others, then by negotiating for the Prince.

CHAP. III.
The Argument.
Diverse ways to be notified to the Prince,

TO be made known and be approved to the Prince the ways are diverse also,
according to the diversity both of the Suitors at Court, and of the Times.
There are some which render themselves known by some action (notably either
useful or glorious) or else by their (more then vulgar) virtue and honesty. To
some, another man's recommendation has opened the way to the Prince, and this
way is more usual then the rest.

2. Princes act in place so eminent above others, and they are hedged about
with such a numerous troop of Noble and deserving Courtiers that a Novice or
new commer can scarce press through such a thicket of obstacles unless there
be some which may lead him by the hand and even force his entrance through
them, or else that he himself can (by some unusual action) draw the eyes of all
men and consequently of the Prince toward him.

3. Memorable is the fact of a certain Architect whom some call D^mocrates,
others Stacicrates who desiring to be known to Alexander the great, when all
the great Ones refused to bring him to the King, consults and resolves with
himself to offer himself to the Kings view, naked, and not anointed with oil,
his head environed with a Crown of Popler; a Lions skin cast over his right
shoulder, and holding in his right hand a wharle-Bat or clubb. And forthwith in
this Attire he approaches the presence of Alexander sitting on the Tribunal:
the novelty hereof drew the eyes of all, and of Alexander also, so that he
commanded him to be brought unto him. And although the King he approved not the
Project, yet he ordered he should be enrolled, and took him as one of his
Family at Court.

4. We have brought this Example not to persuade any man that by such a
Nugament or trifle he may insinuace into the Princes favor, but to show that
such (who are at a distance) unless they be assisted by some flourishing in
Authority, are not fit to break through such a troop of men who compass the
Prince about, unless by some notable exploit or unusual accident they seem to
merit; and, as the Poet says, To be pointed at with the finger; and that it be
said of him, (That Is the man!)

At pulerum est digito monstrari, et dicier Hicest. Pers. 8.
CHAP. IV.
The Argument.
The manners, conditions, inclinations, and propensities of Princes, and their
Familiars, are to be known by such as are Court-suitors.

1. AN unadvanced Courtier, and he who desires both to be known to, and beloved
of his Prince, ought to consider both the manners and conditions of the Prince,
and those his familiars in whom he most confideth; of great Ones also, and of
all those, who either are able to assist him, or, on the contrary, (being
snatched from the Prince, either by the emulation, fear, envy, hatred, or
endeavor, of himself or those about him) are able to prejudice him. First, it
is necessary, that he have a clear insight into the inclinations and customs of
the Prince, which do commonly follow the temperature of his body; for although
this may be concealed by cautelous and wary Princes, yet it can hardly be but
that at last it will break forth, and show it self; since all their actions are
so exposed to the eyes of all men, that it cannot be, but some will take notice
which way they tend. They are also sometimes so sharply stimulated and enraged,
by the weightinesse of negotiations, that forgetting to dissemble, they betray
their ingenies and natural dispositions: Even Tiberius, although the most
crafty Artificer of dissimulation, could not so well bear up the scene of his
contracted brow, but that time, by little and little, brought all his Arts to
light.

2. But since the propensions and inclinations of all men, but chiefly of
Princes, are diverse, and almost infinite, yet may they be brought to two heads;
one whereof contains such, as respect their Greatness; the other, their
Pleasures.

3. Greatness consists either in fame or wealth, or in the obsequiousness
of their Subjects, or, lastly, in the strength, puissance, and faithfulness of
Armies. In these, as the Prince fares well, and need requires, a man ought to
accommodate his endeavors; which whosoever does wittily, (provided he be
neither suspected nor hated upon any other account) shall doubtless be mostly
accepted with his Prince.

4. The same is to be conceived and judged, concerning the vicious pleasures
and affections of Princes: If he be of a diffident and timorous Genius, you may
conceive, that a bold Accuser and Delator, and one who cares not much for the
envy of great ones, and is prompt and ready to execute his Prince's commands,
shall find acceptance with him; such a one Tacitus describes Sejanus to be, He
had a body, (says he in the fourth of his Annalls) able for labor, a bold
mind, shie and wary of himself, to others a dis coverer of crimes, closely
flattering and proud, openly composed and modest, inwardly gripeing and
covetous.

5. If the Prince delight in drinking, he will delight in those thereunto
addicted; for which cause, Tiberius loved Pomponius, and Lucius Piso; whereof
Suetonius writing of Tiberius, in his chap. 24. says thus, Afterward the
Prince, (to the corrupting of public manners) spent two whole nights and
days, in continual eating and drinking, with Pomponius, Flaccus, and Piso; on
the one of which, he conferred the Province of Syria; on the other, the
Presidentship of the City of Rome; and in books professed them, omnium horarum
amicos, his jolly friends and company at all hours.

6. The same Tiberius, (as Suetonius reports) preferred a most ignorant and
simple fellow, that fought only for a Questorship, and Tax-gatherer, before
his Nobles, for drinking at a Banquet, himself taking off his whole glasses.

7. Society in lust endeared Tigellinus to Nero, as Tacitus, Annal 14. has it:
Tigellinus, says he, became more strong in the Princes mind, being associated
with him in his most intimate and close pleasures, So Petronius the Arbitrator,
and Judge of Elegancy, (they are the same Historians words, Annal. 16.) being
taken in among those few familiars to Nero, he thought nothing pleasant and
delicate, in his affluence and plenty, but what Petronius had given his
approbation of. After the same example, Commodus and Heliogabalus, preferred to
all the dignities of the Empire, men most like themselves in licentiousness.

8. Mutianus was not so well beloved of Vespasian, for his faithful duty and
actions, as for that he was most fit (before others) to satisfy his avaritious
desires.

9. Such covetousness endeared a certain youth to Isaacius Angelus, (who held
the Empire after the death of Theodorus) whom he made President of his
Exchequer, (although he could hardly write) upon hopes to participate of the
large Bribes, which he there might have opportunity to take, from such as had
occasion to make use of him in that employment.

10. Manuel Comnenus, an Emperor also, seeking for a sharp Exactor, and crafty
Artificer, in gathering of Tribute and Customs, and one that might largely
supply his prodigality with money, chose John Rucius, a fellow rude, and morose,
and testy, hard to be accosted and spoken to, of intolerable asperity and
sharpness; and, in a word, Procuratorem vultu qui praeferat ipso, who carried
a Procurer or Solicitor in his very face. And not content herewith, or as if
that were not enough, put him in such high Authority, that he not only
trampled upon all others in dignity, but would abrogate and disannul the
Decrees and Edicts of the Prince, and Ordinances of the Senate, upon pretext of
his household affairs, shaving and poleing the most necessary advantages, (such
as was the custody of the Galleys) the chief strength and benefit of the Empire.

CHAP. V.
The Argument.
Whether or no, and how the affections of Princes are to be seconded and
obeyed. How, and wherefore honest men, may undertake Courtship, and public
Functions.

1. NOw that they who desire to find acceprance with a Prince, ought to serve
him in his affections, is a thing not only very well known, but also
experienced, by the daily use of Courtiers.

2. An honest man will admire this, and suppose, that by this rule, he is
intercluded and shut out, from any entrance into Court, whereby he is bidden to
follow the inclinations of the Prince, since they are oft-times devious and
exorbitant, from the path of reason and honesty.

3. I confess, for him that would live a life altogether innocent, and remote
from the custom of those, who are addicted to evil Arts, and their own Genius,
I esteem it better, that he abstain from Court, because sometimes men are there
corrupted, though formerly most innocent and faultlesse.

4. Of such corruptions, let us see an example or two. Festinus, the familiar
of Maximinus, in the time of Valentinian the Emperor, had governed Asia with
much renown, and fame of lenity and modesty, being a sharp reprehender of the
violences and cruel facts of Maximinus, and of the calumnies; by which he (for
his own advantage) had circumvented many.

5. But observing, that by such doings, his Companion was made President of the
Pretorian Bands, (which Dignity was second to the Emperorship only) he changed
his course of life, and imitating Maximinus, did many things cruelly and
unjustly.

6. John Pucius, (mentioned a little before) administered in the affairs and
treasure of Manuel the Emperor, with great integrity, whereby it came to
pass, that the haughtiness and inhuman actings of the Emperor, became more
tolerable to men's minds: At length, applying his mind (as Nicetas testifies)
to the getting of wealth, fell short of none of the like Office, in
covetousness; and became also a president to his friends to do the like, many
of whom being corrupted by his example, followed his steps: Others, although
better, and such as could not be corrupted themselves, yet suffered others to
be tainted, for fear of imminent banishment, to such as should dare to oppose
themselves.

7. Aristides, just in name and deed, President to the Athenians, of their
public Exchequer, at first, of his own ingenuity, and also to discharge the
office of an honest man, was careful to hinder those, who were employed under
him, from purloyning and robbing the Treasury. At length they accuse him of
pilfering, and exclaim on him, as one of the most rapacious and ravenous
thieves, that ever had been; and hardly could he escape condemnation. At length
being quit, and his Office being prorogued and suspended, he was advised to
imitate others, who were his predecessors; and to wink at the thefts and
legerdemains of his Colleagues. So by and by he got the name and report or a
good man, by the opinion and judgment of all.

8. Such courses are still taken in the Courts of most Princes, either from the
malice of such, as are in chief authority, (and look upon honest men with
disdain) or else by the imprudence and stupidity, of the Princes themselves.

9. Therefore to retain honesty in Court, is very difficult. Yet, if any one,
by the exigency and necessity of his own fortune, or by the splendor and
greatness of his birth and lineage, or dignity of Office, or by an impulsive
desire to serve his Country and friends, or being called thither by the Prince,
shall undergo this kind of life, he may persist therein, in my judgment,
although a good man; at least, may live there a while; and as opportunity
serves, and occasion offers it self, not only be serviceable to himself, but
others also.

10. I speak of the Courts of most harsh and cruel Princes; for to live in the
Court of a wise Prince, and one who loves honest men, is far less difficult.

11. Honest men heretofore, undertook public functions and employments, not
altogether out of desire to advance the public, but sometimes also, that they
might anticipate and prevent the entrance of evil men into such employments.
For the same causes may they also, and ought to seek access to Tyrants, and
Princes given to volupty; that so, if not with open face, yet obliquely, and as
much as in them lies, they may either impede and hinder pernicious counsels,
by delaying things evilly consulted, objecting some difficulties to them; or
casting in some more mild and plausible.

12. Burrhus and Seneca (considering those times) were accounted not only good
men, but good Courtiers, who being governors of Nero in his youthful time,
observed the ingenie and disposition of the Prince to be leight and slippery,
and proclive to lust; lest he should break forth, to the debanching of any of
the most illustrious women, granted him to love and court a free woman, whereby
in time he restrained his fury, having taken for a cloak of such doings, Seneca
Anuaus Serenus; who pretending love to her, openly bestowed those largesses,
(the words are Tacitus his own, in the 13th. book of his Annalls) which the
Prince secretly conferred on her. Thus a good man, not knowing how to hinder
luxury, licentiousness, and perverse counsels, may at least divert them, and
bend them to such a course, as from whence less hazard may ensue, both to the
public, and the Princes same and renown.

CHAP. VI.
The Argument.
The rarity and condition of honest men in the Courts of Tyrants and dissolute
Princes. The seminary of evil men, and the Art of approving themselves to the
Prince.

PEthaps some will say, It seldom chances that a Tyrant or dissolute Prince
takes to him an honest man. Nor can I deny that it is very rare, but this also
I affirm, that there are few Princes houses in which some good man (at least)
may not be found drawn thither if not by a call from the Prince, yet by a
desire of accommodating the good, and infringing the power of evil ones, and
may keep his Station there by the aid and benevolence of the better sort, or
the friendship of some great or noble One: observing first and keeping that
wholesome temperament of Lepidus whom Tacitus in the fourth of his Annals
propounds as an example of a good and wise Courtier, who neither by abrupt
contumacy has irritated and provoked the Prince, nor by a deformed
obsequiousness consented to all his lust.

2. The same Tacitus commends Labeo and Capito; of whom speaking. That age,
says he, bare two Ornaments of peace at once: but Labeo being more famous for
his incorrupt freedom and liberty; Capito for his readiness to serve those in
Authority, were much approved, Annals 3.

3. It cannot be denied, but that a Courtiers life to an honest man is more
beset with difficulties then to another man. But this labor will be made good by
the greatness of the glory and pleasure of mind which he shall have. Moreover,
if he act wisely, and accommodate himself to such things as he sees cannot be
changed, I dare be bold to say that he shall be at length endeared even to the
worst of Princes, more dear certainly then others in after times who seldom
with due faithfulness transact the business of their Prince, at least not so
exactly, but that every man may lawfully promise himself better service from a
good man.

4. To this purpose was the Counsel of Salustius and Mecoenas whereby the one
to Julius Caesar, the other to Augustus, commended the love and friendship of
good men because their own regard of estimation, and religious Conscience, is
more prevalent with them to deterr them from dishonest things, then fear of
punishment can do others; or their own imbecility, or want of strength, can
restrain.

5. But, as is said, the growth and sproutings up of evil men is more
plentiful in Courts, who chiefly do approve themselves to the Prince by two
causes; first by Adulation and doing any exploit the Prince commands, and so
much the more servile is he by how much the hope of profit allureth: moreover
there is this, wherein Princes much please themselves, that they may have some
in comparison of whom they (although evil themselves) may seem to be good.
Others also suppose their life more secure amongst such as are like themselves.

6. Dionysius the Tyrant being required to expel from Court a certain fellow,
who by his obscenities had incurred the odium of all men, answered that he must
retain him in the Court, lest himself should seem to be the worst there.

7. They who know themselves obnoxious to some vices have this way with them,
that they cloak themselves with a show of honesty, by comparing themselves
with those who are worse. And it is the old Artifice of such as Rule, to choose
an unlike and unequal successor, that so their own doings may appear better
and more illustrious. Nor was Augustus other wise minded while he called
Tiberius to his assistance seeing his Arrogance and Cruelty, nor Tiberius when
he delivered the Empire to Caligula: of which, Tacitus is the Author.

8. But first it is very necessary that an honest man be sober and sparing in
speech: for Princes do seldom give freedom to such, nor was it successful
to Plato the liberty which he usurped toward Dionysius Syracusa: for therefore
was he delivered to a certain Mariner, and sold into the Isle of Creta, from
whence being redeemed by certain Philosophers, he was admonished either to
abstain from the Courts of Princes, or to speak pleasing things unto them.

9. With like counsel Aristotle instructed Calisthenes his kinsman, whom he
was fitting and preparing to accompany Alexander that he should speak but
seldom and pleasant things to him, upon whose word his life depended.

CHAP. VII.
The Argument.
How, when, and with whom, a man may use Flattery. The condition of true, and
free Adulation. The necessity of Assentation and flattering.

1. IT cannot otherwise be but Flattery must be used with such dispositioned
Princes as have been spoken of, that so a man may oblige them. But this is not
to be done after any manner of way; for, a too sordid and servile Adulation and
flattery displeased even Tiberius; who was heard when he went out of the Court
to speak in Greek to this effect (O men fitted for servitude). They are the
words of Tacitus in the 3 of his Annals.

2. Flattery usurped and too often used becomes as hurtful as when omitted and
neglected. For it many times happens that he whom we manifestly flatter,
suspects us of deceit and craftiness toward himself. It is the judgment of
Aeschines and Plutarch, that flattery ought to have something of truth, and of
the species and shadow of liberty and freedom; that so we may persuade not
only the Prince, but others, that we speak cordially, and thereby conserve
our Credit and Esteem with them.

3. Croesus in the time of his reign had thoroughly learned the Ingenies, and
inclinations of kings, and what would please, or displease them: for when on a
time Cambyses king of the Persians had enquired of those that stood about him,
what they judged of him in Comparison of his father Cyrus, and all had
consented that he was greater then Cyrus, because he had added Egypt, with the
Command of the Sea to his paternall kingdom: but when Croesus his turn came
to speak, he adjudged him inferior far to Cyrus, because as then he had
begotten none like to himself. This answer seemed to savor somewhat of
freedom, and was therefore the more satisfactory to Cambyses his vanity then
the rest.

4. Notable was the flattery of Valerius Messala reported by Tacitus in the
first of his Annals, Messala Valerius, says he, added this that the
Sacramental Oath was yearly to be renewed in Tiberius his name. And being
asked of Tiberius whether or no he had uttered this Sentence of his own head
answered that he spoke it spontaneously and that in those things which
concerned the public, he could use no other Counsel then his own without
hazard of offense, and so there remained naught but the species or show of
flattery.

5. Like to this is that which the same Tacitus reports of Ateius Capito in the
third of his Annals. That Lucius Ennius a Roman Knight being accused of Treason
in that he had coined into money a Promiscuous Effigies of the Prince, Caesar
quashes and countermands the accusation, Ateius Capito openly slights the
business out of a kind of freedom (for neither ought the power of judging and
determining be taken away from Statesmen and Counselors neither ought such an
evil Action to pass unpunished) was not much troubled thereat, lest he should
thereby permit an in jury to be done to the Commonwealth.

6. It were easy to bring other examples of this kind; but those that have
been produced, may suffice to instruct such, on whom a necessity of Adulation
and Flattery is imposed. And lest such men's flattery should be conjoined with
public or private discommodity, it is sufficient that it be sometimes satisfy
the vanity of the Prince.

CHAP. VIII.
The Argument.
How, and after what sort, the Counsels of Princes are to be handled and
ordered by a Courtier.

LEt a Courtier likewise beware that he intermeddle not with the Counsels of
his Prince although called thereto, and so cannot honestly, avoid it. For such
Princes do for the most part ask Counsel with the same mind that Xerres did,
when he went about the War of Greece. He convocated the Princes of Asia as if
he would deliberate with them about the business of the War. I have called
you (says he) my Nobles to Counsel, lest I should seem to act after my own
list without your advice; But yet remember that your obedience to us in these
things is rather required from you, than a careful and doubtful deliberation.
Cambyses, the Predecessor of Xerxes, desiring to marry his Sister, inquired of
his Counselors whether any Law of the Persians did forbid such a Marriage.
They observing that the King inquired, not so much about this out of a desire
to have the question absolved and his doubt cleared, but that he might have a
plainer discovery of their minds, answered that no Law indeed allowed what the
King required, but that there was a kind of law which avouched that Kings might
do what them liked. So that a man may judge, whether credit or obedience be to
be given to him when he asks our advice, even from the inclination and
disposition of the Prince, and the nature of the business.

2. You have already had Examples of Kings I will give you another of a man who
although he bore not the name and title of a King, yet supplied the office of
one formerly in Spain. Ferdinando being dead, the Pope of Rome and the Emperor
Maximilian exhort Charles De Austria, (then Agent in Flanders) to take upon him
the title of King of Spain, although his Mother Joan the Daughter of Ferdinando
was alive, and by reason of sickness unfit for government. The Nobles are
convened in Parliament, before whom Cardinal Ximenes eloquently sets forth
reaons to excuse the Novelty of the business. The Nobles being more observant
of an ancient Custom and of the Queen, then was meet obstinately vote against
the King who soon after was to succeed. Ximenes leaping from his seat, and
being moved, shows that the business in agitation, was not to be doubted on,
nor needed their counsels or advice, and that Kings in their entrance to a
Kingdom are not to expect the Consent of Subjects. That they which were
convened were not called thither by necessity, but that they might have
occasion by the promptitude, and readiness of their suffrages, to ingratiate
themselves with the Prince; and that they might seem to act out of duty, what
was to be done out of favor. Not expecting therefore their approbation, he
affirmed that Charles would proclaim himself King at Madrid, whose example
other Cities afterward followed.

3. Such reason of their Actions do Princes use, not only in like, but in most
Cases. Scarce any thing is advised for other end then this only, that their
designs may receive approbation by the many suffrages, and votes they have for
them; or else to take an inspection of the mind and bent of such as they advise
with. Such was the fetch of Tiberius, as Tacitus witnesses.

4. A Courtier therefore must carefully search out the mind of the Prince, lest
he accidentally persuade to any thing that may prove offensive.

5. The Princes will, being dubious, let him seigne somewhat to shake off the
business propounded, and (having brought arguments on both sides) let him
leave the free election and choice to the Prince; if he conceive not thoroughly
the business, hearing the reasons on the contrary, if he be wise, let him
alter his opinion.

6. Nor shall that shame and blushing (for truly it is a shameful although
familiar evil with great ones, that they blush to be inferior to such whose
advice they follow) disorder the Prince, when you remit the liberty of
concluding to his own prudence. And you shall also avoid the Peril which is
imminent to Counselors when the things they advise the Prince to, contrary to
their expectation.

7. If following his first designs the Prince shall not obtain success, he
will at least acknowledge the Courtiers prudence, who foresaw a future evil
while it was yet evitable and to be eschewed.

8. If you be urged to give your opinion concerning a thing altogether
unlawful, you ought to find out some pretext of delay, or to entreat that a
third man be called, for the more diligent examining thereof; whereby the thing
being more maturely waighed, it may appear whether any thing in it concern
the Princes dignity or safety.

9. By the former way Burrhus inhibited Neroes first attempt to kill his
mother, himself promising toexecute her if she were found guilty of the
offense, and that that should make her defense no not her parents. In the
interim while the objections are preparing to be published, Neroes rage is
abated, fears are asswages, and the cogitation and thought of the fact,
although not altogether abandoned and cast out of his mind, yet was deferred
till another time.

But this way does not often nor in all business take place, but chiefly in
ambiguous and doubtful matters; yet before one under take such a business, a
man ought to look into the ingeny and disposition of the Prince and whether he
can bear such protractions and delayings or not; for there are some so
impatient of loyterings and delays, that whoever uses them, shall certainly
incur their displeasure.

CHAP. IX.
The Argument.
The sudden Motions of Princes, which are either to be pruned and taken away,
or to be moderated.

HE that has to do with such kind of Princes, ought to be skilful and
expeditious in executing subitanious and haste-requiring Commands.

2. Since that (as it oftentimes happens) we may be put to it, not to advise,
but to find out a way to execute designs, if these seem to oppose both Reason
and honesty, ways are to be proposed as remote and at as much distance as is
possible, and such as may be wound about with the show of Facility, or Equity,
or Security: moreover it must be offered to consideration, that sudden
undertakings are discriminous, and full of difficulties.

3. Unless the Prince be hasty and impatient, I doubt not but he will follow
that which he shall judge to be most facile and safe. But if (through
impatience) he will not hear such counsels as tend to protraction, or stay;
nevertheless, such a kind of anxiety of prudence, or affection toward the
Prince may excuse him that persuades; who had rather things were done slowly
with security then prematurely and suddenly with destruction to their Master.

4. But if in such precipitate Course as the Prince shall choose, some
difficulties shall occur, much more then will he perceive the prudence and
discretion of him, that persuaded the contrary course. If he shall give ear to
those, who propound slower ways; such interstice or pausing time, will
administer many things, which may restrain the will and cupidity of the Prince;
and himself may observe, that what he had designed, could not have been done,
or, at least, not without absurdity.

5. But oftentimes, that which the Prince propounds to himself, is brought to
that pass, that even in its first rise, it may be acknowledged very difficult;
but in its progress, plainly unatchievable, and not to be accomplished. You
may not at all animate the Prince, to undertake such things; rather with
venerable silence admit, that he observe his own mind, lest while you dissuade,
and difficulties arise, he seek an easier way to fulfill his desire, which
otherwise (spending his force amongst those obstacles) would of its own accord
vanish, and be assuaged.

6. Sometimes it so falls out, that the Prince demands the execution of some
wicked things, from a good man; in which case, I suppose, no man can be so well
fortified with restraining reason, but that he may be sometimes tainted with
such defilements, especially if opportunity, and the reason of the thing, take
away all place for excuse, or substituting another to the office and
administration. This course therefore was made use of by Burrhus, when Nero
consulted the killing of his mother, where no other effect followed his
dissembled silence, and the strait wherein he was, then; that a woman (though
otherwise always weak and impotent) should, after an injury, be more sharpened
and imbittered.

7. For Burrhus and Seneca being sent for, stuck for some time both doubtful
and fearful: Tacitus, in the 14th. of his Annals, says, They were both a long
time silent, lest being provoked, and put to it, they should dissuade him.
Afterward Seneca (till this time more prompt and ready) looks upon Burrhus, as
if the question should be put, whether or no the murder should be committed,
and put in execution by the Soldiery. Burrhus answers, That the Pretorians
were obliged to the House of the Caesar's, and (being mindful of Germanicus)
durst not act any bloody thing against his progeny. Let Anicetus fulfill his
engagement. Thus Burrhus freed both himself and his Soldiers, from executing a
very great villainy.

8. I confess, thou can not merit at the hands of such a one, whom thou
employest and entanglest in such commissions. But as the case stands, I think
it more conducible, and of greater avail, that such as are like Anicetus,
should rather execute such things, then thou.

9. Most safe it is, to foresee in ones mind and thought, the desires of a
Prince; and before they break out, or take too deep root, to grub them up, or
prune them.

10. There are very many, who have experienced the great force and strength, of
kind and flattering entreaties, and (as Parysatio called them) those silken
words, which some use about such businesses as these. But such as desire to use
this kind of remedy, need be in great authority with the Prince, and to have
audience from him, as one speaking (which is very rare) not more from
affection, then from reason. To conclude, in some one or other, this course may
succeed, but not in all things nor cases.

11. Their way seems best to me, who by their genius, being facetious, and apt
for witty conceits, and upon that account, in favor with the Prince; may
represent to him the danger and turpitude, of such counsels, as the Prince is
feared to incline to, by some opposite and pithy Narrative or Comedy, and such
as may seem to aim at something else.

12. To this, as we have showed, a great dexterity and readiness of wit, and
pleasantness of speech, is very requisite: And also he must take heed, lest
the Prince smell out and perceive, that himself is the argument of such
mimicall discourses, or comicall representations and shows: As Tiberius, of his
fratricide, and killing of his brother, in a Tragedy, composed by Scaurus,
which he named Atreus; and Domitian of his divorce, in that of Helvidius,
concerning Paris and Ceno, believed themselves to be upbraided. To this it is
also necessary, that this narration be fitly and trimly interwoven with other
things, less squaring and agreeing with the Prince; and that which principally
furthers the business, is, that it ought not to be inculcated, and repeated
seriously; and yet, lest it should slip by his ear, it may be iterated by a
casual repetition. The pleasant conceitednesse of the Narrative, makes a
deeper impression of those things which are spoken, and because they appear
spoken, as not studied-for, but ex tempore, and according to a present occasion
and subject, they will not offend the disdainful ears of the Prince.

13. Other ways there are of this Moderation, whereby you neither foment and
bring aid to the Prince's lusts, nor in vain wrestle with them, are fetched from
Occasion, and the very nick and junctures of times; and from Accidents, such as
even the approach and sudden coming in of one of the Prince's Pages or
Lacquies, may produce to you.

14. If the case wholly require, that you must oppugn some one of the Prince's
affections, then ought you to assail and set upon another affection, equally
valid and prevalent in him, and so cause a kind of reluctance and wrestling in
the Prince's mind. And first demonstrate, and carefully show, that whatever we
speak, proceeds from that veneration and duty, which we owe unto him. By this
means, Mutianus held Domitian to his business, and kept him from acting that
to Cerialio, which (prompted by what hope, I know not) he endeavored to have
effected.

CHAP. X.
The Argnment.
Princes have a fourfold Temperature, from their original in in Nature: How a
man may converse with each of them. The Art of Courtiers, in associating others
to them.

THat these things may more prosperously be prosecuted and effected, it greatly
conduces to know the Princes temperature, which they for the most part have in
common with others, this only excepted, That whereas in other matters they are
more powerful, so are they more impotent and weak, in moderating their
affections and inclinations; and these, for the most part, are more violent in
them, then in others.

2. He in whom yellow Melancholy, (which in Greek is called Choler) is
prevalent, will be prompt and ready for action, proud, subject to anger, a
lover of humble and obsequious duties and services, heavily offended with such
as are refractory, impatient in executing, precipitate and hasty in Counsels,
a contemner of other men's judgments, if they discord with his own; cruel to
such as injure him, but placable to such as are hurt, if they remember not
again the injuries; hating such as are mindful of an offense; a speedy and
preventing revenger of such, whom he fears or doubts.

3. He who shall be a manual servant to such a one, had need to have his eyes
and Ears open, that he may readily understand and execute at the beck of his
Command not objecting, nor protracting, least by his contradictions he move the
opinion and Imagination of the Prince to Arrogance, and seem to him to think
him self more wise then he. Let him not be shie to submit to the meanest
office, even to that which may seem below his own fortune, let him bear
injuries and not long remember them, and after an affront or rubb, be the more
officious. Let him not show or tell to any what admonitions and advisements he
gives him, least he seem to upbraid him; hideing and covering over one office
with another as one says, lest the rain beat thorough. When the Prince is
angry, let him not come near him, for then all things will offend him, and
even such as are most dear to him, neither by word nor deed, can then curry
favor with him: Familiarity with such a Genius is easily turned into Contempt,
(which therefore is to be avoided) although the Prince himself incline toward
it. Let all things therefore be composed rather to Reverence and Modesty: for
such are Lions, sometimes kind, but in the end cruel and fierce to such, who
are most known to them, even to their keepers.

4. Such as are of a sanguine complexion are mostly of a merry Genius, lovers
of pleasures and witty conceits, avoiding the sad intricacyes, and contests in
business, desirous of peace and quietness, committing the administration of
affairs to others, and bearing nothing more temperately then complaints,
Courteous and full of humanity, pleasant and amiable abstaining from in juries
especially great ones, not more mindful of things received then of things
done, very desireous to please and accommodate others, and for the most part
frank and bountiful.

5. They who are employed under such, may not in any wise neglect the duty of
veneration, and must handle serious matters very sparingly. They who transact
the weighty and difficult business of the Commonweal, ought not to approach
his presence before they be called in, or be assured that he be not at his
vacant disports and pleasures; otherwise they interrupt his chief delights,
and cause him to blush by their sudden approach, and being taken at unawares
fear a secret and racite check or taunt from them. While Philip of Macedon was
sporting, and in his pasta Tiempo one comes and tells him that Antipater was at
the door, whereupon he being disturbed, and not knowing how to obscure himself
hid the dice in the bed, blushing to be seen by Antipater, when he was at his
pastimes. Wherefore, as they who have the principal care of the Empire by the
princes command, are supereminent to others in serious businesses; even so are
they themselves outstript by others in their free and familiar access to the
Prince, who avoydes and shunnes the more serious and grave, as discording with
his own Genius and natural disposition.

6. They who have Jove for their propitious starr, and are capable both of
serious matters, and of gameing and pastimes, are for the most part very
acceptable to such Princes; so that they be cautious, that while they are
absent from the Prince, their too much facility and courtlinesse diminish not
their Authority with others. Without this observation (as the vulgar Proverb
has it) Familiaritas contemptum pariet Familiarity will breed contempt,
Contempt will give Audacity and boldness to make complaints, as if you did
them a kind of wrong and injury, which the Prince going about to take away as
being an Enemy to mournful and sad things, will endeavor to remove him whom
he shall find most manifestly culpable.

7. The Prince who is of Melancholy complexion and disposition is slow in
Counsels, pensive museing, diffident, suspicious, witty, and for the most part
malizing, disposed to silence, uttering ambiguityes, and rather serving and
traceing other men's senses and opinions, then discovering his own; a
dissembler, an enemy to merry conceits and familiarity, loving solitude,
difficult of access, a friend to few and but a cold one, easily hateing, by
reason of diffidence and distrust (which never leaves him) avaricious, and
absurdly timorous, equally hating offenses and offenders; implacably desirous
of Revenge, and whom (though reconciled) you had need to fear.

8. With these kinds of dispositions a man must deal circumspectly and warily,
and first he ought to be moderate in his speech, and as it were to advise upon
every word, left he speak any thing impertinent or offensive, and speak not
unless compelled. In veneration and reverence let him be more then ordinary,
abstaining from contradictions, demurring in counsels unless urged to speak,
lest his black Melancholy being incensed turn into Choler, and that into
hatred; chiefly, where you think the repulse will be facile and easy. In
requesting be not unreasonable, for to be sent away empty from a Prince is
oftimes dangerous, and a Melancholic and sad person is always excessive and
superfluous, and will deny that he thought he had offended him whom he so
dismissed and account him an enemy; this fear will hardly be bought out by any
Artifice whatsoever. Such will remember injuries a long time, and do measure
other men by their own Genius and disposition,

9. In brief, This constitution is the sharpest of all, difficult, and most
uneven and disordred by reason of the variety of things which the imagination
represents and offers to it. By which their life is made the more laborious
who have relation to such men's service.

10. The Phlegmatic participateth of the weight and flownesse of the
Melancholic; but, as it is unlike in nature and inclination, so is it in
malignity and diffidence. He has his heart as it were environed with Cold, and
from hence it is that he distrusts rather himself, then others, fearing to
undertake great matters because he despaires of the success, or is ignorant of
the way and means how to carry them on. He is doubtful in consults, fearful
in executing, of a stupid Genius, not sharp and harsh in hating, not vehement
and eager in loving.

11. For such, an active Minister, and one prompt, and ready in mind and hand,
is very convenient for the Prince when he shall find one fit to execute and
accomplish what he accounted desperate, perceiving the imbecility of his own
Genius: and he will love and admire such a one, and embrace him as a necessary
Creature, and such favor which is bound with an opinion of necessity, is for
the most part durable, which such a man observing may so act, that he may
effect those things which the Prince looks upon as hard and impossible, and
bring them to a prosperous issue, and this shall he do (if possibly) himself;
at least, let him not have an associate more prompt then himself, and also
beware he be not long absent from Court, lest the chief of businesses be
omitted by the Prince. For if any be found fitter for such employment; you
shall be less valued, or at least, less needful; and so being once or twice
passed over, and not employed in such commissions, be at last neglected and not
accounted of.

12. It is the old art of Courtiers not to choose associates, but such as they
themselves do very much excel in virtue and prudence, that the darkness of
others may be a foil to their splendour, and the Prince may not easily find one
whom he may oppose and set against them, or prefer before them. Add that these
lesser ones, as often as there is need, will easily be open to and ready to serve
those to whom they either did, or may owe their fortune, although by base and
corrupt ways and arts. This cannot justly be expected from an equal, or from
him who strives in his own strength.

13. These are the kinds of humane Inclinations to which Princes are no less
obnoxious then Peasants; being propense and readily bent, sometimes to to this,
sometimes to that course, according to the prepollency and force and prevalency
of this, or the other Temper and constitution.

CHAP. XI.
The Argument.
Age, Business, and Custom, do alter and change the Temper, Disposition, and
Actions of Princes; and that Inclination which by reason of fear lay hid (this
fear ceasing) they betray many wise men and Philosophers, noted and observed
for the same things.

BUt although these things are often thus, yet are they not for perpetuity and
always so to be accounted. Age, Business, and Custom do vary and change the
temper of the body, why not then the Inclinations and Actions of Princes?

2. In time of War, Princes will embrace military and fighting men, whose
favor (afterward. by degrees when things are pacified) will easily wear out
and wax old. If the Prince incline to pleasutes or any other affection, he will
also incline to love such as are ministers and furtherers to him therein.

3. See what Tacitus testifies of Tiberius. The times wherein he was had diverse
changes of customs and manners; he was notable in his life and reputation when
a private man, or in command under Augustus; close and crafty, in
counterfeiting virtue, whilst Germanious and Dousus were alive; mixed of good
and bad, while his mother was healthful; of intestable and incredible cruelty,
but covertly lustful whilst he loved or feared Sejanus. At last he broke forth
into lewdness and dishonorable actions, after that he (having set aside shame
and fear) followed his own Inclination. Acute and tart was the Judgment which
Passienus passed upon Caligula: That there was never a better Servant, nor ever
a worse Master.

4. It Is incredible to be spoken with what various manners, Marius and Sylla
acted: And Plutarch makes a doubt whether Fortune changed their Inclinations,
or only unvailed and discovered those mischievous dispositions which had long
laid hid in them.

5. To speak rightly, The disposition and ingeny of such is not altered, but
that which lay hid through fear (that being removed) breaks forth: as Leontius
said of Zeno he was like a Serpent which being frozen with cold cannot hurt,
but being thawed and refreshed by the heat of the fire draws forth his sting.

Tripho, as Josephus witnesses, while a private person and only a Collector of
the Popular benevolencies and Subsidies, personated a good man; but being made
a King, presently slipped off his Vizard and disguise, and openly showed, that
whatever of goodness had appeared in him, 'twas only colorable and
counterfeited.

7. Nor was Agamemnon much unlike him, if that be true which Euripides objects
to him that he was modest, and easy to be spoken with, before he was made
Captain of the Grecians; but presently after became an Enemy to his friends,
inaccessible to all, and cloystered himself up in his own house. The Poet
adds a useful precept.

Frugi viros ad alta vectos munorum
Mutare mores convenit nunquam suos.
Englished thus.
It suits not well with honest men,
though never so highly raised:
To change their fashions which are good,
and cause them to be praised,
A worthy sentence, but practiced by very few or none; yet Pollio seems
somewhat to follow it (if we will credit Seneca) who says thus: After he was
promoted to the most ample degrees of honor, being corrupted by no occasion,
would he decline from his accustomed and imbred love of abstinency, never was
puffed up with prosperity, nor ever through variety of negotiations, did he
diminish his deserved commendations and glory.

8. For the most and chief defects of Princes take their rise and original
from Arrogance, the most individual and unseparable hand-man and attendant of
great Ones. This ushers in contempt of other men's Counsels, with such who are
persuaded, That by how much they excel others in power, by so much they exceed
them in prudence: and some are so transported that they disdain and think it
below them, to be under the bonds of either law or reason, and that they cannot
be Princes unless they may do what they list according to that saying.

Sanctitas, pietas, fides,
Privata bona sunt: qua juvat,
Reges eant.
Sanctity Piety and faith, are good to private and common persons. Let Kings go
which way they please.

9. I should less wonder if vulgar Ingenies were only corrupted with such
opinions, but I see that the best of mortals have their minds blinded with
these delusions and cheats of power and Puissance.

10. No man heretofore surpassed the seven wise men of Greece in the precepts
of moderation: and none that ever came to the Empire were more cruel Tyrants
then those who came from among them.

11. Appianus being about to speak of Aristo the Philosopher rehearses some;
who professing that name formerly, had exercised Tyranny at Athens: he adds
moreover that some of the Pythagorians (whom he names) who had gotten
employment in Italy had very unjustly abused their command, which makes us
doubt whether those Philosophers who so proudly contemned honor and dignities,
did it bona fide and in good earnest; or rather took) it up as a pretext, and a
cloak for their beggerlinesse and floath.

12. Certes, if we may credit Aristophanes, those Pythagorians lived frugally
and sparingly, not for virtue, but through poverty, not refusing to sup
daintily, if any invited them.

CHAP. XII.
The Argument.
How far Traitors may prevail with a Prince by flatteries; and how a Prince is
to be warned and admonished against such.

1. BUt oftentimes vain fellows do insinuate and creep into Princes, by occult
and seeret suggests and flatteries, who do very much alter the Prince's genius
and disposition.

2. To such kind of men, Tacitus imputes the haughtiness and crudelity of
Vitellius.

3. Vespasian being naturally of a modest ingenie, learnt of such Masters to
oppress his Subjects, with the iniquity of Tribute, as the same Tacitus
testifies. But in brief, it is most certain, that most of them who have made
use of such men's services, have degenerated. Such impostors curry favor with
the Prince, while they ostentate and boast before him his greatness, power,
and utility; who does so much the more willingly embrace them, by how much the
less he knows and understands the parts of his own office and charge, not
perceiving, that they applaud him, that so they may betray him, and expose him
to odium and contempt.

4. And truly, the most secure way of betraying a Prince, is the being
obsequious and serviceable to him in his avarice, cruelty, and lust; because
that he cannot condemn the Traitor, but he makes himself guilty.

5. The Francs, a people in Germany, with the help of Egidius, then commanding
by the Roman power, had driven Clodio Comatus out of his Kingdom; one of his
friends desiring to have him restored, associates himself with Egidius; and
having had sufficient knowledge before, how to do it, inflames and stirs up his
avarice and cruelty. At leng^h disdaining the Roman illegalities and injuries,
the Francs return to love their King again, and recall him to the Scepter and
Kingdom. So this Franck, to betray his Masters enemy, makes use of his own
cupidities and lusts, very prosperously.

6. Sejaenus, when the Roman Empire was approaching, and ready to fall to him,
see how many arts he uses: He ha^ made his observation, how that the City
began to disdain Tiberius, after that Agrippina with her children, were at his
motion imprisoned. And seeing him inclinable to a cessation from business,
neglects not to persuade him thereunto; hoping, that during his absence, the
stresse of the Empire, and rule of business, would be left to him; which so
fell out. And in truth, Tiberius for some little time, was Lord of a little
Island, and Sejanus Emperor.

7. Pereninus guiding the Empire, first circumvented and took away those, who
delayed his hopes, by a pretense of conspiracy, which (...) had wrought against
Commodus; after^^^^ ^^^wes and enticeth Commodus to volup^^ and pleasure,
whereby he in the interim might undertake the chief affairs, and at length
obtain the Empire.

8. The same way entered Bardas, uncle to Michael, Emperor of Constantinople;
for he took away The^ctistus, the Prince's Tutor, and his own colleague; and
caused Theodora, the mother of Michael, to be banished, persuading his young
Pupil to take upon him the government; whom, though much unlike himself, he by
and by turned to volupty and delights, who giving himself at length to the
driving of Coaches and Wagons, knew no better Art then that. Bardas mean while
makes ready the desires of the people for himself, calls to him the learned
men, restores learning at Constantinople, and had plained out a notable way for
his entrance to the business, had not another prevented him.

9. I bring not these things to teach any, how Princes may be circumvented, but
that good men may admonish Princes themselves, that they account not such men,
who sooth them up in their lusts, and depraved actions, more faithful, then
they, who are bold sometimes to denote and observe their evil deeds, with the
black pencill of condemnation and disallowance.

CHAP. XIII.
The Argument.
Of the Domestioks and familiars of Princes, and how to obtain their
friendship.

HAving considered what a waiting Courtier is to do, in respect of the Prince,
let us come now to what he is to do, in respect of, and amongst those, who are
his domestic servants, whose Office is continually, to be employed about the
Prince's person, and therefore very useful for such, as se^k addresses to him,
either by procuring them an extraordinary access, or by mentioning them to
him, or informing them of occasions and opportunities, to dispatch their
business. Princes for the most part, carry one kind of countenance in private,
and another in public; and do more freely disclose their minds to those their
domestics, whom they believe to be faithful and trusty, supposing that their
humility and low condition, is not capable of any endeavor, either traitorous
or mischievous.

2. Who knows not, that Claudius was subject to the commands of such, who had
been bondmen? One whereof ( Pallas by name) he had so enriched, that himself on
a time, complaining to one of his wants, had this reply, That if he made sure
to be adopted by Pallas, he should forthwith be rich. The same was the Author,
that Claudius married Agrippina, after that, by the help of Narcissus (formerly
also a bondsman) he had slain his wife Messalina.

3. Who knows not also, that while the Empire of Constantinople stood, the
power thereof, was sometimes upheld by Eunuchs; and but for them, Arbetius the
chief Commissioner of the Empire, had lost his life, when Verissimus accused
him.

4. Borilus and Germanus, two kitchen-slaves, by the authority whereby they
held Botoniates, one of the Emperors, altogether subject and obnoxious,
rendered him strange and absurd to Isaacius, and Alexius Comnenus.

5. Put case, the Prince does not communicate his counsels to them, yet are
they more easily sifted out and accused by such. Nor can it be, that a Prince
can always keep on his vizard in private: Affections kept close and
suppressed, break forth amongst the multitude, and become conspicuous to men,
when privacy before has given them liberty.

6. It is a thing altogether necessary in Court, for a Prince to esteem men of
all kinds, even the vilest, useful to him; and to believe certainly, that
prudence and ingenuity increase together with authority and fortune; which
Arrianus, writing to Epictetus, shows, by the example of Epaphroditus, and his
two slaves, whereof, although one was Groom of the Stool to the Emperor, the
other a wiper of shoes; yet afterward Epaphroditus, who had lately sold them
as unusefull creatures, not only insinuated into their favors, but also
commended their prudence and discretion.

7. Fortune scarce ever advanced any man to that height in Court, but that she
procured him as many foes, as friends; and never brought any man so low, but
that she could afterward either hurt him further, or again in some kind or
other do him good. Whereupon not in vain, is the observation of Tacitus, in the
6 th. of his Annalls, That while Tiberius was Emperor, it was accounted a
magnifick and stately thing, but only to be acquainted with, and known to, the
Porters of Sejanus.

8. It will be then the part of a wise and prudent man, to procure the
friendship of the Prince's Familiars, whatsoever they be, by any such officious
serviceablenesse, as reason and reputation will permit.

CHAP. XIV.
The Argument.
There are four kinds of great ones at Court. How the first sort ought to be
honored, observed, and entreated. How cautiously a man ought to confide in
Princes, who are not very constant.

FRom the Prince's familiars, let us come to such as are great at Court, who
are of diverse kinds: Some are eminent, by the splendor and excellency of their
birth and parentage, yet are not in intimate favor with the Prince; others
very gracious with him, and yet not mounted to honors; others prevalent with
him, both by honor and favor; others both flourish in his favor, and are
employed in negotiations.

2. The benevolence and good will of the first sort of these, will little
conduce to thy grouth in preferment, who nevertheless are to be courted and
reverenced, both for their own merits, and also because, that though they may
not hurt you themselves, yet may they by their retainers and friends.

3. For men of illustrious and noble Families, are highly esteemed, and prevail
much with such, and with others, by being obliged by an old kindness or good
turn with others, by the reverence and esteem of their greatness and fortunes,
(which easily changes the Princes mind) do therefore favor them, and Retainers
to their service.

4. Archilaus, King of Cappadocia, had omitted to salute and court Tiberius,
when he was Agent at Rhodes, to his great prejudice and mischief; for Tiberius
(having got the Empire) out of a desire of revenge, pretending something more
specious, commands him to be called to Rome, where the wretched man dyed an
untimely death: Yet the Historian testifies, that he omitted not that duty
through pride, but being admonished by some intimate friends of Augustus,
because that while Cajus Caefar flourished, being employed in the Oriental
affairs, friendships and correspondencies with Tiberius seemed unsafe.

5. We are here to consider, that great ones of this sort of fortune, as they
are oft-times impotent and weak in meriting, yet have strength enough to hurt
you: These therefore, although they seem burdenous, and suspected to the
Prince, are to be reverenced nevertheless; and we must make some pretext to
restrain their envy, lest they become our enemies.

6. If it happen, that the Prince will put thee into the hands of such, (which
is usual with Rulers) as you may not refuse this kind of contest or combat, so
ought it to be managed with great Art, and choice of Occasion and opportunity,
that all men may see that thou actest not only by reason, but also give
satisfaction to the Prince. Such an enterprise is full of hazard, but (if
undertaken, as having the Prince for its author) is the way to augmentation and
increase of favor.

7. One here acts all things, in his own name, although he have many helpers,
especially such as are under the degree of Nobility; for fear, lest if they
should not do so, they might offend the Prince.

8. Another adheres more closely to the Prince, by the increase of his fame and
renown, if he be prudent, choosing specious occasions, of doing laudable
service to his Prince, and to the emolument and advantage of the Public.

9. But a man must be very cautious, lest he attempt any thing, that thou can
not bring to pass; for, besides that the vulgar judge all things by the event,
and believes, that Right and Justice stands in the same station with Fortune,
you will wonderfully weaken your fame and favor, wherewith the Prince embraced
you, by sinister success; For he, to abolish the ignominy, and because he
fears, lest he should be debased in the eyes of his Subjects, and animate his
adversaries, whom he in vain opposed, will be constrained to disguise and hide
this authority, and the esteem he had of you.

10. Yet take heed that you believ not, that while I speak of contesting with
Nobles and great ones, I would have you act any thing, or deal with them by
force, since that cannot be done without tumult and noise; nor that you set
upon him with contumelies, and calumniations, for that is the part of men of
mean fortunes, and base corrupt judgments, and their end is seldom honorable
or auspicious. See how it fared with Piso, whom Tiberius had sent into Syria,
to restrain the hopes of Germanicus, who carried himself so insolently, that
the Prince, having advanced Germanicus, was necessitated to leave Piso to
public odium and hatred.

11. When we persuade you to counterplot the designs and endeavors of great
ones, and Nobles, we understand such who are unjust, and undertake something,
either against the state of the Commonwealth, Religion, Justice, the
government of Armies, or public Treasure; whom you must so meet with, and
prevent, that it may appear to all good men, whom it concerns, that you are not
acted therein by any private provocation, but by an honest care of the
Commonwealth only.

12. If you would have an example for your imitation, I shall name Cardinal
Ximenes, who was chosen by Isabella Queen of Castile, to oppose the Nobility,
who then were not so subject to Kingly command, as at this day. From being a
Franciscan Monk, he was made the Queen's Confessor; and afterward, by the
counsel of Cardinal Mendoza, Archbishop of Toledo; and lastly Inquisior of
the faith; and acted with great Authority amongst the Spaniards, and (being the
chief Commissioner in the reign of Isabella, after that in the Reign of
Ferdinand, and at last when the Empire descended to Charles the fifth)
contested so with the Nobles, that he held both Prince and people ever devoted
and addicted to him.

13. It was reported that he died by Poison, and himself was suspected; but
the thing could never be proved, and therefore his death may be more rightly
imputed to aged nature (for he was very old when he deceased). And nothing
hinders but that he may be believed to have maintained, and kept his own
fortune (which mostly he ought to himself and his own endeavors) entire and
flourishing even to the last moment.

14. The same fortune attended not upon Cicho Simoneta, who when Franciscus
Sfortia and after him Galeacius his son, possessed the City of Millane in
Lumbardy under the widow-mother of Galeacius (who was young and under age) was
set to oppose the brothers and heirs, in regard of his trust and prudence; and
being beloved for his mannagement of affairs.

15. He, that he might preserve the Empire and Command for his pupil, thrust
out the brothers of Galeacius, and Robert de. Santo Severino from the city of
Millane. But imagine what envy he underwent, and also how lewdly he was soon
after destituted and forsaken: for the widow-Mother returning into favor with
her adversary made Simoneta the price and reward of her amity and friendship
with them; by whom being a long time detained in prison, he perished miserably
tortured and quartered by them. Learn hence, how cautelously one ought to
trust princes whom you did not sufficiently know to be constant. Such will
prostitute their Ministers for a leight matter, to the lust and will of their
very enemies.

CHAP. XV.
The Argument.
A Second Third and Fourth kind of Nobles or Courtiers, and the reason why each
of them ought to be esteemed and allured.

1. THere are some Nobles (as we said before) gracious indeed with the Prince,
yet live without the dignity of office and charge. These if they contribute not
to confirm and settle us, yet may procure us so much favor with the Prince,
whereby it may be done.

2. They are also useful by commemorating our merits, or, if need be, to
excuse our failings; and by protecting us against the Calumnies, and private
accusations, and detractions of others; who (if they be benevolent) may much
advantage us; if irritated and offended, may much hurt and annoy us. Wherefore
the favor of such is to be purchased by any means, at least such as are not
unbefitting, or below our condition. You may imagine that these are not so
daily tied up to observe the Princes domestic customs and uses; but that
sometimes they look abroad to others. And although they have not employment or
office and charge, nevertheless those whom they recommend, (if not otherwise
unworthy, or ungrateful to the Prince, or unfit to undergo employments) are
seldom despised, sometimes preferred before others, who (though not unequal
in deserving) are yet destitute of such friends and assistants.

3. The third sort we have spoken of, are such who being adorned with great
Authority in affairs, are yet but meanly favored by the Prince. These are
found especially with such Princes who live peaceably, and mind their pleasures
being careless of public affairs, and therefore (committing the government
to one or other who are faithful), become averse to hard and difficult
business, out of a fear of their importance and weight.

4. In such a juncture of affairs, you ought to be more studious in seeking
the favor of the Ministers of State, then of the chief Ruler; for he will
permit them whom he intrusteth with the administration of government, to choose
and delegate others to offices: for it would seem weakness in him to choose
any for officers, whom himself knows not to be fit for employment.

5. There are other Princes, who being more tenacious and steadfast to their
government and Majesty, themselves constitute Officers of State, yet admit them
not to their familiar Converse and Acquaintance, nor to their presence, unless
some weighty business be in agitation, nor entrust them with the dipensing, and
bestowing of Offices, out of mistrust and jealousy lest their power by the
multitude of Clients and Attendants, should amplify and rise to such a
height, as that from thence, (if they should offend) they cannot be taken
down and dejected. The old custom of such Princes has been to hold such
Ministers under some kind of awe, and to give them ground to believe, that the
pile and Bulwark, which they by their labor in so long time have been
building, may with one winck of his eyes be demolished.

6. It Is very hard to perceive how you should carry your self toward such
great Ones, whose power is so circumscribed and limited: their good will may
not much benefit you; perhaps (if the Prince perceive it), it may prejudice
you: And being without it, you will more hardly come to the mannaging of your
business; and you will sometimes be even enforced and necessitated, not without
hazard, to concur with them.

7. Here will need very much circumspect courtesy and mildness; you must treat
them with all the offices and duties of veneration, and civil deportment: and
upon occasion testify (though warily) your secret promptitude and readiness
of mind. Mean while, neglect not to seek out another Trumpeter or spokesman
who may support and underprop thee, and so thou may be more closely joined
with, and notified to, the Prince.

8. Such Nobles remain to be spoken of, who are prevalent both in respect of
favor, with the Prince, and also in regard of office: these (in brief) are to
be honored almost equally with the Prince.

9. The inclinations and will of such, are to be inspected and looked into, and
ought to be known and executed, next after the Princes.

10. After this manner therefore, the power and authority of the great ones
being (as by degrees) subducted, you will not be ignorant what may be hoped
for, and expected from them, for you must carefully beware, that you ask
nothing from any of them, which you or they see, cannot be effected: for there
is nothing that more molesteth humane ingenuity, then not to be of ability to
satisfy the request of one, whom a man loves and affects.

11. Therefore benevolence, being preoccupated by uncivil supplication, or
remediless difficulty, is offended. And know, that he from whom you have
suffered a Repulse, will shun to see you, for fear, lest by the impudency of
such a like request, you put him to the blush, as if through defect of
Authority and power, he could not do what you desire.

12. But (this by the way may be added) access to the knowledge of great ones
is not presently open, it must be wrought by degrees. They who can do very much
with them, whether Strangers, or Domestics, and their dependants and
adherents, are to be allured, considering what abilities each of them has,
wherewith to advance and help others.

CHAP. XVI.
The Argument.
Who those Courtiers are, which are under the degree of Nobility, and what is
to be done with them first: what is to be done with enemies which hate us for
our friends sakes, because offended by them.

1. THere are others in Court, who (being set below the rank of Nobles) are
either our superiors equals or inferiors. And these are of two sorts; some
more apt and ready to benefit us, others to prejudice us. The Authority and
power of both is diligently to be waighed and considered, as that, which may
either promote, or impede, and hinder what we affect and sue for. Their
friendships and affinities also are to be pondered, necessity of times
requiring that weact with them, by their own servants and followers rather
then by our selves, using their Counters to reckon our Game by; at least, by
them, deprecate and turn away envy from us.

2. But first we must take heed, that we do not then only seek their
friendship, when we just need it; we ought to have it already prepared, and
knit fast by the pledges of ancient benevolence and good will.

3. There are three sorts of those who may hurt and hinder us; for they are
either such as are enemies, or envious persons, or else Competitors and
Emulators.

4. They who are enemies, hare us either for our own sakes, or for some of our
friends sakes who have offended them; but this last odium and hatred is for the
most part less sharp then the other, and may be allayed, and mitigated, by
some good office, whereby we may witness that we love our friends; but cannot
forthwith hate all their Enemies.

5. But for the most part the friendships of Courtiers are factious, and
cruel; and they will wish and advise you to abjure all familiarities which
themselves envy.

6. For this cause, some openly preferring the friendship of one party, have
nevertheless not failed to embrace the other party secretly: not that so they
might to betray their friend, but in in case he should fail, provide a refuge
for him.

7. Such prudence is not only happily and successfully used in Court-contests,
but also in Empires. Syenneses being Viceroy of Tarcis when the war began
between Cyrus and Artaxerxes, fearing to oppugn and fight against Cyrus,
embraced his party, but sent his Son to Artaxerxes to be a refuge to his
father, in case Cyrus were conquered.

8. Bardas Durus, having escaped from the imprisonment of the Saracens, seeing
that Bardas Phocas was created Emperor against Basilius sought the amity of
Phocas being as yet his enemy but sent his Son (feigning that he fled away
against his will) to follow Basilius, and to intercede for his father in case
Phocas were conquered: which also came to pass.

9. Solon when the Commonwealth discorded, ordained that none should be
permitted Adiaphory or neutrality; nor do I think that 'twas his mind that
friends embracing contrary parties should not send and return a message to a
private friend; but rather that he hoped, that friends following and pursuing
diverse ends, would then labor more greedily and happily for public peace.

10. After the same manner in Courts, although you be of a contrary faction,
yet may you keep friendship with one that is of another faction, both to the
end you may have a receptacle in a changed fortune, and also that you may be
the fitter to reconcile minds inclining to milder things. There is no safer nor
honester means and way to ingratiate your self with either contending party,
amongst those discords, and contentions that arise amongst great Ones.

CHAP. XVII.
The Argument.
How we must deal with such who hate us for our our own cause, and are
offended with us: where also is entreated of Threats and Injuries.

THey who hate us for our selves, do it either because they are offended with
us; or else, (as is very familiar with great Ones toward their Inferiors and
as the Italian Proverb has it, Qui offendit, non condonet, He that gives the
offense, let him not forgive) because they have offended us. Minds swelling
with great fortune have this fault chiefly. Whom they hurt, they hate.

2. The best remedy for such Injuries, as these do to us, is, If they be not
understood and known; but if its weightinesse shall give it a mark of an
offense to us understood, let us soon demonstrate a mitigation of grief for it,
and that the remembrance thereof is defaced and blotted out of our minds. Else,
if they perceive us to bear it impatiently, we strike into them a fear of our
revengefulnesse, and so, a desire of preventing us.

3. But chiefly let us forbear threats, especially if we be not presently
prepared to execute.

4. For threatenings rouse up the vigilance of adversaries, and do provoke them
to hatred and to double the Injury, and often brings us to shame, if we breath
out revenge, and have not power answerable to our will.

5. I know this moderation is not approved by all men, chiefly, by such as are
revengefull; who are of opinion that no Injury is to be passed by without
sensibility, not only in regard of the sweetness which is in revenge, but
also, because that if you bear with an old Injury, you invite a new; and
therefore think fit to prosecute with immortal hatred, those who offend them.
But such, while they desire to render themselves formidable, and dreadful,
produce this effect to themselves, That no body will have Commerce with them.
Sithence therefore, all are mortals are prone to lapse and digress and so
either affectedly or through incogitancy and want of heed are carried away, let
every one for fear of giving offense, shun those who are so tenacious and ready
to hate, even as wild and savage beasts, leaving them to their own solitude.
Lastly, if he shall also oftend, he will yet expect all amicableness from the
other party, and while he fears revenge, will desire to enforce and strike the
first blow. Wherefore to avoid so many evils, I think it best to insist rather
and pursue the contrary way, and do prefer lenity and mildness, which is not
difficult, no not in the greatest Injuries; respect being first had to the
difference, both of the cause by which; and to the condition and quality of the
persons, by whom the Injuries is committed.

6. For in lighter injuries, and such as have their rise rather from
Perturbation and trouble of mind, then Malice, we ought to be so unoffended as
that we seem not to be at all sensible. If the injury be heinous, let us show
our selves careful and tender of our reputation and esteem; yet not be so
implacable to the offending party, as not to leave him hope of reconciliation,
and place for pardon in case of satisfaction. To which end, I judge it not
unfit to complain of the wrong to the friends of him who has injuried us, and
to commit the cause to their Arbitration.

7. I am of opinion that those wrongs which are insultingly done, through
malepertness and petulancy, and out of a humor to reproach, are forthwith to
be vindicated, yet not so much with a desire of revenge, as to chastise the
offender, that so he may learn to demean, and carry himself more modestly, not
toward us only, but toward others also.

8. Yet such are not to be revenged on with implacable hatred; rather ought we
to testify our grief for the necessity of vindication which is laid upon us.
And (after Amends and Restoration made) that we are ready according as the
nature of the trespass will admit to redintegrate and renew our friendship and
amity with them.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Argument.
How the Injuries of great and small are to be avoided; and how to be handled.
Several Artifices and devices for reconciliation and reingratiating.

BUt because, such abuses are commonly put upon us by such as overpower us; The
first remedy to avoid these, is, not to deal with them but with much reverence,
and respect, taking heed lest they disdain your familiarity with them, or (if
they be more rough and austere) altogether decline to converse with them.
Notable is that that of Martial.

Sivitare velis acerba quadam,
Ettristis animi cavere morsus;
Nullite facias nimis sodalem,
Gaudebis minus, and minus dolebis.
Englished thus.
If shun thou will most bitter things,
From sad remorse secure thy mind.
To none become too much a friend;
Less joy, less grief thou then shall find.
2. The second is not to prefer the sensibility of an injury before ones own
safety: for, it is neither safe, nor is it a wise man's part, to strive too much
with one more powerful then himself. Let the disparity of abilities be a just
pretext to excuse thy disguised Dissimulation.

3. I know that some persuade themselves that an adverssary smitten with fear,
will come and crouch and beg pardon and reconciliation; nor can it be denied
but that some low and poor spirited ones, will sometimes so far debase
themselves, and stoop so low: but such a reconcilement and peacemaking is but
feigned, and will never prove sincere. Nor do such omit, (when occasion is
given to renew injury) to indulge and dispense with their own minds; and by how
much the more timorous and fearful they find a man, by so much the more
cruelly and outragiously will they aspire and breath forth vengeance. Therefore
since an occult and closelying enemy, is more difficult to be avoided, then an
open and declared one, it is better (after some sort) to have such open
enemies, then friends reconciled when enforced thereto by fear. I speak of
those, who being not greater then ourselves, of Amity be broke, they can do us
little harm.

4. For if we have to do with one greater then our selves whose Emnity may
eclipse our Luster, It were better to hold his affection redintegrated, and
renewed, though fictitious and feignedly so, then to have him appear an open
Enemy.

5. If we have been the first offenders, let us be first in appeasing the party
offended, either to themselves, or by mediation of friends.

6. Now that we may discern who are of most ample ability to suppress and
hinder us, it is needful, not only to consider their power, but their
affection, by which (besides their hatred) they are carried to do us hurt.

7. For some are acted by a desire of hatred, (the Piedee and Laquey of
revenge) others by fear, lest having gotten and obtained what we prosecuted, we
should thereby be better armed to prejudice and offend them.

8. That first and worst affection is violent, but that of fear is more
violent, for Court oppressions; but that enemy, who, besides this, is
stimulated also by that other, is the most inevitable.

9. The former may be mitigated, by humble and satisfactory services; but the
timorous will scarce ever be persuaded, to change his fear into a considence,
and assurance of your benevolence toward him; yet this must be assayed by all
means, which occasion and opportunity will rather give him to understand, then
any instruction or discipline.

10. Agesilaus, that he might make them his friends again, whom he had
offended, would promore them to the most honorable places and offices; in the
administration whereof, when they had incurred envy, (as is commonly seen) the
accused are constrained to fly to the Prince, who delivering them from hazard
and infamy, obliges them by this good turn, to become his sincere friends.

11. It is a very familiar artifice, and subtle trick used in Courts, to
supplant and remove a man secretly, that so thou being advanced by this
kindness and good office of his, may be the more strictly engaged and
obliged to him.

12. Not less frequent in Court is that dangerous, and to be avoided craft and
wiliness, of Eutrapelus Horatianus, who was wont to lend money to men, to
supply their luxury, and would puff up the minds of those, whom he intended to
accommodate, with a good round sum.

13. In like manner, they who applaud and allow us in our pleasures,
affections, and expenses, and advise us to undertake such things, as exceed our
strength and abilities, (which also they extol beyond desert) or such things
as are against reason, do most-what go about to hurry us to ruin and
destruction.

14. But let us return to the means of renewing friendship with Enemies,
amongst which, this is in no wise the last, or least, viz. to assist the wishes
and endeavors of an Enemy, both by counsel and endeavor, when you see that
you cannot impede and hinder their success that so he may seem to be engaged to
love by your good turns.

15. By this means Ascanius Sforcia the Cardinal, observing, that he in vain
interceded and went about, to hinder the machinations and plots of Julian the
Cardinal, who labored to advance John, the Nephew of Alexander the sixth, to
the Cardinall-dignity, did afterward so affectedly act on John's side, that he
obtained it for him; and after that, became a greater favourit to him, than
Julian himself.

16. If the stubbornness of the enemy frustrate all endeavors of
reconciliation, we must at last observe, whether our adversary has not some
other, whom he envies, and fears more then our selves; if so, and he seem to
prosecute the same design, which we do, you may so deal with the adversary by
a friend, that though his hate be equally prevalent toward both; yet may he
either favor or less hurt and obstruct our party.

A device, not unlike to this, was that used by Gerlachus, the Bishop and
Elector of Mentz; when he intended to create Adolfus Nassovius his kinsman,
Emperor. He knew, that there was variance between the Princes, who were very
likely to get, or else designed for, the Empire then vacant: He deals with the
Electors, (whom he was about to make use of for his purpose) privately and
apart: He admonishes Vinceslaus, then King of the Bohemians, that most of the
suffrages and votes of the Electors, went against Albertus Duke of Austria,
Vinceslaus his enemy; nevertheless he himself was ready to hinder and stop it,
if he perceived, that Vinceslaus consented. Having persuaded Vinceslaus, he
sets upon the Duke of Saxony, and reports to him, that the Duke of Brunswick
(his adversary) was the next in hope to atchieve the business. But to the
Palatine he boasts lest he should be hindered, that Vinceslaus (who then was
offended with the Palatinate) unless he were hindered, was nearer to it then
the rest. Thus (every one promising to subvert his enemy) he circumvents them
all, and at last nominates his kinsman, who (if he had mentioned him before),
would doubtless have been rejected by consent of all parties.

CHAP. XIX.
The Argument.
Concerning Envy, and by what means it may be overcome.

1. OUr speech must now be framed, and applied to Envy, which is so great an
evil that it needs much happiness and fortitude, to conquer and overcome it,
as that which will not be satisfied but with the participation and enjoyment of
that thing, which it denies to another; but every one being tenacious of, and
holding fast his own good, is w^^^ing to labor and take pains for himself,
and not for others.

2. This is superable, and may be overcome; though very hardly, nor to this is
the communication of that good thing, we hunt after, simply needful. It
suffices sometimes to show the envious, that the good thing which they desire,
if it remain in our power, may be done to their profit and reputation.

3. To this end, it behooveth us to get into their friendship and familiarity;
and to demonstrate to them, That although they be manifestly envious, yet we do
well affect them; affirming that we will all things as they will them, nor go
we about any thing whatever but that thereby we may be the fitter to serve our
friends, and themselves amongst them. In brief; we must so act, that they may
conceive hopes of increasing their own fortunes, by the augments and
amplifyings of our wealth and substance.

4. All haughtiness of mind, too great exceedings in costliness, unreasonable
feasts and banquettings; and lastly, all boasting and bragging, are chiefly to
be shunned by such, who will be cautious of being Envyed.

5. Especially by such as are raised from a mean place and office, unless the
will of the Prince or the dignity of Office require the contrary: for then some
Magnificence and sumptuous provision will not be unbeseeming, so that he
manifest that he is not at such cost for his own pleasure, but in obedience to
the Princes Command.

6. By such prudence and moderation, began Cardinal Ximenes in a principal
City: he was borne in an obscure and unknown place, and it was uncertain
whether nob^^ or not; although his fortune afterward found those, who would
affirm him noble. When he was but mean, he became a Monk; afterward for his
Endowment of mind, made confessor to Isabella Queen of Castilia, upon the
recommendation of Cardinal Mendoza, and lastly Archbishop of Toledo, which
Archbishopric (when Mendoza was dead) Isabella having obtained from the Pope)
he seeing himself unfit for envy, would not accept.

7. In refusing whereof he was so pertinacious, and headstrong, that though
Isabelia had submitted and subjected all the Court-Nobles he would scarce
suffer himself to be entreated to accept of, and undertake the charge and
office. And after he had consented and accepted, there was need again of other
entreaties, by which he might be induced to more ample charges and offices, and
such splendour as befitted his dignity. And so retentive was he of his former
way of life, that he was no otherwise wrought upon, to any alteration, then by
the Authority even of the Pope himself. This modesty wrought well for him, and
he appeased the Envy which otherwise was certainly to be expected to one, who
possessed dignity, environed with so many noble Spaniards, and wealth second
only to that of kings.

8. Lastly this way of acting, as it is a notable and excellent Amulet and
preservative-Pomander against Envy, under the beginnings of dignities: so it
little advantageth those, who have once already carried themselves proudly; for
such Moderation will seem but feigned. An example whereof the history of
Constantinople will afford. A certain Metropolitan, by name Constantine,
being expelled the Court of Isaciaus Angelus, and afterward of Alexius, the
Emperors, returned with Euphrosyne the Empress, boasted of his disdain of
business, and a Court life, took upon him the function of a Deacon; by which to
credit his dissimulation, and that he might the more instantly be courted and
entreated thereto. But, in brief, he so craftily played his Cards, that the
Emperor himself sent for him to Court, contrary to the ordinances of the
Church, he being excluded from the Sacrament of Priesthood, and preferred him
to great offices; and (not content with his own dignity) he brought two
brothers to be at the Emperors elbow, to supply his absence, if at any time by
business of great moment he should be called aside. But because his former
fortune had too much disclosed his insolency; therefore now, although seemingly
modest, could he not long be credited, but afterward being removed from Court,
and never restored, he dyed.

CHAP. XX.
The Argument.
Emulation is the sister of Envy. The Remedies against it.

1. THe same remedies which do change Envy into the better, do also prevail
against Emulation which indeed has less malignity in it then Envy has, but
more ambition; and is not less treacherous against the gro^th and thrivings of
others.

2. But we may avest and turn aside those who are inflamed with ambition, by a
specious show of veneration, and allure and delight them with vain honors;
lest they become Competitiours with us, scruing up their hopes to higher things
and assisting them as far as is lawful. On the contrary, undervaluing the
things we affect and aim at, as below their Merits, yet sufficient for us to
enterprise, as not having equal Hopes with them of greater.

3. If there be any fear that they should get before us, they may be stopped by
injecting a doubt, which may be done, if (arguments being proposed on both
sides,) the greater species and show be added to those things, which are most
apt to stop, and retard their ambitious courses.

4. But of all courses, that were best, if we could conceal our designs till
the Emulous, or offended parties have clapsed their time, wherein they could
have stopped and hindered us.

5. The suite of such as solicit too openly, is often odious to those, who
acting more modestly take time to turn themselves in, and to consider they
also have a conflict with greater difficulties, and are exposed to more Envy if
they overcome; but if otherwise, to more reproach.

6. Far safer is it (as is said in number 4.) to suppress and conceal
advisements, and like watermen rowing in a boat to turn the back upon the
place they strive to land at.

7. They who have canvassed for the greatest Empires, have steered this Course,
nothing being more usual with them, than that (in Euripides his Tragedy)
example of Agamemnon, to boast that his desires tended rather to peace, then
honors. And many have been sensible, that this has been the most wholesome
remedy, and Antidote, in turning aside the plots of adversaries, and avoiding
the Infamy, which abides these frustrated, and earnest Suitors. And at last
they have attained that glory, that their honor seems rather to be conferred
on them by their own merits, then by flattering suffrages and votes of others.

8. Lastly, in atchieving honors; this chiefly must we take heed to, that we
strive not with any one who is greater then our selves, and more potent then
they, under whom we shelter our selves. Manilius Lepidus a man in the judgment
of Tacitus most wise, will then be worthy our imitation, who being brought into
the Senate by Tiberius with Junius Blesus, Uncle to Sejanus, that one of them
might be chosen Proconsul of Africa, excuses himself with his own
unhealthiness, the age of his Children, and that his daughter was marriageable,
fearing doubtless that Sejanus would become his Enemy, if the Province had been
taken before hand from Blesus. Annal 3.

9. Neither may we strive too obstinately with one, whom the Prince more
propitiously favoring goes about to advance, although the law favors us
against him. For the Law doubtless is overcome by favor, as the Historian
tells us, was formerly done, when Germanicus and Drusus created Haterus
Agrippa, the kinsman of Germanicus, Praetor, non obst^nate Lege, the law
notwithstanding. Annal 2.

CHAP. XXI.
The Argument.
How ruin is to be avoided, when it is imminent; how it may be handled.
Examples of such as have fallen by their power.

1. Hitherto we have dispatched the chief precepts, which a politic man is to
observe. If any remain, every ones prudence and dexterity may supply them. And
although they serve not only to acquire and get, but also, to keep and maintain
Courtly power; yet will it not be useless, to have in readiness the examples
of such who have fallen by their power and greatness; that we may be wise by
others perils, and if we cannot shun ruin, at least we may learn to prepare
our selves for it. For this last is not less necessary then the other.
Sithence he who indeavoureth a flight, of times assayeth in vain; he who
prepares for a fall (inevitable to most whom fortune mounteth on high) renders
it the more gentle and supportable.

2. Such chances often happen, either by our own default, or by the Arts, and
devices of envious Enemies or Competitors, or by the perverseness of the Princes
inclination, or finally, by his death.

3. Since all men's lives are prone to lapse and repleat with errors, chiefly
theirs, who live loftily, and by reason of their Authority (by which they who
are near to them, are constrained to approve all their Actions, whether good or
bad) are set without, and beyond the chance of the Dice, and danger of
reprehension.

4. But above all others, that is the basest treason when men rise up against
their Prince, the Author of their dignity and honor, a note and character of
an ungrateful mind and unfaithfulness, a filthy crime, and the most just
matter and subject of a Prince's Odium and indignation.

5. Let such men as are advanced to great dignity, fly the very shadow and
appearance of this wickedness: and for that end, let them not move the Prince
to the least suspicion, and let them decline those honors which may seem
opportune, and seasonable, by evil endeavors.

6. Paterculus adjudged Sejanus the most prudent of Courtiers; and indeed he
ought to have been so, who could flourish in favor under that same crafty, and
distrustful Tiberius.

7. In acting (says he) he was like one asleep revengefull of nothing done to
himself, and so obtaining all things, scruing himself into the esteem of
others; calm and undisturbed in countenance and life, but restless in mind.
And yet on this crafty and subtle piece had Ambition so got hold, that he
aspired to the Empire. For that end first he desired intermarriage with Livia
the widow of Drusus, whereby being allied to the house of the Casars, he might
the more faciliate his desire. And although his request was suspected by
Tiberius, as he might guess by his tergiversation and refusal; he never yet
changed his mind: but because this succeeded not, he attempted another way.

8. He well knew that the City disdained Tiberius, and therefore, while he was
wavering, he eggeth him forward, and persuades him to betake himself to Capreas
his magnificent Tower near Naples. Of this matter, Tacitus in the fourth of his
Annals, says thus. Least by driving away the troops which daily came to his
house, he should infringe his power, or by receiving them, give way to
criminations, be bent this way, to force Tiberius to live in pleasant and
delightful places, far remote from Rome. He provided many things, he held
addresses and accesses in his own hands; he intercepted Letters often which
were conveyed to and fro by the Soldiers; when as Caesar growing into years,
and lying quiet, and at ease in a secret place, would, he thought, ere long,
transmit the charge of the Empire to him with more facility. Nor did his hope
altogether deceive him, for in short space, under the show of helping Tiberius
in his old age, he got almost all the strength of the Empire into his own
hands.

9. Nevertheless, that this way which Sejanus took had more of hazard in it
then expedition, the Sequel will declare: which more exactly to commemorate
will be a work well worthy our labor, to the end that both our Courtiers may
be better cautionated, in ruling and governing their own fortunes; and Princes
in promoting of others.

10. Sejanus was either more indeered unto, or more endured by Tiberius, when
he found his help useful in repressing Agrippina, and her sons Nero and
Drusus. In which villainy, Sejanus showed himself very prompt and ready, knowing
that thereby he should not only hoise up sail, and have a speedy voyage to the
Prince's favor, but also establish his hopes for future power and greatness,
there being none remaining of Caesar's house but those two youths; whose tender
Age, if they had accepted the chief Regiment and Government, had left to him
the Authority and mannagement of affairs, till opportunity would serve him, to
usurp and possess the Supreme style and Title.

11. But observe how precipitate and heady Ambition makes men! He sees not by
that how much the nearer he was to the height, by so much the more was he
suspected by the diffidency of the Prince; and that the course he takes would
rather diminish him, then further his progress. He hunts counter; for when
nothing, save the name of Emperor (which yet many were ready to afford him)
and the power of a Triune, (which title being the top and Pinnacle of Honor and
dignity, the Emperors did challenge as due soly to themselves) was wanting to
him; not content therewith, he strives to exaggerate and heap up his power, to
a greater bulk and breadth; And by this (as he renders himself venerable to
all, so) he brought himself under suspect with Tiberius.

12. He therefore, when he perceived that not only the Praetorian bands, but
many of the Senators and Principal Families, (partly by benefits and hope, and
partly by fear) were addicted and devoted to Sejanus; and that his own secrets
were carried, and disclosed by his own domestics to Sejanus, and the like not
done to him of the matters of Sejanus; by and by, plotted and contrived his
ruin and destruction, as of an Emulator, and one contending to outvie him. But
before he would set upon any action, thought fit to try how some stood affected
toward him, that so he might distinguish from the rest, who would approve his
design and advise him in it.

13. And lest Sejanus should smell out Caesar's intention, he makes him a
Consul, and in his presence, and also by Letters to the Statesmen and people,
styles him his friend in Labors; at length feigneth himself sick, that so he
might sound the affection of Sejanns, and others toward him.

14. Sometimes he writes to the Senate more cheerfully of his health, and that
he would come shortly into the City. Sometimes commends and applaudes Sejanus;
another while depresseth him; receiving some upon his recommendation; spurning
at others, that so he might keep him ambiguous, and doubtful betwixt hope and
fear.

15. Who, (whether yet imboldned by favor, or out of fear) determines to act
nothing forcibly, lest he should hazard all his hopes, hoping that his petty
trespasses against the Prince (if any were) would in time be raced and blotted
out of memory. Some, mean while hitherto following rather Sejanus his fortune
then himself, seeing the mutability of Tiberius, begin to act more cautiously
the affection of others toward him by little and little, withers and grows
stale.

16. Tiberius, having a good while since taken a clear prospect of the proud
and lofty mind of Sejanus; and also mistrusting, lest his design, being
stirred up by contempt, should be frustrated, by running the hazard of fortune
and chance, commanded, it should be noised abroad, that he intended to deliver
over the Tribunician power and authority to Sejanus. A little while after, by
Letters to the Senate, which were carried by Macro, (who was Provost of the
Pretorian Bands) he commands him to be committed to prison. Macro having entered
the City, before day, acquainted first Memmius Regulus, then a Consul, (for the
other Conful was more inclined to Sejanus) with the Prince's mandat, which
afterward he shows to Grecinus Laco, then Captain of the Watch. From thence
going toward the Senate House, he accidentally accosteth Sejanus, who being
troubled in his thoughts, enquires whether he had any Letters for him from
Tiberius: He whispereth him in the ear, that by and by he must be saluted a
Tribune; who being tickled with secret joy, enters the Court. Macro dismisses
the Pretorian Attendants, shows by Letters, that it is the Emperors pleasure
it should be so, and that thereby they are promised a donative. Macro having
ordained Laco's Band to the Pretorian Attendants, who were now dismissed,
entering the Senate House, offers the Letters; and anon, (not expecting the
reading of them) charges Laco diligently to watch, lest Sejanus breaking out of
the Court, should raise a tumult, himself going to the Pretorian Attendants,
and prohibites them from attempting any thing.

17. The Letters which were then read being somewhat large, afforded Macro time
enough, to provide necessaries, and were wonderfully interlaced and contrived.
In the beginning, not a word of Sejanus, but of other matters; by and by he is
nipt, but very lightly; after this, (some other things being interwoven)
follows a high accusation; and yet but perfunctorily and slightly touched. At
length, (after many digressions about the public affairs) two of Sejanus his
familiars are nominated, whom the Senate are commanded to animadvert and
consider, with this addition, that he himself should be apprehended; no mention
was made of any course to be taken for his death, that so, hopes might be left
to the accused, to purge him of the crimes, which were therefore objected but
as leight matters.

18. The Letters being read, many of those who had brought him into the
Senate House, (when they perceived the business to be far otherwise, then that
Sejanus should receive the power of a Tribune) began to rise up, and
encompassed Sejanus, lest he should slink away, which was thought he would have
done, if the beginning of the Letters had thundered more sharply against him.
But contemning those petty and slight nips and twinges, he stirrs not from his
place; and being called upon twice or thrice by Memmius the Consul, he scarcely
submitted; so insolent and haughty was he grown.

19. When he was risen up, Laco first follows him; afterward Regulus,
accompanied with other of the Senators, brought him out of the Court into the
Prison, where afterward he was condemned by the Senate, ad scalas Gemonias,
which was a place appointed, from whence condemned men were thrown down.

20. Behold here the end and destruction of a Courtier, who had scarce his peer
within the memory of man, for craftiness and power; whose structure and
building, although as to the whole, and continuance of it, seems to be due to
Tiberius, yet may rather be ascribed to the destiny of such power, as commonly,
by reason of its own heap and bigness, falls so much the lower, by how much
the higher and loftier it thrusts up it self; according to that saying,
Tolluntur in altum and lapsu graviore ruant.

21. This may be learnt from the example of Perennius, whom (striving to get up
to this height by Seianus his Arts and devices) Commodus, although far
inferior to Tiberius in ingenuity and wit, subverted and overthrew.

22. Perhaps these relations may not move many men, because they seem to
themselves to be wiser then others, and to know some things which was unknown
to those whose chances are here related; And truly, there have been some in
these latter Ages, to whom this business has succeeded not altogether so
unhappily, such as Boyla was, (of whom we may read in the History of
Constantinople) who being found to have conspired against Constantine,
Monomachus the Emperor, suffered not such exquisite, and heavy punishment as
others in like cases had done, because he fell into the hands of a mild and
placable Prince.

23. But we are willing here briefly to recite that story, from which may be
understood, That Counsels even the most secret, and such as to humane eyes are
not passable, oftimes by divine Providence, and even by unhoped for means are
derected and discovered, and cannot avoid their punishment, although handled
with never so much craftiness and subtilty.

24. No mortal could have believed, that this Boyla had had, either aptitude
and fitnes, or subsequent cause for such a villainy. The greatness of the
benefits wherewith he had adorned and beautified him, had wrought an opinion
in the Prince of his fidelity, for otherwise he seemed simple to any great
matters; for he was not only borne in a low and mean place, but also was of
such a buffling, fumbling, and cumbred speech, that he could scarce be
understood, and when he perceived that it delighted the Emperor, he afterward
industriously affected it.

25. By this assentation and soothing, he so far insinuated into the Prince's
familiarity, that he had admittance even to the privy, and bedchamber of
Constantine. At length, being enriched by the Prince, and elected into the
number of the Senators, he began to shute out his hopes to a higher flight, and
went so far, that he thought, by the ruin and destruction of the Prince, he
might find a way to the Scepter it self. He first opens himself to those, whom
he knew were offended with the Prince, and promises largely to those, who
approve and associate their aids, commending the refusers for their good will
to their Prince, and made show, as if he were but an explorator, and private
spy, to try their faithfulness and loyalty.

26. While these things were in agitation, he shunned the conscience of all
men, save those whom he feared not; and had done the bloody act, had he not
been discovered by one of his own comerades and counselors, and by his art
deprehended, having the very weapon in his hand, which he had sharpened to kill
the Prince withal. The Emperor bore the injury so mildly, that he accounted
it enough, that some of the conspirators were put to death; but the Ringleader
and Captain he only banished.

27. It would be too tedious, to bring in here all those, who in Courts have
been shipwrackt; such, I say, as by such offenses have merited punishment; and
which have happened, not only to the manifest authors of such wickedness, but
even to such, as have been suspected of the thoughts thereof. But we will content
our selves, with producing these, and only add this, That all Pride, whether
it offend the Prince by ambition, or boasting, upbraiding, malediction, or
revileing; by splendor, or too great a retinue, is the high road to
destruction and ruin.

CHAP. XXII.
The Argument.
Bragging and boasting before the Prince, reproaching and twitting with
offices, liberty, arrogance, too much familiarity, pride, vanity, avarice,
perfidiousnesse, conspiracy, sowing of dissension and strife, are every one of
them denoted by their examples.

BOasting and upbraiding of Offices, in the Court of Alexander the Great, lost
Philotas and Clytus; Craterus also, was almost blown up with the same winds.
Certes, he had longer stood affected with the Prince, had he contained himself
within the bounds of noble and generous modesty.

2. Thus Caius Sylius with Tiberius: Antonius the first, with Vespasian; Syllas
with King Agrippa, publishing aforehand their offices and employments, deprived
themselves of all the fruit and benefit of them; concerning the first of whom,
Tacitus, in the 4 th. of his Annalls; and Josephus in his 4 th. History,
touching the last, are to be inspected and looked into.

3. Princes believe, that their fortune is destroyed, by such kind of
boastings; which fortune they will have seem to be due to themselves, not to
the merits or virtue of their subjects.

4. A lust and desire of reprehending the actions of Princes, and a freedom of
inveighing against others before the Prince, is to be avoided, as the neighbor
to arrogance. Eumenes, petulantly and saucily, complaining before Alexander of
Hephestion, that he assigned to Stage Players, and such kind of fellows, the
Soldiers quarters, incurred the displeasure of the King.

5. To be too familiarly busy about the Prince, or to boast ones self, the
sole Arbittator and Commissioner of principal charges, savoureth, if not of
pride, yet certainly vanity; and covetousness sometimes crowds it self in with
it. Many examples of such are extant every where, in Histories. How immodestly
did Zotirus demean and carry himself, under Heliogbalus? how did Turinus under
Alexander, the son of Mammea? One whereof was by the Emperor's command
suffocated with smoke, using a more uncouth and harsh fortune then the former,
it seeming just, ut, qui fumum vendiderat, fumo puniretur, That he who had
vended and sold smoke, should perish by smoke. The other was wont to boast,
that the Prince was ruled by his advice, and also made advantage, by selling
favors, when the courtesy was no way advantageous to the purchaser.

6. Worthy in the first place to be remembered, is the arrogance of Plancianus,
which also was accompanied with vanity, and at length broke out into treachery:
He was of that arrogance, that he durst oppose himself against Bassianus, the
Emperors son, the author of his dignity and fortune: Moreover also, so vain,
that passing through the City, he would not only preclude others from
addresses to him, but almost from having a view of him; and had some to go
before him, to turn those whom they met, out of his way. At length proved
traitor to his Prince; and being found guilty of manifest conspiracy, lost his
head for his pains.

7. Philip the fair reigning in France, Enguerrandus Marigny, presuming to
confront Carolus Valesius, how miserably he perished, together with others, is
observed out of the French Histories.

8. Before all things also in Courts, we ought to beware, that we lend not our
help to the sowing of discord amongst Princes; for they being reconciled to
each other, do mostly sacrifice such persons to their friendship. Which thing
is made good, both by many examples, in the Histories of all Nations, and also
by that memorable example of Otho Crondorferus, which the History of Bavaria
supplies us withal. He was in flourishing favor with Radulphus the Palatine,
and was the author of the enmities between him and his mother: At length, the
mother ingratiates her self with her son; but Crondorferus was rewarded, with
the loss and deprivation, both of his tongue and eyes.

CHAP. XXIII.
The Argument.
How a man may conserve the Prince's benevolence, and the good will of such as
are in favor with him.

1. WE ought not therefore to cross or resist Princes themselves only, but
even not such as are in favor with them, and are more prevalent then ourselves.

2. This Counsel Germanicus when he dyed gave to Agrippina; whereof Tacitus
speaks in the 2. of his Annals, thus: Then turning to his wife (says he) he
entreats her by the memory of himself, and the Children they had between
them, that she should put off cruelty and fierceness, and submit her mind to
rigorous fortune; least returning back to the City, she should stir up, and
provoke, such as were more powerful then herself, through emulation. This
precept being slighted by Agrippina, ruined both her, and her children. We
spoke a little before, of that which was the diminution and shortning of
Eumenes his favor with Alexander, that behaving himself too irreverently and
unseemly in the Prince's presence, when he came to complain of Hephaestion, he
even wove himself, (through the Complaint) into the web of Envy.

3. Therefore, when we see any one flourish by the grace and favor of the
Prince; we ought carefully to weigh our Authority, if we have any, in the
balance with theirs, and try whose is most ponderous. And in the Examen and
trial thereof, not to attend so much to the external species and shadow; but
to the importance and weight of interior and inward causes.

4. Craterus and Hephaestion seemed once to be both in great and equal favor
with Alexander, till Alexander himself made the difference; when he calls the
one, Amicum Regis, the friend of the King; the other Amicum Alexandri the
friend of Alexander; for upon this speech, Craterus could make this observation
and judgment, That Princes being commonly more addicted to their pleasure, then
their own dignity and honor, do hold, and account them most dear unto them,
who do love and embrace Alexanders, that is themselves; then those who do
court, and admire the fortune of Kings. And although there arose a dissension
afterward between him and Hephaestion, whereby the whole Court was divided
into parties; Alexander showed himself addicted and tied to neither party, but
chid both; and threatened to punish them, if hereafter they put him to the like
trouble. In this kind of decision which Alexander here uses, he manifested,
not so much his equal and indifferent affection toward them both; as a
singular and most especial kind of prudence in Princes, very much to be
imitated. This discord and difference, he sees, may produce many troubles;
neither was he ignorant that Craterus his wonderful Authority, with the
Macedonians; and his own favor toward Hephaestion was envyed, and bred
displeasure against himself: he therefore blames Hephaestion for his envy, in
public; and chides Craterus privately, lest the Macedonians should be
offended.

5. Amongst those, who in the examination of Princely benevolence and favor,
have either been more neglective, or being devoid of reason have been more
unexperienced and unskilful, Antonius Primus deserves to be listed, who
(presumeing to contend with Mutianus) learnt at length, That it was more
destructive to him that he had disdained Mutianus, then if he had despised
Vespasian.

6. Now, that Princes do more sharply revenge an injury done to their
Ministers, then to themselves, is a thing attested by Examples almost in all
Courts, the cause whereof Dio sifted out; after he had declared the same to
have happened in the case of Sejanus.

7. Even as they, (says he) whom virtue and their known merits, have dignified
and exalted, do not very much stand upon, and esteem or heed the vanities of
their honors, and the outward marks and expressions of worship and reverence:
So on the contrary, they, who by Ambition endeavor to raise themselves from
the ground and dust, and to cover their domestic and covetous briberies, do
take it very hainously, and interpret it presently a contempt, if you neglect
the least matter or punctillio of homage, or good turn toward them. So much
the more difficult is it therefore, to conserve and hold fast the benevolence
of such, then of the Prince himself. For he counts it his glory to pardon an
injury, but they, (that they may not seem to remit, what they cannot
vindicate) not only strain their power in persecuting their enemies, but
ostentate and boast of such their doings.

CHAP. XXIIII.
The Argument.
Pride denoted and observed by Examples in men, of the most inferior Rank and
Condition under Princes. Treachery and perfidiousnesse against the Prince in
discloseing his secrets, is forged and compacted of many Monstro^s, and
unnatural courses and designs.

1. ANd not only has an insolent, and haughty carriage and deportment, been
destructive and mischievous to Nobles and great ones: but even to men of the
most inferior and base degree. John king of Arragon so fondly and fervently
loved Alvarus de Luna (the son of a former king of Arragon, but borne out of
wedlock) that he would commit to him the chief affairs, and even the kingly
dignity; his Nobles in vain resisting. But when he being lifted up with pride
in this prosperous fortune, had precipitated and thrust down headlong a Noble
man, who in the kings name had admonished him of his duty, himself by the
kings Command, lost his head for his pains.

2. This has been in Court, the frequent cause of such Shipwreck; when any
has rendered either himself, or the Prince odious to the people, or to the
chief of the nation. For either the Prince himself to free him from envy, will
cast such a one off; or else others will rout him, and destroy him.

3. While Commodus was Emperor, Cleander had armed the Pretorian Companies
against the people of Rome. This bred Rome so many troubles and tumults, that
(had not the Emperor himself sacrificed Cleander to the peoples fury), he
could not have been secure.

4. The same Commodus had incurred the odium and hatred of all men, for the
love of one Anterus; from whom that they might deliver their Master, some of
those Ministers, who well affected Commodus, met Anterus upon a time as he
returned from Court; and slew him.

5. Eutropius being (amongst a few others) a long time beloved of Arcadius the
Emperor, when he was but believed to be the Author of the sedition moved by
Tribigildus; was delivered up by the Prince to his Enemies, as a price of peace
and quietness.

6. Amongst those evils, which subvert and overthrow Courtiers; that
unfaithfulness is not to be passed by, which bewrays the secrets of the
Prince, and imparts them to his enemy. That of Sylla, as it was horrible, so
was it notorious by the destruction of many others, and hammered and forged
with many Monstrous and prodigious actions, (to wit) with lightness and
unconstancy, imprudence and lack of heed, vanity and infidelity; I may add,
with a desire of getting money, unjust honor, Revenge, Curiosity, and other
restless troubles.

7. As to the secret of Princes, I esteem it best that they make choice of
such, as are not cleft, and full of chincks and crannyes, so as to vent and let
out those secrets they impart to them; seeing they fly only to them to be
admitted into their Consciences and private thoughts. For if thou alone be
knowing; and yet fame and report, which is ingenious and cunning at conjecture
and guessing, shall by chance spread abroad something like that committed to
thy secrecy; thou will not avoid suspicion, but he will judge his Secret to
issue out from thee; And although the Prince (it may be) has by chance opened
the same thing to another, yet possibly he may forget it; or more confide in
the others silence and secrecy, and the blame be nevertheless laid on thee.

8. Not without cause was Philippides the Comic poet (amongst the chief) dear
unto king Lysimachus, who being asked what he would wish to be made partaker
of, by the Prince; answered, That he would refuse nothing that came from him,
so long as he might be free from the knowledge of his secrets. Let us follow,
as much as may be, his example, and count it safer, to be unknowing of his
Secret, as a thing hard to be kept, then to be acquainted therewith.

9. Hiero Prince of Syracusa said, that they who revealed the secrets of
Princes were injurious; in that they exposed others, as well as themselves, to
the odium and loathing of the Prince.

CHAP. XXV.
The Argument.
The causes, kinds, and examples of Conspiracies with the enemies of a Prince.

1. BEsides this, most doubtful of all, is the fortune of those, who being
driven thereto, either by avarice, or ambition, or by desire to prop up their
own security, conspire with a Prince's Enemies, either extraneous and
foreign, or domestique.

2. Cardinal Balaeus, the Son of a Botcher, being made Treasurer by Lewis the
11. was also from that preferred to a Bishopric, from thence by the
intercession of the King, and the accord of the Pope (who endeavored to confer
a Benefit on him whom he had hitherto experienced to be his adversary)
attained to Cardinal Dignity. But afterward being found to have conspired with
the Kings foes, was imprisoned by the space of 12 years, from whence at length
the prayers and intercession of Pope Sixtus the 4th only, freed him.

3. For the like crime, Cardinal Pratenfis in the Reign of Francis the first,
underwent the like punishment, who perhaps had never been released from Prison,
but that afterward drinking his own Urine, he deceived the Physicians by
dissembling the Strangury. For the King fearing the Popes anger, if the
Cardinal by that Malady should have been consumed, set him at Liberty.

4. Peter de Vineis being a privy Counselor to the Emperor Frederick the
second; and being suspect of conspiracy with Pope Alexander the third being the
Emperors Enemy, lost his eyes by it.

5. Not only the Counsels of Stilico (the Father in Law of Honorius the
Emperor) to enjoy the Oriental Empire, but his occult and secret commerce
with Alaricus King of the Goths, are believed to have procured and caused his
death; which thing that Ignominious peace and League which he entered into with
Alaricus, although the Senare withstood and did oppugn it, does confirm.
Lampadius, who also himself cried out against it, calls it not a Peace, but a
Paction of Servitude, by which the Emperor was constrained to become tributary
to the Barbarians.

CHAP. XXVI.
The Argument.
A Politian may not be the Author of ambiguous Counsels: After what sort
Consults of undertaking War, and breaking Leagues may be instituted. How
great a variety there is of those errors: for which Courtiers fall away from
their reputation, and favor with the Prince.

1. FIrst also, our Politician whom we instruct, must beware, that he be not
the Author of ambiguous Counsels; the unhappy issue of these, will be imputed
to the Adviser, but the prosperous success, to the fortune and good hap of the
Prince, not only by the vulgar who judge of all things by their event; but by
the Prince himself; who will be glad that he has one, on whom he may derive
the Envy of unhappy Counsel.

2. While Stilico was living, and after his death, there was but one Argument
and subject matter of wailing and complaining amongst the people, to wit, the
peace which he had made with the Goths. Olympius who had procured the Ruin of
Stilico, striving to be famous by contrary ways, broke off the League of
peace, Alaricus in vain objecting Right and Equity; War being begun, for
sometime contrary to Augury and divination; he being accounted in the judgment
of the vulgar the Author of all their Evils, was at length accused by the
Eunuchs, who were very gracious with the Emperor, and leaving the Court fled
into Dalmatia.

3. When the business was of undertaking a War or breaking the League, the
Ministers and furtherers in this business are made parties; they only bring
arguments on both sides, and leave the choice of either to the arbitrament of
the Prince: not with standing, if they were constrained to deliver their
opinions they would conclude it safer to incline to peace, unless very
Necessity or manifest and apparent Utility, persuaded the contrary.

4. Jovius, the Successor of Olympius, of whom we have spoken, wisely
prosecutes the business: for he being more prone to War, that so he might be
more necessary to the Prince, did nevertheless as the Politic custom of some
is, prefer the love of Peace. Meeting at Rhemes to parley with Alaricus he sends
those conditions which Alaricus had proposed to Honorius, persuading him apart
by other Letters, to offer the command of the Armies to Alaricus, by which he
might be made more equal and indifferent for other things. The Emperor
denying that it was besides his business to commit the stresse thereof to a
forrainer, and one who was yet an Enemy, answered that he had rather consent to
became tributary.

5. These Letters when Jovius had read before Alaricus, he being wroth, that
himself, and his, were contemned by Honorius, broke off this uncertain web and
work of the Paction and Agreement: Jovius returns to Honorius, who himself
being offended with the insolency of his Enemy, swears not to have peace with
Alaricus, and with the same Oath binds all his party. Thus Jovius by the same
subtilty and craftiness, both removes the envy of the Truce-breakings from
himself, and obliges Alaricus by the testification of his good will; whereby he
would have had him been made the Tribune of Caesar's Armies; but infolded
Honorius in War: which thing wonderfully established the Authority and Power of
Jovius.

6. There is such great variety in Histories, of those Errors and faults, for
which Courtiers fall into disfavour with Princes, that no man by any diligence
can so collect them all, but that when he has quoted many, he will yet seem to
have omitted more. Wherefore the most principal only being tasted, we will
leave the rest to every ones industry and prudence.

CHAP. XXVII.
The Argument.
By what wiles a Courtier may be suppressed, by malevolent persons: First, That
either he may go from Court himself, under some pretense; or else be speciously
removed. Of such, who by the same Art, are called up out of the Provinces.

WE have seen how by his own default, a Courtier may fall into the displeasure
of a Prince. We will now show the means, by which his foes, such as are
envious, or emulous, may depresse and abase him: For, they may endeavor to
remove him from Court, upon some pretext not dishonorable; or may render him
suspected or hated to the Prince; or lastly, in a public and open manner,
constrain the Prince to remove him.

2. The way of Amolition, or removing, which we said was the first way, has
diverse means, and various ends; for some, out of a show of honor, or occasion
to live with some friends, and near allies, are induced, not unwillingly, to
withdraw themselves from Court. This way Stippiota craftily used, (when Manuel
Comnenus was Emperor) to remove Hagiotheodorita, who stood in his light; for
there being a difference between Michael the Pedagogue, and Josephus Balsamon,
Stippiota persuaded the Emperor, that if Hagiotheodorita, Balsamons kinsman,
were made Governor of Peloponnesus, the difference would becomposed.
Hagiotheodorita being glad of an opportunity to help his kinsman, accepts the
courtesy; little minding, that Stippiota alone, would in the interim (his
Competitor being removed) have the ordering and managing of the chief affairs
of the Empire, which also came to pass.

3. Some men, being wearied with the contentions and brablings of adversaries
in Court, betake themselves unto any Province whatsoever, upon pretext of
necessary departing thence. Thus did Agrippa, who (as Vellcius testifies) went
into Asia, pretending some principal business; but, as report went, for some
private grudge between him and Marcellus, withdrew himself from the present
time.

4. Tiberius (while Caius Caesar was yet alive, who envyed him) departed to
Rhodes, pretending to turn Student there, and (as Suetonius says) by his
mothers means, obtained, that to cover his reproach, he might make show, as if
he had gone Ambassador thither.

5. If he whom you desire to remove, have no pretense to get leave to withdraw,
and will not take it as a courtesy, that he may depart willingly, and without
compulsion, you may persuade the Prince to prefer him, to some charge and
office, upon this account, that none is more worthy or fit for such an
employment.

6. After the same manner do emulous and envious persons, desire to have such
abstracted and drawn from a Province, or subdued Country, whose authority they
endeavor to weaken, whom they labor to bring into Court, as necessary and
useful to the Prince, and to thrust him into the crowd of Courtiers, by whose
loftiness, he may be the more obscured and clouded.

7. This was the artifice and trick, which Apelles used with Polybius, when he
went about to deprive Taurio of the government of Peloponnesus.

8. So Darius (by the advice of Megabyzus) called back Hyesteus from the
government of Jonia, a Region of Greece; not because there was need of his
presence, but that he might infringe and lessen his power and greatness.

9. If these Courtiers were content to enlarge their own place and bounds, by
the removing of another, and would stop there, the comparing of others far
worse, would render this Art tolerable; but for the most part, they stick not
here.

10. When Constantius was Emperor, Sylvanus being Commander of the Infantry,
(as Ammianus Marcellus reports) by the procurement of Arbetius, is sent into
France, to correct and amend those mischiefs, wherewith the Barbarous people
had infested the French; as one emulous, and that could not endure to see any
one quiet, and out of trouble; declines so great and hazardous a work, and
turns it upon another. Sylvanus undertaking the journey, and having ingratiated
with the French, became thereby powerful. Afterward Arbetius compileing envy
against him, with the Emperor, was at length himself brought to ruin.

11. The same fortune almost had Ursicinus, Commander of the Cavalry, under the
same Emperor: One Eusebius an Eunuch, with many other Courtiers, had conspired
his death; by the machinations and devices of these conspirators, he is sent
into the borders of Persia, that so he might be at distance from Court, where
having continued by the space of ten years, he receives for his successor
Sabinianus, a man, who neither for wit nor experience, was comparable to him,
for such a charge. By and by, (a rumor being raised, that the Persians made
ready for war) he is commanded to stay there, having delivered up his power to
the other; Eusebius purposely so disposing the matter, that so Sabinianus
should challenge to himself, the prosperous event of the war against the
Persians, and that the adverse and ill fortune thereof might be imputed to
Ursicinus, which the event afterward confirmed: For Ursicinus being dejected
for another fault, spent the remainder of his life in private. You may see if
you please, chap. 30. numb. 5.

12. The times of the same Constantius will supply us with another example; for
Ruffinus, the uncle of Gallus, by the fathers side, being President of the
Pretorian bands, was sent to appease the sedition of the Soldiery, with no
other intention, then that he might perish amongst the hateful hands of those
mad and peevish people. For the same end, Clytus complains, that he was sent by
Alexander against the Sognians.

CHAP. XXVIII.
The Argument.
The second way, is; Calumnies and Commendations are made use of, to make
others suspected and hateful to the Prince. Touching Detraction, Examples.

THus much concerning Amolition and removing, as the primary means and way,
which is used by enemies, and envious and emulous persons, to bring others into
disfavour with their Prince and Sovereign. The second is, that whereby they
render men suspected and odious to the Prince, by the help of detractions and
calumnies, or else by commendations.

2. In Calumnies we must attend unto two things; First, Whether they be fit and
sufficient to change the Prince's will. Secondly, Whether they have a likeness
to truth. Of the first, judgment is to be made, both by the present state of
affairs, and also, by the genius and inclination of the Prince, and the very
nature and condition of negotiations.

3. No calumnies do abound with more ruins of great men, then such as do
accuse and impeach them, of machinations and plots, against the Prince, and his
rule and government, or of contempt and disdaining to obey him, or such as are
of detracting speech, and mocking or scorning the Prince's words or actions.

4. Calumnies, and false accusations, are then rendered probable and likely, if
the accusation, which makes the party accused guilty, be branded with a note of
arrogance, either in the words or actions of themselves, or else of their
servants, friends, parents, or those who are tied and obliged to them, by
necessity or alliance. If they be supposed to have counterfeited Letters, the
judgment and sentence will be such, as that which the Prince has already
conceived in his mind, even the faithfulness of the calumniator, and the
guiltiness of the party accused.

5. Those things which by calumny are wrested into a crime, are such, as the
party traduced is said to have spoken, or done; either spontaneously, and of
his own accord, or else being induced by the deceits and circumventings of
enemies, or envious persons. Such wits, by allurements and enticeing words, can
fetch and pump up things that are not; and in every matter, find occasion and
opportunity, wherewith to help themselves.

6. There are some, who having counseled and persuaded a man to do something;
when they have found him yield, they make this the very weapon of their
accusation, and feign, that he has attempted some horrible design against
the Prince.

7. A certain Magician a Monk, one Santabarinus by name, was (before others)
beloved by Basilius, Emperor of Constantinople, but envyed beyond measure by
Leo his son: And therefore, having endeavored by all obsequious readiness of
feigned devotion, to allure his good will, at length wrought the young man to
credulity: For afterward, (having gotten some credit with him) he advises Leo,
to wear a dagger for his defense, privately, under his Mandilion or Jacket, if
at any time he went out to hunting with his father. Following his instruction,
the Magician goes to his father, and feignes to him, that his son had privately
conceived parricide, and shows the Dagger, as a detection and token thereof,
which he, watching his opportunity, had carried about him. To be brief, the
matter was so handled, that the son was imprisoned; and although protected with
the most intensive and vehement prayers and entreaties of the Nobility, he
scarcely escaped punishment.

8. In the time of Valentinian the Emperor, Aetius accuses Boniface his
companion, (who was very deer to the Emperor, and made Governor of Africa) of
treachery against Placidia, the Prince's mother, and that he intended to
subject Africa to himself; advising also, that he might be speedily recalled
thence. At the same time, he admonishes Boniface by Letters, that he was
accused at Court, and upon that account recalled; but bade him yet take heed of
coming back, lest he should be an enemy to his own safety. Boniface giving
credit to these things, so far disobeyed the Emperesses recalling him, that she
agreed with Gontarus, King of the Validuli, and Gensericus his son, then
manageing the affairs in Spain, to reduce him, if he opposed by force; who by
this occasion, possessed themselves of Mauritania. At length, the cheat being
discovered, Placidia permitted, that after the custom of that age, a Duel
should be appointed, wherein Aetius being conquered, he was commanded to avoid
the Court.

9. Not unlike to this was the subtilty and wiliness of Samonas, who being
deerly beloved to Leo the son of Basilius the Emperor; for detecting the
Conspiracy of one Basilius a kinsman of Zoa the Empress, who would have
destroyed Andronicus being chosen Chieftaine, together with Amerinus Logotheta
against the Saracens; he wills his friends to admonish him by Letters, that he
should beware of Hymerius; who came with an intention to accuse him
(exoculation, and depriving of the sight, was a sort of punishment in that age,
wherewith principal men, and those whose power they thought fit to abate and
weaken, were afflicted and chastised) An ronicus believeing these things to be
of truth, which were but feigned by Samonas; having made his escape from
Hymerius, possesses himself of a certain Castle. This hindered not Samonas
to exaggerate and heap up business against him to the Emperor, and by his
persuasions, an army is sent, which drives Andronicus together with the
Saracens from the confines of the Empire.

10. We have a little before (Chap. 27. Numb 10) made mention of Arbetius. It
seems worth observation how he superaddeth Treachery upon treachery. When he
sees that Constantius was offended with Silvanus, and doubted least he coming
to Rome, should obliterate and wipe off the Criminations objected against him,
he takes care that the Emperors Letters (by which he calls Silvanus unto him)
might be committed to the charge of one Apodemius. He coming into France, and
suppressing the Letters, tells him that he was in very imminent danger. Here
upon Silvanus moving sedition as a remedy and cure of his own safety,
imprudently and unawares verified the Calumination.

11. But truly we have too long been silent concerning Sejanus; who, as he was
wonderfully crafty in all things, so was he not unaccustomed to this Art
whereof we now treat. That he might render Agrippina the more suspected to
Tiberius, he suborneth his friends, that they might puff up and increase her
hopes beyond what was lawful. Her neighbors also are provoked and enticed, to
stimulate and prick forward the haughty and smelling spirits of Agrippina, by
depraved and stubborn words and speeches. Himself being the Engineere and
contriver of the plot, Claudia Pulchra Neice to Agrippina is accused and
slandered; to the end that Agrippina complaining hereof, and being a woman, hot
and fell, ill able to bear a coffeehouse, might the more vehemently and
sharply touch and gaul the suspicious mind of the Emperor.

12. Sejanus, not herewith satisfied, strikes higher and harder at the
discontented and improvident Lady: and having suborned some, who in show of
friendship should admonish her, that there was an intent to poison her; and
that therefore, she should shun to eat of the Banquet which Tiberius, her
father in law had invited her to; She (unhappily credulous and rash of
belief), when Tiberius offered her an Apple, withdrew her hand, and thereby
very much offended him.

13. He also, (when there was appointed unto Agrippina and her sons a
Scout-souldier to lie perdue, and to watch and observe their actions),
instructed and suborned some to admonish her; that she should fly to the Armies
of Germany; or else lay hold on the effigies and pourtraiture of Augustus, in
the most frequented place of judicature; and also should invoke the aid and
assistance of the Senate and people of Rome.

14. Moreover, by what kind of wickedness he also circumvented his Client
Titius Sabinus, that he might render him altogether suspected of Ambition to
Tiberius; is to be read in the very History. Which being no less abominable,
then worthy your remembrance; it will not be irksome to thee Reader, that we
have here run it over, in the very words of the worthy Historian, which are
extant in the fourth Book of his Annals.

CHAP. XXIX.
The Argument.
Examples of Treasons and Disloyalties. Of false Letters, and false witnesses.

I Cannot but add one Example more out of the same Cornelius Tacitus. Firmius
Catus a Senator, and of most intimate friendship with Libo a young Citizen of
Rome, and one improvident and very soon to be drawn to vanities; drew the
youth to the impious vows of the Chaldean Magicians, and himself became an
Interpreter and expounder of dreams to him; while he ostentates and boasts to
him that Pompey was his great Grandsire, that Scribonia (who was once the wife
of Augustus) was his fathers Sister; that the Casars were his Cousin-germanes,
and shows him a house full of Pictures; encourages him to Luxury and
borrowing of money, being his Companion in his Lusts and necessities; that by
many such shows and representatures he might the better entangle him. He
desires access to the Prince, having declared the Crime and Accusation; and
the party accused by Flaccus Vescularius, a Roman Knight, who had nearer
familiarity and acquaintance with Tiberius. Annall fourth, Book the second.

2. Stippiota, whose wile in removing Hagio^headerita before (Chap. 27 Numb 2.)
we have related, could not shun but that, after the same manner with Sabinus
Romanus (of which in the preceding Chapter. Numb 4.) he was almost
circumvented. The builder of the snare was Cameterus Logotheta, who being an
Enemy to Stippiota accuses him before the Emperor as an Impostor; and one who
had conceived in his intentions to betray Sicilia. And that the Calumny might
resemble truth, he hides the Emperor in a corner in his Bedchamber; and in
his hearing, begins to discourse with Stippiota (whom he had purposely invited
thither,) of the affairs of Sicily; where some few things fell from him which
were either contrary, or unpleasant to Caesar. Cameterus not content with this,
causes feigned Letters to be put into Stippiota's Boots, which by the
Emperors Command being searched, Stippiota was condemned, and his Eyes put out.

3. This discourse brings us occasionally to the other way and means, by which
we told you, that Calumnies and false accusations come to have the resemblance
of truth: and this consists in the supposition, and pretense of forged and
counterfeit Letters; And yet, this mode, and way could not so preserve and
maintain it self, but that at length it vanished and came to naught, although
it has ever had the greatest force, to cause suspicion to take the deeper
impression in the mind of a Prince, and to alienate and estrange his will;
which thing being considered, the parties accused fearing worse matters, have
either spontaneously quitted their employments; or else after the Calumny has
been accepted and taken for granted, having attempted and set upon those very
villains, have added to and increased such derraction: which is verified a
little before by the Example of Silvanus, Chap. 28. Number. 10.

4. The perfidiousnesse and treachery of false witnesses, is a main and
Principal ground, and prop for Calumnies and slanders, and such as they
chiefly have need of, who accuse any one of high Treason, in betraying their
Prince and Sovereign, whose domestics are in this case most prevalent.

5. In the reign of Arcadius, Eutropius conspiring against Timasius an old
Sword-man and of approved Authority, corrupted Barous his Client, (or rather
his most intimate familiar) with flattery and gifts, to accuse Timasius of
affecting the Empire. Bargus puts his faith and credit out to use to the
accuser Eutropius upon this account, because there having been such a
conjunction between him and Timasius, he could not be thought or believed to
accuse of any such crime one so well deserving at his hands, unless he were
most certain of the truth thereof.

6. They add moreover to the probation of the crime, feigned and forged
Letters. By this means the most innocent man, together with his Son, is cast
out into the Isle Oasis from whence neither of them returned.

7. Caius Petronius seemed better and more to be desired to Nero, then
Tigellinus, for skill and knowledge in volupty and pleasures. Scevinus, the
friend of Petronius was the Author of Conspiracy against Nero. Whereupon
Tigellinus being destempered with Envy, having corrupted and misled a servant
of his to detect Petronius of Emulation, by and by objecteth and lays to his
charge his friendship with Scevinus, and his knowledge of, and being conscious
to his enterprise. Annal. Book the 16th.

CHAP. XXX.
The Argument.
Of the Principal Grounds and Basis, of Detraction and Calumniation; the
affection of the Prince to both parties: And of feigned friendship under occult
and secret inveighings and backbitings.

WE have said before, that the affection of the Prince toward the
Calumniator, makes very much to confirm and strengthen the Calumny. This was
thoroughly noted in Sejanus, who endeavoring to bring Agrippina the widow of
Germanicus under suspicion with Livia Augusta, chose Julius Posthumus for his
turn: for he, by the Adultery and forgery of Mutilia Prisca, was one of Livias
intimate ones, and very fit for Sejanus his Counsels, but Prisca was very great
in the opinion of Augusta. They are the words of Tacitus, in his fourth book.

2. But the snares and guiles of Calumnies have a more compendious, and short
procedure and determination, if the party slandered have formerly been any whit
suspected by the Prince. For then the Calumniator, may not only thereby
suppress the other, but advance himself also.

3. The familiars and friends of Aulus Vitellius, would not set upon Junius
Blesus, before such time as they perceived Vitellius his benevolence and
friendship toward him, begin to wax stale; and do the sooner obtain their
desire, because Vitellius his brother Lucius accommodates them with his aid in
the accusation. Hist. Book the third.

4. Gracchus, one of the Children of Casar, and, as Tacitus says in the 13th
of his Annals, by experience and Age having been taught in the Princes family,
even from the time of Tiberius, thought, that the best way, and remedy for him
to conserve and keep the favor of the Prince, was, to accuse Cornelius Sylla,
whom Nero had a good while before suspected. The like Art Tigellinus uses
against the same Sylla and Plautus. Whereof Tacitus in the 14th of his Annals
says thus. Tigellinus grows daily more strong, supposes his evil arts in
which only he excelled, will become the more acceptable, if he can but linck
the Prince in association of his lewd enterprises, his fear then would have a
starting hole. And having found that Plautus and Sylla were much dreaded,
Plautus having been lately removed into Asia. Sylla into Gallia Narbonensis,
makes mention of, and commemorates their nobility, and near Allies, the one of
the Eastern the other of the Germane Army. After a few other passages he
turns quite about, and bespeaks Sylla a needy indigent fellow, and by that
means notably adventurous and saucy, and a Counterfeiter of sloth and
negligence, while he may find a place for temerity and rashness. Plautus by
reason of his great wealth was unfeignedly desirous of ease and idleness.

5. We have spoken of Ursicinus his being accucused by Eusebius the Eunuch,
before the Emperor Constantius, to whom he was formerly under an ill opinion
by reason of his alliance and neerness of kindred to Gallus before (in the 27
Chap. Numb. 11.) not observing the event of that cause which was this: The
Eunuch fearing that he should want Arguments to prove the crime, devises
another craft and treachery, desires the matter of accusation may be
protracted, and the judgment for a time suspended. The business then remaining
undecided, he obliges to himself Ursicinus, whom he seems to free from the
danger of the judgment, yet withal removes him from Court, which was his chief
aim, making great show of friendship therein, but occultly and privately
inveighing against him to the Prince,

CHAP. XXXI.
The Argument.
The Art of Calumniators and the chief means of detracting; To accuse one of
a speech which in it self is true but fould, and not spoken by the accused; and
by a show of relating the words of others, to reprove the evil actions of the
Prince without punishment or danger.

THey who accuse another to have spoken evil of the Prince, by how much they
draw and heap up more evil words from those which are true, by so much the
easy will their accusations find credit and belief.

2. This evidently appears in the example of Granius Marcellus whom (as
Tacitus says in the 1 book of his Annals) Caepio Crispinus accused to have
uttered some sinister and unhappy words touching Tiberius, a crime inevitable,
since that the accuser chooses something of the Prince's vicious actions, and
objecteth them to the accused's charge to have spoken of. For because they were
true, therefore were they believed to have been spoken by him.

3. Many Calumniators having followed this Example have upbraided and twitted
the Emperors with their faults, by a show of relating other men's speches,
without reproof. This alone, in a manner moved them, to be very sparing in
giving ear to false accusers.

4. And truly Tiberius, as he was a hater of reproaches, so was he a lover of
calumnies and accusations; and lest he should hear the one, when he was present
in the Senate, and that the other might not be omitted, departed to Caprea,
believing (as the Historian says) it was fit for him to shun the assembly of
his Councills, and their votes, which commonly, while he was present with them,
were grave and weighty. Annal. Book 4.

5. This way of upbraiding Princes, with their vicious actions, did they use,
who translating by checks and taunts the Matricide of Nero, accuse others of
the same crime, before Caesar, who was the auth or thereof, with a desire
rather of rebukeing and discommending the wickedness, then of destroying the
party accused.

6. These are the most usual ways and modes which calumniators use; for who
can enumerate them all? Calumny is a Monster, which has a thousand figures and
shapes, a thousand crafts and cunning deceits.

CHAP. XXXII.
The Argument.
Of the wiles and subtleties of Court-commendations, masked Courtiers, and such
as disguise themselves. The inward intention and disposition of such, as
commend or dispraise us, is to be looked into. The third way and means, by
which one Courtier oppresses and grieveth another, viz. Power and Force.

FRom Calumnies, let us come to Commendations; there is use made likewise of
these in Courts, (as we have said) to suppress and pull down others; the most
here do palliate and cloak their odium, envy, and emulation, that so they may
the more easily deceive and frustrate.

2. Thus did Fabius Valens scandalize Mantius Valens, by secret criminations,
without his knowledge or mistrust; and that he might be the less aware of his
deceits, would openly commend him. Tacitus Hist. 1.

3. So did Eusebius the Eunuch, impugn and overcome Ursicinus, by the
inticeing allurements of immense and huge bounty and largess, and did often
openly call him, a stout and valiant man; being very crafty and cunning, to
entangle and ensnare the simple man, in his poisonous and deathfull
intrapments; and in that season too powerful, as Ammianus Marcellinus reports.

4. Alfonsus King of Arragon, when a certain person had before him commended
another, (besides his accustomed wont and manner) turning about to his friend,
Iste exitium haud dubie ei, quem laudat, meditatur, That man doubtless means
ruin to him, whom he thus commends. Nor was the King mistaken in this
opinion; for about fix months after, he that so highly had commended, impleads
and sues the other at Law, and had overthrown him, had not the King interceded.

5. Mucianus, when he could not oppress Antonius the first, openly loadeth him
with much commendations in the Senate, and secret promises; showing and
boasting, that the nigher Spain was vacant, by the departure of Cluvius Rufus;
and bestows upon his friends Tribuneships and Offices: And after he had pust
up his mind with hope and desire, remitteth and weakeneth his force and
strength, by dismissing the seventh Legion in their winter quarters, whose love
to Antonius was most ardent. Tacitus in the 4th. Book of his Histories.

6. Neither do Courtiers only, but even Princes, when they desire to diminish
and pull down some, take this way and road. Tiberius (having Libo under secret
suspect and envy) advances him to the Pretorship, and feasteth him often, not
being estranged in countenance, not moved in language, and so conceals his
anger, as Tacitus says, in the second Book of his Annalls. By the same Art, he
also overthrew Sejanus. Domitian was never more to be feared, then when in his
countenance he made show of courtesy. Nicetas was wont to call the
commendations of Andronicus, the beginnings of an injury; his liberality, a
token of confiscation of goods; his lenity, the forerunner of death.

7. Some, in commending others, have this reach, that thereby they may kindle
the Prince's hate against them. By this means, was Julius Agricola suppressed
by Domitian; whereupon, Tacitus writing of Agricola, says thus; The cause of
his danger, was not any crime or complaint of hurting any body, but the
Prince's being displeased at his virtues, and the glory of the man, and withal
(that worst sort of friends) such as commend and applaud.

8. Ju^ian the Emperor had a saying, Nullos esse capitaliores hosts quam
larvatos Aulicos: There are none more capital and deadly enemies, then masked
and vizarded Courtiers, such as Polybius, and, after him, Mamertinus describes;
who, in a Panegyric, and flattering speech, speaks thus: Callido artificio
accusatoriam dicacitatem laudum titulis peragebant in omnibus conventiculis,
quasi per benevolentiam: They rehearsed accusatory scoffings and reproaches, by
a cunning Art, under the titles of commendations, in all their conventicles,
and private meetings, as done out of good will.

9. But we may then discover those commendations to be usurped by some, when in
commending one, they endeavor to bewray and denote another, as unlike to him.
This kind of malignity, Plutarch objects to Herodotus, when he says, that the
Athenians were commended by him, as valiantly retunding and repressing the
Persians Armies; not with a desire to extol the Athenians, but to disgrace and
defame the others.

10. It is usual with Kings, as Seneca testifies, to commend their ministers
and servants, who are deceased, that so they may shame such as are living. Thus
did Augustus advance and set forth, the faithful duty and services of Mecoenas
and Agrippa, when having openly manifested the sensualities of their daughters,
he would reprehend his familiars and friends, as careless and neglective of
their Prince's business and fame.

11. Augustus beats Tiberius black and blew, by commending and excusing him;
whereof Tacitus writing in the first Book of his Annals, says thus, Augustus a
few years before, had required of the State and Council, that Tiberius should
have the power of a Tribune, although in an honorable Oration, he had yet cast
out something, touching his habit and attire, and his institutions and
purposes; all which, as seeming to excuse, he upbraids and casts in his teeth.

12. These things therefore should admonish us, that we endeavor to look into
the inward intents, and dispositions of such, as either praise or reproach us.

13. We told you, that the last way and means, by which Courtiers are oppressed
by their enemies, is, Force and Strength, which then principally takes place,
when either People or Soldiery, being offended at our dignity or manners, stir
up sedition.

14. It Is not unknown, what tumults were amongst the Parisians, how they were
heated therewith, when John King of England was taken prisoner. Nor is the
condition and fortune of those unknown, who, when his son was Viceroy, held
the principal offices and dignities in the Kingdom.

15. Not many years since, the seditions of the Janissaries, swept away
Ministers of chief authority, from the Turkish Emperors. The times of Arcaaius
the Emperor, will afford us some examples hereof, from the most ancient
Histories. Ruffinus was very near and deer (amongst the chiefest) to that
Prince, who being offended with Stilico, and meditating his ruin and
destruction, sends Gaina with the Armies, as an Auxiliary to the Emperor; but,
in very deed, to take away the life of Ruffinus, which also was accomplished:
For Ruffinus being gone forth with the Army, the Soldiers of Gaina having
risen up, by giving a signal, compassed him about, and tore him in pieces.
Eutropius being substituted in place of Ruffinus, had likewise offended some
prime Courtiers; and (the same Gaina being the plotter and contriver)
Tribigildus moves sedition; who flying over, and dispoyling Asia, denies peace
upon any other terms or advantage, then, that Eutropius should be taken away:
To which Law, at length ( Gaina driving the Chariot) the Emperor consents.
Nor was this enough; the same Gaina afterward, openly joining with
Tribigildus, that it might be manifested, that he was reconciled to Arcadius,
requires, that Aurelianus Salurinus, and Jobn Chrysostomus, (then chief men in
transacting affairs) should be delivered up to their arbitrament and pleasure;
whom (being delivered up) he commands to banishment; and was content, that he
had given them occasion, to bewail the edge of their own swords.

CHAP. XXXIII.
The Argument.
Sometimes the fierce and untractable genius and d^sposition of the Prince,
envying such as are deserving, is amongst the causes, why the Courtier is
disfavoured and dis-esteemed by him. How such displeasure is to be handled and
ordered.

VEry often, Courtiers, who think themselves guarded on all hands, happen upon
a Prince, whose Genius is vain, distrustful, envious, covetous, cruel, or
timidous, which proves to their inevitable ruin. These diseases, as planted in
Nature, do mostly what delude the circumspection of the most prudent. Seneca,
owing much to his liberty with Nero, but little to his service, although
prudent, and not uncrafty in Courtly Arts; yet being overcome, as it were, by
the malice of the Prince's genius and disposition, yielded at last. He first
incurs his envy by his eloquence and wealth; and afterward falling under
calumny and false accusations, was bereft of the Prince's favor, and his own
life together.

2. The diffidence and envy of Princes, toward some, has been so formidable,
that they had rather suffer a diminution and abatement of their own emoluments,
and profits, then be highly active, with their Prince's envy and displeasure.

3. Publius Venidius, fearing the Envy of Marc Antony, (by whose Authority he
waged war;) was content to have repelled the Parthians in three several
battles even to Media, yet would not prosecute the victory.

4. The same thing did Bellisarius, when Justinian was Emperor, as Agathias
says; when in like manner he feared, least the greatness of the victory, and
applause of the people, should stir up the hatred of the Nobles and
afterward of the Prince.

5. Such as these, neither provide rightly for the utility and advantage of the
Prince; nor their own honors. But the fault nevertheless is not in them so
much, as in him that rules; and for this cause Mertoenas persuades Augustus,
that he should neither impute sinister Events to his Ministers, nor
successful to Himself. For (says he) many of those who handle public
affairs, fearing to be envyed by the Prince, have more negligently acted in
their Employment; choosing rather to run the hazard of Glory, then safety.

6. Their course notwithstanding, seems best in my approbation; who, to avoid
Envy, whatsoever notable Enterprise they publish and set forth, attribute the
glory thereof to the Prince, though absent at the time of the action.

7. Agrippa the son in law of Augustus, persuades those who take in hand great
matters, to attribute the thing accomplished to the Prince; and himself did
often so. Thus Joab when he had besiged Rabbath and could have subdued it,
would not before David himself was come; Craerus when the war was to be
composed, with Artacona; waited for the presence of Alexander. Julius Agricola,
as Tacitus reports, never triumphed for any Actions to his own fame and
renown, but referred the fortune to the Author, and General, looking on
himself, but as a Minister and instrument.

8. This same Envy and Emulation, (for the others though diverse are here the
like in effect;) let it be that they are diseases, yet have they been common
and familiar to the most generous Princes; such as were Philip, and Alexander;
and do more strongly blast some, then others.

9. Theodosius the second of that name, had delegated and appointed the care of
those Seas, which flowed up to Constantinople, to Syrus to be immured and
walled in; which work when he had effected in sixty days, this Celerity and
speedy dispatch was so grateful to the people; that they cried out on all
sides, that the City was built by Constantine, but renewed by Cyrus. This being
heard of the Emperor, stirred up such Envy in him, that Cyrus to expiate it,
was necessitated to put on the hood.

10. He that has to do with such dispositions, may think that he walks upon
the hot imbers; and therefore ought with all diligence so to act, as that he
may diligently search out their inclinations; that so he may guard himself
against them, or if that may not be done; he may at least be conscious to
himself, of having not omitted his duty and office.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
The Argument.
Of obtaining favor with, and retaining an office under the Prince's
successor. The kinds of Calumniatours that hinder us in this place. The
dexterity and quickness of stopping and restraining them. A true friend in
Court, is Rara avis seldom found.

1. HE may worthily be reckoned amongst the happy ones, and as it were the
Chickens of fortune; whose Authority with the Prince from whom he had his
beginning, remains in the same height and loftiness with his Successor. This
is rare in Courts, because he who presumes to be next; by retaining his
office, is for the most part suspected to those that rule; and being so eminent
in this place, they are very often necessitated to cross and thwart such
persons which yields most frequent seed to deadly feuds and hatred.

2. And besides this, the successor of a Prince has mostly his own Ministers
and Servants, well known to him by their long and faithful service and
employments, to whom that they may make way to dignities and honors, he will
pull down the Clients and retainers of the deceased, either freely or by
persuasion to give place to others, that are petitioners.

3. There are yet some, whom either the matter of their employments for which
they are apter then others, their office whatever it be insinuates them onto
the succeeding Prince's acceptance, that besides the deceased Prince he would
not part with any such a one.

4. Macro to ingratiate himself with Caligula subornes and incenseth his wise,
Ennia, to entise the young man by love, and to contract matrimony with him,
that so she might overcome him and prevail with him. The same Macro causes
Tiberius when he lay dying, to be oppressed and overcharged, with the weight of
heavy Clothes cast upon him, as says Tacitus in his sixth Book. Julian the
Emperor retains Arbetio by him, although he hated him for his pride, and for
his contentious and turbulent spirit, conceiving him to be necessary to him.
Afterward Valentinian calls the same Arbetio to Court of purpose, that he
might oppose and set himself against Procopius.

5. We have shown hitherto, what a Courtier is to shun and avoid, who would
enjoy the grace and favor of his Prince. The head and chief of all Counsels,
which can in this place be given a Courtier, is, Modesty toward the Prince;
measuring himself not in himself, nor comparing himself with himself; not
framing himself I say, by the Modul of fortune, but of his own duty, acting
nothing boastingly and in a bravadoe, nothing irreverently, avoiding Envy (as
much as is possible). A thing so formidable to many worthies and ancient
Grandees; that many (pretending unfitness, or other inability to manage
them); others (betaking themselves to their books,) have with drawn and
estranged themselves from the public Negotiations, as one, whereof Historians
make mention, of Domitian; as the other, of Galba.

6. First we will carefully transmit, and pass over those Commendations of
Malevolent persons, and the Calumnies; of which we have already spoken.

7. They who slander us, or say, that there is wanting in us some of those
things which are requisite to the well serving of a Prince; and affirm that we
have spoken something amiss, and with intention to offend; or else have by
Act, hurt and injured some body.

8. The fault which is objected against us, is either to be excused, or
amended; or else expiated and purged by the operation of other virtues. As also
all our words and deeds are so to be moderated, that they become not obnoxious
to Sinister interpretations and constructions. Therefore the mind of another,
is first to be scrued and searched into; before we disclose our own. But if
through carelessness, somewhat may fall from us, that may be offensive, we must
show, and evidence to them; (either by some good office to be performed for
them, or by casting in some smooth and handsome interpretation, by other words
and speeches), that we had no mind to offend them in our discourse.

9. If we have cognizance that we are calumninated, it will be advisedly and
wisely done of us; to be as little absent, and at distance from the party, to
whom we are accused, as possible may be. For besides this, that affection
toward such as are absent freezeth in time; the reproach and slander, unless
maturely and timously repelled, and foiled by the aid of verity and truth,
will more easily find place; which (the course being turned, and a doubt
speedily injected), will flagg and wither: but by delay, and none contradicting
the accuser's affirmations, will be corroborated and strengthened, and take
root in the Prince's mind, and carry him so sarre; as that he may hate the
party accused, before he inquire into the Crime.

10. He therefore that will be rightly advised herein, shall procure himself
one, or more friends; who in his absence may defend him from the assaults of
Slander: but be sure they be persons of honor; and such, as to whose defense
the Prince may no less give ear, then to the others Calumnies. But of such
friends, I confess there is great sterility and barrenness at Court: where it
is mostly usual amongst all, either to oppress their fellows; or suffer them
to be oppressed. Yet it happens sometimes that there may be one, who by
benefits received from us; or by desire to oblige us to them; or lastly out of
hate to the Accuser; may be moved and persuaded to such a good turn.

CHAP. XXXV.
The Argument.
How much Ostentation is to be avoided by a Courtier in favor with the Prince.
What Retinew he may have. Of Courtly modesty and moderation. The reason and
proportion of Clients and Retainers, and of friends.

A Courtier should not only such Ostentation and boasting of his Prince's
favor, that so he may avoid the Envy of Compeers and equals (of which we have
spoken Chap. 19.) but that of the Prince also.

2. When on a time the Spanish Nobility in the Reign of Philip the second, went
about to root out and overthrow Cardinal Spinosa, see how they go about to
undermine him: they all lay down their Mases and Offices at his foot, they all
feign and profess that he is the Hinge upon which their fortunes depend. The
Prince's domestic Ministers and servants offer themselves ready at his beck.
When the King gets intelligence hereof he is removed from Court; and within two
years decays, what ever the lofty structure of power were, that he had built
to himself.

3. Let a Courtier therefore learn to be contented with a small retinue and
train, to keep his station, and subsist with that dignity wherewith the Prince
has adorned him, and rather below his degree; but let him never transgress
his bounds. Its unseasonable to diminish and curtaile ones train only in a
declining Fortune. 'Twas no boot to Seneca after he had left Neroe's favor to
betake himself to a private Cottage, and to have composed and built up to
himself a Pyramid of studies, and under pretend of unhealthinesse to deny
entrance to visitors; nor did it any thing ease the mind of Agricola, by night,
and with slender attendance, to walk about the City.

4. It behooves very much that a man do timously compose and module himself to
temperance and moderation.

5. Yet although we would not have you be surround with the noise and rout of
many suitors and attenders; nevertheless would we not have you neglect to make
many your Clients and retainers: not such as should serve for your pomp and
solemnity; but such, as, if any dysaster should befall thee, may either restore
and renew, or at least refresh and comfort thee.

6. For though sinister and unhappy Fortune has found but few such friends,
yet has it most found some, who if they cannot eye friendship yet may they for
their own benefit and commodity, have respect to something ^ending to the
conserving and preservation of thy Fortune.

CHAP. XXXVI.
The Argument.
Comforts in adverse fortune. The benefits of Princes are to be dispensed
warily: His favor is not to be too much divided amongst others. By what means
one may intercede for others. Favor is not ambitiously to be boasted of. The
free arbitrament of Princes in acting. What commands of his are to be obeyed
and dispatched. The reason of a Princes dress and sumptuousness. How we are
to deal with one that complains to us of being offended and hurt by the
Prince. Of the Court household service. What is the most especial part and
Office of Courtly wisdom.

BUt yet, as it is a great Comfort and consolation in adverse fortune, to have
communicated with others in our prosperity, and to have used the favor of the
Prince to lift up and advance others: so is a Courtier also to be admonished
that he dispense and bestow those benefits warily. For it is most certain, that
whatever the Prince has conferred on another at our request is in a great
measure to be imputed to us. Therefore his grace and favor, unless it be very
great toward us, is not to be too much divided amongst others; and very
seldom are others who are not after some sort known to the prince, to be
recomended unto him. That of Horace is to be observed.

Qualem commendes, etiam atque etiam adspice; ne mox
Incutiant aliena tibi peccata pudorem.
Englished thus,

Such as in friendly wise thou would commend,
Be sure thou try them as thou would thy friend.
Lest by their faults thy self should get disgrace;
By their reproof a blush light on thy face.
2. If we desire to beg a Boon of the Prince let our request be just, and
accommodated and fitted to time; conjoined likewise with the dignity and
Emolument and advantage of the Prince, and such as the like has been obtained
by many others. If the Prince signifies his consent, let us manifestly
evidence that we accept it as a very great benefit and bounty; if he refuse, we
must be very careful, that we give him not cause to think that we are
discontented.

3. Here also must we observe that which before Chap. 35. Number. 1. we
admonished, that we do not ambitiously ostentate and boast of the Princes
favor, as if we had him obnoxious to our Commands, which some having done have
ill succeeded as we showed. What ever Princes act, they desire to seem to act
it, by their own free Arbitrament and will, without the additament and props,
or Authority of others, especially of their subjects.

4. If the Prince give us in Command any thing hard and perilous, lets
endeavor to have it comprehended in writing, and if possible to be most
accurately and exquisitely gathered and composed; if any difficulties occur in
executing them, let us ripen them, and before we betake us to the Province and
place appointed to execute them in, let us not omit or neglect to unfold and
declare them, if the matters be not fit to be written and be to be committed to
us in secret, we are often to iterate and repeat them over in his presence,
that we may more thoroughly understand the mind of the Commander, and he may
see, that his Authority in the things which we act, is not denied.

5. That which remains, is, We ought to show our promptitude and readiness to
do, even the meanest offices the Prince Commands us to. A small matter ofttimes
opens a way to a great fortune; and Princes will have their Commands to be
estimated, not by the weight and ponderosity of the things commanded, but by
the magnitude and greatness of their own fortune: and therefore are not less
offended at our abandoning and disdaining of their less and easy Commands,
than of the hardships and hazards they expose us to, by their employment.

6. When we are near the Prince, we ought assiduously to watch that we be not
overrun with sudden and unexpected commands, or taken tardy in doing something
besides our business and employment. To this purpose, let us (as much as may
be) observe and preoccupate in our mind, the things which are incumbent on us,
and prepare our thoughts to every thing which falls into agitation, and that we
speak not many things to the Prince, nor any thing that we do not well know and
understand. When the Prince speaks, let us be intent, and not minding other
matters, neither let us appear sad, and full of thoughts, lest we seem, either
not to hear, or by a careless heating, to transmit and pass over slightly his
speeches.

7. If any one that is grieved by the Prince shall come to us and complain of
his fortune; let us show, that we pity his case, and persuade him to silence
and patience: let us also raise him up to hope well, extenuating the Injury
done to him, and excusing the Prince. But we must act very circumspectly with
such; for there are some who feign themselves injured, that so they may pump
and draw up something from us, which may signify a sinister and evil will in
us, toward the Prince, and may thereby find occasion to oppress us. Others are
(re vera) and in truth grieved and hurt, yet oftentimes being imprudent and
silly, and carried away by affection and selfishnesse, do not conceal those
things which are communicated to them in secret trust.

8. If it be our fortune to have the charge of a family, we ought to keep our
servants also from speaking more freely against the Prince, or such as are by
affection and love chiefly endeered to him; for the fault of a household servant
is of times tranferred upon the Master.

9. This is amongst the choicest parts and Offices of Courtly wisdom, viz. to
be able sagaciously and prudently to resent the Princes affection, when either
changed, or but lukewarm toward us. If any such thing should happen, it is
gently and sweetly to be dissolved and untyed as the knot of love; but in no
wise to be broken and torn open, till that the Cause of this change of
affection be abolished; for so a return to the former favor is sometimes
given, especially if we seem not to have remembered the injury; or else clearly
to have never so much as heeded or regarded it.

CHAP. XXXVII.
The Argument.
A judgment touching the Constancy and mutations and changes of Princely love
and Benevolence. Felicity inexplicable and intricate; The Court starr.

THat a Courtier may rightly judge of the constancy and permanency of the
Prince's good will, toward him, it is not enough that he be knowing of the
Princes Genius and disposition, and the Authority and power both of his friends
and foes; he ought first thoroughly to weigh and consider the cause, which
exkindled this love of the Prince toward him. For if that which was the cause
should cease in us, or be found more valid and strong in another; doubtless
the Princes affection toward us, will altogether cool; or at least be lessened.

2. It Is sometimes difficult to divine, what the cause is for which thou art
beloved; and as Ausonius says, This is a felicity, the reason whereof we
cannot render. But ordinarily, this love of Princes arises, either from a
similitude and likeness of disposition; or from the grace and comeliness of
our deportment and behavior, or from some duty and offices performed; or some
other virtue and aptitude to obey their will.

3. That love, which that external and outward grace and likeness of manners
produces; although it seem most firm and stable, does soonest of all wax old
and decay; both because as we have said, the Genius and inclinations of men is
changed according to age, and the variety and change of intervening and
accidental affairs; and also for that it is a rare thing for two such like
dispositions to be found, which may not in some thing differ and disagree.
Oftimes also, that contrary thing which they have, is more prevalent to discord
and division, then the things wherein they resemble each other, are to Concord
and agreement.

4. Notwithstanding, I know not what star or constellation, by an unusual
manner and way, does so attemperate and season some men to the Prince; that he
can not easily in any thing depart from, nor leave such a ones fashions and
temperature. And these are they, (I deny not) who reap a plentiful crop of
good things before all others; especially if they know how, wittily and trimly
to serve the time; and before a Tempest to furl up their sails.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
The Argument.
The love of Princes toward women. The paramours of Princes. Presents bestowed
on Princes, are easily envyed. The condition of well deserving men in Court.
The affections of some Princes toward such men. The reason why Rewards and
Largesses are given and appointed for the undertaking of business. the love of
Princes toward such as minister to their volupties and delights.

WIth this kind of love, Princes are sometimes affected to Women; and that by
so much the more, as they are prone to venerious volupties and pleasures.

2. From the same nevertheless do these fall away and decline; if not by their
own fault, yet at least by the satiety of the party loving, or by the sight of
a better Love or Mistress: whereby it comes to pass, that they become more
crafty and guilefull; who endeavor to divert the Prince from all familiarity
and converse with others, especially with such, who seem fit and able to bend
the Prince's mind another way. Some by feigned and counterfit disdain, have
kept them loving and kind to them. Others being more audacious, have ungirt and
unbuckled those whom they perceive to be more obliged and constrained to them
by Luxury and carnal pleasures and delights.

3. This art used Poppaea to Nero; of which ye may see, in the words of the
prince of Historians, in the 14. th of his Annals.

4. The female friends of Princes have oftimes more easily obliged some to
them, after this mode and way then by flatteries or pleasures. But, there is no
constancy (as we have said) in this kind of Love.

5. It were more convenient and agreeable indeed, that the love which thou
have, (as it were) hatched to thee and bred by services; should be more stable
and firm, as that which is sprung from a more honest Cause; and fitter to
allure and entice others, to the like offices and duties.

6. Yet very often, does experience teach us the contrary; many times the chief
benefits in Court are envyed, and those whose turn and office they cannot
requite; they often revenge with hatred.

7. Such are not willing to be indebted to any man, much less to a subject.
They shun, and endure not, that deserving men should see them, as those who
should upbraid their ingratitude, which is the cause that their condition, in
Court, is most miserable; for, when by some office and service they have
merited from the Prince, they are forthwith constrained by shamefacednesse, not
to require their reward; and seem by fear, not to have given, but sold their
advantage and benefit. Princes, in the interim being careless of benefits and
good turns, and very sloathfull as to compensations and recompenses,
procrastinate and put off from day to day; until the remembrance of the
benefits wither and fade away from the minds of those, who are conscious and
privy to them, who before feared some secret taunts and reproaches.

8. Some understanding thus much, have thought it good to strike (as they say)
while the Iron's hot; (that is to say) when they have known themselves
destinated and appointed to some certain business; before they would undertake
it, have had an eye to the reward, knowing that the hope of receiving an
Office, is more strong and vali'd with Princes, then the Hopes of a reward;
that it is better to be obliged to Rulers, then to oblige them; because whom
they oblige, they think should be benevolous and bear them goodwill; he who
has obliged them, (because he may be thought not to love the Prince, who shall
deny him his recompense and reward) shall be punished with odium and hatred,
instead of compensation. This was the judgment and opinion of Lewis the 11th,
as Comineus reports.

9. Love toward those who Minister aid and assistance to the Prince's volupty,
and are obedient thereto, seems fit to be more stable, and is so indeed so long
as the Prince is constant to his own inclinations: But (they being changed)
such as administer to them, are also changed; sometimes also the Prince,
becoming conscientious of what is honest, abominates and casts away the
Ministers together with the vice.

10. Moreover as the inclinations of the Prince are some more durable and
lasting then others; so also the favor which we have spoken of to such as
administer to them, will be alterable and unconstant.

CHAP. XXXIX.
The Argument.
Of the pleasures of Princes. Veneriall Love. Companions in evil actions. The
affections of avarice and covetousness. Pretext of public exactions and
tazes. The morosity and peevishness of exacters denoted. The envy of Riches.
What kind of avarice in a Prince may be consummated and accomplished. The too
much facility and gentleness, and the insolency of Ministers, denoted and
observed. A just occasion of enriching a man's self, is not to be refused.

I Shall not here meddle with all the volupties to which a Prince's natures are
prone, because they are not all such, as upon which the height of
Court-fortune can be superstructed and built. There is a three fold kind of
them, too common and familiar with Princes which I will rehearse viz. Veneriall
Love, Cruelty, and Covetuousnesse.

2. Veneriall Love, as it is mostly vehementer then the rest, so is it the more
unconstanter; which although it may last in him, yet will he not long love and
like one and the same party; and though he may not change the subject, yet (to
use the Scholastic term) he will change and vary the object. Nevertheless,
very many have used this as the basis and foundation wherein they have reared
and built up their fortunes, not sticking to prostitute and debauch their own
wives that they might attain the Prince's favor. As we read in Tacitus's 13th
book of Annal. that one Ortho did, yet this succeeded not so, as to ingratiate
him: for Nero removed him from Court, lest he should have a Rival near him.

3. Others, that they might oblige the Prince, have associated themselves with
him, and been contented to be witnesses and ministers of his misdeeds and lust.
An example whereof was Tigellinus. Annal. 14th. These consider not, that
Princes scrupple not to sacrifice such men at length to public envy, to free
themselves there from. Such servants of Lust may expect the same which Remirus
d'Orco (that Minister of Cruelties to Caesar Borgia) experienced, whom Borgia
at length commanded to be put to death, as the person guilty of all those
things, which himself had cruelly acted and done.

4. And by this example of Remirus we may learn their sat and destiny, who
lend their aid to the cruelty of a Prince. Seldom is the Princes affection
toward such, long lived; both because he afterward reads his own vices in
them, and also, because he is afraid himself of them, whom he perceives and
find so apt for villainy.

5. Nero although of a cruel disposition, and an old and crafty Politician,
after his mother was slain hated Anicetus, whom he perceived to have upbraided
him with his Matricide.

6. But least of all, is that affection of covetuousnesse mutable. The
diversity of object changes not that, as it does Love; it is not lessened and
impaired with age, but increased; and although it be equally and alike hateful
to the people as Cruelty is, yet is longer endured; because exactions have
commonly a pretext of public necessity, and honest parsimony, and likewise a
species and show of common utility. Hence therefore they who are Ministers
herein, may seem longer to be sheltred by the Prince's amity, whiles that they
(which is rare in such kind of men) be nether froward, nor testy and difficult,
not too greedy of wealth and gain.

7. Morosity, which for the most part is also conrumelious and reproachful,
procures odium and envy both to the party, and to the Governor and Ruler of a
people. The Author whereof the Prince at length will reject and cast off, that
so he may remove the envy from himself. Riches are obnoxious to envy, not only
of the multitude, but sometimes of the Prince himself; who, if truly covetous,
will seldom be contented to have wrung out and squeezed the full sponge, which
(as we read) Vespatian was wont to do, but will imitate the Peasants and
Rustic people, who at last devour and eat up those swine, which they have
formerly crammed and fatted.

8. Certes, the Kingdom of France has seen many such, who being rough and
sharp beyond measure, or too hasty to enrich themselves, when they have acted
too insolently, after a great and lofty fortune, have been brought to perdition
and ruin.

9. In the Reign of Philip the fair, one Peter Berchy being Chauncellor of the
Exchequer, and of the Prince's bed Chamber, was strangled at Paris. Lewis the
son of Philip having afterward attained to the Kingdom, Enguerrandus Marigny
fell into the like misfortune, under Charles the seventh. Guise in dignity
equal to Berchy, being questioned by the law, was afterward sown up in a
Sack, and drowned. His successor Camus Beauly, was slain at Poitiers. The like
Fate had befaln Peter Essart, in the time of Philip the first, had he not
redeemed himself with a hundred thousand Florens.

10. I could name others, but I spare their memory, mean while the examples
produced do sufficiently instruct, that the facility of such kind of Ministers
brings too much detriment and hurt to the Princes utility; but their own
insolency, attracteth hatred and destruction even to themselves. Too much
Riches are to be avoided, which may stir up against us; as also it is
lawful, not to refuse a just occasion of being wealthy.

CHAP. XL.
The Argument.
Aptitude and fitness for business in a Courtier, is the ultimate cause of
Princely grace and favor. What consideration is to be had therein, to wisdom
and glory. The weakness of Courtly power, Sovereign Counsel, for such as
act highly. A Compendium of a sedate and quiet life, and of the Author's wish.

THe last of the causes, for which Courtiers are beloved of the Prince, now
remains; which in the 37. th Chap. Numb. 2. we told you, was aptness and
expeditiousnesse in doing the Prince's business; which when we have observed
to be acceptable to the Prince, we must also mark, whether or no it be
therefore pleasant and taken in good part, because necessary; or because the
Prince's desire provoked him, to such an aptitude. If acceptable because
necessary, the love will endure so long as the necessity lasts; nevertheless
it will be rather a forced, then a voluntary and free love.

2. If the Prince aspire the glory of this kind of aptitude, we may not doubt,
but that they who in this shall exceed him; will in time be grievous to him.
Since that, there is an imbred desire, not in Princes only, but in all men, to
excel all others in the art they profess; Certes, no man scarcely can with an
equal and moderate mind bear it, if he be surpassed by his household servant.

3. Asinius Pollio being exhorted by some to answer and require something that
Augustus had written against him, with some verses; answered Nolle se ejus, qui
possit proscribere, scribendo incurrere invidiam: That he would not incur the
Envy of him by writing, in whose power it lay to proscribe and banish him.

4. There being a controversy sometimes betwixt Favorinus a Philosopher, and
Adrian the Emperor, concerning some word, when the Emperor had posed him, and
his friends admired it, he answered thus: Non erubesco, vinci scientia ab illo,
qui triginta Legionibus imperat: I am not ashamed to be conquered in knowledge
by him, who has thirty Legions at his command.

5. It is a known precept of wisdom Coram Rege noli videri Sapiens: Seem not
to be wise in the presence of the King. It cannot otherwise be, for to purchase
the Prince's favor here, we ought to desert and lose our own glory: and not
only when we have to do with words, but in every thing we ought to submit and
yield him the Palm of victory. And to that end, it will not be impertinent and
besides the purpose, that a man sometimes admit against himself somewhat
(though a little hurtful) even by his own consent and procurement.

6. From the things hitherto discoursed on, it appears, of what slender
stability and durableness all kind of Court-powers are. These therefore are the
most sovereign advicements and counsels which can be given to such as act
highly and eminently, ad descensunt in arenam prapararesese: to make them ready
for Combat, though it be judged more generous and courageous, to fight him who
enters the List, than to fly. Notwithstanding if we must fight with more
peril then Guerdon and recompense, a man may not be ashamed maturely to
retreat, and to imitate the Parthians, who fight as they fly.

7. It is also more gloriosu and commendable to descend slowly, and by
gradatious and steps, then precipitately and rashly to commit himself into
others hands, and retreat through a certain and sure posterne, then to be
thrown out at the window. So having found a pretense, it is less
dishonorable, freely and spontaneously to bid adieu to honor, then to tarry
till you be repelled, and removed. To this may be added the saying of an
ancient Roman, Quid fatigatae felicitate molestis es? Quid expectas donec
Castris eijciaris? why art thou troubulous to tired felicity? why tarriest
thou, till thou be removed out of the Camp?

8. It Is happiness (says Seneca) to dye in selicity. On the contrary, I deem
him a happy Courtier, who in the middle of felicity betakes himself to a
retirement. Peradventure he that does so, shall not find the like judgment from
all men in this particular, and shall seem unworthy of his fortune, the
messenger whereof he so suddenly turns back: but who so is prudent will not
stick at these sayings, but will rather provide for his safety; and will call
to mind, that at all Games and pastimes which depend on fortune, it is better to
break off a Gainer, then a Looser; and that it is not a wise man's part to
change certainties for hazards and doubtful chances.

9. And mostly men ascend gradually to such a height of dignities; but who
will not admire to see one descend from on high, when he sees no Stairs or
Ladders under him? And if so be that by the fulgor, and brightness of too
great a fortune, a man be inveigled and dazelled, and one pace or step fail
him (as may easily happen to such as live in a lofty and high condition) they
may not be said then to descend, but to fall headlong.

10. You have now (friendly Reader) the sum of such things which I conceive
may as to these subjects herein treated of, satifie your desire, which I have
principally aimed at in collecting them them. Whether they may be profitable
and behoovefull to thee, tu videris, see to that thy self: they have indeed
long since been of no use to me; take therefore as a Compendium and Epiphonema
of my Life and wishes, these Verses of Seneca.

Stet quicunque volet potens
Aulae culmine lubrico;
Me dulcis saturet quies,
Obscuro positus loco.
Leniperfruar otio;
Nullis nota Quiritibus,
Aetas pertacitum fluat.
Sic, quam transierint mei
Nullo cum strepitu dies;
Plebeius moriar senex.
Illi mors gravis iucubat.
Qui, notus nimis omnibus.
Ignotus moritur sibi.
Englished thus.
Let who will stand advanced
On Courtships slippy Calm;
Me sweet repose shall please
Confind to place obscure.
I shall enjoy my ease.
Unkenn'd of Courtly spark
My time in silence glides
Thus when my days shall flit
Without either noise or train
I shall decease an old Plebeian.
He dies a painful death
Who Is too well known of all
Yet's to himself unknown.

AN INDEX. In which the first Number shows the Chapter; the Latter, the
Aphorism or Paragraph, and full Sentence of the Chapter.
SLanderous Accusations. 31.1. Adiaphorie, or Neutrality, taken away by Solon.
16.9. By what artifice. Adolphus Nassovius was promoted to the Empire. 18.17.
When and how to use Adulation. 7.1. and 2. Egidius, and Clodio Comatus. 12.5.
The remedies of Emulation. 20.1, 2, 3, 4. Aetius and Boniface his Comrado,
under Valentinian. 28.8. The various ingeny and disposition of Agamemnon. 11.7.
An example of suppressing counsels and advisements, when he hunted for the
Empire, 20.7. The praise of Agesilaus, in gaining himself friends. 18.10. By
what pretext Agrippa left the Court. 27.5. His counsel, how to avoid a
Prince's envy. 33.7. Agrippina neglecting good advice, lost himself and his
friends. 23.2. By what way he was circumvented by Sejanus. 28.11, 12, 13 He is
rendered suspected to Livia Augusta, by Sejanus. 30.1. Alaricus, and the
ignominious Peace made with him. 25.5. Alfonsus King of Arragon. 32.4. Alvarus
de Luna, under John King of Arragon. 24.1. How great an evil Ambition is.
21.11. Considered under a Frince, 24.6. The dangers of too manifest Ambition.
20.5, 7. Friendship is to be purchased, before we need it. 16.2. Friendship,
with its diverse parts. 16.6.10. False or pretended friendship, 30.5. Court
amicabilities are factious. 16.5. A true friend in Court, is rara avis. 34.10
35.6. None have friends, without some enemies. 13.7. Amolition, and driving
from Court, by malevolent persons. 27.2, 5. And from the Province or County
27.6. Andronicus and Samonas. 28.9. The nature and manners of Andronicus
Comnenus. 32.6. Anicetus. 9.7, 8.39.5. Anterus under Commodus. 24.4. Antipater,
and Philip of Macedon. 10.5. Antonius primus under Vespasian. 22.2.23.5. By
what art Apelles deprived Taurio, by the administration and assistance of
Peloponnesus. 27.7. Aptitude and readiness in the Prince's business. 40.1.
Arbetio. 34.4. Sylvanus. Archelaus, King of Cappadocia, and Tiberius. 14.4.
Aristides, how he became from just to be injurious. 5.7. Aristotle's counsel
to Callisthenes, when he was providing himself to accompany Alexander. 6.9.
Arrogance in a Prince denoted. 22.4, 6. Ascanius Sforcia, the Cardinal.
18.1.5. Asinius Pollio. 40.3. The Court-Star. 37.4. Atreus his Tragedy. 9.12.
Avarice in a Prince denoted. 22.5.24.6. Augustus, why he associated to him
Tiberius. 6.7. Whether or no an honest and upright man may adventure to Court.
5.2, 3, 9, 10. And wherefore. 5.11. The first sort of Court-Nobles. 14.1. a
conflict with them, 14.6, 10, 11. Another kind of them. 15.1. A third. 15.3. A
fourth. 15.8. The difference of Courts, in respect of Princes. 15.5. and 10.
Aulus Vitellius, his haughtiness and cruelty, whence. 12.2. The infirmity and
weakness of Courtly power. 40.6. A Courtier ought not to intermedle with the
Prince's counsels. 8.1, 4. He must be expeditious in sudden commands. 9.1. How
the prudence of a Courtier may be first and chiefly made known to the Prince.
8.7. Who are Courtiers under the degree of Nobility, and how to deal with them
16.1. Courtiers masked, and under vizours. 32.8. The art of Courtiers, in
taking in associates. 10.12. Princes will have Courtiers owe their fortune to
none but themselves. 22.3. The condition of some at Court, who have well
deserved at the Prince's hands. 38.7. Aurelianus Salurinus, and John
Chrysostom. 32.15. Baleus the Cardinal, under Lewis the eleventh. 25.2. Bardas
aspiring to the height of affairs. 12.8. Bardas Durus, and Bardas Phoca. 16.8.
Bargus, Timasius his Client. 28.5. Bellisarius under Justinian. 33.4. By what
and how, advice may be given, to undertake a War. 26.3. Benefits and good turns
done by Courtiers, are envyed. 38.6. Benevolence and good will of his ministers
and servants, is harder to be kept, then that of the Prince. 23.7. Love and
charity to good men commended. 6.4. Borilus and Germanus, kitchen-boyes of
Botoniates the Emperor. 13.4. Boyla, under Constantine Monomachus. 21.12, 24.
Burrhus. 5.12.8.9.9.6, 7. Caesar Borgias. 39.3. C. Petronius. 4.7.29 7. C.
Sylius, under Tiberius. 22.2. Caligula, the best servant, but the worst Master.
11.3. Calumny, what a monster it is. 31.6. Calumnies, the instrument of
malevolent persons, to shake off others. 28.2. Their wiles and subtleties.
28.4. How they are made to resemble truth. 28.4.27.2, 3, 4, 6. How they are
strengthened andbackt. 30.1, 2, 3. Accusations and commendations made use of,
to reproach and scoff the party commended. Ways of calumniating. 34.7. How to
countermine and meet with them. 34.8, 9. Calumniators and revilers are not to
be listened unto. 31.3. Their art, in upbraiding men's vices, under the color of
relating what other men say. 31.3, 5, Cambyses, whether greater then Cyrus, or
not. 7.3. He endeavors to marry his sister. 8.1. Camuterus Logotheta, the
betrayer of Stippiota. 28.2. Camus Beaulius. 39.9. Capito. 6.2.7.5. Charles
d'Austria. 8.2. When it is chiefly safe to conceal our designs. 20.4, 6, 7.
Cicho Simoneta. 13.14, 15. Claudius and Pallas, formerly a bondsman. 13.2.
Cleander, under Commodus. 24.3. Court-Clients. 35.5. Clodio Comatus. 12.5.
Clytus, in the time of Alexander the great. 22.1.27.12. Coepio Crispinus
slanderously accuses Granius Marcellus. 31.2. Courtly train and attendance.
35.3. Prudence in commending others. 36.1. The vitions affections of Commodus.
4.7. Conspiracy against the Prince. 22.6. The religion of conscience, and care
of estimation, can do more, then the fear of punishment, or imbecility of
strength and abilities. 6.4. Principal counsel. 40.6. When there is place for
advised and sober counsels. 8.2, 3, 4, 5. We must refrain from doubtful
counsels. 26.1. The causes and kinds of conspiracies, with the Prince's
enemies. 25.1. Constantine, a Metropolitan. 19.8. Contempt from familiarity,
what it produces. 10.6. From whence it is. 11.8. The artifice and skill of
reviling. 31.3.5. Unseasonable feasts and junketings, what evil they procure
and increase to the party. 19.4. Cornelius Sylla betrayed. 30.4. The variety of
his manners. 11.4. Craterns, under Alexander the great. 22.1. 23.4.33.7.
Croesus and Cambyses. 7.3. Cyrus, why be was punished by Theodosius the second,
by the hood. 33.9. Words spoken, because true, are brought as an accusation.
31.2. Democrates the Architect, how he intruded himself into the family of
Alexander the great. 3.3. Dionysius Tyrannus. 6.6. Dionysius Syracusanus. 6.8.
Departure from Court voluntary. 27.3. Discords not to be sown amongst Princes.
22.8. Dissimulation of injuries, its just pretext; viz. Imparity of strength
and abilities. 18.2. A jusi occasion of being rich, is not to be refused.
39.10. Domitianus. 34.5. When chiefly to be feared. 32.6. Enguerandus Marigny.
39.3.22.7. Epaphroditus with Arrianus. 13.6. Eumenes with Alexander the great.
22.4.23.2 Eunuchs, their Kingly power. 13.3. Their wickedness. 27.11. Their
favor with the Emperor. 26.2. Eusebius, the Eunuch of Constantius. 27.11.30,
5.32.3. Eutrapelus Horatianus. 18.12. Eutropius under Arcadius.
24.5.28.5.32.15. Exactions public, their pretext. 39.6. Excuses, sometimes
exprobations. 32.11. Causes of destruction. 39.10. Exoculation, what punishment
formerly. 28.9. Accusing by slander of others, the way to upbraid a Prince of
his faults. 31.3, 5. Exprobations under the species of excusings. 32.11.
Exprobation of manners, what a mischief it is. 22.1.2. Fabius and Mantius
Valens. 22.2. Facetious and witty jests, when necessary. 9.11, 12. Facility too
much, described. 39.10. Familiarity, when it breeds contempt. 10.6. Familiarity
too much with the Prince, denoted. 22.5. Family servants, how to be accounted
of. 36.8. Haughtiness of mind, how great an evil to procure envy. 19.4.
Favorinus the Philosopher, gives the Palm to Adrian, disputing with him. 40.4.
How counsels for breaking a League, are to be undertaken. 26.3. Felicity, what
it is. 40.8. Felicity wearied. 40.7. Felicity inexplicable. 37.2. The Iron to
be smitten while it is hot. 38.8. Festinus changed, by the pravity of Maximinus
his familiar. 5.4, 5, The End to be considered before all things, in every
action. 1.1. Firmius Catus, the betrayer of Libo. 29.1. Fortune's Chicken.
34.1. Fortune, when prosperous, the right use thereof. 36.1. Fortune
unprosperous, it comforts. 36.1. Fighting by flight. 40.6. Functions public,
why undertaken by honest men. 5.11. Gainas, What a kind of traitor he was,
under Arcadius. 32.15. Galba. 34.5. The avarice of some Frenchmen. 39.8.
Gerlachus Elector of Mentz, his artifice, in promoting Adolfus Nassovius his
kinsman to the Empire. 18.17. Germanicus, his counsel to Agrippina, when he
was dying. 23.2. Glory attained by us, is to be accounted of, after the glory
of the Prince. 40.5. Goths, and the ignominious peace with them. 25.5.26.2.
Grianus Marcellus reprochfully accused. 31.2. Gracchus the betrayer of C.
Sylla. 37.4. Grace and favor overpowers the Law. 20.9. Grace to be attained by
several artifices and ways. 18.10, 11, 12, 14, 17. Gyace sewed up into a
sack. 39.9. Hagiotheodorita, by what craft he was extruded from Court by
Stippiota. 27.2. Haterus Agrippa, made Praetor against Law. 20.9. Heliogabalus,
his vicious affections. 4.7. Helvidius, a Tragoediographer. 9.12. Hephaestion,
under Alexander. 23.4. Herodotus denoted by Plutarch. 32.9. Hiero, Prince of
Syracusa. 24.9. Men, even the vilest, thought useful in Courts. 13.6. An open
enemy, and an occult, either greater or not greater. 18.3, 4. Hyesteus recalled
from Ionia by Darius, through the counsel of Megabyzus. 27.8. Janissaries their
seditions. 32.14. Imparity of our abilities, a just pretext of dissembling
injuries. 18.2. Imprudence toward a Prince denoted. 24.6. Infidelity toward a
Prince observed. 24.6. Boasting, how great an evil, to procreate and augment
envy. 19.4. The further evil thereof. 22.1, 3. The same denoted. 34.5. The
depravation of inclinations, through arrogance. 11.9. Through adulation and
flattery. 12.1. The crafty reconciliation of some poor and low-spirited
fellows.. 18.3. None have enemies, without some friends. 13.7. Injury done to
a minister and servant, more sharply to be revenged, then if done to the
master. 23.6. Injuries, their fittest cure and remedy. 17.2, 6, 7, 8. Injuries
by great ones, how to be shunned. 18.1, 2. All restlesnesse and trouble under a
Prince, marked. 24, 6. Insolency in Ministers considered. 39.10. The means of
overcomming envy. 19.1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8. Envy to be avoided. 34.5. How the envy
of the Prince, and of associates, may be shunned. 35.1. The causes of envy.
39.10. The wiles of causing men to be envyed. 28.1. Joab besieging Rabbath
under King David. 33.7. John King of England taken. 32.14. John Chrysostom.
32.15. John Pucius. 4.10.5.6. Jovius, the successor of Olympius. 26.4, 5.
Irreverence denoted. 34.5. Isaacius Angelus, his vicious affections. 4.9.
Julian the Emperor, his saying touching vizarded Courtiers. 32.8. Julius
Agricola. 32.7.33.7.35.3. Julius Posthumus. 30.2. Junius Bloesus, under Aulus
Vitellius. 30.3. Justinian and Bellisarius. 33.4. Labeo. 6.2. Commendations and
Court slanders, to be passed over with care. 34.6. The wiles and subtlies of
Court-commendations. 32. 1, 7, 9, 11. Lenity, its commendation. 17.5. Leo, the
son of Basilius, and Santabarinus, the Monk and Magitian. 28.7. Levity in a
Prince observed. 24.6. Liberty toward the Prince noted. 22.4. Libo, betrayed
by Firmius Catus. 29.1. Libo, under Tiberius. 32.6. Letters false, their abuse,
to make calumnies likely, and resembling truth. 28.4.10.29.2, 3, 6. Lucius
Piso. 4.5. Lucius Vitellius, the brother of Aulus 30.3. The right use of
Enterludes, and more ferious things. 10.6. Also of facetious and witty
conceits. Lewis the 11th. 38.8. Macro, under Caligula. 34.4. The shameful
evil of some great ones. 8.6. Magnificence, its right use. 18.5. Maledictions
brought near to truth. 31.1. The seminary and seed plots of evil men in Court,
very fruitful. 6.5. Manlius Lepidus, 6.1. His example commended, in the
offering up of honors. 30.8. Manuel Commenus, his vicious affections,
4.10.5.6. Mark Antony his envy. 33.3. Marius, his diverse manners. 11.4.
Maximinus corrupts Festinus, his familiar. 5.4, 5. Mecoenas. 2.4.6.4. His
counsel to Augustus. 33.5. Mella, his favor with his Prince. 2.5. Messalla
Valerius. 7.8. How every man ought to measure and limit himself. 34.5. Menaces,
a Courtier is to abstain from them chiefly. 17.3. Ministers, when their favor
is to be sought next the Princes. 15.4. Modesty, the best medicine against
envy. 19.7, 8. Its commendation. 25.3, 4. Modesty toward the Prince praised.
34.5. Slacknesse, its reason and season. 8.8.10. Morosity under a Prince
described, and observed. 39.7. Mutianus. 4.8.9.14.32.5. Mutilia Prisca. 30.1.
Narcissus, Claudius his late bondsman. 13.2. Nero, his vicious affections. 4.7.
Obligednesse to Rulers is better, then to oblige them. 38.8. Odium and hatred
with some Princes have been repaid, instead of compensation. 38.8. Odium, its
seeds, 34.1. and causes, 39.10. The desire thereof, is the handmaid of Revenge.
18.7. Offended persons by the Prince, complaining to us, how they are to be
handled by us. 36.7. Offices boasted of beforehand, how great an evil. 22.1,
2. Oh men, ready for servitude A saying of Tiberius. 7.1. Olympius and
Stillico. 26.2, 4. Wealth obnoxious to envy. 39.7. When too much, is to be
avoided. 39.10. The too great study of it, at length undoes every thing. 39.6.
Oftentation of the Prince's favor, why a Courtier should avoid it. 35.1.36.3.
Otho Crondorferus, with Radulfus the Palatine. 22.8. Otho, prostituting his
wife Poppaea to Nero. 39.2. Pallas, Claudius his late bondsman. 13.2. Paris, and
Cenon, a Tragedy. 9.12. Parisians, their tumult, when King John was taken.
32.14. Parthians, they fight and fly at once. 30.6. Parysatis. 9.10. Peace with
Alaricus, how ignominious. 25.5.26 2. Perennius his arts, in agitating for the
Empire. 12. 7. He is subverted by Commodus. 21.21. Perfidiousnesse against the
Prince. 22.6. Its many evils. 24.6. Periergia, or curiosity under a Prince,
denoted. 24, 6. Peter Berchy. 39.9. Peter Essart. 39.9. Peter de Vineis, under
Frederick the 2d. 25.4. Philippides, a Comick-Poet. 24.8. Philip of Macedon,
and Antipater. 10.5. Pythagorean Philosophers, denoted. 11.11, 12. Philoras,
under Alexander the great. 22.1. Piso, his insolency. 14.10. Plancius, under
Bassianus the Emperor. 22.6. Plato commanded to be sold. 6.8. Pollio, his
constancy in disposition, 11.7. Pomponius. 4.5. The reason of reward, where
business is imposed. 38.8. Pratensis the Cardinal, under Francis the first.
25.3. Princes affection, how to be repugned. 9.14. When changed or estranged
from us, how to be handled. 36.9. Love and benevalence, from what causes they
spring. 37.2.40.1. Its duration. 37.3, 4. His love toward women. 38.1.2, 4.
Venercall love. 39.2.6. Love to such, as minister to their volupties. 38.9.
Benevolence, which is to be weighed with our authority. 23.3. The constancy and
mutation of benevolence and favor. 37.1. A Courtier ought not to mingle with
Counsels. 8.1, 4. Cupidities and lusts, how to be abated or appeased. 9.9. How
to be moderated. 11.13. Causes of detriment and loss. 39.10. Domestics and
familiars. 13.1. The affection of covetousness. 39.6. All our actings, to be
assigned to the Prince's glory. 33.6. The common ends and aims of Courtiers,
is glory, and the favor of the Prince. 1.4. which depends upon his
inclination. 33.9.10. To differ from him in this, is the cause of ruin, favor
and grace in procureing and placing benefits on others, how it is to be
handled, and how to be divided to others, 36.1, 2. What favor is to be
obtained from his Successor, and how is be preserved. 34.1. How his Mandats are
to be expedited, 36.4, 5. His temperature. 10.1. Diverse ways to be made known
to the Prince. 3.1. How to appear before him. 36.6. His election in taking
counsel is to be left free. 8.5. Princes will seem to act by their own
arbitrament. 36.3. Would not be indebted to any, much less to a subject. 38.7.
Some, when they cannot repay meant good turns, requite them with hatred. 38.6.
They are to be admonished against flatterers. 12.9. Princes actions, though
libidinous, are not to be reprehended without mischief, 22.4. their greatness,
4.3. their volupties, and vicious affections, 4.4, 5. their inclinations and
affections, 10.1. when these break forth, 13.5. their secrets, are not to be
disclosed, 24.7. their consultations, 8.3. The choleric, 10.2, 3. sanguine
nature, 10.4. melancholic, 10.7. phlegmatic, 10.10. Their diffidence and envy
are formidable, and to be shunned, 33.2, 6, 8, 10, The mind and affection of
some Princes, toward deserving men. 38.7. The errors of such, as have fallen
from their Princes favor, and the innumerable variety of them. 26.6.
Arrogance, the individual handmaid to great ones, 11.8. their propensities,
4.2. their temper and inclination, how it is varied and altered, 11.1, 2,
5.12.1, 3. their volupties, 39.1. they have one countenance in private, and
another in public. 13.1, 5. The art, how to approve ones self to Princes. 6.5.
Princes, and they who are much in favor with them. are not to be disdained or
neglected. 23.1. Princes have been upbraided with their vices, by the accusing
of others of the same. 31.3, 5. Honesty, hard to be kept in Courts. 5.9.6.3, 8,
9. The securest way to betray him, is, to be obsequious to the Prince's lust.
12.4, 5. Prudence increases to getherwith authority and fortune. 13.6. Publius
Ventidius. 33.3. To fight and fly at once. 40.6. He that offends, let him not
forgive, 17.1. or they who hurt do hate. Reconciliation feigned, is the part of
base and lowminded ones. 18.3. Reconciliation, its Arts. 18.14.16. Remirus d'
Orco, A Minister of Caesar Borgias. 39.3, 4. Rubellius Plautus betrayed by
Tigellinus. 30.4. Ruffinus under Constantius. 27.12.32.15. Ruin, its kinds.
21.2. And causes. 21.3. which are either by our own fault. 21.4. Or the fault
of Courtiers. 27.1. Where also of a specious remioveing from Courts and
Provinces. 27.2.6. Or by suspicion and envy stirred and set forwards by
Calumnyes and false Commendations. 28.1.32.1. Or violent. 22.13. Or else of the
Prince. 33.1. Sabinianus the successor of Ursicinus. 27.11. Salustius. 2.4.6.4.
Samonas, and Andronicus. 28.9. Santabarianus the monck and Magitian. 28.7. It
is not expedient to seem wise before the Prince. 40.5. Seven wise men of
Greece, denoted and deciphered. 11.10. The chief and principal office of
Court wisdom. 36.9. Scaurus, a Tragoediographer. 9.12. Scevinus Cepetronius
his friend. 29.7. Sejanus, the most prudent of Courtiers. 21.6, 7.20. He
endeavors to render Agrippina suspected to Livia Augusta. 30.1. By what
artifice he was overthrown. 22.6. His arts when the Empire was ready to be
vacant. 12.6. His wiles and devises against Agrippina. 28.11, 12. The History
thereof. 21.7, 8, 9, 10. His porters. 13.7. Seneca. 5.12.9.7.35.3. Being a
great man yet sinkes under the Princes rancour. 33.1. What kind of Associates
are to be admitted by Courtiers. 10.12. Associates with the Prince in vices.
39.3, 4. Solon, what kind of newtrality and indifferency he forbad. 16.6.
Spinosa the Cardinal. 35.2. Stilicus, and his peace with Alaricus. 25.5.26.2.
Stillico and Ruffinus. 32.15. Stippiota. 27.2. Circumvented. 29.2. Stuaden
Commands how to be handled. 9.2. Smister successes, how hurtful they are.
14.9. Too much cost linesse, how great a mischief to contract Envy to it
self. 19.4. Pride the way to perdition, 21.27. Pride against a Prince
observed. 22.5.24.1, 2. Supplantation at Court. 18.11. Crafts and wiles of
making men suspe ted. 28.1. Siennenses, Viceroy of Tarsis. 16.7. Syllas, with
king Agrippa. 22.2. Silvanus, Commander of the infantry under Constantius by
the procurement of Arbetio is sent into France. 27.10.28.10.29.3. Tautio, by
what means driven from the province of Pesoponnesus in Greece by Apelles.
27.7. Time, to be served. 37.4. The perfidiousnesse of false witnesses denoted.
29.4, 5. Theodosius the 2d. his Envy against one Cyrus. 33.9. Tiberius, why he
delivered up the Empire to Caligula. 6.7. Upon what pretext he deserted the
Court. 27.4. Why he went to Capreas. 21.8.31.4. A lover of Calumnies but a
hater of upbraidings. 31.4. He advances such as he intends to overthrow. 22.6.
Tiberius his vicious affections. 4.5, 6. His saying. 7.1. Manners and nature,
various at diverse times. 11.3. His custom in searching ont Counsels. 8.3.
Though a most crafty dissembler, yet time brought forth his Arts into light.
4.1. Tigellinus. 4.7. An emulator of Caius Petronius 39.7. The betrayer.
30.4.39.3. Titius Sabinus, Agrippina's Client. 28.14.29.2. Tribigildus, and
Gainas under Arcadius. 32.15. The diverse Ingeny and disposition of Tryphon when
a king. 11.6. Turinus, under Alexander Mammea. 22.5. Vanity in a Prince,
denoted. 22.5.6.24.6. Furle up sails before the Tempest. 37.4. Silken words.
9.10. Vespasian his vicious affections. 4.8. His degencrate disposition. 12.3.
His avarice. 39.7. Revengefull desires, noted. 17.5.24.6. The imparity and
dislikenesse in power and abilities, a just pretext to dissemble our injuries.
18.2. A Compendium of the Authors composed and settled life, and of his wishes.
40.10. The will and tendency of such as slander, or praise us, is to be
inspected and thoroughly looked into. 32.12. Ursicinus under Constantius.
27.11.30.5.32.3. Vulgar people judge all things by Event. 14.9.26.1. Wives
prostituted to receive the Princes favor thereby. 39.2. Xerxes, with what mind
he asks the Counsel of his Nobles. 8.2. Ximenes Cardinal. 8.2.14.12,
13.19.6, 7. Zeno the Emperor his diverse inclination. 11.5. Zopyrus under
Heliogabalus. 22.1.
FINIS Indicis.

