THE Duke of Norfolk's Case: WITH REASONS for Passing his BILL.
IF want either of Precedent for a Parliamentary Divorce, before going through
the tedious and ineffectual Methods of Docters Commons, or of Demonstration of
Fact, have hitherto deprived the Duke of Norfolk of that Relief against his
Wives Adultery, which the Divine Law allows; The late Statute made in the like
Case and the Coming in of Two, who while the Duke's former Bill was depending,
had been sent away to prevent that Discovery which they now make; cannot but be
thought to remove all Objections against an Act of Parliament, not only for the
benefit of the Duke, but of the Public; as a means to preserve the Inheritance
of so great an Office, and Honors to Persons of the true Religion.

And since Bishop Cozens his Argument in the Lord Ross's Case has made it
Evident, That those Canons which govern the Spiritual Court in this matter, are
but the remains of Popery; nothing can be now requisite to satisfy the most
scrupulous of the Reformed Religion, but to set the Duke's Proofs of his Lady's
Adultery in a true Light

The Reputation which the Duchess had maintained, of Wit and Discretion, made
it difficult for many to believe, that she could be surprised in the very Act
of Adultery, as had been formerly proved. And though then it appeared, that one
Henry Keemer lived with the Duchess, while she went by a feigned Name at an
House hired for her at Fox-Hall, by Sr John German's Brother; and that Nicola,
who then lived with Sir John, used to receive Wood sent from the Duchess to
Sir John's house by the Cockpit; the withdrawing of Nicola; and carrying with
him the Dutch Maid, equally Entrusted with the secret on Sir John's side; left
no Evidence of their Constant Conversation, but Keemer since dead, and Susannah
Barrington, who had the like Trust from the Duchess

Keemer, though very unwillingly, some years since confessed his living with
the Duchess at Fox-hall, where he pretended she was obliged to conceal her
self for Debt; and what share Susannah had in the secret was unknown, till
Nicola appeared: Nicola coming into England sometime since in Expectation of a
Service, expressed his readiness to discover what he knew and to Endeavor to
bring with him the Dutch Maid.

She proves, That for two Months the first Summer after the King came for
England, Sir John Germain and the Duchess lived together as Man and Wife, and
were seen in Bed Eleanor Vaness Exam. 22. Feb. 1699.
together by her, Mr. Bryan, and his Wife, Sir John's Sister: and that
Nicholas Hauseur, Sir John's Va^et^de Chamber, used to be assisting to him; as
the Dutchess's Woman, Susannah Barrington, was to her, at going to Bed, and
rising.

She proves the like Conversation at Fox-hall, and the Dutchess's House at the
Millbank, till the Duke's first Bill for a Divorce was depending; within which
time Nicholas Hauseur, by Sir John's Order, carried her away, and Susannah
Barrington, with intention of going for Holland, to prevent their being
Examined to what they knew; but the wind proving contrary, thev could not go
till the Bill was rejected; and then Sir John fetched back Susannah, who was
most useful to the Duchess; but Hauseur went for Holland with Ellen.

He confirms Ellen's Evidence in every particular; and besides the Persons
mentioned by Ellen as privy to Sir John's lving with the Duchess, names Sir
John's Brother Daniel. Nicholas having been found very trusty, his Master sent
for him to return to his Service; and gave him Nicholas Hauseur.
the opportunity of proving the Continuance of the same Adulterous Conversation
at several Times and Places, from the Summer 1692. to the 26th. of April 1696.
He swears he had after his return to Sir John's Service, seen them in Bed
together at Sir John's House, at the Cockpit, and at the Dutchess's Houses at
Millbank, and where she now lives; and used to be let into the Dutchess's
Apartment by Susannah Barrington, or Keemer. Nor can any Man who shall read the
ample Testimonials given Mr. Hauseur by Sir John; by the last of which it
appears that he served him faithfully as his Steward, reasonably question
Hauseur's Credit.

Another who had been advanced by Sir John from his Footman to Mr. Hauseur's
place, William Bailey.
and from thence to a good Office in the Excise, very unwillingly confirmed the
Testimony of Hauser and the Dutch Maid, not only as to the time of their going
from the Service of Sir John and the Duchess, but though being no Foreigner,
he could not so easily be sent away to prevent discovery, and therefore was not
let so far into the secret as Houseur and the Dutch Maid; yet he swears the
Duchess used to come masked to his Master's House that he has gone with him as
far as the Horseferry toward her House at the Mill-bank; that then his Master
sometimes lay out all Night, and the next morning he has carried Linen and
Clothes for his Master to Keemer's House, or Keemer has fetched them from him:
And this he proves to have been since the rejecting the former Bill, and about
Five Years since when he was succeeded by Hauseur, as before he had succeeded
Hauseur.

Two other Foreigners, La Fountain who had lived with Sir John. and was Served
with Summons at the Dutchese's House at Dravton; and Hugonee, who ran away from
the Lord Haversham's since Summons was taken out against him; seem to have had
the same Trust that Hauseur had: for both declared. That nothing should oblige
them to betray their Master's Secrets: One said, No Court could dispense with
his Oath of Secreey: and both declared they would immediately go beyond Sea.
Summons have been taken out for Mr. Brian and his Wife, and Sir John Germain's
Brother (who are, or lately were in Town) to confess or deny what Nichola and
Ellen appeal to them for: and it cannot be imagined that Sir John should choose
the Honor of being thought to have to do with a Duchess, before the Clearing
her and himself from the Imputation, by bringing his Relations to disprove the
Charge, if what is sworn to be within their knowledge is false.

And if Sir John's Vanity should prevail with him, at least it is to be
presumed, that his Relations would be more just to him and the Lady, than to
suffer any thing to pass against them, which they could with Truth and Justice
prevent.

But since none of them appear, the World will believe their absenting more
than a thousand Witnesses, in confirmation of what Mr. Hauseur, Ellen and
Bailey, have sworn. Whose Evidence not only stands untouched by any thing
offered by the Dutchess's Witnesses, but is plainly confirmed by them in the
principal parts.

This being the nature of the proofs, it is observable,

1. That there never yet was any Case of this kind, where the Evidence was not
liable to greater Objections than can be made to this.

Though in the latest Case of this kind, there was full Conviction of the
Ladies having Children while she lived separate from her Husband; and the
presumption was very violent whose the Children were; yet this was but
presumption, and that was weakened by the presumption in Law that they were the
Husbands; especially since there was no direct proof of the Lover's ever lying
with her.

2. Tho in that case, by reason of the interval of Parliament, and fear of the
deaths of Witnesses, a Suit was begun in Doctors Commons, 'twas taken from
thence while the Suit was depending; therefore that was rather an Objection
against proceeding in Parliament than an Argument for it.

3. In that Case, several Witnesses were examined at the Bars of both Houses,
who had not been examined at Doctors Commons, nor any notice given of their
Names before their Examination.

4. It appears by that Case, and the present, that the Examinations in
Parliament are more solemn and certain than those of the Spiritual Court; which
depend too much upon the Honesty of the Register, or his Deputy.

5. Before that Case, Parliaments have either broken through the Rules which 1
Eliz n. 31.
bind the Spiritual Court, as in the Case of the Duke of Norfolk, 1 Eliz. where
the Parliament ratified a Marriage, as lawful according to God's Law; tho
protracted and let, by reason of certain Decrees and Canons of the Popes
Law; or else have dissolved a Marriage where there had been no application to
Doctors Commons, as in the Case of 2. and 3. W. M.
Mrs. Wharton, who had been married to Mr. Cambel; and yet there had been no
Examination of Witnesses, but what had been before the two Houses.

So long before, in the Case of Sir Ralph Sadler, upon proof before the two
Houses that the Lady Sadlers former Husband had deserted her and disappeared
for Four 37. H 8:
Years before she Married Sir Ralph, the Parliament Legitimated her Children by
Sir Ralph.

Whereas some Object against the Passing the Bill, as if it would countenance a
Jurisdiction in the House of Lords to examine to such matters, in the first
Instance or Originally; the Objection would be the same if it had begun, as it
might, in the House of Commons; but in truth would be of equal force against
most private and several public Acts, occasioned by the examination of
Witnesses, or Notoriety of Fact.

Since therefore the Duke has so long, and so often in vain endeavored to be
freed from a Lady, publicly famed and proved to have lived with Sir John
Germain, as his Wife; the Duke's former disappointments cannot but be powerful
Arguments for his speedy obtaining that Justice which the Spiritual Court
cannot give him; their Power reaching no further than to that liberty of living
as she list; some years since settled by Articles: But as none of less Art and
Oratory than her Counsel could have turned this into a License to commit
Adultery, if she List, or a Pardon afterward; had there not been evidence of
her Acting according to such Construction, the Duke would have hoped she had
repented of the former Injuries he had received from her; but now hopes she
shall not longer continue to bear the Name of his Wife, and put him in danger
of being succeeded by Sir John Germain's Issue, or deprive him of the
expectation of leaving his Honors, Offices, and Estate, to a Protestant Heir.

BY Virtue of an Order, Obtained from His Grace the Duke of Norfolk, Earl
Marshal of England: Jeremiah Wilkins, is hereby Authorized to Print, and
Publish His Case, and that no other do presume to Print, or Publish the same.

By His Grace the Duke of Norfolk' s Special Command.

London, Printed by Jer. Wilkins, near Fleet Street, 1700.


