OF PEACE AND CONTENTMENT OF MIND.

By PETER DV MOVLIN THE SON. D. D.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop at the
Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1657.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE RICHARD EARL OF CORK, Vicount of Kinalmeaky and
Dungarvan, Baron of Yoghall and Bandon, Peer of Ireland.
My Lord,
THese Contemplations belong to your Lordship by double right, as fruits grown
and ripened at the rays of your favor, and as characters of those virtues
whereby you have wrestled out the difficulties of an age of Iron and Fire; The
roughness of those storms makes your present tranquillity look smoother, and
your Lordship takes the right course to have tranquillity at home in any
weather, consecrating your heart to be a Sanctuary of the God of peace, where
you entertain him by faith, love, and good works; not serving the world, but
making the world to serve you; keeping a constant march through the various
occurrences of both fortunes, with a meek and resolute equanimity, and a
prudent sincerity. To keep your mind in that golden frame, if these endeavors
of mine may be instrumental, they shall but refund what they have received, for
to that tranquillity which I enjoy under your noble shelter, I owe these
meditations of tranquillity. May they prove of the nature of those seeds which
improve the soil where they grow. And may your good soul reap some fruit of
these productions of your favor and my thankfulness. I rest

At your Manor of Lismore July 30. 1655. MY LORD Your Honors most humble and
dutiful servant, PETER Du MOULIN.

PREFACE.
BEing cast by the public storm upon a remote shore, whence I behold the
agitations of the world with a calmer judgment, because former troubles have
left me little occasion to be much concerned in the latter; I find my self
invited by this uncertain interval of unexpected rest to meditate how I may
find the rest of the soul and contentment of mind in all conditions. And
seeking it for my self, I may be so happy as to procure it to others.

For that contemplation I made use of four books, this halfe-wilde country
affording but few more, The chief is the holy Scripture, the meditation
whereof brings that peace which passes all understanding. The next is the
book of Nature; Then the book of Gods providence in the conduct of the world,
both teaching me to say with David, Psalm. 92.5.
Thou Lord have made me glad through thy works. The fourth book is that which
every one carries along with himself, the spirit of man. A book where there
is much to be put out, and much put out which must be renewed, before we can
read in it any subject of peace and content, for without the corrections of
grace this natural book is, like that of Ezekiel, Ezeck. 2.10.
written within and without with lamentations and mourning and woe.

It is the work of wisdom and my endeavor in this treatise, so to correct
this fourth book upon the three others, that we may study it with delight,
and find peace and contentment within us, which may spare us the labor to
seek it abroad. That wisdom which must work in us that excellent effect, is
divine wisdom; She is a tree of life to them that lay hold on her, Prove. 3.18.
and happy is every one that retains her. And humane wisdom instructed by
the divine seconds her, and does her good service in that great work.

This philosophy swims against the stream of a great torrent. So I call the
numerous abettours of that eminent moral Philosopher, Doctor Charron my
countreyman, who with great care separates divine wisdom from the humane, and
attributes to the humane alone that which only belongs to the divine, Preface
to the three books of wisdom.
to make a man walk always upright, steadfast, and content in himself.

I have more serene intentions in this book, which bears on the front the
Peace and contentment of mind then to carpe at the learned and the dead. And it
grieveth me much to dissent from that brave man whom I truly admire,
acknowledging his book of Wisdom to be of rare excellency, and of singular
use to such as know how to use it aright. But it grieves me more that he has
persvaded so many seeming wisemen, pretenders to the magistracy of wit, Ibid.
that integrity is not a dependence of Religion, and that the virtue and
integrity of Divines is altogether frowning, chagreene, austere, servile, sad,
timorous, and vulgar. One would think that he is drawing the picture of some
old barefooted she votary. But Philosophical wisdom, that is (as he expounds
it) the human and civil, he makes it free, cheerful, lofty, noble, generous,
and rare.

It is likely that Charron describing Theological wisdom weeping, austere,
base, and poor spirited, had before his eyes those rules of monastical
discipline which he made once a show to affect, though very ill agreeing with
his free masculine, and lofty spirit, as setting forth piety and wisedone in a
servile and melancholy dress. Had he lived till now, his solid rational wit
had liked no better of the delicate and poetical piety that came since upon the
stage of France, some of it published in English to little purpose. Where in
stead of reason and authority to satisfy the judgment and comfort the
conscience, you shall find posies of light courtly conceits, as if they
presented the devotion of the people with beads of rosebuds, shedding in their
hands that turn them. These two different ways of piety are unsavory to
philosophical minds that would be paid with reason and good sense, which if
they find not in religion, they will forsake it, and seek for wisdom in
Philosophy.

I owe that duty to Theological wisdom to make it appear, to my power, that
she is the true Philosophy, and that to her that magnificent character is
proper and special, Ibid.
to make a man's spirit firm, upright, free, cheerful, universal, content
every where, which privileges Charron reserveth to civil wisdom. It is a
high injury offered to piety to take vertve and moral Philosophy from her
jurisdiction, and transport to humane wisdom that which is proper to the
divine, Ibid.
even the skill of living and dying well, which is all. Let us endeavor to
show by our example that Divinity does not handle wisdom austerely and drily
as he does reprove her, but sweetly and pleasantly, Ibid.
which he says to be proper to humane wisdom. And that we may restore that
to Religion which Charron takes from her, let us think it no shame to take
place among those whom he condemns. They take (says he) Religion to be a
generality of all good, Lib. 2. cap. 5.
that all virtues are comprehended in it, and are subordinate to it. Wherefore
they acknowledge no virtue or righteousness, but such as moves by motives of
Religion.

I profess my self one of them that think so, preferring to Charrons
authority, that of Saint Paul, who makes Religion a generality of all good, in
this pregnant text. Phil. 4.8.
Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if
there be any praise, think on these things. I hope with Gods help to justify
that unto true piety it properly belongs, to set a man at peace with God, with
himself, and with his neighbors; to set a right order in his soul by
rectifying his opinions, and governing his passions; to make him moderate in
prosperity, and patient in adversity, wise, tranquil, generous and cheerful
as long as he lives, and glorious after his death. In these few words I have
set down the argument and order of this Book. If all these are within the
precincts of piety, very little will remain for humane wisdom separate from
religious to make a man virtuous and happy.

Charron very wittily alleges that many Philosophers have been good and
virtuous, and yet irreligious: To which the answer is, that it is an indulgence
when they are called good and virtuous without the knowledge and love of the
divine and saving truth: and that such of them as have been nearest to that
title, had reverend opinions of the Godhead, and despised the silly
superstitions of that age. Also that their want of religion has made their
pretended virtue maimed and monstrous, as in the case of killing ones self,
which Charron (after Montagne) esteem two much, and dares not condemn it
without a preface of reverence and admiration. This he has got by separating
Virtue from Religion; proving by his example, that Nature without grace cannot
but stumble in the dark, and that to guide ones self it is not enough to have
good eyes, but there is need of the light from above.

Whereas we should make a faithful restitution to Religion of all that is
virtuous in Pagan Philosophy, as descended from the Father of lights, and
belonging to the patrimony of the Church; this man does the clean contrary,
robbing Religion of those things which are most essential to her, to bestow
them upon humane wisdom; soliciting virtue to shake off her subjection to
Religion her mother and Sovereign, and to make her self absolute and
independent. Himself forgets to whom he owes that wisdom of which he
writes; In the School of Religion he had got his best learning; to Religion,
also he should have done his homage for it.

Can all the Books of humane wisdom afford such a sublime Philosophy a^ that
of the Lord Jesus, when he teaches us to be prudent as serpents, and
harmless as doves. Not to fear them that kill the body, and cannot kill the
Soul. Not to care for the morrow, because God cares for it, and because to
every day is sufficient the affliction thereof. Not to lay up treasures in
earth where the moth and the rust spoil all, but in Heaven where they spoil
nothing. And when he brings us to the school of Nature, sometimes to weane us
from covetous cares by the examples of Lillies of the field which God
cloatheth; and of the birds of the air which he feeds; sometimes to persuade
us to do good to our enemies, because God makes his Sun to rise upon good and
evil, and his rain to fall upon the just and unjust.

How many lessons and examples do we find in Scripture of heroical
magnanimity? Such is the Philosophy of St. Paul, who professed that when he
was weak, then he was strong, and that he fainted not, because that while the
outward man decayed, the inward was renewed day by day. Such is the Philosophy
of the Hebrews, who bore with joy the spoiling of their goods, knowing in
themselves that they had a better and an enduring substance. Such also is the
Philosophy of David, who was confident never to be removed, because God was at
his right hand; and taking him for the portion of his inheritance, he looked
through death and the grave to the glorious presence of Gods face, and the
pleasures as his right hand for evermore.

This is Theological wisdom. Is it all frowning chagreene, austere, servile,
sad, timorous, and vulgar? Is it not all free, cheerful, lofty, noble,
generous, and rare? Let us acknowledge that it is the only wisdom that makes
man free and content. If the Son of God set us free, we shall be free indeed:
Out of him there is nothing but slavery and anguish.

Satan the great enemy of God and men could not have devised a more effectual
course to disgrace godliness, and cast men headlong into perdition, then to
separate wisdom from religion, and portray religious wisdom weeping,
trembling, with a frighted look, and hooded with superflition. They that take
so much pains to prove, that religion and wisdom are things altogether
different, have a great mind to say, if they durst, that they are altogether
contrary. And if any be persuaded by Charron, that to be wise and virtuous one
needs not be religious, he will come of himself to believe that he that would
be religious cannot be wise and virtuous. Certainly who so conceives once
religious wisdom in that sad, servile, and timorous Idea, which Charron
assigns to her, must needs think that wisdom and virtue lose their name, and
go from their nature when they will be religious.

There is then nothing more necessary in this age, in which Atheism is
dogmatizing and speaking big, then to demonstrate that the beginning and
accomplishment of wisdom is the fear of God. And in stead of that prodigious
method, to withdraw men from religion (that is from God) to make them wise and
content; that truth must be pressed unto the heart, that a man cannot be wise and
content but by joining himself with God by a religious belief, love, and
obedience.

That we fall not into a contrary extreme, we must take heed of robbing
humane wisdom of her office and praise. And we must acknowledge that she
needs to be employed about many things in which piety is not an actour, but an
overseer: But piety must never be severed from her, for where she gives no
rules, yet she sets limits. Piety must be mistress every where, humane
wisdom the servant. Now it is the servants duty to do many things which the
mistress will not put her hand to, standing more upon her dignity then to
descend to inferior offices. In which although piety has no hand, yet she
has an eye to them, and lets nothing escape her knowledge.

On the other side, humane wisdom confines not herself to inferior offices,
but assisteth Piety in the highest. She does her good service when she keeps
in her own rank. But she goes out of it when she presumes to govern her
Mistress, subjecting faith to reason, and conscience to worldly interesses.

In this Treatise, I consider piety and wisdom as the means to obtain the
peace of the soul and contentment of mind. Not to vote for the Epicureans
against the Stoicians by subordinating virtue to content; for I am of opinion
that these two things must be subordinated the one to the other by turns, as
the use requires. Now my present use is to employ virtue for contentment of
mind. Wherein I hope not to be censured as subjecting virtue to contentment, in
stead of subjecting contentment to virtue, these two being all one if they be
well considered; for the only way to content our mind is to be virtuous, and
to be virtuous we must get a tranquil and contented spirit. It is well done to
prefer virtue before contentment; but it is well done also to invite men to
virtue by the contentment that virtue yields. Since all men are great lovers
of themselves, and much led by their pleasure, let us husband that voluptuous
humor, and the love that every one bears to himself, to make them
inducements to render unto God his due, making ingenuous minds sensible that
the only way for them to be pleased, and upon good ground, with all that is
within and about them, is to study to please God; and that duty and content
consist in one and the same thing.

For these Meditations, the want of books, even of my private collections,
which at the first was to me some discouragement, in the progress of the work
proved rather a help. The less opportunity I had to read, the more liberty
had I to contemplate. Truly, if after so many writers, the public stock of
holy Philosophy is yet capeable of new improvement, it must be expected from
those who being but little assisted with the conceptions of others, are put to
make more use of their own sense and experience. Many times God sends more
grace where there is less helps otherwise.

OF THE PEACE OF THE SOUL AND CONTENTMENT OF MIND.
THE FIRST BOOK. Of Peace with God.
CHAP. I. Of the Peace of the Soul.
THe Gospel is called a Testament, because it is the declaration of the last
Will of our Lord Jesus Christ. By that Will, he leaves his peace to his
Disciples, and being near his death tells them, John 14.17. My peace I leave
unto you, my peace I give unto you. For since Jesus is called the Prince of
Peace, Isaiah 9.5. his proper legacy to his heirs, is peace.

How comes it to pass then that such as bear themselves as Christ's heirs by
Will, yet will not take his legacy? and that Peace is no where a greater
stranger then in the Christian Church, to whom it was left by an especial
title?

It is true indeed, that the peace which our Savior left to his Disciples is
not the temporal but the spiritual, which is the peace of man with God, and
with his own conscience; wherefore he tells them, that he gives it not as the
World gives it. But it is true also, that the want of that spiritual and
inward peace brings outward war, as Saint James teaches us, James 4.1. Whence
come wars and fightings among you? come they not hence, even of your lusts that
war in your members? He that is well with God and himself, and keeps his
affections in order, quietly brought under the rule of the fear and love of
God, will neither lightly provok quarrels, nor be easily moved with
provocations. He will be little concerned in public contentions, and gently
get off from particular.

This is the root of the evil, that we seek not to be invested in the
possession of that peace of God, which the Lord Jesus left us by his Will, and
now so graciously presents unto us by his word and spirit, and that we disturb
the work of that good spirit the spirit of peace, siding with our turbulent and
vicious passions against him.

When we lose that peace, we lose all other goods, for in peace all good is
comprehended. It is the extent of the word peace in Hebrew, that philosophical
tongue. That soul, where the peace of God dwells, does sincerely relish his
blessings, and turns evil into good. But a vicious unquiet spirit does not
taste how the Lord is gracious 1 Pet 2.3. And turns good into evil, as a
liver inflamed with a burning Fever, is worse inflamed by nourishing meats.

The objects that moves desire and fear in this world, are for the most part
indifferent in their nature; good to him that uses them well, evil to him
that knows not how to use them; So that good and evil lie within a man's
self, not in things without Pro. 14.14. A good man shall be satisfied from
himself, says Solomon. This is a beaten subject though never sufficiently
considered. If it were, it would frame the soul to piety and tranquillity, and
make a man's spirit free, clearesighted, master of all things, and (which is
more then all) master at home.

The way to attain to that command of our inward State, is to yield it to God,
who being our great principle and our original being, imparts his freedom, and
a beam of the soverainty of his sublime nature, to the soul that draws near
unto him from whom it is descended. God being the sovereign of the soul as of
all creatures, the soul cannot have any rule at home but from him, nor enjoy
it under him without a free subjection to his will.

That peace and liberty of the soul whereby a man having all his interest in
heaven, is disinteressed to all things in the world, walks confident among
dangers, and entertaineth with an equal and serene face good and evil
success, is easier described then obtained. Yet we must not be discouraged,
but study to describe it, that we may obtain it in some measure, for it is
gained by meditation. And the best kinds of meditation upon that peace, is, to
lift up our soul unto God the inexhaustible fountain of peace, which he makes
to flow upon those that draw near unto him.

We shall never fully enjoy that peace, till we be fully united with the God
of peace; A perfection unsuitable with this life, where the best are often
drawn aside from God, by the wandering of their thoughts, and the disorder of
their affections, which made St Paul to say 2 Cor. 5, 6. that while we are at
home in the body we are absent from the Lord. Yet so much as a faithful man
enjoyes of the peace of God, while he lives in the flesh, is as much above the
most flourishing peace of the greatest Kings of the world, as Heaven is above
earth. And where it is vvanting, the highest earthly glory, which draws the
envy of men, ought rather to move their pity. Without it, the garish show of
honors and treasures is like a richly imbroidered nightcap upon a head
tormented with a violent meagrime. And all that worldly pomp is not only
useless but hurtful, sowring the mind with cares, and firing the appetite
with temptations, which afterward tear the conscience with remorse, or
benumme it into a deadly lethargy. Whereas the peace of God is a Paradise, the
moderator of passions, the School of virtue, the kingdom of God within the
soul. Blessed and holy is he that has it. and to him is next in happiness
and holiness, he that sincerely endeavoreth to get it, and to that end yields
to God the raines of his affections, brings his will under Gods will, and
humbly invites him to fix his dwelling, and bear rule within his breast.

It is the end that I aim at, in this work. And I beseech the God of peace, so
to bless and honor it, as to make it an instrument to work His peace in the
souls of his servants, beginning at my soul.

To that work every Christian ought to put his hand as he loves God and
himself. To which we are the more induced and in a manner compelled by the
contrariety of the Time. While the storm of war or intestine dissensions is
raging in all parts of the world, not leaving one safe corner for peace, the
wise Christian must take sanctuary in that inward peace, that peace of God,
which though it pass all understanding, yet will dwell in the understanding
and the affections of those that faithfully seek it, and keep both hearts and
minds in the knowledge and love of God through Jesus Christ. Get once God
within you, you have a shelter at home against all injuryes abroad; as he that
in a tempestuous rain flies into a Church, and in Gods house finds peace and
safety, whilst the whole air abroad is enflamed with lightnings, and roaring
with thunder; and the land floods are hurling down houses, drowning sheep and
shepherds, and destroying the long hopes of the Husbandmans labor. For the
faithful soul is Gods Temple, which he graceth by his presence, and blesses
with his peace, not suffering it to be removed though the earth be removed, and
though the mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea.

This peace at home, in which our duty and our happiness are concentred, is an
inviting subject for a diligent contemplation. Let us examine wherein
consists the true peace of the soul and contentment of mind, and how we must
keep peace with God, with our selves, with our neighbors, in adversity, in
prosperity, and in all the occurrences of life.

CHAP. II. Of the Peace of Man in his integrity, and the loss of that peace by
sin.
THe fundamental rule of great reformations is to bring things to their
beginning. By that rule, that we may know the true peace of God and how we
may get it, we must cast back our sight upon the beginning, how God gave it to
man, and how he lost it soon after. And here we must use that which the
Spirit said unto the Churches, Rev. 2.5. Remember whence thou art fallen, and
repent.

Man newly created after Gods likeness was in perfect peace with him: for God,
making an image of himself, would not have made it dissenting from him; and
peace is a prime lineament of Gods Image. That first human soul, recently
breathed out of Gods mouth, followed with delight the fresh and pure traces of
his divine production; and man, finding in himself the likness of his Creator,
took a great joy and glory to compare that copy with the original. That moving
image of God did imitate his actions, as does the image of our body in a
glass. And whereas in the work of regeneration, St Paul says, that the new
man, is renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created him, and that
he is created after God in righteousness and true holiness, it follows, that the
first man was created such, since we learn that such must be the renewing of
man, to be created again after the image of God.

These lively expresses of the image of God, knowledge, righteousness, and
holiness, could not be in that first man, without an entire peace and consonance
with his Creator. And having peace with God, he had it also with himself; His
desires were not at variance with his fears, nor his knowledge with his
actions; His thoughts belyed not his words; His cupidity did not draw against
his conscience, and his conscience laid no accusation against him. From that
good intelligence with God and with himself, he could not but reap a great
content in his mind; that content also being a lineament of the image of God,
to whom, as holiness, so happiness is natural and essential.

For that contentment of mind he got no small contribution from the beauty and
plenty of Nature smiling upon him, and the willing submission of all animals
flocking about him, as loving subjects, meeting to welcome their new
Sovereign. For his peace with God kept all creatures in peace and obedience
under him: Abroad, the clemency of the air, and the pleasantnes of a garden of
Gods planting delighted him. And at home, his familiarity and free access to
his Maker filled him with joy and confidence. And his original righteousness (if
he could have kept it) would have perpetuated that blessed peace unto him; for
peace is the most proper effect of righteousness, as it is expressed by Isatah,
The work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness
quietness and assurance for ever. Isa. 32.17. Truly, God forbidding him to eat
of that excepted fruit upon pain of death, did intimate that as long as he
kept in obedience, death could take no hold of him, nor any of the
appurtenances of death: for such are all the infirmities of the body, all the
griefs of the mind, and all the crosses of this life. Ezekiel in the
eighteenth Chapter is copious upon this demonstration that life is inseparable
from righteousness, and mortality from sin.

This last was justified by woeful experience; for man going from his
righteousness forfeited his life and his peace: And presently, a dark cloud of
confusion and misery troubled his golden serenity: The voice of God which was
the joy of man, suddenly became his terror; Gods presence which was his life,
became so formidable to him, that it went for a current truth, Judge. 13.22. We
shall surely dye, because we have seen God. Man being fallen off from God,
most part of the creatures fell off from him, and that rebellion continued ever
since. Those that have sense and motion openly deny to yield subjection unto
him, flee away from him when he will come near them, or fly upon him with
open hostility: And to get service from them, he must tame them young, before
they be able to resist him. Other Creatures destitute of sense, yet seem
sensible enough to let him know, that they yield to him a forced service.
Neither can the earth be won to do any good for him, but by great labor and
long expectation: Diseases enter into his body with the meat that he eats,
and the air that he breaths. Storms beat upon him, Summers scorch him,
Winters chill him. Foxes have holes, and birds of the air have nests, their
garments are natural, warm in winter, light in summer: To man only, Nature
gives not where to lay his head; nor so much as a skin capable to abide his
native air. He is ashamed to see his person, and robbes his subjects of their
vesture to hide himself under the spoil.

And yet that discord between man and nature is less then the discord between
man and man. For generally, men advance themselves by their mutual ruin, and
seldom get any of the goods of this world, but by the evil of another;
Wars, lawsuits, envies among Neighbors, and domestique quarrels, make the
face of the world like unto a wild rugged field, full of thorns and briars; if
not liker unto a stormy Sea, where the waves break one another continually. It
is the reign of discord and confusion.

And yet the discord of man with his own kind, is not so grievous as his
disagreement with his own self; I mean the natural and unregenerate man. For
reason, which bore a peaceable and uncontrouled rule within man's soul, before
he was estranged from God, finds no more that ready obedience of the facultyes
and affections. His general inborne notions of goodness and wisdom, are now
and then darkened with the particular violent suggestions of the appetite,
casting a thick cloud before the eye of the understanding: Reason her self
studieth her own delusion, putting a disguise of good upon evil; Many times
also a man knowing and condemning evil, follows it at the same time; being
alike unable to blind his judgment, and rule his passion. Then, as passions are
pulling against Reason, they will also pull one against another; as when
subjects nave shaken off the yoke of their King, the State breaks into
factions, and every one is pulling for himself. Wrath and lust, will fiercely
bustle the one against the other, as two land flood torrents falling from two
opposite mountains. The like between fear and desire, covetuousnesse and
ambition, love and jelousie; or if one passion reigns alone, it does tyrannize
over the heart. To tear a man's soul, and bring him to slavery and misery,
there needs no more but lust or envy, or impatience of revenge.

In a heart lying under that tyranny, and helping his own slavery, when God by
his spirit begins the work of regeneration, then begins another kind of
discord; of which St Paul speaks, Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusts against the
Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh, and these two are contrary the one to
the other, so that you do not the things that ye would. This is a more
irreconcilable quarrel then the other between the vicious passions, which
many times will agree to do evil, and yield one to another by turns, as the
occasion serves; But between the flesh and the spirit, that is, between the
fear of God and the corruption of our nature there can be neither peace nor
truce; Vice must fall and break his neck before the fear of God, as Dagon
before the Arc, unless that God irritated by a pertinacious resistance,
withdraw his fear and knowledge from a stubborn heart; and then it is not God
but man that is overcome, for while he shakes off the free yoke of piety, he
puts on the slavish yoke of his unruly appetite, and becomes a drudge to feed
the greediness of an imperious and insatiable master. Isa. 48.22. There is no
peace says the Lord for the wicked. The case is deplorable of a conscience
destitute of the fear of God and faith in his promises, where the heady
untamed passions have snatched the rains from the hands of reason. It is the
fable of Phaeton turned into a story; for reason, too weak for the headstrong
appetite is overturned from his seat, the celestial light is quenched in the
soul, the fire of cupidity is kindled in the heart, the unruly passions run
wild their several ways, and the man is cast headlong into perdition.

That perdition is the final separation from God and the endless discord with
him, which begins in this very life. Yet as long as a man lives upon earth, he
has a share in that general love of God to his creatures, and the goodness
and patience of God inviteth him to repentance. But after this life is done,
God is an open enemy to those that have lived in emnity against him, and abused
his grace and long patience. To describe that miserable state, the Lord Jesus
calls it outward darkness; worm that dies not, a fire that is not quenched,
where there is wailing and gnashing of teeth. Imagine if you can, what it is to
be shut out from God the father of light, and driven away from him for ever;
After that, a hideous darkness, a worm gnawing, a fire burning, wailing and
gnashing of teeth, late remorse, despair, hatred of ones self, and all
imaginable distresses are but consequences of that misery of miseryes, to be
hated of God and hate him for ever.

Of that incomprehensible misery the suburbs are the torments of conscience in
this life, to which the racks, the wheels, and the fires, are not comparable.
How grievous those torments are, many forsaken wretches have sufficiently
expressed it, who being tortured by their conscience, and incapable to conceive
any deliverance from the dismal expectation of hell, have chosen rather to
leap into hell, by a desperate selfe-murther, then to endure any longer the
angry face of God pursuing them. And the miserable souls find there, what they
seek to avoid; Amos 5.19. as if a man did flee from a Lion, and a Bear met him.

The examples are frequent of those whom the secret lashes of conscience have
forced to make an open declaration of their hidden crimes, showing thereby,
that they were upon Gods rack. But truly the examples are yet more frequent of
seared and benumbed consciences, which by pastimes, companyes, businesses, and
the deceitfulnes of riches, divert their mind from that formidable thought of
the quarrel, that is between God and them; cosening themselves, as far as
they can, with a vain opinion that the way to escape Gods justice, is, not to
think of it; and, that they may not think of it, they enjoine their reason not
to believe it.

But that numnesse is unworthy of the name of peace: There is great difference
between safety and security, between having peace and not thinking of war.
Such men are like passengers sleeping in a ship that is sinking; or like that
we have heard with horror and compassion, that bestial soldiers condemned to
death, would drink lustick, and go drunk to the gallows; This I say is the
behavior of most part of the world, who bearing their condemnation in their
conscience, make them-selves drunk while they are going down into perdition;
sometimes with strong drink, but continually with the lust of the flesh, the
lust of the eyes and the pride of life, and with worldly cares and projects,
being of opinion that it is needless to think of death, because it comes
without thinking.

But in that carnal lethargy, conscience will start up by intervalls and pinch
drousy hearts: Especially when adversity lies heavy upon their persons and
familyes, and when sudden dangers overtake them. Then do they see the angry
countenance of Gods justice; Their own crimes take them by the throat, and
they seem ready to say as Ahab to Eliah 1 Kings 21. have thou found me mine
enemy? And God says to their heart with anger, I have found thee, because thou
have sold thy self to work evil in the sight of the Lord. There is no
conscience so sunk in a deep sleep of sin and worldlines, but will now and
then awake, and cry out in a sudden fright. So did Felix, though a Pagan, an
extortionner, and a man every way infamous; for, as St Paul reasoned of
temperance and righteousness and judgment to come, Felix trembled, and answered,
Go thy way for this time, Act. 24.

Whosoever has read books and men, may have observed what unquietnes, crimes
will bring to the criminal; That tyrants continually imagine a naked sword
hanging over their head; That the wicked flee, when no man pursues; That
murderers and perfidious men have a broken sleep, and their mirth is
interrupted with parentheses of frowns and grimme looks; That when they
excuse themselves of a foul fact, of which their conscience accuses them,
their conscience many times gives the lie to their words, and they are
contradicted by the inconstancy of their looks, and the stammering of their
tongue. And conscience will double these terrors, when their end draws nigh.
Many know who he was that started up often in his mortal drouzines on his death
bed, commanding that his men should give over slaying.

But suppose that the wicked, that have the world at will, had as much rest
within as without, yet ^^dons saying to Craesus ought to be observed, Never to
pronounce any man happy before his death. But the Christian ought to give to
that sentence a longer term, if he has bin with David in the Sanctuary of
God, and there has understood the end of the wickd, and found that God has
set them in slippery places, to cast them into destruction.

CHAP. III. Of the reconciliation of man with God, through Jesus Christ.
Such being the enmity between God and sinful man, which is followed with the
discord of man with nature, and with his kind, and with himself; How welcome,
how precious to him must the blessed news be of Gods reconciliation with him?
Esa. 5.27. How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him, that
brings good tidings, that publishes peace, that brings good tidings of
good, that publishes salvation, that says unto Sion, Thy God reigns? the
chief ambassador that anounceth that peace with God, is he that made it. It is
the eternal son of God, who by an infinite mercy toward man guilty and
miserable, was pleased to allye himself with him, by a personal union of the
divine nature with the humane. He has taken our nature and imparted his unto
us. He has made himself Man to take upon himself the debt of man. For seeing
that man was indebted to Gods justice, it was requisite that a man should give
satisfaction. Which because man's nature was not able to find, Christ joining to
the Nature and Obligation of man the Nature and Virtue of God, and both in one
Person, has fully satisfied the justice of his father, which required a
perfect obedience, and death for punishment of disobedience.

He has then presented to God a most accomplished obedience, of which the most
eminent act was to have readily undergone a shameful and bitter death at his
Fathers command for the sins of mankind, of which he was the pledge and the
representative; An obedience of infinite merit, more powerful to obtain
pardon, yea and reward, at Gods hands, then all the disobedience of the world
to incense his just wrath to punishment. 1. Pet. 2.24. His own self bare our
sins in his own body on the tree. Isa. 53.5. The chastisement of our peace was
upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. For it pleased the father that
in him should all fullness dwell, and having made peace through the blood of
his cross; by him to reconcile all things unto himself. Col. 1.19.

All that have recourse to that infinite love of God and that ransom of
inestimable value, the merit of his son, embracing it with a true faith,
(which cannot act, nor subsist, without a true repentance) find their peace
made with God; their iniquity is pardoned, they have received of the Lords
hands double for all their sins. Isa. 40.2. It is a double satisfaction, both
because it is twice greater then all the sins of the world; and because it
works a double effect, the one to get pardon for sins, the other to obtain a
reward for imputed righteousness. And that satisfaction represented to God in
our faithful prayers makes them acceptable and of sweet favor, as the incense
put upon the sacrifices,

It is much to be lamented that these tidings of grace and glory are but coldly
entertained by carnal ears, as now grown stale and vulgar. And that there is
more joy for prevailing in a Lawsuite, and for a Peace that opens the markets
and the freedom of commerce after a civil broyle, then for our peace with God
through Christ, in whom we have free access unto the throne of grace, that
we may obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need. Heb. 4.16. But
he that in the fright of his conscience has seen hell open, gaping for him,
and has once lost his thoughts in that bottomless gulf of misery and
horror to have his creator his enemy; if upon that he embrace by faith that
great and heavenly message, not only that his sins are forgiven him by the
merit of Christ, but that by the same merit, of an enemy and a child of wrath
he is become the son of God and heir of his Kingdom, his heart will melt
with joy love and admiration, and the sadder his sense was of his deplorable
condition, the greater will his thankfulness be for his gracious restoration O
the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and the goodness of God, who has
found a way to set forth together his justice and his mercy, and to pardon
sin by punishing it! O the infinite love of the Father, who so loved the
world that he gave his only Son for them! O the infinite love of that only
Son, that so loved his enemies that he delivered himself to a most bitter
death to give them life and immortality, yea and his own kingdom! O the
infinite love of the holy Ghost, who so loved the world as to announce unto
them this excellent piece of news by his word, and seal the promises of God
in their hearts by faith in Jesus Christ, that whosoever believes on him
should not perish but have life eternal.

Behold then the only foundation of the peace of the soul and contentment of
mind! It is that peace made for us with God by his only son, who has taken
our sins upon himself and in consequence the punishment; giving us in
exchange his righteousness, and consequently the reward of it, since by it we
appear righteous before God. This is the summary of the Gospel, This is the
only comfort of the faithful, That being justified by faith we have peace
with God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Romans 5.1. Without that persuasion all
the moral precepts and all the reasons of Philosophy cannot set the mind at
rest, much less the riches, honors, pleasures and pastimes of this world, for
who can have peace with himself while he is in dissension with God? And who
can have peace with God, but by the mediation of his beloved son Jesus, there
being no other name under heaven by which we must be saved?

The chief impediment of the tranquillity of mind being the remorse for sin
against God, and the apprehension of this just and terrible threatening, Cursed
is he that continues not in all the words of Gods law to do them. Whosoever
embraces the merit of Jesus Christ by faith is fenced against all the
threatenings of the law, and all the accusations of his conscience: For to them
he will answer, As Gods threatenings are just so are his promises; now, he has
promised that if we judge our selves we shall not be judged of the Lord. 1.
Cor. 11.31. That he that hears the word of the son of God and believes on
him that sent him has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation,
but is past from death to life. Joh. 5.24. That the blood of Jesus Christ the
son of God cleanses us from all sin. 1. Joh. 1.7. That he has blotted out
the hand writing of ordinances that was against us which was contrary to us,
and took it out of the way nailing it to his cross. Col. 2.14. Wherefore these
threatenings, that God will bring every work to judgment, and that even for one
idle word account must be given, reach not to those evil works of which
beleivers have repented and embraced the remission by faith in Jesus Christ.

Those threatenings of judgment do not reach me, since I have already past
judgemont upon myself by a serious contrition, and have received my Absolution
by the merit of him that was judged and condemed for me. If account must be
given for my sins, Christ must give it, who charged himself with them But
that account is discharged, My sins are put out of Gods score; The curse of the
law to a soul that believes in Christ, as I do, is a handwriting taken out
of the way, a Bond torn and nailed to the cross of Christ; God is too just to
make use of a bond vacated to proceed against me: the merit of his Son which
he received in payment for me, is of too great value to leave me in danger to
be sued, for the debts which he has paid; for himself was arrested by Death,
the Sergeant of Gods justice, and put in that jayle whence there is no coming
out till one has paid the utmost farthing; and being come out of that jayle by
his resurrection, he has made it manifest that he has paid the whole debt
which he was bound for in our behalf unto Gods justice.

What though my sins be great? yet are they less then the merit of Jesus
Christ. No sin is so great that it ought to take away the confidence in Gods
promises. No sin is so great that it may damme a soul beaten down with
contrition, but together raised by faith and washed in the blood of the son of
God, Indeed the remembrance of my sins must be bitter unto me, yet that
bitterness must be drowned in the joy of my salvation, and my repentance must be
a step not a hinderance to my confidence. So I will say to God every day with a
contrite heart Forgive us our trespasses: And at the same time I will remember
that I make that prayer unto our Father which is in heaven, who commands me to
call him Father, to assure me that he will spare me as a man spares his own
son that serves him, Mal. 3.17. and to style him heavenly father to whom the
kingdom and the power and the glory belongs, to lift up my hope to that
celestial glory which he fully possesses, and which he will impart to his
children in their measure. I will walk before God with humility and fear,
thinking on my sins past and my present weakness and sinfulnes; but together I
will go in the strength of the Lord and make mention of his righteousness. The
righteousness of God that frighteth sinners, comfort me, and his justice is
all mercy to me: For the infinite merit of his Son being mine, he is now
gracious unto me in his justice. Hereby the peace and assurance which I enjoy
through faith, is advanced to a joy of heaven upon earth, and to this song of
triumph. Isa. 61.10. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be
joyful in my God; for he has clothed me with the garments of salvation, he
has covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decks himself
with ornaments and as a bride adornes herself with her jewels. This is the
peace and contentment of the faithful soul that feels and relisheth her
blessed reconcilation made with God through Jesus Christ. For he that has
peace with God has peace also with himself. And the love of God powerfully
growing in his heart by the consideration of the bounty of God (whose sweetness
we may taste though not conceive his greatness) breeds there together the peace
of God which passes all understanding, banisheth tumultuous and unlawful
affections, and brings the lawful under its obedience; so that all the
affections of the regenerate soul meet in one, and make but one, which is the
love of God, as many brooks that lose their names in a great River.

When the love of God brings not that great peace to the soul, and the
absolute empire over the passions, it is because love is as yet imperfect; and
the cause of that imperfection is the deficiency of faith, which does not yet
embrace aright the reconciliation with God through Jesus Christ; and faith is
deficient when it is not maintained by good works, her food, without which it
pines away, and falls into a shaking palsy; and when that foundation is
shaking, all that is built upon it cannot but be tottering: This then must be
our first and earnest task, to make our selves sure of our peace with God by a
lively faith, whereby our hearts may be purified from evil works, and made
fertile to all fruits of holiness. For hereby we shall have peace with our
selves and shall be masters at home.

Hereby also we shall have peace with Gods creatures, receiving temporal
blessings as testimonies of Gods reconciliation with us, and in every bit of
bread we shall taste his love; Prosperity and adversity will prove equally
good unto us, being dispensed by his fatherly care. If God multiply our
afflictions it will be only to multiply our deliverances. He will never put us
to the trial but to refine our faith, weane our hearts from the world, and make
his heavenly comforts more welcome to us; Truly the faithful soul, that
knows how to make the right use of good and evil, shall find experimentally
the truth of St. Paul's sentence that all things are for our sakes. 2 Cor. 4.25.

Also this peace with God brings us peace with our neighbors. For he that has
a comfortable seeling in his conscience that God is reconciled with him, will
easily be reconciled with his brethren, holding it a point of equity,
generosity, and gratefulnes, after that his Master has forgiven him ten
thousand talents, to forgive his fellow servant an hundred pence. If all men
had the peace of God in their hearts, there would be no discord in the world.
But because most men want that good peace, and they that have it, have it but
imperfectly, therefore peace between men can hardly be well cemented. When you
see men professing piety and sound doctrine, tearing and devouring one another
with wars or lawfuites, you may be sure that the peace of God rules not in
their hearts, surely not in the hearts of the authors and fomentors of discord,
though they should pretend the zeal of Gods glory, who has no need of men's
turbulent passions to advance his kingdom, which is all peace. In heaven where
the peace of God abides in its fullness, and fills the hearts of every one of
his Saints, there is also of necessity a perfect peace between them, for they
must needs have all one love, since they have all but one interest, which is
the glory of him that loves them, and for ever glorifieth them with himself.

CHAP. IV. General means to preserve that peace with God: and first to serve
God purely and diligently.
HAving spoken of the true and only foundation of the peace of the soul and
contentment of mind, which is the confidence that God is appeased to us through
Jesus Christ; Let us now use the means to preserve that peace and stand firm
upon that solid ground, beginning by the more general.

The first is to serve God with purity and diligence, for which this
consideration is essential, that our reconciliation with God was made by way of
purchase, and that when we were lost and estranged from God, he was pleased to
redeem us by his Son: Wherefore as they that bought servants expected
service from them, God also has bought us to be served by us. That end of our
redemption is thus set down by St. Paul, Tit. 2.14. Christ gave himself for us
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a
peculiar people zealous of good works. It was the custom over all the world
in S. Paul's time to buy and sell servants: As then servants could not expect
the favor of them that had bought them, unless they did them good service; we
that are purchased by God with such a great price must not expect to enjoy his
peace and gracious countenance, if we do not serve him according to his will;
Wherein our utility meets with our duty, for of the service which we yield
unto God the whole benefit results unto us.

Before all things we must look well that our service to God be pure and such
as he requires; for without that purity all our diligence to his service would
be not only unless but hurtful. One cannot go to God turning his back to
him; The more we labor to serve him otherwise then he has commanded, the more
we offend him. The pure way of Gods service is set down in his written word,
wherein although many places are too high for the understanding of the most
wise and learned, yet the things necessary for the duty and salvation of man,
are so clearly expressed, that this commendation is justified by experience
which David gives unto Gods word, The entrance of thy Words gives light, it
gives understanding unto the simple. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet and a
light unto my path. It is one of the chief duties of Gods service to read and
carefully meditate that good Word, and lend a devout attention to them that
announce it. For by it God speaks to us as a father to his children, and none
but unnatural children refuse to hearken to the voice of their Father. This
duty brings its recompense, for the holy word of God is the glad tidings of the
peace of God with men, and the only doctrine that frames that peace within us.
For which reason the Prophet would hear it, Ps. 85.5. I will hear what God
the Lord will speak; for he will speak peace unto his people and to his
Saints. To that holy word, as to a sanctuary, troubled consciences must have
recourse to get the peace of God. Yet the faithful soul ought to be more
studious to learn in it, how to please God, then how to get comfort. Those
Christians are yet upon the lower degrees of their regeneration, that practice
the duties of Gods service only to work their salvation. We must read and hear
Gods word for a higher end, even to conform our wills to the rule of his
declared will, and we must think more of his glory then our felicity. If faith
in his promises make us say joyfully with David, Ps. 32 1. Blessed is he whose
transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered, the zeal of his glory must
make us say with more joy and affection, as the same David, Ps. 119.1. Blessed
are the undefiled in the way who walk in the law of the Lord. Blessed are they
that keep his testimonies and seek him with the whole heart. v. 5. O that my
ways were directed to keep thy sttatutes? v. 7. I will praise thee with
uprightness of heart when I shall have learned thy righteous judgments. And all
along that great Psalm he utters the unspeakable joy that he took in
meditating and doing Gods commandments; one may see that he cannot say enough
to express how heartily he was affected to it. If we love the holy word of
God for its own sake, and converse often with it with reverence and affection,
because it is the word of our heavenly father, and the declaration of his
nature and will, we shall find our peace in it, though we seek it not, and
get a satisfaction not to be parallelled by any joy for the things of this
world.

To this duty of hearing God speaking to us in his word, the next is to speak
to him by prayer, whether it be to implore his grace, or to thank him for his
benefits, or to praise him for his infinite perfection. By these two duties of
hearing God and speaking to him, we begin in this world that good intelligence
and holy communication with God, in which the heavenly peace and sovereign
felicity of man consists.

By prayer we seek and meet that peace of God which is announced to us in
his word and whosoever seeks it well, will be sure to meet it, for to this
seeking is the promise made Math. 7.8 Every man that asks receives, and he
that seeks finds, and to him that knocks it shall be opened.

When this direful remembrance sinkes into a conscience, how man was put out
of Paradise, and Cherubims were placed at the gate with aflaming sword to keep
him out that he may not find the way to the tree of life, it is enough to
sink one down with fear and anguish, and make him cry out standing upon the
brink of despair, Must I be driven away from God for ever, and what way is
left for me to return to the tree of life without which I cannot shun
eternal perdition?

Upon that perplexity Prayer comes and offers her help, saying, I will bring
thee thither, and will go with thee, without any let of the flaming sword; for
I know a way to the tree of life, where the terror of the law does not keep
the passage; the son of God who is the way the truth and the life, has made
me way unto the throne of grace, to which I go with full assurance to obtain
mercy and find grace to help in time of need.

This freedom of prayer to approach unto God was in some sort represented by
the sacrifices. That they were figures of prayers we learn it out of the
Psalm 141 where David beseeches God that his prayer may be set forth as
incense, and the lifting up of his hands as the evening sacrifice, Ps. 141.2 As
then the smoke of the sacrifices did mount up toward heaven, which is a way
which cannot be stopped, likewise faithful prayers have at all times a free
passage to heaven: and although Satan be called the Prince of the air, he
cannot disturb them in the way; But, that they may reach to heaven, the
incense of the merit of Christ must be laid over the sacrifice of prayer.

To that holy duty we are encouraged by Gods commandment and promise. Both
are in this text, Ps. 50.12. Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver
thee, and thou shall glorify me. And so in this, Come unto me (says Gods
eternal Son) all you that labor and are heavy laden, and I will ease you.
Math. 11.28. None that prays to the father through the merit of the Son
returns empty; For either he gives us what we do ask, or what we ought to
ask, and that which is fit for us. He that keeps that holy correspondence
with God is never dejected with sorrow, or perplexed with fear, for he finds
in that divine communication a plaster to all his sores, and an inexhaustible
well of life and joy. David had found it so when he said, Ps. 16 I have set the
Lord always before me, because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved,
Therefore my heart is glad and my glory rejoices, my flesh also shall rest in
hope. By prayer we ground our souls in faith, raise them with hope, inflame
them with charity, possess them with patience during our life, and yield them
to God with joy in our last breath.

To reap these benefits by prayer, we must understand well the right use of
prayer which is double; It serves to ask of God our necessities both of body
and soul; for since in him we live and moove and have our being, we must
continually seek to him by prayer of whom we continually depend. But the
noblest and most proper use of prayer is to glorify God, and converse with him
because we love him, and because he is most perfect and most worthy to be
beloved; coming to that holy duty, not as a task, but an honor, the greatest
honor and delight that a creature can be capable of in this world, stealing
away from affairs and companies to enjoy that pleasant and honorable
conversation; as lovers will steal away from all employments to entertain
their best beloved. For what is sweet in the world in comparison of this
sweetness? what is honorable compared to this honor to have familiarity with
God and be admitted to his presence at any time, to be received of him as his
children, and when we lift up our affections to heaven the habitation of his
glory, to find that himself is come to meet us in our heart, and has made
it another heaven by his gracious presence?

In that meditation a faithful man will call Gods benefits to mind; and to
conceive their excellency to his power, he will from the consideration of Gods
grace reflect upon that of his own natural condition, sometimes criminal,
miserable, and Gods enemy; but now through Gods preventing love and unspeakable
mercy changed into the quality of child of God and heir of his kingdom. He
has bin provoked to pity us by the depth of our misery, wherefore in all
reason we must be provoked to thankfulness by the height of his mercy; And
this is the chief employment of prayer, an employment which paying our duty
brings our felicity, and though we have paid but what we owe, and scarce
that, gives us a present payment for the duty which we have paid.

O what a heavenly delight it is to lose ones self in the thought of Gods
mercyes, which are beyond all reckoning and above all imagining? and to say to
him after David, Ps. 40.5. Many, O Lord my God, are thy wonderful works, and
thy thoughts which are to us ward, they cannot be reckoned up in order unto
thee; v.8. If I would declare and speak of them they are more then can be
numbered. I delight to do thy will O my God, yea thy law is with in my heart,
Ps. 86.11. Teach me thy way, O Lord, I will walk in thy truth, unite my heart
to fear thy name. I will praise thee O Lord my God, withal my heart, and will
glorify thy name for evermore, for great is thy mercy toward me, and thou
have delivered my soul from the lowest hell. Such a conversation with God to
rejoice in his love, praise him for his graces, and crave the leading of his
spirit to walk before him unto all pleasing, is an imitation of the perpetual
employment of Angels and glorified Saints. It is a beginning of the Kingdom of
heaven in this life. In it consists the true peace of the soul and the solid
contentment of mind.

CHAP. V. Of the love of God.
BEing entered into the meditation of the love of God, let us stay upon it. It
is good for us to be here, let us make here three tabernacles. And more reason
have we so to speak in this occasion, then St. Peter when he saw Christ
transfigured in the Mount. For by planting his abode there, he could not have
made Christ to do the like, nor given a settled continuance to that short
bright lightning of glory: But by our meditation upon the love of God, we make
him to stay with us, and our soul is transfigured with him, being filled with
his grace and his peace, and already enlivened with a beam of his glory.

Now because the ground the spring and the cause of the love that we bear to
God, is the love that he bears to us, we must before all things study to
conceive as well as we may, of the great love of God to usward. Behold what
manner of love the father has bestowed upon us that we should be called the
sons of God. 1 John. 3.1. This is the principal point of his love, where all
other testimonies of his love do begin and where they end. Without this none
can say, that he is beloved of God; For to be the work of Gods hands and
maintained by his providence, is common to all creatures, and to be made after
Gods image, and by his liberality to enjoy the plenty and service of nature, is
common to all men good and evil: But because creatures without reason, and men
without goodness bear no love to God, it cannot properly be said that God
loves them, though he be their maker and preserver. Love being the bond of
perfectness Col. 3. Gods love would not be the bond of perfectness, if he
loved those things that never return him love; For, that love may be a bond,
the two ends must meet and knit together: now these two ends knit, when a
creature beloved of God bears a reciprocal love to him. For thereby not only
the man that fears God joyneth with him, but the whole nature also and all
the creatures are re-joyned with their principle and Origin. And whereas some
creatures cannot, others will not love God, the true child of God, because he
gets some utility out of them all, yea of those that are Gods enemies, loves
him and gives him thanks for and in the name of all; and so by this means love
proves a true bond of perfectness, which proceeding from God and knitting
with God again, embraces and holds fast together the whole creation, and
brings it back to its Creator: A consideration, which cannot but bring a
singular content, and a great peace to the soul. Being persuaded of the love
of God to us whereby we are called the sons of God, we look upon all
creatures as the goods of our fathers house, prepared for us. And though others
which are none of Gods children enjoy them also, yet they are for us; since the
wicked are for the good, either to exercise their virtue by trials, or even to
serve and sustain them; For as the angry waves roaring and foaming about the
ship where Christ was with his disciples, yet were bearing the ship; likewise,
the enemies of God and his Church while they are beating and storming against
it, bear it up in spite of their hearts. The agitations of the great sea of
the world, make Gods children more sensible of the great love which the Father
has bestowed upon them, to have given them his beloved son to be in the ship
with them to keep them safe in the storm; and the dangers that overwhelme
others, are helps for good unto them that love God. All the deliverances that
God sends them, all the blessings that God powers upon them, they take them as
productions of the fatherly love of God who has adopted them in his Son.
They taste that love in the enjoyment of present goods, they breath that love
in the enjoyment of future and eternal goods, they rest upon that love when
they sleep, they lean upon that love when they walk, they find that love in
all the occurrences of their life; with what face soever the various accidents
of the world look upon them, they see through them the evident love of God,
being certain that nothing happens to them but is directed by the good hand of
their loving Father.

These pleasant rivers of the love of God conduct our meditation up the stream
to the great Source, that love which passes knowledge, that mysterious deep
love which the Angels desire to look into; whereby of his enemies that we
were, he has made us his children, giving for us, even to death, his own
precious Son; entitling us, by him, to his eternal glory; and giving us the
earnest of it by his good Spirit crying in our hearts Abba Father. O
incomprehensible love! which has undergone and overcome death to give us life,
and that he might have from us an immortal love!

That immortal love ought to be the effect of this meditation. So that having
conceived to our power how much God loves us, we may also to our power apply
our heart to love him; acknowledging that all our heart, all our soul, and all
our understanding, is yet too little to return him love for his love.

It it true, that this is a debt from which we can never be acquitted, and we
owe it even after we have paid it: But as this debt must be paid continually,
the continual payment yields a continual satisfaction to him that pays it and
owes it still. For whereas pecuniary debts make the heart sad, this debt of
love makes it glad, when our duty meets with our inclination, and when we
most desire to dok that which we are most obliged to do. Besides, this debt
is of that nature that when we pay it we make together an acquisition; for
although the love began by God he takes it upon him to repay us the love that
we pay him, Ps. 91.14. Because he has set his love upon me (says the Lord)
therefore will I deliver him: I will set him on high because he has known my
name. Pro. 8.17. I love them that love me, and they that seek me early shall
find me.

But love is due to God, not only for the love that he has done us, and for
the good that we hope from him, but for the good that is in him, and because
he that is the sovereign beauty and goodness must be beloved in the chiefest
and highest manner. All that is beautiful and good in Nature, the glory of the
celestial bodies, the fertility of the earth, the shady green of trees, the
fragrancy of flowers, the variety and utility of animals, the rational
inventive vivacity of intellectual natures, the admirable order of the Universe
both in disposition and conduct; All these are so many productions of the great
bottomless depth of beauty, bounty, power and excellency; and who so wisely
considers them, presently conceives that the Author is possessed of an
infinite perfection only worthy to be beloved for his own sake, and that all
the good and beautiful things that he has done must be beloved only in
relation to him and for his sake. To which if you add two other points, of
which Nature cannot sufficiently inform us, and wherein the Word of God
supplies the deficiency of Natures teaching, which are the justice and the
mercy of God toward sinners. O who would not love that infinite love and
excellency, though he had no interest of his own in it?

But how can we barely consider Gods excellency in it self with an abstraction
of our interest? Certainly the consideration of our concernment will go along,
though unsent for, with the contemplation of Gods supreme virtue and goodness.
And it is impossible to consider God as the only worthy object of love,
without conceiving, even with the same thought, that our sovereign good
consists in loving him; reputing what a height of honor and content it is
when that great Creator, who is all bounty, all beauty, and all perfection, is
pleased to contract amity with the creature.

For in this consists the great and only excellency of man, that God has
given him a nature capable to entertain freindship with his Maker: A capacity
which being obscured by sin is restored to him by grace: And God, who as the
only absolute Sovereign is above all Laws, condescended so far to us as to
bind himself to the Laws of friendship with man, which Laws on his part are
most inviolably kept; the whole defect in that mutual love is from man.

As then friends disjoined in place are joined by love, so are God in heaven
and man upon earth. God indeed is every where, yet God and man are more remote
in degree of nature then any two can be in place: But they are joined in a way
far more excellent and real, for the thoughts of two mortal persons make no
mutual impression, when they are without the line and reach of communication;
whereas God is never remote from the faithful soul, and they may commune
together at any time. God makes his love sensible to the faithful soul, and
says to it by the presence of his spirit, Soul I am thy salvation; and the
soul says to him, Lord thou art my God, I am thine, save me and teach me to do
thy will. God communeth with the soul by his word and spirit, and the soul
communeth also with God by her word and spirit; that is, by prayer and holy
aspirations.

It is also a law of friendship that friends bear the one with the other, and
that the strong support the weak. Wherefore God all perfect, having knit a
friendship with the creature, subject as yet to much imperfection, supporteth
her defects with his love, and covers her sins by his righteousness: Man
also for his part must patiently bear, what chastenings God lays upon him,
taking all kindly at his hands; for as he must be assured of his love, he must
also be certainly persuaded of his wisdom, and believe that Gods dealing with
him, is all love and wisdom.

It is a law of perfect freindship that friends declare their secrets one to
another: So God deals with his friends; and Jesus Christ uses this for a
reason, why he calls his Disciples his friends: John 15.15, Henceforth I call
you not servants, for the servant knows not what the Lord does, but I have
called you friends, for all things that I have learned of my Father, I have
made known unto you. And Daniel says that the secret of the Lord is with them
that fear him, [not the secret of his Council, but that of his Good will
toward them, in that which concerns their duty and their salvation, which is
the sense of the following words, and he will show them his Covenant.] We then
to show our selves true friends to him that honors us with that title must
also disclose unto him the secrets of our hearts: It is true they are open to
his all-seeing eyes, and if we would hide our secrets from him we could not.
But God takes a delight that we give him an account of our selves, not that He
may be better informed, but that we may be better and happier: for they that
disguise themselves before him are incapable of his grace, and dissembling is a
violation of the laws of friendship. It is the comfort of the godly, that
while they confess their sins to God as unto their clear-sighted Judge, they
discharge together a duty of friendship, declaring to their supreme friend
their private infirmities and secret diseases, to call upon his help. What
benefit we may expect by that free dealing with God, we learn out of David's
experience, who speaks thus to God. Psalm 32.5. I acknowledged my sin unto
thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid; I said, I will confess my
transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin: For
this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee, in a time when thou may
be found; surely in the floods of great waters they shall not come nigh unto
him. Into the bosom of that friend we must power our secret sighs; to him we
must lay open our most intimate desires and fears, that we may say to him with
David, Psalm 38.9. Lord all my desire is before thee and my groaning is not hid
from thee. Which as it is true in regard of Gods all-seeing knowledge let it be
true also in regard of our sincere unbosoming of the secrets of our souls
before God.

Now that the secrets of our souls and the meditations of our hearts may ever
be acceptable in his sight, and because the heart of man is so close and full
of windings of hypocrisy, that man himself cannot find the bottom of his own
inside, let us call upon God to assist us in that search by his good spirit,
saying. Psalm 139.23. Search me, O Lord, and know my heart, try me and know my
thoughts: And see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way
everlasting. Before we have sincerely laid open before God all that is within
us, we have no reason to expect the blessing of serene and innocent peace in
our soul: For God, who is jealous of his glory, takes it as a high contempt
when his creature will offer to avoid the all-seeing eyes of the Creator; and
besides, he is jealous of our love, taking it as a derogation to the love due
to him, when we go about to conceal our thoughts our affections and our
projects from him. Wherefore the sense that the conscience has of this
jealousy of God, holds her in continual anxiety.

Whereas he that is true to a resolution to call God to witness of his most
secret actions and intentions (as he is whether we will or no) gets two
benefits that way: The one, that finding himself obliged to impart all that he
has in his heart to God his eternal friend, he will take heed of doing, yea
and thinking, any thing that is displeasing unto him, and by his uprightness
will prevent the shame of opening many impurities before that holiest of
Holies. The other that by this free and open dealing with God he shall get a
great tranquillity in his conscience. For, if in humane friendships we presume
that by disclosing the secrets of our hearts to a generous friend, we oblige
him to love and fidelity, and after that action of freedom we find our heart
much eased; how great must our ease and contentment be when we have poured all
our heart into Gods bosom, that perfect friend, who is truth and sincerity it
self? It is a wise part to conceal nothing from God. The only way to possess
our soul with peace and confidence, is to make God our Confident.

It is also a great point of mutual friendship to yield to the interesses and
desires one of another: Herein God has showed the way to men, having so far
condescended to the condition and necessity of men, as to have put on their
nature and taken their debt upon himself, yea and to have discharged it: He is
dead like men, and for men. And being the sovereign incomprehensible wisdom,
he descends to our capacity to declare himself to us, and draw us to him He
calls us indeed to deny ourselves that we may give ourselves unto him, but
yet how much does he yield to our desires and fears? And with what wisdom
and sweetness does he sort his trials with our strength? And where is the godly
man, that has not found in his forest afflictions that kind usage that St
Paul speaks of, 1. Cor. 10.13. There has no temptation taken you but such as
is common to man; But God is faithful who will not suffer you to be tempted
above that you are able, but will with the temptation also make a way to
escape, that ye may be able to bear it.

Since then God who is so great does accommodate himself with us who are so
little, the law of reciprocal love requires that we accommodate our selves
with him who is so great; that we diligently inform our selves of his will to
make it our will; that we observe the things which he loves that we may love
them, and the things which he hates that we may hate and avoid them; that all
our interesses bow under his, that the end of all our ends be his glory,
seeking not our own things but the things of the kingdom of God. We shall
never be our own, till we have wholly resigned our selves unto God. We shall
never have a true peace and content within, till our affections be altogether
subjected to his love, and conformed to his will. But then shall we be
peaceable, contented, and masters at home, when God shall reign within us, and
when we shall know no more difference between his interest and ours.

Finally, the highest point of love being an entire union, and to have all
things common, it is also the purpose and in the end the efficiency of Gods
love to us, yea so far that by his great and precious promises we are made
partakers of the divine nature, 2. Pet. 14. and that Christ is in us and we in
him Ioh. 17. What has God reserved to himself that we may not call ours?
Heaven and Earth are for us, His providence is our purveyour, His Angels are
our keepers, His kingdom our inheritance: He gives us his good plenty, his
word, his Son, his Spirit, his own self. Can any be persuaded of this
beneficence of God, and refuse to give him his body, his soul, his intentions
and his affections? Shall we use reservations with God who keeps no good from
us? Would any poor man refuse to have community of goods with a rich man? Now
God who is the plenty and felicity it self will have community of goods with
us. Let us embrace the condition readily: Let us give our selves, to God, and
God shall be ours; Or rather say we, God is ours, let us render our selves to
him: for he prevents us in that Covenant; since God is ours, good reason we
should be his. Blessed we! that we may say with the Spouse I am my beloveds
and my beloved is mine, for by that union of persons and community of goods
with God, the soul finds her self arrived to the sovereign degree of riches,
peace, glory and delectation.

CHAP. VI. Of Faith.
Faith is a Christian virtue, whose most proper and natural office is, to
embrace that peace made for us with God by Jesus Christ. And by it we sign
and seal for our part the Agreement made between God and man, This expression
is borrowed of John the Baptist speaking of the Lord Jesus, He that has
received his testimony has set to his Seal that God is true. Joh. 3.33. All
that we said before of our reconciliation with God by Christ, and how that
reconciliation is applied to our consciences, is an explication of the duty and
benefit of faith; Yet we must speak of it again as a consequence of Love. For
the principal and most natural fruit of the love of God is to put our whole
trust in Thus St John having said much of the love of God to us, and of the
love that we owe him for it, adds, 1. Ioh. 4.18. There is no fear in love,
but perfect love asteth out fear, because sear has torment; he that fears
is not made perfect in love. Faith as the mother of all virtues brings forth
the love of God, but Love is soon eeven with faith, and brings forth her own
mother; For as we love God because we trust in him (as certainly persuaded of
his wisdom, power and fidelity in his promises) so we trust in him because
we love him, for in all our friendships our trust in the beloved person
follows the measure of the love that we bear to him. He then that loves God
sincerely, trusts in him; And when calamity tempts him to unbeleeving fears, he
will observe Saint Peter's exhortation, 1. Pet. 4.14 Let them that suffer
according to the will of God commit the keeping of their souls to him in
welldoing as unto a faithful creator.

It is impossible to love well without a good opinion of the person we love,
especially of his fidelity and righteousness: Seeing then, that God has
promised to pardon sins to those that confess them with a serious repentance,
if we love him we shall trust in his promise, that if we confess our sins
he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousnes, 1 John 1.9. grounding our trust in his mercy upon his fidelity
and righteousness: for since he promised it, certainly he will do it, he is too
faithful to break his word, and too just to punish us for those sins of which
Christ has borne the punishment in our name. This gracious declaration he has
made, Luke 12.32. Fear not, little flock, for it is your Fathers good pleasure
to give you the kingdom. Shall we have such an ill opinion of him, as to think
that he has promised more then he was willing or able to perform; or that,
since the promise made, his will is altered, or his power diminisht? Let us be
sure that he that loved us from all eternity will love us to all eternity, Romans
8.33 Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that
justifyeth, who is he that condemns? It is Christ that dyed, yea rather that
is risen agnine, who is even sitting at the right hand of God, who also makes
intercession for us. And if upon this safe ground we trust in God for the
things of the life to come, we must upon the same ground trust his love for
the things of this life. He that spared not his own son but delivered him up
for us all, how shall he not with him freely give us all things? He that saved
our souls from death shall he not deliver our bodies from the dangers of this
world? Certainly, he that has prepared for us eternal delights at his right
hand will not deny us our temporal daily bread.

This assurance in his love will sweeten our afflictions and lay down our
fears, for being persuaded that God as he is infinitely good is also
infinitely wise, we must in consequence believe that all the evils which he
sends us are so many remedies to other evils; that our most smarting dolours
are corrosives applied by that wise Physician to eat the proud flesh of our
corrupt nature; that he does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of
men, Lam. 3.33. especially when he chastises his children, but is in a manner
forced to that course by their necessity, as when a man is pincht by his best
friends, to awake him out of a deep lethargy.

And since that eternal friend is every where present by his al-seeing
knowledge and almighty power, and has promised besides, his gracious presence
to his friends, saying I will not leave thee nor forsake thee; what reason have
we of joy and confidence at all times, in all places, and in all the
occurrences of this life, having God with us always, observing us with his
eye, upholding us with his hand, protecting us with his providence, guiding us
with his wisdom, and comforting us with his love?

The last good office that Faith does unto us, is in the approaches of death;
for then especially it does represent the promises of God unto the faithful
soul, and seals them afresh, knitting that bond of perfectnes the mutual
love between God and the conscience faster then ever: By it God speaks peace
unto the soul aspiring to heaven, and makes it spread the wings of holy
desires, to pass with a swift flight from the combat below to the triumph
above.

Faith, bearing up the soul in that last flight, changes name and nature in
the way, and becomes love; to embrace him for ever in glory, in whom we have
believed in infirmity.

CHAP. VII. Of Christian Hope.
THe proper action of Faith is to embrace Christ and ground the soul upon him;
But it has another action common to it with hope, which is to embrace the
benefits obtained to us by Christ. Of these benefits, the present grace is
proper to faith, which is justification, otherwise the Reconciliation of God
with the conscience; the future glory by the contemplation of Gods face, is
more proper to Hope.

Both faith and hope bring a sweet peace and solid content to the soul that
loves God. But it is peculiar to hope to add to that peace a beam of glory;
much like those spies of Israel that entered into the Land of Promise before the
rest of the people, to whom they brought some of the fruit of the Land; For it
enters into heaven beforehand, and from thence brings us a taste of the
promised inheritance.

Hope is the only thing that puts some value upon the life of this world, for
all the good of this life consists in this, that it is a way to a better, and
that the earth is the tyring-room of the godly soul where she makes herself
ready for the wedding of the Lamb. But for that, what were this life good for?
It would consist but in two things; to do evil and to suffer evil. The very
goods of this life without that hope would be evil; for none among the Pagans,
and all others that were not sustained by Christian hope, was ever made happy.
The wisest of them have sought the sovereign good out of the objects of the
senses, not finding any solid content in sensual things or actions. Solomon
wiser then them all, had found that all under the Sun was vanity and vexation
of spirit, and under all he comprehended intellectual as well as sensual
things. Neither could any give a more judicious verdict of all than he, for he
had tried all things. Where then shall we find any thing worth the pains of
living, but in Hope? For if in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of
all men most miserable. 1 Cor. 15.19. Hope not keeping within the limits of the
poor goods of this life lives already with the life to come, for it looks for
the Kingdom of Christ which is not of this world as himself teaches us: where
although he reign as a sovereign, he reigns not as a redeemer; and so here
is not the reign of his redeemed. We find it by experience.

Who so then will enjoy the peace of the soul and contentment of mind must have
his hope and his spirit in a better place; for why should we expect of the
world more then it has? Can one gather grapes of thorns or figs of thistles?
May one expect peace of a perpetual agitation, or a durable content from things
of short continuance? For the soul of man being created for permanency, is
contented with nothing less then a permanent good; which is the essential
reason why no man could ever find satisfaction in the world, there being such a
disproportion between man's soul, and the objects that the world presents to
her: for all worldly things are finite, but the soul though finite in her
substance is infinite in her desire, which nothing less then infinity can
satisfy. Now it is by hope that the soul enjoys in this finite world an
infinite good. It is by hope, that we rise from the dead before we die, being
advanced to a degree of grace that has already a streak of glory. Of which St
Paul gives this high expression. Col. 3.1. If ye then be risen with Christ,
seek those things which are above where Christ sits on the right hand of
God. When Christ who is our life shall appear then shall we also appear with
him in glory.

Worldly hopes flatter us and then disappoint us. But though they did perform
all they promise, the present possession of the best things of the world is
nothing comparable to the hope only of heavenly things, even that lively hope
unto which God has begotten us again by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from
the dead; To an inheritane incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not
away, reserved in heaven for us. 1 Pet. 1.3.

O holy and glorious hope, which already makes us partakers of Christ's
resurrection, and followers of his ascension, even to the right hand of God!
already living with the life of Christ and animated by his spirit: Blessed
hope, by which we are preserved from the general corruption as with a
sovereign antidote, and by which we subsist yea and triumph in afflictions,
Heb. 10.34. taking joyfully the spoiling of our goods, knowing in our selves
that we have in heaven a better and an enduring substance. It is by hope that
we look joyfully upon our bodies decaying with sickness and age, 2 Cor. 5.1.
Knowing that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a
building of God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. For in
this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our house which is
from heaven. It is by hope, that the Martyrs and all that suffer for
righteousness see the crown laid on the top of their cross, and rejoice in
this promise of their Savior, Matthew. 5.11. Blessed are ye when men shall
revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you
falsely for my sake: rejoice and be exceeding glad for great is your reward in
heaven. By hope we behave ourselves wisely in prosperity, 1 Cor. 7.31. using
this world as not abusing it, for the fashion of this world passes away. Hope
beats down pride, refraines lust, and weans our hearts from the world. Worldly
hope disordereth the soul and makes a man go out of himself, depending of the
future, and losing the present, and is always wavering and feverish: But
heavenly hope, although it transport the soul above herself, and make her
depend upon future goods, sets her nevertheless in a quiet steady frame;
because the soul rising to God receives God, who makes her his home; so that a
man by hope, enjoyes beforehand part of the goods which he aspires unto. Hope
grows like rivers more and more as it draws nearer the end of its course:
And when it has brought the godly soul into the Ocean of felicity, there it
loses the name of Hope, and becomes Enjoyment.

CHAP. VIII. Of the duty of Praising God.
SInce we already embrace eternal goods by hope, as we desire to begin now
the joys of heaven, we must resolve to begin the duties of that blessed
Estate. To seek the first without the second, would be an ungenerous
disposition, and an impossible undertaking. If we apprehend aright that the
felicity of man consists in his duty, and that the glory of the blessed
Saints in heaven consists in glorifying God, we will seek in that great duty
our felicity, and delight to sing our part, even, in this life, in the hymns
of those glorious spirits. Nothing gives to the soul so great a peace, Nothing
elevateth the soul to such a Paradise, like Joy. The love of God is preferred
before faith and hope, because these seek their own good, but that seeks
Gods glory; Which to a godly soul being much more considerable then her own
happiness, yet is found to be the sovereign happiness of him that seeks it
before his own good; Neither is there any more certain and compendious way to
get glory to ourselves then to seek Gods only glory.

In this then the godly man must delight, and can never want matter for it, all
things giving him occasion to praise God, either for his mercy to his children,
or his justice to his enemies, or his power and wisdom eminently shining in
all his works, or the infinite perfection that abides in himself. God has
made all creatures for his praise; and none of his material creatures can
praise him but man only; And of all men, none but the godly praise him: Or if
others do it for company, it becomes them not, neither are their praises
accepted. Then upon the godly lies the whole task to praise God for other
creatures that cannot or will not praise him. But that task is all pleasure;
as nothing is more just, so nothing is more delightful then that duty.

Look about upon the fields richly clad with the plenty and variety of nature:
Look up to heaven and admire that great light of the world, the Sun so
wonderful in his splendor virtue and swift nesse: When he is set, look upon
the gloryes of the night, the Moon and the stars like so many bright jewels
set off by the black ground of the sky, and setting forth the magnificence of
their maker. See how some of them keep ea certain distance among themselves,
marching together without the least breaking of their ranks, some follow their
particular courses, but all are true to their motions, equal and infallible in
their regulated periods.

Then being amazed and dazelled with that broad light of Gods greatness and
wisdom, let every one make this question to himself, Why does God make me a
beholder of his works? Why among so many different creatures has he made me
one of that only kind, to whom he has given reason to know and admire the
workman, a will to love him, and a tongue to praise him? Is it not that I might
render him these duties in the name of all his other works? And to this duty I
am obliged by the laws of thankfulness, since all these other works are for
me; good reason then that I should be for God, lending my tongue and my heart
to the whole universe to love praise and bless the great and good author of
this rich and beautiful Nature. O the greatness, the goodness, the wisdom of
the incomprehensible Creator? And among all his attributes manifested in this
admirable workmanship, O how his tender mercies are over all his works? How
every part of this great work is complete? How all the parts are well sorted
together, helping and sustaining one another with a wise Economy? O if the
work be so perfect what must the workman be? If the streams be so clear what
must the source be? Upon these if we fix our meditation with a holy attention
we shall hear that speech which St John heard being rapt up in spirit. Rev.
5.3. I heard (says he) every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth,
and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them,
saying, Blessing, honor, glory, and power, unto him that sits upon the
throne and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.

From Nature looking to Providence, let us observe how notwithstanding the
opposition of spiritual malices and the preversnesse and blindness of men, yea
and by these very things, God advances his glory, maintains his truth, and
forms a secret order in confusion. For the execution of his decrees a Million
of engines are set on work subordinate or coordinate among themselves, whereby
things most remote yet meet in the order of causes to produce the effects
appointed in Gods counsel. Where the chief matter of wonder is, that many of
these causes are free agents, which doing what they will, bring forth most part
of the time that which they will not, and by the uncertainty of their giddy
agitations arrive to the certain End determined by God. Who can comprehend the
innumerable multitude of the accidents of the world, all written in Gods Book,
and dispensed by his providence, that infinitely capacious and ever watchful
wisdom, ever in action, though ever at rest; which by the order he gives to the
greatest things is not distracted from the care of the least? He makes the
heavens to move, and the earth to bear, and disposes of peace and war in the
world, and of the subsistence and revolution of Empires. Who would believe,
that at the same time he tells the number of our hairs, and that not so much as
one sparrow falls to the ground without his special appointment, but that we
are told it by his own mouth, and that our experience assures us of his care
of the least of our actions and accidents of our life? Here we must rest
amazed, but not silent; for our very ignorance must help us to admire, and
extol that depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, whose
eye and hand is in all places, whose strength sustaineth, whose providence
guides all things, and takes as much care of each of his creatures as if he
had nothing else to look to.

If our minds be swallowed up in the depths of Gods wisdom, this one depth
calls in another deep, which brings no less amazement but gives more comfort,
and that is the fatherly love of God to us his children. Ephesians. 3.18. O the
breadth, the length, the depth, the height, of the love of Christ which passes
knowledge! the breadth that embraces Jews and Gentiles, having broken the
partition wall, to make a large room to his wide love, that his way might be
known upon earth, his saving health among all Nations. Psalm 67.2. The length,
which has elected us before the foundation of the world, and will make us live
and reign with himself for ever. The depth which has drawn us out of the
lowest pit of sorrow and death; and to effect that, has drawn him down to that
low condition. The height, which has raised us up to heaven with him, and
makes us sit together with him in heavenly places.

With what miracles of mercy has he preserved his Church from the beginning of
the world? How many graces does he pour upon the several members thereof,
nourishing our bodies, comforting our souls, reclaiming us from iniquity by the
gift of repentance and faith, keeping off the malice of men and evil Angels
from us by the assistance of his good Angels, delivering our life from death,
our eyes from tears, and our feet from falling.

But before and after all other benefits, we must remember that principal
benefit never sufficiently remembered. Col. 1.12. Giving thanks unto the
Father, which has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the
Saints in light; who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has
translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son; in whom we have redemption
through his blood even the forgiveness of sins. This is the highest top of our
felicity, the main ground of the peace of the soul, and the incomparable
subject of the contentment of our minds; Yea, if we have such a deep sense of
that heavenly grace as to praise God continually for it with heart and mouth.
For as we praise God, because he blesses us, he blesses us because we praise
him; and by his praise, which is the eternal exercise of his blessed Saints we
become already partners of their employment, their peace, and their joy.

CHAP. IX. Of good Conscience.
ALl that we have said hitherto regards the Principal causes (both the
efficient and the instrumental) of the peace with God. There are other causes
which of themselves have not that virtue to produce that great peace, yet
without which, it cannot be preserved nor produced neither; these are, a good
conscience, and the exercise of good works. Not that the reconciliation made
for us with God by the merit of his Son needs the help of our works, but because
the principal point of our reconciliation and redemption is, that we are
redeemed from iniquity, which is done by the same virtue that redeemes us from
Hell, and by the same operation: For it is a damnable self-flattery and
self-deceipt for one to believe that he is reconciled with God, if he feel in
himself no conversion from that natural enmity of the flesh against God,
neither can he enjoy a true peace in his soul.

In that reconciliation God makes use of our will; for in all agreements both
parties must concur and act freely. And to make us capable of that freedom,
God by his spirit loses the bonds of our unregenerate will, naturally
enthralled to evil. But it will be better to meddle but little with the work
of God within us, and look to our own; learning the duties which we are
called unto as necessary, if we will enjoy that great reconciliation.

The first duty is to walk before God with a good conscience, for in vain
should one hope to keep it tranquil and not good: Conscience is the natural
sense of the duties of piety and righteousness, warning every man (unless he be
degenerated into a beast) to depart from evil and do good; And a good
conscience is that which obeys that sense and warning. But the ordinary use,
which I will follow, by a good conscience understands only the first part,
which is, to beware of evil.

This good conscience is so necessary for the enjoying of that peace of God
applied to us by faith, that the A postle to the Hebrews requires it that we
may stand before God with a full assurance of faith. Heb. 10.22. Let us draw
near (says he) with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, having our
hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience and our bodies washed with pure water.
And St Paul charge Timothy 1. Tim. 1.19. to hold faith and a good conscience,
which some having put away, concerning faith have made shipwreck, showing that
faith and a good conscience must go hand in hand, and that the loss of a good
conscience ushereth the loss of faith, which is consequently followed with the
loss of inward peace: Whereas a good conscience brings forth confidence, as St
John teaches us, 1. Joh. 3.21. Beloved if our heart condemn us not, then have
we confidence before God.

By a conscience that condemns us not, we must not understand a conscience
without sin, for there is none such to be found; Much less a conscience that
condemns not the sinner after he has sinned, for the best consciences are
those that forgive nothing to themselves, and pass a voluntary condemnation
upon themselves before God, by a free and penitent confession: But the good
conscience that condemns us not, according to St John's sense, is, that which
bears witness to a man to have walked in sincerity, and cannot accuse him to
have shut up his eyes (since his conversion) against the evident lights of
truth and righteousness, or to have hardened his heart against repentance after
he has offended God.

The godly man will remember that the peace between God and us was made by way
of contract, whereby God gives himself to us in his Son, and we give our
selves to him. If then any refuse to give himself to God, there is no
contract, God will not give himself to him, and so no peace, for every
contract must be mutual. When the one party offers to sign and seal, and
the other refuses it, there is no agreement. Whosoever then will covenant with
God and enjoy his peace, must to his power keep his conscience clear from all
willful violations of the conditions of the agreement; For, since this covenant
is often termed in Scripture a marriage, our soul which is the spouse of Christ
must give herself to him as Christ gives himself to her, else the marriage is
void, for it is the mutual consent that makes the marriage.

Whereupon one may say that God is more good then we are wicked, and that
while we break the contract, God remains faithful, and leaves us not every
time that we leave him. Truly, there is great need of that, otherwise this
spiritual marriage would soon end in divorce: But you know that when the faith
of matrimony is violated between husband and wife, although they be not
divorced, love decreaseth on both sides; what remains of it, is sowred with
jealous grudges, and peace dwells no more in that house.

It fares so with us when we violate the faith and love which we owe unto
God, by doing that which is displeasing unto him; God does not presently give
us the Letter of divorce, and his constancy stands firm against our ficklenes;
but he discontinueth the inward testimonies of his love, and his peace recedeth
from us; then we dare no more seek our delight in him, and cannot find it
any where else; pastimes make us sad, and when we take the air, and shift
place to find ease, we are not eased, because we carry our burden along with
us, a sad weight upon our heart, a bosome-accuser within; we come to the duty
of prayer against stomach, and return from it without comfort.

It is certain, that the eternal covenant of God cannot be disanulled by the
sins of men, as St Paul says, that the unbeleefe of the Jews could not make
the faith of God without effect. Romans 3.3. But I speak not here of the eternal
decree of God, but of the offer made of his Covenant unto the conscience, by
the word of God, and his spirit, which covenant many lightly embrace and then
break it having not maturely considered before, upon what conditions it was
offered.

Who so then will keep the peace of his conseience and his confidence with God,
must carefully keep himself from all things that displease his holy eyes, and
turn away his gracious countenance; lest when our need or our duty calls us to
draw near him by prayer, we feel our selves pulled back by a guilty fear.
Let us walk in his presence with such simplicity and integrity that at all
times we may say with David, Psalm 26.5. I will wash my hands in innocence, and
compass thine altar, O Lord; That I may publish with the voice of
thanksgiving, and tell of all thy wondrous works: O Lord, I have loved the
habitation of thy house. See what serenity, what liberty of Spirit he had got
by his innocence: He goes straight to the Altar of God, he rejoices in his
praise, he delighted in his house, he will choose it for his habitation. Evil
consciences are not capable of such a freedom with God.

David in this Text alluded to the form of the Sanctuary, which had a Laver in
the entry, where the Priests before they came near the Altar were to wash
themselves: We also, that we may keep our free access unto Christ our Altar,
must wash our hearts in innocence; If we go not through the laver, we miss our
way to the Altar: St. Paul regarded this Figure when he said, 1. Tim. 2.8. I
will, that men pray every where lifting up pure hands.

It is true, that to lift up our hands pure unto God we have need to wash them
in a better innocence then our own, and the purest have need to be washed in the
blood of Jesus Christ. David himself having said that he would wash his hands
in innocence, Psalm 26. and soon after, but as for me I will walk in mine
integrity; immediately upon that prays to God to redeem, and have mercy upon
him. Yet God requires our innocence, which he examines as a gracious Father not
as a severe Judge; he looks more to the sincerity of our hearts then the
perfection of our actions, giveing his peace to the penitent souls void of
hypocrisy. Psalm 32.2. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not
iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guile; That walks before God with
fear, knowing his infirmities, and together in confidence knowing Gods mercy
and the certainty of his promises; That has no evil end, and corrupts not
his good ends by evil ways; That chooses rather to miss the advancements of
the world then to shrink back from his duty to God, ready to suffer the loss
of all things that he way keep him. That looks upon his temporal goods without
remorse, because among them he sees nothing ill gotten; and upon his
neighbors goods without envy, because he has taken the Lord for his portion
who is rich to all that call upon him. Romans 10.12. His words agree with his
heart, and his actions with his duty. He brings his affections captive under
the the fear of God, boweth his will under Gods will, and makes all his ends
to stoop under the interest of Gods glory. He that does these things shall
never be moved: Whatsoever becomes of his temporal condition (which is better
settled by integrity then by all the tricks of the craftiest pates) he shall
possess a firm, serene, equal and tranquil spirit; He shall have peace in
war, and calm in the storm, knowing that no evil can befall him so long as
he is well with God.

CHAP. X. Of the exercise of Good works.
TO have a holy and tranquil conscience, it is not enough for us not to do
evil; we must do good. These two duties may be distinguished, but not severed.
He that does no good, of necessity does evil; for it is ill done, to do no
good. God made us not only that we should not sin (For that, it would have
bin sufficient to have given us the nature of plants or stones) but he has
given us an intelligent active nature, that we might use it to know, and love,
and serve our Maker. And since he made us after his image (for which reason
Adam is called the Son of God Luke 3.) if we will be like our Father which is in
heaven we must study to do good, for he does good continually, even when he
sends evil, which he makes an instrument of good, whether it be for justice or
mercy. Psalm 26.10. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth; and such all
our paths should be.

To this we are more especially called by our redemption whereby we are
restored into the right of Gods children which we had lost, and are purchased
to be his servants. God did not adopt us that we should be idle children:
Christ did not purchase us that we should be unprofitable servants.

Now because the life of man is laborious and always in action, we learn out
of Gods example to examine all our works severally and jointly, to see whether
they be good, and rejoice when we find them so. Thus God said, Let the light
be, and the light was, And God saw that the light was good. The like after the
works of every day of the first week. And in the end of the creation God made
a review of all that he had done; And behold all was very good; to signify
that God seeing all his works good and complete took great delight in them,
and did remunerate his own actions with the satisfaction which he he took in
his own wisdom and goodness. That we may then imitate God, let us do nothing
but good; and again when we have done it, let us see how good it is: Though it
cannot be but very defective, yet if we find in it sincerity and an ingenuous
desire to do good, we may in our measure rejoice as God did for doing good, and
shall enjoy a sweet peace within representing both in the good that we do and
in the delight that we take in well doing, the image of him that has created
and adopted us to express his likeness.

Our confidence in God by the merit of his beloved Son is the ground of true
peace and content. But that confidence is fed by works. By faith we bear
testimony to our hearts that we are reconciled with God, and by works we bear
testimony to our faith. As, by the respiration we know that a man is alive, and
by the same respiration the man is kept alive: So, the exercise of good works
is together the mark of faith, and the way to maintain that spiritual life.

As God has wisely ordered that the actions necessary for the preservation of
natural life should be done with delight; likewise, the exercise of good
works whereby the life of faith is maintained gives a singular pleasure unto
the faithful soul. Psalm 40.8. I delight to do thy will, O my God, said David.
And the Lord Jesus could say that his meat was to do the will of him that sent
him: John 4, 32. Wherefore as healthful bodies eat their meat with appetite, so
godly souls apply themselves with a holy appetite to good works. In both, it
is an inward sense of necessity that provokes the appetite, it being as
impossible to live with the life of faith without good works, as to keep the
body alive without meat or drink. And, as these satisfy the stomach, good
actions give a sweet satisfaction to the soul. But as one cannot live always
in the strength of one meal, but must take new food every day, else the body
will pine away, and die in a short time; likewise, the use of good works must
be daily: too much intermission will abate the pulse of faith; trouble will get
into the conscience, or a heavy numness, which will end in the extinction of
spiritual life, unless the appetite of doing good work (...) awakened by
repentance, and faith get new strength by good exercises.

For this exercise, the Lord Jesus gave us an example that we should follow
his steps; Who did good in the whole course of his life, and more in his death;
Who spent the night in prayer, and the day in healing the sick and converting
sinners: Who for ill words returned saving instru^^ (...); Who overcame
contempt with humility, and adversities with patience: Who did good to them
that persecuted him to death, healing the ear of Malchus that was come to take
him, and praying for them that crucified him! Who to obey God his ather
despised his own life, denied the love of himself, and made this free and
miraculous submission to God in the terrors of death, Father, not my will but
thy will be done.

The joy and glory which he got by that submission must encourage his Disciples
to prefer the obedience to God and the duty of a good conscience before all
interesses; being sure that to forsake them for God is the way to preserve
them, and that by suffering for his glory, we get glory.

The content that accreweth to the soul by tending carefully Gods service and
loving nothing like it, cannot be expressed but by those that feel it. How great
was St Paul's satisfaction when he said 2 Cor. 1.12 Our rejoicing is this, the
testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not in
fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the
world. And how sweet was his rapture of joy, when he said being near the end
of his race, 2 Timothy 4.7. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course,
I have kept the faith; Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness which the Lord the righteous judge shall give me. O what pleasure
is comparable to the testimony of a good conscience! The joy of a great
conqueror who has newly got an imperial crown, is not comparable to St Paul's
happiness when he rejoiced to have fought the good fight of faith, and stretched
himself toward the crown of righteousness laid up for him. Increase of
worldly goods increases sorrow. When they are above sufficiency, instead of
easing the mind they oppress it. Worldly pleasures are shortlived, leaving
behind them an unpleasant farewell, and often a sting of crime. Worldly
honor is wind, which either will blow a man down, or puff him up with an
unsound tumor. But godliness and good actions give a sincere joy, a solid
content a lasting peace, a satisfaction penetrating to the inmost of the soul.
This is richly expressed by Isaiah in prophetical terms, Isa. 58.10 If thou draw
out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfye the afflicted soul, then shall thy
light rise in obscurity, and thy darkness be as the noone day. And the Lord
shall guide thee continually, and satisfye thy soul in drought, and make fat
thy bones; and thou shall be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water,
whose waters fail not.

Although Devotion, and good conscience, and the practice of good works, were
sad things, as the world imagines them; yet ought we to undergo that sadness
in this life of few days, to make provision for the other life which is
eternal, since this life is a moment on which eternity depends; And we should
sow in tears to reap in joy: But seeing that a good conscience active in
piety and good works gets thereby, even in the present, a serene peace and a
heavenly comfort not credible to any but those that feel it; is it not a great
encouragement to do well, That the way to make us happy, is to make us saints?

It is none of the least arts of Satan for turning men away from the practice
of godliness and virtuous actions, to represent Devotion and virtue with an
austere habit and a sour face, enough to make children afraid, and grown men
also, many of them having with a gray beard a childish understanding,
authoritatem senum, vitia puerorum. But certainly this is a false ugly vizard
set upon a handsome and gracious face; there being nothing more serene and
pleasant then godliness and a good conscience. A good conscience is that merry
heart which is a continual feast. To do Gods will with a good will keeps a
man's heart cheerful to God, and pleasant to himself. Will you then make your
hope sure of an eternal rest, and of those pleasures for evermore at the right
hand of God? Do but take the first course to make yourselves content and
joyful in this life which is to walk before God unto all pleasing to your
power and to be rich in good works. Was there ever a more winning invitation
then this? Make yourselfe joyful and contented in this life, that you may be
eternally joyful and contented in the next.

CHAP. XI. To redress ourselves often, by Repentance.
We have meditated upon the peace of God and the way how to get it in our
souls, and keep it. That peace brings a golden serenity and a solid content to
our hearts. But because the godliest persons in this world are subject to
sin, and by sinning to trouble that peace and serenity, it is necessary to
redress ourselves often by repentance. Of that duty I have spoken in the third
chapter of this first book, as the necessary way to embrace by faith our
reconciliation with God, and a maine part of the great work of our conversion.
But after we are reconciled and converted, we are men still. Neither is any
conversion so great in this life as to root out sin altogether out of man's
nature. Whosoever then will preserve his integrity and peace (for these two
commonly go together) must have this warning continually in his mind, Let him
that thinks he stands take heed lest he fall 1. Cor. 10.12. And if he fall,
let him take up himself presently by a godly repentance. The more he esteems
himself advanced and confirmed in piety, the more let him mistrust himself
and beware of the temptations of Satan. For after holy, resolutions and
elevations of zeal and devotion, great sins very often are committed; because
then the conscience is most subject to relent, as overconfident of her good
estare; Much like besieged soldiers who after a brave sallie will remitt of
their watchfulnes, despising the enemy whom they have beaten, and in their
security are taken by surprise. Conscience will fall asicepe, but Satan never
sleeps, and never misseth to take advantage of our negligence. Heb. 12.1. Sin
that does so easily beset us says the Apostle to the Hebrews. By saying us,
he comprehends himself acknowledging that the most perfect are easily beset by
sin.

Some sins are presently felt, and leave a sting as the Scorpion does; To that
sting the remedy must presently be applied by repentance, and a faithful
recourse to Gods mercy through Christ; also the assistance of his Spirit must
be implored, else the venom will spread, and the wound become mortal. Other
sins are less felt, or creep in undiscerned, yet leave a heaviness upon the
heart, and make it slower to godliness and good works. Then the businesses of
the life intervening, the remembrance of many sins will slip out of our memory,
which nevertheless work their effect upon the conscience, blunting the sense
of piety, and setting the soul further from God.

Wherefore it is the part of a wise Christian often to revisit the state of his
conscience, call himself to account, and by a pious solicitude of repentance
pick and sift out even the least dust that sticks to us of the worlds
uncleanness and our own, scowring out that rust which conscience, like iron,
will contract, if it be not often handled.

If the unclean spirit will not dwell in a man's heart unless he find the
house empty, swept, and garnisht, Matthew. 12. that is, void of all goodness and
furnished for his turn; We must not expect that the holy Spirit will dwell in
our heart unless we bestow our best care to sweep it for him, emptyed of the
immundicities of sin, and to garnish it with holiness. He will not keep
house under the same roof with the unclean spirit. And unless we speedily put
that enemy out of doors, God may in his displeasure leave him the whole house.
Whereas if you keep it swept for God with daily repentance, he will make it his
Temple, and say, Psalm. 132.14. This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for
I delight in it. But that our hearts may be clean habitations for him, we have
need to call for the assistance of his grace. Psalm 51. Create in us a clean
heart O Lord and renew a right Spirit within us.

Since the Son of God honors us so much as to call us his friends, let us
religiously observe the laws of friendship with him. Even in humane
friendships, if we have sometimes the missorutne to give offense to one whom we
especially love and respect, we cannot be at rest till we have given him
satisfaction. And should we be so imprudent as to neglect God our great friend,
after we have offended him? Shall we let the Sun go down upon his wrath and
our offense? Let us return to him without delay, and humbly seek his peace.
The speediest reconciliations are the best.

In this return to God, which must be every day, let us call to our
remembrance all the sins of late date, and others of elder date not
sufficiently repented of, confessing them to God with contrition, and craving
pardon for them with humility and faith through the merit of his Son, which
to all repenting sinners is an exhaustible spring of mercy, open at all times.
Zechariah meant this by that Fountain opened to the house of David and to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness. And becaure many
trespasses of ours are out of remembrance, and some we have run into without
our knowledge, we must beseech God with David to cleanse us from secret faults,
Psalm 19.12. and that he be pleased to forget those sins which we have
forgotten.

To that daily return to God, some extraordinary returns must be added, where
fasting and alms be joined to prayer. Thereby these clouds shall be cleared
off, which trouble the serenity of the conscience, and the soul shall get a
great help to rejoice in the love of God and glory in his bounty.

When one is come to that blessed state of the soul, he must wipe off the
tears of repentance and drown that sadness in a thankful joy. For the
sorrow of repentance is good by accident only, because there is some evil to
be healed. It is like a medicine which gives gripings and disquieteth nature,
therefore not to be used but to recover health: Although we cannot repent too
much to have offended God, there may be excess in the sorrow of repentance. To
seek merit or ostentation in penitent sorrow, which is the face that vulgar
souls give to devotion, is making a glory of the matter of our shame, as if a
fellon had the ambition to wear the halter about his neck with a good grace.
The sorrow of repentance is an ill passage which we must of necessity go
through, if we will be saved; but we must not make that passage a dwelling
place. After we have used it to make our peace with God, we must be comforted
and rejoice in that peace. For God has not called us to sorrow, but to peace
and content; And the Gospel is the Doctrine of peace and assurance.

OF THE PEACE OF THE SOUL AND CONTENTMENT OF MIND.
SECOND BOOK. Of Man's Peace with himself, by Rectifying his Opinions.
CHAPTER I. The Design of this Book, and the next.
THe sense of our peace with God may be distinguished from the peace with our
selves, but not separated; for the peace with God being well apprehended
setleth peace in the heart between a man and his own conscience, which
otherwise is his inseparable accuser and implacable adversary.

We have spoken in the first Book of the ground and principal cause of our
inward peace which is also the end and perfection of the same, and that is our
Union with God. We have treated also of the means altogether divine and
effective of that end, which are the love of God and our neighbor, faith,
hope, and a good conscience active in good works. We intend now, with Gods
help, to speak of those subordinate causes and means, where Prudence is a
servant of Piety, to keep peace and good order within. In this great work the
handmaide shall often need her Mistrisses help; for reason not sanctified by
piety is as dangerous to use, as Antimony and Mercury not prepared.

The two great works of sanctified reason to keep inward peace and content,
are these; Not to be beaten down with adversity or corrupted with prosperity,
going through both fortuns with virtuous clear and equal temper, making profit
of all things, and fetching good out of evil.

To frame that golden temper in our mind, we must lay down before all things
for a fundamental Maxim, That all the good and evil of man's life, though it
may have its occasions without, has truly and really its causes within us;
excepting only some few casualties where prudence has no place; and yet there
is no evil but may be either prevented, or lessened, or turned into good by a
virtuous disposition.

Hence it follows that not without but within us our principal labor must be
bestowed, to take an order for our peace and content. To keep us from falls in
a long journey, if we would send before to remove all the stones out of the
way, we should never have done; but the right course is to get an able and
surefooted horse and to sit fast on him. It would be a more impossible
undertakeing in the wayfairing condition of this life to remove all temptations
and oppositions out of our way; but against these two sorts of obstacles, we
must provide a firm spirit, able to go through all, and stumbling at nothing;
but keeping every where a sure and eeven pace.

To that end let us acknowledge within us two general causes of all our
content and discontent, and all our order and disorder: The first cause is the
Opinion that we conceive of things; The second is, the Passion moved or
occasioned by that opinion. Take a good order with these two causes, you shall
be every where content, tranquil, wise, and moderate. But from the disorder of
these two causes, proceeds all the trouble of the inward polity of our minds,
and all the misrule and misery that is in the world.

It must be then our labor to order aright these two Principles of our good
and evil within us, and in the order here set down, which is essential to the
matter; Employing this second Book to get right Opinions of the things of this
world, from which men usually expect good or evil. And this will prepare us
matter for the third Book, whose task will be to set a rule to passions. For
that which sets them upon disorderly motions is the wrong opinion wherewith the
mind is possessed about the objects. And whosoever can instruct his mind with
right opinions, may after that, rule his passion with little labor.

CHAP. II. Of the right Opinion.
I Said that things exterior are the occasions of the good and evil of man,
but the causes of the same are the interior, Opinion and Passion. Now to treat
of the causes we must also treat of the occasions, as subjects of the opinion,
and objects of the passion; Not to examine them all, for they are as many as
things in the world and accidents in man's life; there is none of them
altogether indifferent to us, but are considered either as good or evil. We
will stay only upon the chief heads, and endeavor to find the true price of
things that men commonly desire, and the true harm of those things which they
fear.

In this search, I desire not to be accounted partial, if I labor to give a
pleasant face to the saddest things. It is my professed intention. For my work
being to seek in all things occasion of peace and content, why shall I not, if
I can, borrow it even from adversity? And is it any whit material whether I
find it indeed or devise it, so I can make it serve my turn! Is it not
prudence for one to be ingenious to content himself, yea though he cosen
himself to his own content? My readers may bear with me if I use them as I
use my self, who, next to the care of pleasing God, make it my chief study to
content my mind, and in all the several byasses that God puts upon the rouling
course of my life, strive to behold all accidents by the fair side; or to give
them one in my mind, if they have none. Wherein I hope to justifye the
ingenuity of my dealing, to ingenious mind, and show that I give no false
colors to evil things to make them look good. For since the good and evil
of most things consists in opinion, and that things prove good or evil as
they are taken and used, if I find good in those things which others call
evil, they become good in my respect. It is the great work of wise men to
turn all things to their advantage, subjecting exterior things to their mind,
not their mind to them, et sibi res non se rebus submittere.

This truth then ought to be deeply printed in minds, studious of wisdom and
their own content, That they bear their happiness or unhappiness within
their breast; and, That all outward things have a right and a wrong handle; He
that takes them by the right handle, finds them good; He that takes them by the
wrong indiscreetly, finds them evil. Take a knife by the haft it will serve
you, take it by the edge it will cut you.

Observe that all sublunary things are of a compounded nature; Nothing is
simple, nothing but may do good, nothing but may do harm. And so in moral
goodness or badnesse. There is no good thing but is mingled with evil: There
is no evil, but some good enters into the composition. The same truth holds in
all persons, actions, and events. Out of the worst, a well composed mind
endowed with the grace of God, may extract good with no other chemistry then
piety wisdom and serenity.

It lies in us, as we incline our minds, to be pleased or displeased with most
things of the world. This may be exemplifyed in things material and of less
importance, which may be presidents for things spiritual and of greater moment.
One that has fed his eyes with the rich prospect of delicate Countries as
Lombardy and Anjou, where all the beauties and dainties of Nature are
assembled, will another time take no less delight in a wild and rugged
prospect of high bare mountains, and fifty stories of steep rocks, as about
the grand Chartreuse, and the bottom Ardennes, where the very horror
contributes to the delectation. If I have bin delighted to see the trees of my
Orchard, in spring blossomed, in summer shady, in autumn hung with fruit; I
will delight again, after the fall of the leaf, to see through my trees new
prospects which the bushy boughs hid before; and will be pleased with the
sight of the snow candied about the branches, as the flowers of the season.
This is better then to consider in deserts nothing but their hideousness and
barrenness, and in winter nothing but the rheumatique weather.

If a facile and well composed mind take delight in these varieties of nature,
why not in the varietyes of his condition? When he is rich, he will delight in
the service of his men; When he falls to poverty, he will delight to help
himself, finding that he is the sooner obeyed and more to his mind. If he
has children, he will delight to provide for them; If God take them from him,
he will rejoice that they are provided for. If he obtain a beloved woman, he
finds his content increased; If he miss her, he finds his care diminisht. If he
be near his friends, he injoyes gladly their love and presence; If he be far
from them, he sees no more their distresses. One time he loves health, because
it makes life sweeter; Another time he will love sickness, because it will
bring a happy death. That man's patience was ingenuous, who having put out his
eye falling upon his own staff, gave God thanks that his staff was not
forked, so he might have put out both his eyes with that fall.

There is nothing where a well instructed mind may not find matter of some
content and comfort. A truth presupposed by St. Paul when he teaches to
rejoice evermore, 1 Thessalonians. 5.16. yea and glory in tribulations. Romans 5.3. For
when God multiplyeth his trials to his children he makes his comforts to
abound much more. Of which they deprive themselves who in their fortunes look
only upon the sad side, and are ingenious to vex themselves. The occurrences
of this life having many faces, a wise man will always entertain the best.
And in my opinion it should not be a hard matter to obtain of ourselves, to
give always sentence in our own favor.

Yet this must be used with some distinction. For in those evils which consist
in our own fault, we must always consider the evil as great as it is, and
give sentence against our selves; for the way to be absolved of God is, to
condemn ourselves before him. In that case he that is against himself does
much for himself. But as for the evils that come to us by accident or by the
fault of another, we must always lessen the evil and be partial for our
selves through humility, meekness, patience, yea and forgetfullnesse; for so
shall we give judgment in our favor, the mild part being that which must
work our content. Whereas he that aggravates evils with his imagination, and
makes his spite, and appetite of revenge to be as hammers to knock in deeper
the arrows that are shot against him, gives sentence against himself, and
takes part with his enemies to work his own discontent.

These considerations must be further insisted upon in their proper place. I
use them here only as instances of the benefit of opinion when it is well
taught, and the harm of the same when it follows a wrong information.

To get a right Opinion, the contemplation by which Epictetus begins and
grounds his Book, of most rare excellency, must be maturely and diligently
studied. For if we bestow but a little Christian dress upon it, it will be a
perpetual and infallible rule for the right valuing of all things, and so will
prove a singular help for the clearenesse and tranquillity of mind. Here it is.

In the universality of things some are in our power, some are not: Such as are
in our power are Opinion, appetite, desire, aversion, and all our inward and
outward actions [By our power I mean not our mere natural power, which is
weak and prone to evil, but the regenerate power strengthened with Gods grace,
which assisting our natural freedom gives it both to will and to do according
to his good pleasure. Phil. 2.13. Wherefore the Christian has more power over
his opinions, passions, and motions then Epictetus, who had but the natural
power.] The things that are not in our power, are money, glory, empires, and
generally all things that are none of our works.

Those things that are in our power are free by their nature, and cannot be
hindered by any but our selves, or at least without our consent: For although
the world and the Devil seduce our opinions and tempt our affections, they
cannot get any victory over us, unless we lend our hand to it. But as for the
things that are out of our power, they are weak, subject to servitude, exposed
to opposition and hindrances, and depend of the power of another.

We must then hold this for certain, that if we take things subject to
servitude, to be free; and things that depend of another, to be ours; we cannot
but meet often with oppositions and obstructions in our designs. We shall
lament and torment our selves, we shall accuse men, and murmr against God.
But if we account that only to be ours which is ours indeed as depending of
us, and look upon all that depends not of us as being nothing to us, we can
lose nothing, we shall not afflict our selves for any thing in the world, the
spoiling of worldly goods that are about us shall not wrong or deject us, for
that cannot be taken from us which is none of ours.

That consideration will do us great and good service in this Treatise. And to
begin, let us make use of Epictetus his distinction for the distribution of
the principal things about which we have need to rectify our opinion, that we
may be wise and tranquil every where.

The things that depend not of us are either the goods of fortune (as they are
called) which are riches, honor, friends, and family; Or goods of the body, as
beauty, strength, health, pleasure and life it self; As these things depend
not of us, no more do their contraryes, poverty, dishoner, enemies, loss of
friends, deformity, pain, sickness and death. When one has those former at
will, that state is called prosperity the latter, pass under the name of
adversity.

The things that depend of us, or rather of the grace of God in us, which
becomes the best part of ourselves are piety, honesty, wisdom, diligence, and
their contraries depend of us, also, yet with some dependence from outward
agents, the world and the Devil.

There be other things of a mildle rank, which partly depend of us, partly not,
and therefore are ours only in part, as learning and capacity where industry
and diligence may do much, but nothing against or without nature, and they are
lost by age and sickness, and other outward causes.

Let us review this order with more leisure, and weigh the price and
inconvenience of each thing; for without that, it is impossible to behave our
selves about them with a judicious tranquillity. We begin with things
belonging to prosperity.

CHAP. III. Of Riches.
OF things that depend not of us, the most remote from us are the goods of
fortune; The goods of the body are nearer, for our body is the house of our
mind, which is our trueselfe, and whose goods are properly ours. Yet such is
the imprudence of men, that they are most busy about that which is most remote,
and neglect that which is nearest and most essential to them; for the goods of
the body, neglecting those of the mind; and for the goods of fortune,
neglecting those of the body; They will forfeit their conscience to please and
serve their body, and hazard their body to get or preserve the goods of
fortune. Whereas they should follow a clean contrary order, hazarding and
neglecting their body, if need be, for the good of the mind, and the goods of
fortune for both. [Here I say once for all, that by fortune I understand not
blind chance, since Gods providence rules all, but the exterior of a man's
condition as it is distinct from those things which properly belong to the body
and the mind.]

So far I will comply with the humor of the world as to speak of riches in
the first place, for it is that they seek before all things, showing by their
actions, which always must be believed rather then words, that they hold it
the first and chief good. Pecunia ingens generis humani bonum. An error, that
has provoked some to oppose it with another error, saying that money is the
root of all evil. St. Paul decides the difference, saying that the love of
money is the root of all evil; 1 Timothy 6. the love of money, not money it
self. It is not wealth that does the mischief but the weakness of men that
cannot wield it, coveting it with greediness, purchasing it with wicked ways,
employing it in unjust actions, keeping it with trouble, and losing it with
despair.

Riches are good, but in the lowest rank of all goods; for they have no place
among laudable goods, there being no praise to be rich; Nor among goods
desirable for their own sake, for they are desired because of other things. It
is not nature but custom and fancy that gives price unto gold and silver,
instead of which shells are used for commerce in some part of the East Indyes.
But for fancy, a bar of Iron would be more precious then a wedge of Gold.

In one point, as indeed in all other respects, money is inferior to other
goods, as health, honor, and wisdom; that whereas one may enjoy them by
keeping, and increase them by using, one must lose his money to enjoy it, and
part with it to use it.

But in two things especially the imperfection of riches is seen; that they
satisfye not the desire, and that in the greatest need which is the redemption
of the soul, they are of no use, rather a hindrance.

True goods are those that make the possessors good, which riches do not. They
are indeed instruments of good in the hands of those that can uve them well;
But they are instruments of evil, in the hands of those that know not how to
use them. And the number of these last being the greater by far, riches do
much more evil then good in the world. They stir up folly, lust, and pride,
and open a wide gate to wickedness, yet themselves not wicked of their nature.
To a well composed and disposed mind they are excellent helps to virtue, for
they afford means for good education and matter for good actions. Wisdom and
riches together is a fair match. The rich and wise Solomon speaks thus of it
by his experience, Eccl. 7.11. Wisdom is good with an inheritance, and by them
there is profit to them that see the Sun, for wisdom is a defense, and
money is a defense, the excellency of knowledge is, that wisdom gives life to
them that have it.

The French version of that Text says that Riches cover the owners, So they
do, but it is as the shell covers a snaile, for they are a heavy toilesome
luggage, wherewith a man can advance but slowly, and without which he cannot
go; And if they shelter him from some injuries, they expose him to other; they
provoke envy, and are a fair butt for fraud and insolency: So to go one step
further in the comparison; that shelter may be broken upon a man's back, and he
crushed under it.

To know the just price of riches, reckon what they cost both to get and to
keep, what pains there is to get them, what danger and care in the keeping,
what unsatisfaction in the enjoying, what uncertainty in the possession; Prove.
23.6. for they make themselves wings (says Solomon) which no humane art can
clip; A thousand accidents, which no prudent forecast can prevent, make them
suddenly flee away. The worst is, that they distract the mind from the true
goods; for they that have got them and possess them most innocently, if they
will preserve them and keep them from sinking (which they will naturally do)
must apply their mind to them, and much more, if they will increase them. Which
interposition of the earth cannot but eclipse the clear light of the mind,
and hide heaven from the sight of the soul. This made the Lord Jesus to speak
this sentence confirmed with an oath and a repetition. Matthew. 19.23. Verily I
say unto you, that a rich man shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of heaven.
And again I say unto you, It is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a
needle, then for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God. And truly
although riches of themselves be not evil, but be as the mind of him that
possesses them is, good to him that uses them well, evil to him that uses
them ill, yet the Devils haunting of gold mines, and places where money and
plate is hid, gives a probable suspicion that the Devil sticks by riches, and
breaths upon them the air of his malignancy.

Let every wiseman consider whether he will bestow for them as much as they
cost, that is, whether he will weary his body, vex his mind, offer violence
to his conscience, bring his heavenly soul captive under the things of the
earth, and be diverted from seeking the goods which are only permanent and
true to them that have them once, to run after deceitful goods which are
none of ours even when we have them; of which the keeping is uncertain, and
the loss certain, though we might avoid the ordinary daingers, whereby
foolish rich men destroy their wealth, and their wealth destroys them.

The just measure of riches, is, as much as one needs for his use, for that
which is above use, is of no use. How they must be used we shall consider, when
we treat of Passions. Here we seek only to know their price.

CHAP. IV. Of Honor, Nobility, Greatness.
THe proper rank of worldly honor is next after riches, for it is to them
chiefly that honor is deferred. Without them the honor done to Virtue is but
words. Indeed the honor that follows is but smoke, but yet smoke has some
substance, words have none.

Of honor gotten by virtue, and of its right worth, something must be said
when we speak of Renown. Here we have to do with that outward garish luster
which dazleth the eyes of the vulgar, gets salutations, and opens a lane
through the crowd for a noble person. Riches are to honor that which the bones
are to the body, for they keep it up: When honor loses riches it falls to the
ground, like hops without poles. Nobility with poverty does but aggravate it,
and make it past remedy; A misery described in two words by Solomon, Prove.
12.9. Honoring ones self, and lacking bread.

In time of peace it is wealth that brings nobility and greatness; In time of
war it is violence: for, by invasions, high titles and royalties of Lordships
had their beginning. We may then value Nobility by its causes, for wealth has
nothing praise worthy, and it is the origin of new Nobility: Invasion is mere
Injustice, and it is the Origin of ancient Nobility so much cried up.

There is a natural Nobility consisting in generosity, and a nobility by grace
which is our adoption to the right of Gods children; These two together make a
man truly noble. Civil nobility is nothing in nature, and consists merely in
the opinion of men and custom of nations. We deduce it from masculine
succession, but in some Kingdoms of the East they derive it from the feminine,
because every one is more certain of his Mother then his Father. In China,
learning, not extraction, gives nobility. In some places nobility consists in
merchandise. In some the military profession, in some in leading an idle life.
Which different customs show that worldly nobility lies altogether in fancy,
and in effect is nothing.

Yet such as it is, it proves a goodly ornament to Virtue; it is like enamell
which being of small value sets off the luster of Gold. It adds grace
facility and power to virtuous actions. Many virtues are obscured or altogether
hid by poverty and mean condition. Sobriety in a poor man is imputed to
indigence, continence to want of power, patience to baseness. But these
virtues become illustrious and exemplary, when humility meets with greatness,
and temperance with power; Virtue then shines when it is set in a high Orb,
where a man takes for the measure of his desires, not what he can, but what he
ought to do,. A right good man, being high and rich, has great helps to do
good, and power prompts him both with the occasion and the desire.

On the other side, when greatness and means meet with a weak and perverse
spirit, it does harm in the world. And such are most men, whose vicious
affections appear not when they are kept under by poverty and obscurity, but
when they rise, their vices will rise with them. As Organs ill set, and ill
tuned, show not their defect while the bellows lie down unstirred; but when
the wind is blown into the pipes, they gall the ears of the hearers by their
discord and harshnesse. Likewise many vices lie mute and quiet, till the wind
of honor and plenty get into them, and blow up an ill composed mind with
audaciousnesse, rashness, and discordance with himself, which rises too high
with pride, and together falls too low by miserableness, and where all is out
of tune by lust, insolence, and intemperance.

But even those that were evil before, unless they have constant minds, and
thoroughly dyed with piety, will be corrupted by honor and plenty. For all men
whom we call good are prone to evil, and no greater invitation to evil then
facility.

And if great honor (which is never without great business) does not corrupt
a man, it does interrupt him; and as it gives him means to do good, it takes
off his mind from thinking of it, and many times binds his hands from doing
that good which he intends, by reason of the diversity of business and several
inclinations of men which he must accommodate himself unto; it being certain
the greater a man is, the more he is a slave. And it is in the highest
condition that a man has most reason to say after St. Paul Romans 7.19. The good
that I would I do not, but the evil which I would not that I do. One is
constrained to court those whom he despises, favor those whom he fears,
shut his eyes many times to see neither vice nor virtue, till one use himself
in good earnest to prefer convenience before righteousness; There a man's
life is a continual Pageant of dissimulation, which he knows in others, and
returns it to them, who also know it in him, yet both parties put on the face
of respect and kindness over an arrogant and mischievous mind, and embrace
those whom they would have choked.

There also when a man would do good to others, very often he does harm to
himself. To advance one man's suite he must put back and discontent many, and
get ten enemies for one friend, who will less remember the good office, then
the others the injury which they think to have received by the repulse. Truly
high places are not fit for true friendship, for they take away the freedom
from it, and by consequent the sweetness and the right use. In the throng of
business and company, the mind loses its tranquillity; And many times after
one has lost his rest he loses his labor also. It is a great misery for a
man to be never his own, and to have no time to think of God, of which when one
discontinueth the use, he loses in time the desire of it, and too many
acquaintances make one a stranger with God: Paucos beavit aula, plures
perdidit; Sed et hos quoque ipsos quos beavit perdidit. The Court advances but
few persons, and destroys many but even those which it advances it
destroys and spoyleth; for most men as they grow in height decrease in
goodness, and many times in estate; like squibs which consume themselves as
they ascend.

It is in few men's choice, whether they may be great or no, some being borne to
it and obliged by their birth to maintain their condition. Others being borne
far under it, and there kept by invincible necessity. Yet among great and
small, some still are in possibility to raise their degree and come to greater
place. And whereas it is in the choice of few persons whether they shall be
great, it is in the choice of all, whether they will be ambitious, and aspire
to high and negotious places. Let a wise man consider whether honor be worth
as much as it costs to get and to keep; whether he would lose his rest for it,
leave conversing with God to converse with men, run the danger to become
wicked to become great, and among the justlings of envy be always ready to
fall and break his neck. Let him weigh in the scales of a right judgment the
respect and Opinion of others, against so much personal care, peril, and loss.

A middle degree of quality, enough to stand a little out of the dirt, is
commodious and desirable. The degrees above and beneath are slavery. But a wise
and pious man finds liberty and nobility in any degree.

CHAP. V. Of Glory, Renown, Praise.
FRom the honor that attends greatness and riches we pass to that which is
deferred to Virtue, or that which bears the name of it. For this second sort
of honor many generous spirits have contemned the first, and greatness, and
riches, and life too; dying willingly that they night have glory, when they
shall be past having any thing in this world.

Wise Solomon says, that a good name is rather to chosen then great riches,
Prove. 22.1. And better then be precious ointment, Eccl. 7.1. The goodness of
it lies in some facility that it gives to do good, for when men's minds are
possessed with a good opinion of a person they are susceptible of his counsels.
Thereby also a man may better his condition.

The content that a good action gives to the doer is a real and solid good, but
the content that the reputation of it gives, is vain and deceitful: If the
Renown be for vain things, such as most things are in the world, it can yield
but a contentment like itself, and though it be raised by real virtue, yet
reputation is but discourse and the Opinion of others; It is hollow meat, and
who so will feed upon it will soon be like that hungry Dreamer of whom Isaiah
speaks, who dreams that he is eating, but he awakes and his soul is empty.
Isa. 29.8. A wise and good man looks for a better reward of his virtue then
the talk of the world. No action is good if it be don for praise, or if
approbation be sought of any but God and ourselves. John 5.44. How can ye
believe (says Christ) which receive honor one of another; and seek not the
honor that comes from God only? Our actions ought to be such as to be of
good savor, before the world, else they can do no good in the world: But that
good savor must be sought as an accessory, not a principal, and must be
rejected, when instead of an accessory it becomes a hindrance and a bar from
the the principal, which is the glory of God and a good conscience: Let that
witness bear testimony to our selves, and let men say of us what they will. My
Opinions and Affections if they be good, make me good and happy, not the
Opinion of my neigh bours.

A wise man must subject reputation to himself, not himself to her. If he can
make her run before him as his Harbinger, to prepare for him an accommodation
wheresoever he goes and get him a room in the judgments and affections of
men, it will be a prudent course. And it will be a point of prudence not to
hunt reputation too eagerly: for Reputation is well compared to our shadow,
she flees from us when we run after her, and runs after us when we run from
her. She will go more willingly where you would have her, if she go not of your
errand but of her self, and does better service when one thinks not of her.
If she be desired it is for something else; but to court her for her own sake,
it is more then she deserves. A virtuous man will disdain to do so much, when
he observes that she is more apt to speak of frivolous then serious matters,
and will many times put a gloss of praises upon evil things. What a coil
does Roman antiquity keep, about that harebrain'd girl Clelia for stealing a
horse out of Porsena's Camp, where she was an hostage, and foording a River
none of the greatest to return to her Mothers chimney-corner? For that action
against the public faith, rash, ungenerous, injust, and especially immodest
in a maid, her statue on horseback was publicly set in the Market place, and
fame is trumpetting her praise to the worlds end. It were easy to name many
both of old and late date, that have got reputation at a very easy rate. How
many famous men are like boys crackers, that give a great report without
effect? How many toys are talked of and extolled, while grave works are
buried in silence? Since Fame has trumpets, it is no wonder that she fills
them with wind; that goes far and fast by its leightnesse, and is fit to
make a noise. But a solid virtue makes little noise, and the tongues of the
vulgar do so much for her, as to let her alone.

The Renown of great and good things advances but slowly, but recompenceth her
slownes by her long lasting. But even in that long lasting there is vanity, for
what benefit is it for virtuous men deceased, that the world speaks of them
two thousand years after their death? Are their souls more glorious for it in
heaven? Are their bodies the less cold in the grave? Yet for that hope of an
outliving useless renown gallant men will climb up a breach through a thick
hail of musket shot and grenades, that the world may say of them, These
gentlemen are dead in the bed of honor: O brave men! It is pity that these
praises make not these brave men to rise from the dead for joy, preserve not
their flesh from worms and putrefaction, and make no roses nor violets grow
upon their graves. Well let us pay them that praise which they have so dear
bought. O brave men! But let us say also, O the folly of men, who having fed
themselves with vanity in their life time, will not end their vanity with their
lives, but seek to perpetuate it by their death.

It were strange that praise should do good to the dead, since it does more
harm then good to the living. For one that is encouraged with praise to do
well, a thousand are thereby puffed up with pride. It is hurtful to weak spirits
and troublesome to the strong. If praise were a real good, every one ought to
praise himself, as one feeds himself. And none ought to be ashamed to hear
or speak his own praise, for none ought to be ashamed of good things. That
shame, is a proof either that praise is not good or that it belongs not to us.

This deserves a deeper consideration. Glory and praise among men are of those
shades and images of divine attributes scattered in this inferior world; of
which shades the substance and reality is in God. Glory in him is a substance,
yea his own essence, and to him alone all Glory belongs. The sparks of
glory that are in creatures are rays of that sovereign splendor. Now these
rays go not straight like those of the Sun, they go round and fetch a
compass to return to the principle of their being. Ps. 145.10. All thy works
shall praise thee O Lord, and thy Saints shall bless thee. Since his works
praise him by nature, his Saints must praise him by will. Those streakes of
glory that are in his creatures, as coming from him, must return to him by
nature or by will. For although man be not able to give any glory to God by
praising God, yet God knows how to receive from us that glory which we cannot
give him, and to make himself glorious in his own works.

Here is then the reason why men are desirous of praise and glory, and yet are
ashamed of it: Their desire of it is a natural sense that it is good; And that
they are ashamed of it, is another natural sense that it was not made for them.
Wherefore a wise Christian will desire and seek the glory of God: And when
some image of that glory is given him by the praises of men, he will presently
bring that praise and glory to God as Gods proper goods, saying, Glory is a
Crown that was not made for my head, and on my knees I put it on the head of
him to whom it properly belongs.

Such is praise in its Original and End, both which do meet; but being
considered in its inferior causes and conveighances, as it comes from and
through men, it is a tide of popular applause, as subject to go down as to
come up, consisting in fancy, expressed in talk, rising upon small causes, and
upon small causes falling again. We must make more of our content then to
pin it upon such an uncertain possession; never reckoning among our goods a
thing lying in the Opinion of another, and remaining in the possession of the
person that gives it, for humane praise belongs not to him that is praised but
to him that praises, since every one is or ought to be master of his Opinions
and words. They that give us praise retain it in their power and may take it
from us when they please.

CHAP. VI. Of the goods of the Body, Beauty, Strength, Health.
FRom the goods of Fortune which are altogether out of us and many times
consist in imagination, we come to the personal: beginning by those of the body.

The first is Beauty, which among bodily goods may be called the first gift of
God, and the first advantage of nature. I say not, that it is the principal,
for health is far above it in excellency. But it cannot be denied that it is
the first, since God has placed it in the entry, and on the front of this
building of the flesh.

Beauty at the very first meeting winnes the good Opinion of beholders, and
gives an advantageous preconceit of a fair mind. Beauty is a sign of
goodness of nature. The sweet vigor of the eyes, the smoth skin, the lively
white and red, the handsome lineaments of the face, and the comely proportion
of the body are marks of a quick and well composed mind. Which yet is not
peculiar to Beauty: For many persons in whom melancholy is predominant, which
tanneth their skin, sets their eyes deep in their head, and puts a sowreness
on their brow, have a penetrating and judicious understanding. Open faces,
which are the most beautiful, have commonly candid and serene souls, but none
of the craftiest.

The observation that Pride is a companion to Beauty is not naturally true, but
by accident; for beautiful persons being praised and admired of all, who can
wonder that they grow proud, since so much pain is taken to make them so?

A good presence is well sorted with valor and wisdom, and does excellent
service to brave men, if they spoil it not by affectation.

Beauty is the loadstone of Love; which courts her and calls its her fair Sun.
And so she is, for it gets heat by Beauty. And as the heat caused by the Sun is
allayed when the Sun is set, so does the heat kindled by Beauty lose its
flame when Beauty its gone. When love outlives Beauty, some other causes must
keep it alive, as virtue and utility.

Beauty is among desirable goods, not among the laudable; for nothing is
laudable in us but the productions of our will and industry. For which reason
handsome women ought to reject praises of their Beauty; for either these
praises are injurious to God, who as the Author ought to have the whole praise
of his work; or they are injurious to them, and seem to presuppose that they
have made their beauty, and sophisticated nature by art; for none ought to be
praised for that he has not done.

Great and rare Beauty in its nature is desirable, but by accident; and as the
world goes, it is more to be feared then desired, and does more harm then
good. It is hurtful to the person that is endowed with it, for it exposes her
to temptations and insolence, which commonly make her wicked and miserable. It
is hurtful to the person that woeth it or enjoys it, for it sets him as a
mark for injuries. Many might have led a tranquil life, and escaped discredit,
quarrel, ruin, and stabbing in the end, had not their wives bin too handsome.

But though beauty were not cumbered with all this danger, the nature and price
of it must be well considered, that we may not expect of it a contentment
beyond its kind. Beauty is the exterior and superficial ornament of a sickly
and mortal body, the inside whereof is unpleasing to the eye, and would make
the hearts rise of the admirers of the outside if they could see it. It is a
fair blossom only for the spring of life, which will fade with age, or wither
with sickness and cares, in the very spring. It is a cheater, which promises
much, and keeps not promise, for the most amorous never found in it a delight
answerable to the desire that it kindles. Take the right measure of the
goodness of that so much desired possession of beauty, so shall you not desire it
above measure; and when you have it, you shall reap from it a more sincere
content, because you shall require of it as much as its nature affords, and no
more.

Strength also and Health are things desired, not laudable, as things that come
by nature, not by will.

Great strength of body is commonly accompanied with a weak mind; and that
disproportion is augmented with much feeding, and obliges nature to bestow the
maine Magazine of spirits upon disgestion distribution of meat, and hardening of
the brawnes of the limbs, to enable them for strong labor, leaving but few
spirits to attend reasoning and contemplating. Speak to perpetual hunters, of
the delight of speculation; you shall find them little more capable of it then
their hounds, which are the highest point of their meditation. To their mind
is very convenient the definition which Aristotle gives to the Soul, that it is
the first act (that is the principle of the motion) of an organical body; for
their soul seems to be made for no other end but to move their body. It is
certain that too great exercise of the body dulls the mind. The preheminency
of man above beasts consists in reason, and the capacity of knowing and
loving God. Men that are proud of their strength, robore corporis stolide
feroces, placing their advantage and content in a thing wherein they are
inferior to many beasts, descend from their dignity and take place under their
natural subjects. He that with his forehead would knock a great nail into a
post, to the very head, deserved this praise, that next to a Bull he had the
hardest head of all beasts.

Health of all goods of the body is most to be desired, yea more then life; A
truth not contradicted by the known Maxim, that the end is better then the
means, for I hold not health to be subordinate unto life, but life unto
health. Being is the means, and well being is the end. Non est vivere sed
valere vita. So Mecenas must be left to his own Opinion and desire, who though
he were maimed hands and feet, and had all his teeth loose in his head, and a
bunch on his crooked back, would think himself well, if he had but life; Yea
if by enduring the sharpest tortures of the cross he might keep life he would
willingly endure them. His enemies could wish him no greater harm, then to buy
life at that rate.

The body being made for the soul, the true natural benefit of Health is not
long life, but the liberty of the actions of the mind. For the mind sticks so
to the body that it cannot act very freely in a body tormented with acute
pain, or pined with a lingering disease. Wherefore that we may go through that
necessary captivity as easily as may be, an especial care must be had of the
health of our body; taking all occasion from it, of accusing the excesses and
ill government of the mind, for the corruption and inflammation of the
humors; behaving ourselves with our body, not as living for it, but as unable
to live in the world without it. Our mind was made for a better end then to
serve the flesh. Yet let us give it faithfully its due, as to the horse that
carries us in our journey: It must be fed and tended, else it will fail us in
the way.

Curious persons commit two faults about the care of their bodies. They bestow
much cost and labor to adorn them, but they neglect their health, exposing
themselves half naked to cold air to show a fine half shirt, as if they
furnished their rooms with rich hangings, and suffered the rain to fall on
them for want of repairing the roof. In matter of clothes, health and
commodity are the best counselors, not the eyes and Opinions of strangers.

Health must be acknowledged the richest jewel of all temporal things, yea
preferable to many ornaments of the mind. He that has got much learning in
the Tongues, and has diseased his body with watching, has lost more then he
has got.

But the healthfullest body of the world is a tottering house which must every
day be underpropt with food, and (for all our care) will fall in the end. We
must look upon it as a tenement at will, which we hold under God our Landlord;
not fearing but rejoicing that we must leave it, knowing that if our earthly
house of this tabernacle were disolved, we have a building of God, a house not
made with hands eternal in the heavens. 2 Cor. 5.1.

LIFE, I set neither among goods nor among evils, for it is neither good nor
evil in itself, but the subject of good and evil, like the painters cloth
where all sorts of colors are couched. Such as it is, it must be put in the
rank of those things that depend not of our will, and therefore must not be
accounted ours, but used as a borrowed commodity. We must say more of it, when
we speak of Death.

CHAP. VII. Of bodily Pleasure and Ease.
OF all arguments of meditation there is none where writers show less
sincerity then in this. Every one blames pleasure and ease, and yet every one
seeks it. They tell us that it is the cause of all evil, that it poisoneth
the passion, that it blinds reason, that it is an enemy to good counsel, aad
that it is impossible for Virtue to stand with Volupty; Yet the same Authors,
love their ease, and their very discourses of ease are effects of ease, and
productions of wits sweetened by prosperity.

Then they charge pleasure with the vices of men, whereas it is not pleasure
but men that must be blamed: For pleasure does not corrupt men, but men corrupt
pleasure. It must be acknowledged good in it self. It is the seasoning that
God all-wise and all-good has given to things profitable and actions
necessary, that we should seek them. Look upon a brave horse with a judicious
eye: After you have considered his great use, and praised the bounty of God for
making an animal of so much service and commodity to man; praise God again for
making him so handsome and of such a gallant mettle; And acknowledge that the
gracious Creator regarded as well man's delectation as utility. The delicious
taste of fruits, the fragrant smell and gay colors of flowers, the fair
prospect of groves, meadows, calm and clear waters, and all the delicate
variety of Nature, speak very expressly that God, as an indulgent Father, has
taken great care to please and recreat us, and condemns that sad and sour
wisdom which deemeth to merit much by avoiding (at least in show) all that is
pleasing in Nature. Of that kind, is this prayer which may be read in many
Books of devote contemplation, Lord give me grace to be delighted in no
earthly thing: Which is as much as saying to God, that he was much overseen
when he made his works good and pleasant, since it is ill done to delight in
them, That devotion wants common sense, if it be serious, and more if it be
hypocritical.

We must then place bodily pleasure among the goods but among the least, and
those in which beasts have more share then men. The more pleasures are simple
and natural, (as they are among beasts) the more they are full and sincere. But
we by our wit make a toil of a pleasure, and drown nature in art.

He that can set a right value upon Beauty, Health, and Strength, of which we
spoke lately, may easily do the same of the pleasure which they are capable to
give or to receive. If then these qualities be but weak transitory and of
short continuance, they cannot yield or feel a pleasure, solid, constant, and
permanent. Health, the best of the three, is rather a privation of disease then
a pleasure, and it makes the body as sensible of pain as of delight, of which
many that enjoy a perfect health are deprived.

It is a great abatement of the price of bodily pleasure, that one must seldom
use it to use it well, yea and to preserve it, for the excess of it is
vicious, be the way never so lawful; and the satiety of it breeds
sastidiousnesse and weariness. Whereas true pleasure consisting in the
knowledge and love of God, one cannot sin, by excess, nor lose the relish of
it by fullness; but the appetite is increased, and the faculty mended by
enjoying.

Pleasures of the body, though in themselves good and desirable, are given by
God for something else, and to invite us to actions of necessity or utility:
But spiritual pleasure, which is to know and love God, is altogether for it
self, and for nothing beyond it: for there the pleasure is so united with the
duty, that the glory which we give to God, and that which we enjoy by knowing
and loving him, are sweetly confounded together and become but one thing.

This consideration, that bodily pleasures are appointed for a further end,
helps much to understand their price and their use. For the pleasure of the
taste is to invite the appetite to eat, eating is to live, living is to serve
God; and between these two last, there are other subordinations, for many
actions of life are for the domestical good, domestical good for the civil,
the civil good for the religious. Bodily pleasure standing naturally on the
lowest round of this ladder, is removed out of its proper place, when it is
placed above the superior ends; which is done, when the actions of life which
are due to the domestical and civil good, and before and after all to the
religious, are employed to make a principal end of those things that are
subordinate to them as inferior means. For we must desire to eat for to
live, not to live for the pleasure of eating, and so of other natural
pleasures, the desire whereof becomes vicious, when those things to which by
nature they ought to serve, are subjected unto them.

Pleasures are good servants but ill Masters. They will recreate you when you
make them your servants: But when you serve them they will tyrannize over you.
A voluptuous nice man is always discontented and in ill humor. Where others
find commodity he finds incommodity. He depriveth himself of the benefit of
simple and easy pleasures. He loses pleasure by too much seeking. By soothing
up his senses he diseaseth them, and pain penetrates sooner and deeper into a
body softened with voluptuousness. But he that less courteth pleasure enjoys
it more, for he is easily contented. To live at ease in the world we must
harden our body, strengthen our mind, and abridge our cupidity.

In nothing the folly and perversity of the world is so much seen as in this,
that of the things which Gods indulgence has given to man for his solace and
recreation he makes the causes of his misery, the baits of his sin, and the
matter of his condemnation; for, from the abuse of pleasure proceeds the
greatest part of the evils that are in the world, both the evils which men
suffer and those which they commit; Yea, from thence all evils proceed, if we
remount to the first sin.

Therefore a wise man will abstain from unlawful pleasures, and taste the
lawful with moderation, lest that by excess he make them unlawful. Knowing
that pleasure which strayeth from duty ends in sorrow; that it is no gallantry
to offend God; and that no delight can countervaile the loss of the serenity
of conscience. Vice it self will teach us virtue: For when we see the slaves
of voluptuousnes, get in that service a diseased body, a sad heart, a troubled
conscience, infamy, want, and brutality, we find it an ill bargain to buy
pleasure at so dear a rate.

This observation also will be of some help for the valuation of pleasure.
That the pleasures that stick most to the matter are the most unworthy, as all
the pleasures of the taste and feeling; and those pleasures that recede further
from the matter are more worthy as the pleasures of the sight: Wherefore the
pleasure of hearing is yet more worthy, as having more affinity with the mind.
And as they are more worthy they are also more innocent. But in all things
excess is vicious.

As excess in pleasures is vicious, so is the defect. For God has made many
handsome and good things to please us, in which nevertheless we take no
content, and many times reject them out of niceness. How many perfect works
of God strike their image into our eyes, and yet enter not into our thoughts?
How many conveniences are sent to us by Gods good hand, sufficient to fill our
minds with comfort and thankfulness, if we had the grace to consider them; and
we think not of them though we make use of them. We are so enchanted with false
pleasures that we lose the taste of the true. But a wise man is innocently
inventive to solace himself, and finds every where matter of pleasure. All
things without smile upon him, because his spirit is smiling within; and he
lends to objects his own serenity, whereby he makes them pleasant.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Evils opposite to the forenamed Goods.
IT is to make the title short, that I call them evil, not to condemn without
appeal and informatition all that is not in the list of the goods of fortune
and goods of the Body. By looking upon these goods we may judge of their
opposites: An easy work, for having found nogreat excellency in these goods
and no solid content in the possession of them, it follows that to be without
them is no great misery.

They must be viewed impartially, for there is both good and evil every where,
although to speak Philosophically and properly, the true evil and the true
good lie within us. The silly vulgar cannot comprehend that a man can find his
happiness and unhappiness within himself, and seek their good abroad where
it is not; toyling, sweating, and wearing out their life with labor in that
quest and making themselves misetable out of fear of misery. Whereas most
accidents without are neither Good nor evil in themselves, and become good or
evil to us according to the disposition of our minds. And of things within us,
there are but two in themselves evil, Sin, and Pain.

Stoicians will not acknowledge pain to be evil, because it sticks to the
body only, which, say they, is man's lodging not man himself. But what-man
feels all the incommodities of that lodging* The soul is tied by personal Union
with the senses and really suffers what they suffer. So to maintain, that
pain is not evil when one feels it, commanding the outward countenance to
unmoovednesse in the midst of the sharp torments of the stone and the gout,
laughing when one has more mind to cry, is increasing pain with the addition
of constraint, and heaping folly upon misery.

But pain becomes a blessing to the wise and godly, which learn by it to
weane their hearts from the love of the world and themselves, and to seek in
God that comfort which they find not in this world and this life: for all
things help together for good unto them that love God.

Herein the senses may do good service to reason and piety, to find content in
many things where others find the contrary. Some will declame against the senses
as ill Judges of the goodness and badnesse of things. To whom we must say that
the senses are never Judges but informers, and that the ill information that
our understanding receives of the quality of the objects ought not to be
imputed to the senses, for they plainly report what they perceive, but to the
prepossest Imagination, which upon their simple information frames false
Ideas, set off with colors of her own, which she presents to the Judgment,
and makes him Judge amiss through misinformation.

If we will then get good service from the senses for the right informing of
our judgment, we must obtain of ourselves these two points. The one not to
receive their testimony but about their proper objects, which are the outward
qualities wherewith the senses are affected. The other not to preoccupate them
with Imagination, Opinion, and Passion. So when they are confined to their own
province and become impartial witnesses, it will be easy to persuade our reason
rather to beleev our own sense, then the Opinion of another.

Thus, when we desire to know whether we be unhappy because we are deprived of
riches, kept back from honors, without reputation, or ill reputed in the
world, we must not refer ourselves about that to the Opinion and talk of the
world, but to our own sense. Let us sincerely examine our senses, what harm
we receive by it. Are we more hungry or cold by these misfortunes? Does the
Sun shine less bright upon us? Is our bed harder? Is our meat less feeding?
If our senses thus examined, have nothing to complain of, and yet we complain
that we are come short of some hopes, that others step before us, that the
world regards us not, or speaks ill of us; Let us ingenuously acknowledge,
upon the testimony of our senses, that we are well if we can believe it, and
that it is not out of Sense but Opinion that we are afflicted.

This is the difference between fools and wise men, Fools consult Opinion and
Custom: Wisemen consult reason, piety, and nature. Fools regard what others
think: Wisemen consider what themselves find and feel. Fools gape after
things absent: Wisemen possess the present and themselves. O how many men
complain that have no hurt, but in their imagination! which is indeed a great
hurt, and incurable many times. When you see a man rich and healthful, tearing
his heart for some inconsiderable loss, or for the rash words of an ill
tongue; desire him to ask his senses, where the pain is. And if he feel no
pain by it, why does he put himself to pain? Why is he ill, when he may be
well? He is well, if he can but heal his imagination. Is it not a disgrace to
a reasonable creature, that whereas reason ought to rectify the senses, the
senses should need to rectify reason! and that men who love themselves so much
must be exhorted to do no harm to themselves when they feel no harm? A
rational godly man will examine what he feels, and will do no harm to
himself when God does him good. And when his senses have reason to complain,
he will quietly hearken to them, and rather believe their report about the
measure of the evil then the cries of the bystanders that commiserate him. He
will not be easily persuaded that he is sicker then he is indeed, and will not
increase his pain with his imagination. And whereas others make themselves
sick out of imagination when they are well; he will use his imagination, to
make himself well when he is ill.

Not that I would advise a man to blind himself for fear of seeing, and dull
his sense for fear of feeling evils: For the better we know the nature of
things, the better we know how to deal with them, that we may avoid or bear
the evil that is in them. But because imagination has a real force to
increase or diminish many evils, it is the part of a wiseman always to employ
the strength of his imagination to his advantage, never to his hurt.

The evils where the indulgence of Opinion must be used to make them lighter
are the evils of the body and fortune; But as for the evils of the mind which
are the vices of the understanding and the will, there the flattery of Opinion
is most dangerous; for the principal sickness of the mind is, that one thinks
not himself to be sick.

I have advised reason to take counsel of the senses when the imagination
aggravateth the evil, or makes it, and yet the senses are free of pain: But
when the senses are offended in earnest, then they must take counsel of reason,
and more yet of piety, to find some ease.

Let us meditate upon the nature of those evils of fortune and body, so much
feared in the world. He that gives a right Judgment of the evil, has half
found the remedy.

CHAP. IX. Of Poverty.
THere be many degrees of civil poverty according to the diversity of
conditions and businesses. To a Sovereign prince, it is Poverty to have less
then a hundred thousand pounds a year; but to a husbandman it is riches to
have twenty pounds a year rent free. In all conditions those are truly poor
that have not wherewith to maintain that course of life which they have set
up, and all men that cannot satiate their cupidity. Thus very few rich men will
be found in the world, since there are but few that aspire not to greater
things then they can compass, and desire no more then they have. All that
find want are poor, whether their want be of things necessary or superfluous,
and among many degrees of poor men, there is but one Poverty.

Yet those are the poorest that find want of superfluous things, because that
kind of poverty is made worse by the increase of riches. To such men, God is
just and merciful together, when he heals that wanton-need, with a pinching
need of things necessary.

Need is the thing that is generally most feared of all men: Certainly it is
most incommodious, even to the wisest. Wherefore the Wiseman in the 30. of
Proverbs besought God that he would not send it him. It is an ordinary theme
for eloquence and flourishes of wit to maintain that Need is not evil; and
they that descant more upon it are they that less feel it; as Seneca, a man
of prodigious wealth, who many times commends extreme poverty, or the condition
that is not far from it. They say indeed that it is to the wise only, that
need is not evil; but because that must be proved by the experience of a true
and perfect wiseman, we would have the testimony of such a man: but such a man
we find not, neither do all the sects of Philosophers that professed poverty,
afford such an example. For we will not stand to the arbitrament of that saucy
beggar Diogenes, a vain sordid and affected man in all his words and actions,
who took a nasty pride in an impudent mendicity. If poverty did not make him
evil he made poverty evil, turning it into a profession; and instead of
making it an exercise of virtue, using it as a pretense of idleness and
licentiousness.

To the ordinary sort of minds, Need is a gulf of misery. Prove. 14.20. The
poor is hated even of his own neighbor. Every one hides himself from him.
Need makes men ashamed, and shame increases their need. Some also by Need are
made shameless, and in the end bold thieves. Qui paupertatem timet, timendus
est. Need is an ill counselor: It makes men murmr against God and find
fault with the distribution of his goods. It beats down the courage,
stupefyeth or sowreth the wit, and clips the wings of contemplation. It is hard
for one to have high conceits, when he wants bread.

Yet, to speak properly, Want does not all that evil, but the evil
disposition of men, that have not weaned their heart from the world, nor sought
their only treasure in heaven, and have not chosen God for their portion: No
wonder that their spirit is beaten down as well as their fortune, when the
worldly ground, which they had built upon, sinkes under their feet.

But he that despises the world and the life of the world, despises also Want
so much feared by others. For, take things at the worst, (a perpetual rule of
wisdom about casual future things) the worst that can come to him that is
without bread, is to be without life, which a thousand other accidents may take
from us. Life is a depositum which God has committed to our keeping: No lawful
diligence and industry must be omitted that we may preserve it and give a good
account of it to God; And himself having trusted us with it, assists us to
keep it. Very seldom it is heard, that any persons dye for lack of bread. But
precious in the sight of God is any death of his Saints, Psalm. 116.15. Neither
is there any more curse in dying of hunger, then of a surfeit.

Of all kinds of death, but the sudden, I hold death for want of food to be
the easiest. It is no more but letting the lamp quietly to go out. Atticus
after a long fast to overcome an acute sickness, having lost the appetite of
meat, lost also the appetite of life, and refusing to take any more meat, dyed
without pain. And so Tullius Marcellinus, after an abstinence of three days
Mollissime excessit et vitae elapsus est, he departed most quietly and escaped
from life, says Seneca. He spoke better then he meant, saying that he escaped;
for such a volutary death was an escape from the station, where God has placed
him. He went from life without commission, for God had given him wherewith to
keep it: But he to whom God gives no more wherewith to keep himself alive
must acknowledge that his commission is out, and depart cheerfully. For to
prevent death by sordid and unlawful ways is more then God calls him unto,
and more then life is worth. To say, necessity compels me to these ways, and
otherwise I cannot live, is an ignorant or wilful mistake of Necessity; The
ways cannot be necessary, when the end is not so: And before a man conclude
that such ways are necessary because without them he cannot live, he should
consider whether it be necessary for him to live. It is necessary for us to be
righteous and generous; not, to live. Who so conceives no necessity in life,
and no evil in death (which to Gods children is the end of all evils, and the
beginning of all happiness) will soon rid his heart of that cowardly fear of
dying for want, and reject the temptations to lead an ill life that he may keep
life.

The fear of Want is for want of obeying Christ's command, Matthew. 6.34. not to
take thought for the morrow; and for want of observing the course of his
providence which provideth for his creatures that cannot provide for
themselves: Beasts sleep quietly not knowing and not thinking where they shall
get meat the next day. You will say, it is because they have no reason and no
foresight; and were it not better to have no reason, then to make no use of it
but for our vexation! Were it not better to be incapable of thinking on God as
beasts are, then to think on him only to mistrust and murmr against his
providence?

A poor man to whom God gives health and industry to get his living is
possessed of a great treasure, and a stock yielding him a daily rent. His
condition is incomparably more happy then that of the noble and wealthy. The
labor that gets him bread, gets him also an appetite to eat it, and sleep to
refresh him when he is weary, and health to continne his labor; Eccl. 5.12.
The sleep of a laboring man is sweet, whether he eat little or much, but the
abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep: His many children give him
less care, then fewer children to the rich, and less pain also to provide
for them. For whereas in noble houses the c^arge grows always as the
children grow; in poor families that live by labor the charges grow less as
the children grow; the Sons serve the Father in his work, the Daughters spin
by their Mother. Children are the riches of poor people, and the impoverishing
of the rich. Then to give them portions; the Father that has no land is not
troubled to engage the Lordships of the eldest Son for the marriages of his
Daughters, nor to charge the land with annuityes for the younger Brothers. Each
of them has the whole succession, which is their Fathers labor. No doubt, but
that is the most tranquil condition of all.

The examples are many, of those that lived merrily and sung at their work as
long as they were poor; but an inheritance unlooked for, being fallen into
their lap, they have given over singing, and turned sad and full of thoughts.
Anacreon came once to that trouble, but he rid himself of it. He was a Poet,
and consequently poor. Polycrates the rich Tyrant of Samos bestowed two or
three thousand Crowns upon him. But Anacreon after he had kept them three
days restored them to his benefactor, because, said he, that-money would not
let him sleep. Which action was not the production of a Philosophical mind,
for by his Poemes now extant it appears that wine and women were the highest
spheres of his contemplation; but the true cause was, that he found riches
heavier to bear then poverty.

I was saying that Poverty beats down the courage and stupefyeth the wit; but
it is only with them that had no great courage and no great wit before, and
they would have bin more beaten down and stupefyed by riches, but in another
way: for riches swell indeed the courage with pride, but they beat it down at
the same time with fear, and make it soft with voluptuousness; they slacken
diligence, and blunt the edge of industry, but poverty whets it, and awakens
and sharpens the wit, if there be any. Riches in a competent measure are more
accommodate to the operations of the speculative understanding; for high and
curious contemplations require a mind free of cares, and rested with plenty. A
man that wants bread has no thoughts of finding longitudes and the pole of
the lodestone, or the exquisiteness of eloquence: Magnae mentis opus, nec de
lodice paranda Attonitae. Poverty is fitter for the operations of the practical
understanding, for necessity is the mother of arts. Magister artis ingenique
largitor venture: We owe most part of mechanique inventions to men put to their
shifts.

The best thing that is in Poverty is, that meeting with a sound and godly
mind, it helps to weane it from the world, and raise it up to God, which is the
great work of a Christian, to which riches are a great hindrance. He that has
but little in the world, finds in his poverty a great motive to lay up treasure
it heaven, to which he is invited by the example of the Lord Jesus, who made
himself poor to make us rich in God. To the poor was the Gospel first
preached, and when it was preach to the rich and poor together, the poor were
the first that embraced it, because they were less tied unto the world, and at
more liberty to go to God.

It is most observable that all persons admitted by God to salvation are
received in the quality of poor, and the rich must make themselves poor
before God through humility and meekness, that they may be capable of that
high blessing whereby Christ began his sermon, Mat. 5 Blessed are the poor in
spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of God. To that Poverty in spirit the
poverty in worldly goods is a great help. A wise and godly man, that knows
how to get advantage by all things will prudently manage all the helps to
heaven which poverty affords, when he shall be brought to that condition. He
will become more serene in his devotions, more resolute in his dangers, more
undaunted to maintain the truth, lighter to flee from one City to another in
time of persecution, and better disposed at all times to welcome death, casting
no back-look upon the world where he has nothing to lose. If he had once
riches, and has lost them, he will acknowledge that they were none of his,
since they could not stay with him; for the true goods of a man are inseparable
from him, as being within him. These goods are, a right reason, integrity of
conscience, the love of God, faith in his promises, and an appetite led by
reason and piety. With that patrimony he may say with more reason then Bias, in
what condition soever he be, I carry all my goods along with me. The goods of
fortune deserve not the name of goods.

To him that desires nothing but what is sufficient to Nature, poverty does no
harm; and to him that desires more, poverty does good; for it brings him to
sobriety. To have little and to be contented with it, is a great wealth.

Poverty and riches having their commodities and incommodities, the most
desirable temporal estate is the midlemost, which is neither, and holds of
both. That state the wise man requested at Gods hands, Prove. 30.8. Give me
neither poverty nor riches, feed me with food convenient for me; Lest I be full
and deny thee, and say who is the Lord? and lest I be poor and steal and take
the name of my God in vain. But our condition is not in our choice. Virtue and
tranquillity of mind may be had in any fortune, because they depend not of
fortune.

CHAP. X. Of low Condition.
IT is, in the Judgment of many, worse yet then poverty; and it is for its
sake that they fear poverty. It is of several degrees and is more or less
grievous according to the diversity of persons and designs. To them that
aspire to honors, but are kept back, and think they lose all they cannot get,
it is unsufferable; and more yet to them that had honors and were justled out
of them; for men will get up to honor with a good will, but none descends from
it unless he be hurled down; which has given occasion to the institution of
yearly Magistrates. Others are bred in a low condition and aspire not much
higher, yet they groan under the yoke which their condition ingageth them
unto. Thus all are discontented, and none are so high but think themselves too
low.

The low condition indeed is slavish, especially in France and Poland; and he
that can handsomely get out of the bottom where the land-flood of the public
storms stays, and take himself out of the number of the beasts of carriage,
shall do prudently to seek his liberty. St. Paul's advice is judicious Art thou
called being a servant? care not for it: but if thou may be made free, use
it rather. 1 Cor. 7.21. If it be impossible for a wiseman to get that liberty,
let him consider that as the low condition is more onerous, so it is less
dangerous; In France especially, where although the armies consist of high and
low, yet the maine shock of battles falls upon the Gentry, and the best of the
Nobility. The hazardous attempts fall to their share. All may follow war, but
the Gentry hold it their proper trade. The French Gentleman is borne in a
manner with his sword by his side. Who so will observe how in noble houses two
thirds of their branches are lopt off by war, shall find that the Nobility
and Gentry pay dear for their immunities.

To bear with the low condition, one should observe well the inconveniences of
the high. The higher a man stands, the fairer mark does he give to envy, secret
undermining, and open hostility. Great places are like stilts upon which a man
has but a tottering standing, especially in a crowd, where all justle against
him to make him fall. A Crown loads a Kings head and covers it not, but lets
in on all sides the arrows that are shot against it. There is no need of deep
Philosophy to be free from the desire of it, and of all places of great respect
and great business. One needs but know them, and love himself. All great
dignities are great miseries. It must needs be that there is some fatality for
the subsistence of the general, that sets-on men to thrust blindly forward for
high dignities; Otherwise men being all voluptuous and lovers of themselves,
would not take so much labor as to climb up with hands and feet unto their
misfortune. A wise man will love his own rest better then to crowd for
dignities; choosing rather to sit upon lower steps, and to owe his tranquillity
to his obscurity. He will esteem no honor or great employment worth losing
the liberty of meditation, and the holy and heavenly conversation with God: for
who would come from heaven to be toyling in the earth? As valleys have less
wind and more heat of the Sun then mountains, so the low condition has
less agitation then the high, and the rays of the Snune of righteousness
will commonly shine upon it more graciously and powerfully,

Nobility of extraction being nothing in nature, the same is true also of mean
blood; both consist in Opinion, and yet not in opinion of the persons
concerned, but of others, which to any wiseman must be of very small
consideration. In any condition one may have natural nobility, consisting in a
meek and magnanimous disposition, apt to the knowledge of great things, and so
well seasoned with virtue. By that description how many ignoble persons will be
found among the Noble by extraction, and how many noble among persons of mean
descent? God deliver us from Gentlemen of the savage kind that make nobility
to consist in barbarousnesse, idleness, and contempt of divine and humane
laws; and from ignobleupstarts, who to approve themselves Gentlemen strive to
outdoe them that are so, in pride and licentiousness.

But there is a nobility infinitely above the best natural nobility. (I bring
not the Cvil within this comparison, it is nothing but fortune and Opinion)
That high transcendent nobility is but to be the child of God by Jesus Christ,
and heir of his Kingdom. The titles of that nobility are from all eternity,
and will be to all eternity; and by it a man rises so high as to become
partaker of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. says St. Peter. Who so has the
patents of that nobility, and makes himself sure of them by a lively faith
working by love, is neither puffed up nor beaten down with his temporal
condition. He will look with contempt upon the vulgar contentions about the
first place, much like the emulation of horses striving who should go the
formest of a company. And truly it is a quality of good horses not of good men.
A man honored with spiritual nobility if he have temporal nobility besides,
must keep his degree, but esteem it too low to glory in it. And if he have not
that worldly advantage, he will be content with the heavenly, knowing that
being one of Gods children he cannot be further ennobled.

As we that live upon Earth find it very great, and see the Sun very little
although it be a hundred and threescore times greater then the Earth; Likewise
to men altogether earthy, the honors of the earth seem very great, and the
heavenly nobility but a small thing: But if from the Orb of the Sun the Earth
may be seen (as it is very likely) no doubt but it appears a very small
thing, as lesser then most of the visible Stars. Worldly honors appear
lesser yet, to him that has the true sense of his heavenly nobility, and
looks upon Earth as it were from Heaven. The time draws nigh that will make
Kings and Beggars alike in the dust.

CHAP. XI. Of Dishonor.
REal dishonor is within, and consists in viciousness and indignity of the
person; for by it a man is separate from God the scource of honor, out of whom
there is nothing but dishonor and misery. But the dishonor which we are here
to consider is out of the person, and consists in the Opinion of others.
These two sorts of dishonor do not meet always, for many that are vicious and
infamous before God are honored of men, even because they are vicious; and
others that are good and honored with Gods love, are blamed and dishonored of
men, even because they are good; So erroneous and fantastical is the judgment
of the multitude.

We have already found that therenowne and praise that men give is but wind;
that is enough to judge that the blame and infamy which they give, is of the
same substance. It is such an imaginary evil, that it is almost impossible to
find out in what subject it subsisteth. It is not in him that is blamed, for
what is that to him that is in the grave, or to him that is alive and knows it
not, or cares not for it? It is not also in him that blames; for it proceeds
indeed from him but subsisteth not in him: else he that blames another for a
murder should be a murderer himself. If then the blame subsist neither in
the blamed, nor in the blamer, where shall we find its subsistence between
both? It may be conceived that it subsisteth in the blamed person because it
sticks so fast many times to him, and penetrates so deep, that it kills him
with sorrow. Yea but to speak properly and truly, it is not the blame that does
the harm, but the imagination of the blamed, prevented with an erroneous
Opinion, which makes a man fansy an evil where there is none, and do to
himself that harm which none could have done him but himself: And is not
that voluntary pain, which is not felt unless a man have a mind to feel it?
God give me never greater evils then those that cannot hurt me unless I will
be hurt, and have need to beg my consent and my hand to give me the blow.

A wise man will despise, not only that imaginary evil, but even the remedy.
For what need of a plaster where there is no sore? When his friends come to
him to comfort him because that some have spoken ill of him, he will desire
then to apply the remedy where the disease is, even to the rashness of the
judgment of those weak persons, and to the intemperance of their tongue. And
will think that their applying a balsome of consolations to his heart, for a
sickness in his neighbors brains, no less strange and extravagant, then if
they would warm his bed because his horse has a cold.

This is indeed the right reasoning when the thing is considered in its proper
and bare nature, but because the world being prepossest with a wrong opinion of
a worthy man may be persuaded to do him harm, or hindered to do him good, or
deprived of the good he might do to the public; that worthy man must not
altogether neglect to rectifye the misconceits taken against him, which he may
with less difficulty atchieve by a serene and constant course of integrity
then by finding and proving, confuting, and keeping a great bustle to bring
contrary witnesses face to face. Innocence and the confidence that attends it
must needs stand so high above the babbling of the vulgar, as to be no more
moved with it then the Stars with the wind ^^owing in the lower Region.

The dishonor that has some ground in the truth must be wiped off, not by
excuses, but by amendment. Is one blamed for being vicious? He must be so no
more. And that out of hatred of vice, not of dishonor, which being but a
shadow of it will vanish at the rays of Virtue.

CHAP. XII. Of the evils of the body, Unhandsomnesse, Weakness, Sickness,
and Pain.
OUr judgment being satisfied that the good of the body, beauty, strength
health and pleasure are none of the great goods, we ought also to be persuaded
that their contraries are none of the great evils. And if our very bodies must
not be accounted ours because we cannot dispose of them at our pleasure, and
because by the undermining of age they sink, and slip away continually from
themselves; the commodities and incommodities of these frail tenements at
will, where our souls are harbored for a few days as ought not to disquiet
us matters of any importance.

To begin at Unhandsomnesse; if a woman be unhandsome (for that sex is
especially sensible of that disgrace) let her stay but a while; age will bring
all the beauties to her row, within few years, and death after; That last day
draws near, which will make fair and foul alike, strong and weak, sick
and sound; them that are tormented with dolor, and them that torment
themselves with voluptuousness and curiosity. Whosoever is much grieved with
those incommodities never apprehended aright the frailty of the opposite
commodities. We must not be vexed for the want of things, which by their nature
decay and perish very hour.

There are few incommodities but have a mixture of commodities, which a wise
lover of his own tranquillity will pick and convert to his advantage. The
unhandsome woman shall not be admired, but in recompense she shall not be
tempted nor importuned as a prey by lust and insolence. She has with her a
perpetual exhorter to humility, piety, and all virtue, and to recompense the
want of beauty with goodness. Seldom is unhandsomnesse reproached to women,
but to them that aggravate with malice and envy their disgraces of nature.
Beauty cannot be acquired, but goodness may. Yet among them that want beauty,
some are so wise and so good that they become handsome. They are commonly more
happy in marriage then great beauties; for they give less jealousy to their
husbands, and study more to content them.

Persons of weak constitution are less obnoxious to acute sicknesses, which
many times will kill strong bodies in three or four days. They are less
tainted with that stupid pride, which commonly attends great strength of body.
Finding themselves inferior to others in excercises of strength, they apply
themselves to exercises of wit, to which commonly they are more apt. As weezels
have more mettle and nimblenesse then Oxen; there is often more industry and
quickness of wit in little weak men, then in men of of large and brawny limbs;
for the predominancy of blood and phlegm which makes the body large, is the
duller temper for wit; whereas choler and melancholy which by their contractive
quality limit the stretching of growth to a lesser extent, serve also, the one
to sharpen the wit, the other to give solidity to the judgment. Weakness
reads to a man a continual Lecture of prudence and compliance; for being not
able to carry on his designs with a high hand, dexterity only will serve his
turn.

Also that want of strength teaches him to make God his strength, sticking
fast to him by faith and a good conscience. That way the weakest become too
strong for all the world. When I am weak then I a^ strong says St. Paul. 2
Cor. 12.10.

Of this, Gods children have a blessed experience in sickness, whereby God
makes their body weak to make their faith strong, and their souls, by the
dolours and lingering decay of their bodies, susceptible of many salutary
lessons, for which health and ease have no ears.

Sickness and pain are evil in their nature, but they are good by accident,
when God is pleased to turn evils into remedies, to bring a man to repentance
and make him look up to the hand that strikes. They are punishments to sin
and ways to death, but to the faithful soul they become instruments of grace
and conveighances to glory. Many of them that believed in the Lord Jesus while
he conversed among men were brought to it by bodily sicknesses, And he when he
healed a sick person, often would say, Thy sins are forgiven thee.

To give an impartial judgment of their quality and measure, one must rather
believe what he feels then the cries and compassion of them that love him, and
have interest in his preservation. They say, that a man is very sick when he
feels not his sickness. Yet he has so much good time, till he feel it, If
the pain be sharp, it is short; If it be little it is tolerable; If the evil
be curable, be patient, good Cure will heal it, If the evil be incurable, be
patient death will heal it. No evil is superlative when one is certain to
come out of it; By life or by death there must be an end of thy sickness.

All the remedies that Pagan Philosophy gives in extremities, come to this,
that patience is a remedy to evils that have none. But here Christian
Philosophy opens the treasure of divine comforts, which to make the faithful
man patient in tribulation, make him joyful in hope, and show him the crown
ready for him at the end of the combat. In the combat he is strengthened by
faith; and the comforter whom Christ promised to his disciples, powerfully
assisteth him in his last agony; Or if his trial be prolonged, he tells him, as
Paul buffeted by a messenger of Satan 2 Cor. 12.9. my grace is sufficient for
thee, for my strength is made perfect in weakness.

By that grace, sickness beats down pride, quenches lust, weaneth the heart
from the love of the world, makes the soul hungry and thirsty after
righteousness. Theodoricus Archbishop of Collen with great wisdom exhorted
the Emperor Sigismond, to have the will in health to live holily, as he said
when he was tormented with the gravel and gowte. Sicknesses give to a godly man
a sense of his frailty: when we feel these houes of mud, our bodies, drooping
toward the ground their original, then do we sigh for that building of God,
that house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. 2 Cor. 5.1, Therefore
labor and heavy load make us seek to him that says, come unto me all ye that
labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Matthew. 11.28. Thus evil
does good to them that are good, and helps evil men to turn good. In sickness
and dolours Gods children find the peace of the soul and contentment of mind.

CHAP. XIII. Of Exile.
TO speak of exile after dolor, is an abrupt passage from sensible evils to
imaginary. The world is the natural and general country of al men: To be
exiled is but to be sent from one Province of our Country to another. That
other Province, where one is exiled is the Country of them that are borne
there, and of them also that live there exiled, if there they get accommodation.
That particular Province which a nation calls their Country, is a place of
exile to them that are borne in it, if they do not know it; as to Oedipus,
exiled from the place where he was bred, to the place where he was borne.
Children brought from nurse to the mothers house will cry, taking it for a place
of exile. It is a childish weakness in a man to think himself lost when he
is in a place where he never was before. Every where we have the same nature,
the same heaven, men of the same kind. Reasonable creatures should be ashamed
to be surmounted by unreasonable, in that easiness to shift Countreies.
Swallows hatch about our houses, are banished from our Climat by the approach
of winter, and they make no difficulty to go seek another beyond all the lands
and Seas of Europe: but men will cry when they are driven from their chimney
corner, having the choice of al places of the world which is so large. Yet that
advantage we have over birds and beasts, that al Countries are not alike to
them, but al Countries are alike unto virtue, and to us if we have it; for that
treasure no enemy can hinder us to carry along with us.

We may indeed be exiled into an ill Country, but that Country is never the
worse for not being our Country. All lands are in equal distance from heaven,
the Country of gods children. God is as soon found in the land of our exile,
as in that of our birth and sooner too; for God is near those that are
destitute, and preserves the stranger, Psalm. 146.9. Are you banished by a
Tyrant? Think how many persons are exiled from their country and dearest
relations by their covetousness, which is the worst tyranny, ranging the
unknown seas of a new world for many years; some to fetch cucineel and pearls
from burning climats, others to get sables and hermines from the snows under
the Pole. Some are banished by others, some bythem-selves. Nothing is strange to
a man when his will goes along with it; we need but to incline our will where
necessity calls us. Impatience in exile is want of a right apprehension of the
condition of gods children in the world. Heaven is their country. Life is
their Pilgrimage. They are strangers even in the place of their birth, yea in
their very bodies: Whilst we are at home in the body, we are strangers from the
Lord, says Paul. 2 Cor. 5.6. Being then strangers in all places of the world,
one place must not seem to us more strange then another. We are never out of
our way, as long as we are going to God.

CHAP. XIV. Of Prison
PRison is the grave of the living. There men are buried before their death:
Liberty is the privilege of nature, without which life is a continual death.
And it were better to have noe life then not to enjoy it. All beasts enjoy
liberty, some few excepted that have lost it by being too much acquainted with
us.

But as there is need of iron cages to keep lions, there is need in the world
of prisons and captivity to keep in men that will not be ruled by reason and
equity. And though many be imprisoned wrongfully, if they have the grace to
look up to God, the disposer of their condition, they will acknowledge, that
God is wise to use them so, and that licentious humor has need of restraint.

Or if they need it not they have less need to afflict themselves: A well
composed spirit is free in the closest Prison; bonds and fetters cannot
restrain his liberty. The worst fetters are covetousness, ambition, lust,
appetite of revenge, wherewith many that seem free are kept in bondage. Who so
can shake them off is at liberty, though he were in a dungeon. Such was St.
Paul's freedom in a chain. 2 Timothy 2.9. I suffer trouble (said he) as an evil
doer, even unto bonds, but the word of God is not bound. The grace of God also
cannot be bound, and many times God makes use of the bonds of the body to set
the soul free. A man is very hard tied to the world, if he cannot be untied
from it by a long imprisonment.

Prison will be less tedious to him that remembers that it is his natural
condition. That he was nine months Prisoner in his Mothers womb. That after
his death he shall be made close Prisoner under ground; And that as long as he
lives he is laden like a snaile with his own Prison, which he carries about
slowly, and with great incommodity; a clog put by our wise Master to the
swiftness and quick turns of our spirit which is always in action. Think how
fast our thoughts go, which in a moment travel from one end of the world to
the other, and how high our designs will rise, whose wings we are constrained
to clip and abruptly to pull down our soaring mind, to look to the necessities
of our craving body, and then acknowledge that our body is a very Prison,
confining the spirit, which is the Man. The imprisonment of that body is no
great addition to its captivity. It is but putting one box within another.

And if we look about us, how much captivity do me meet with in society! Is
not ceremony a slavery which is multiplied and diversifyed at every meeting?
Are not honors golden fetters, and businesses Iron fetters? Do not public
factions enslave particular interesses, and spread nets for the conscience?
Many times that captivity is avoided by that of the Counter and the Fleet. To
many their prison has been a Sanctuary, and a strong hold against the dangers
of a turbulent and destructive time.

No dungeon is so close as to keep the faithful soul from rising to God. They
that are forbidden the sight of their friends, may converse with God at any
time, which is a great liberty: And the Lord Jesus who recommends that work of
mercy to visit the prisoners, himself does carefully practice it, comforting
by his Spirit his disciples to whom the assistance of men is denied, and
showing them heaven open when they are locked and bolted. In effect it is the
body, not man, that is imprisoned. The Jalour may keep out a prisoners friends
from him, but he cannot shut out comfort and tranquillity from his soul.

CHAP. XV. Husband, Wife, Children, Kindred, Friends: Their price, their Loss.
IT may seem that these should have bin put among the goods of fortune. To
which I might answer somewhat Stoically, that it is not altogether certain
whether they must be put among the goods or among the evils, for they may be
either, as it falls out. But I rank them with neither, but among exterior
things, of which we must labor to get the right Opinion.

To that end we must always consider them two ways, as they are good or bad,
and as they are near to us in blood, or bonds of duty. Neither must the second
relation hinder the first, so forestalling the mind with the relations of
Husband or Wife, Son or Brother, that one be incapable to make a right
Judgment of their disposition and capacity, and set a just price on them.

The only relation of Parents must spread a veil of reverence between our
eyes and their imperfections, that we may see nothing but good in them. There
it is wisdom to be somewhat deceived: Though it be not my theme to speak of
the duties to be rendered to our several relations, yet because I seek the
contentment of mind, I cannot choose but say that of all civil and natural
duties none is so contenting to him that pays it, as the duty paid to
Parents. Herein Epamimondas Judged his victories most fortunate unto him that
he had obtained them in his Fathers life time who did much rejoice at them.

To other relations we must also pay their proper duty. Of which we must
remember this general rule; That it is impossible to get content by them
unless we do our duty toward them. For that content must not be expected from
them but from ourselves. The content that one takes with a dear Wife, a good
Brother, and a well chosen Friend, is more that which he gives then that which
he receives. It lies in the testimony of his conscience that he has rendered
to them the true offices of love.

Without prejudice to those duties, we may and ought impartially to consider
their inclinations and abilities, and what may be expected of them. In those
relations which come by choice, as of a Husband Wife and friend, the judgment
must precede the affection, to find what is fit for us before we fix upon it:
But in relations of Kindred made by nature without us, the affection must go
before and the judgment must follow; that we may know them so well, that
though we love them, we trust them proportionably to their honesty and
capacity, and no more.

In this point the vulgar sort making many gross mistaks. For it is an
ordinary but an evil expression, I would trust him as mine own Brother. Yet
most knaves have Brothers, who should do very unwisely to trust them. The style
of Merchants selling their ware is more ingemous, when they promise to a
Chapman to use him as if he were their Brother, for they would not scruple to
cozen their Brother. And truly hence the word of cozening had its Origin,
because it is usual to make use of the bond of Kindred to be trusted enough to
deceive enough.

For counsel and conversation we much choose the wisest and worthiest rather
then the nearest in blood: But when there is occasion to give, or need to seek
help; we must run to the nearest in blood rather then to the worthyest, if
they be but honest. So much we must defer to the choice of Nature, that if
there be any virtue in them, though but small, we be nearer to them in
affection then blood. Solomon says that a Brother is borne for adversity,
Prove. 17.17. because other friendships by differences, intervening of parties,
interesses, and Opinions, are subject to cool and untie, but among Brethren
those differences are overcome by the strength of nature; and in adversity
either good nature or fear of blame makes Brothers give real help to Brothers.

Wife and Children are the strongest trials of a magnanimous spirit, for they
make a man's heart tender, and in the pinches of adversity make him descend to
ungenerous shifts. He that has none shall have less delight and less sorrow.

Yet must we acknowledge that a marriage well sorted between two persons of
merit is of all worldly felicities the greatest.

Of children expect noe good but the satisfaction to have done them good, and
to see them do well for them-selves. For in this relation the nature of
beneficence is to descend, seldom to remount.

Nothing is more precious among humane things, then a virtuous loving friend,
kin or no kin. And if he be one story above us in nobility and virtue, he
is better then lower. Equality indeed is requisite in friendship, but friend
ship it self works that equality where it is not; And there is need of it,
for it is impossible to find two friends in the world altogether equal in all
respects.

The price of friendship is according to the price of the person, whom
therefore we must study to know well, that we may love no person above or under
his right value. A reasonable benevolence of a man of great merit is more
obliging then the ardent affection of an Idiot; From the former you may receive
instruction honor and content; From the second importunity, and the disgrace
to be paired with a man of no worth: Such a friendship will end in a breach,
and so in repentance.

Whether friendships be knit by nature or by choice, that we may not expect of
them a content beyond their nature, we must remember that our friends are men,
whose love may, and whose life must fail. The use of them we may have, not the
possession. The best and most powerful friends are weak reeds, which we must
not lean upon with all our weight, lest they break in our hand, and we take a
sore fall. Thus says the Lord, Cursed is the man that trusts in man and
makes flesh his arm Jer. 17.5. As this is a sentence given by God against
them that put their confidence in man, it is also a natural consequence of the
nature of the fault: For putting our confidence in man is going out of our
selves: It is going out of God: It is making men Gods, for unto God only is
that homage due of an absolute and total confidence. Noe wonder that God
thereby is moved to jealousy.

To that evil, Pagan Philosophers give a remedy little better then the
disease, which is, To put confidence in ourselves. This being a most erroneous
Doctrine is nevertheless half the way to the truth: for they had very well
observed, that a wise wan must not depend from another but retire within
himself, where all the good and evil of a man lies. But while they enjoyne a
man to retire within himself they leave out the maine precept proper to a
higher School then theirs, that a man should seek God within himself; and to
find God in his breast, that he should invite and then entertain him there, by
a pure service, a sincere love, and an entire confidence.

Many, by much good Kindred, and many Friends and relations, become less
virtuous and industrious; getting the ill habit of the Italian Signora's who
walking in the streets bear more upon the arms of their supporters on both
sides, then upon their own legs. They have need to be sent from home to learn
to stand alone without a Nurse to hold them. None can be owner of any measure
of steadfastness and content that makes all his support and satisfaction to
depend of his neighbors. That man has more content in the world, who having
confined his desire to few things, troubles also but few persons; and is
desirous of Friends to do them, not to receive of them good offices, regarding
their virtue more then their support.

When we have got good Friends, we must be prepared to lose them. Death
separateth Friends, and disolveth Marriages. When that happens, we must
remember without trouble or amazement that those persons so dear to us were
mortal, but indeed that should have bin remembered before. A Philosopher
visiting his neighbor who was weeping bitterly for the death of his Wife, left
him presently, saying aloud with great contempt, O great fool! did he not know
before, that he had married a woman not a goddess? After we have condemned
that cruel incivility, yet must we acknowledge that it is a folly to lament for
that which we knew before to be unavoydable. Yet after all reasons, when love
has bin very dear, the separation cannot but be very sad. Tears may be
permitted, not commanded to fall. And after the duty paid of a mournful Adieu
to the beloved person, we must remember upon what terms and condition we hold
of God that which we love best, even to leave it at any time when God
redemands it. And if besides we have good ground to hope, that the person
departed is received into peace and glory, we must praise God for it; which we
can hardly do, as long as our obstinate mourning repines against his will.
Lamenting for those that are well is ignorance, or envy, or self love. If we
would not rejoice when they were in affliction, why should we afflict our
selves when they are in joy?

It is some recompense for the death of our dear Friends, that our enemies are
mortal as well as they. A wise man will consider his enemies as rods in Gods
hand, and mind the hand rather then the rod. To destroy our enemies when they
are in our power is a childish folly, for so will Children burn their Mothers
rod, as though there were no more rods in the world. Our enemies oftentimes do
us more good then our friends, for the support of our friends makes us
careless, but the opposition of our enemies makes us wary and industrious.
They make us strong and safe, for they make us fly to God.

In nothing wisdom is more seen then in judging of an adversary. A great
serenity is requisite, that fear make us not think him more dangerous then he
is, and that pride make us not despise him, blinding our eyes not to see the
good and evil that is in him, and what harm he may do us. It is a common and
useful maxim for the conduct and tranquillity of man's life, that there are few
great friends, and no little enemies.

When enemies are reconcilable, all things past must be taken to the best by
charitable interpretation. When there is no possibility of reconciliation, al
things to come must be taken to the worst; both to strengthen us with
resolution within, and to encounter the evil without by prudence and vigorous
ways. In the reconcilement we must pardon freely, receive ill excuses, and if
there be an offense which cannot be excused, never mention it. The remedy of
injuries is oblivion.

If an enemy can neither be mitigated by charity, nor overcome by strength, nor
avoided by prudence, there remains still unto the wise Christian an
intrenchment, out of which he cannot be forced, which is a good conscience, and
the peace of God in it. These he must cherish and keep fast, not only as his
last intrenchment, but his only possession, and the strong hold only worth
keeping: It is impregnable as long as faith and love are the Garrison.

CHAP. XVI Of Death.
IT is the subject of which Seneca speaks most, and of which there was least
for him to speak; for being doubtful whether Death destroyed the soul or
released it, Mors nos aut consumit aut emittit; and being more inclined to the
first Opinion, it was better for him neither to speak nor to think of it. But
what! others of his rank that had reasoned before him about the immortality of
the soul had quitted themselves so meanly of that task, that out of their
labors in that field, he could not reap any satisfaction of his doubt. This
is the grand privilege of the Christian that he sees life through Death, and
that the last limit of Nature is the date of his franchising, and the gate of
his felicity and glory. Death that moweth down all the hopes of this world
perfecteth Christian hope.

Death is the separation of body and soul: It is the return of these two parts
of man so different to their several principles. Eccles. 12.4. Then the dust
returns to the earth as it was, and the spirit returns unto God that gave
it: Who disposes of it either in mercy or justice. Death is the last Act of
the Comedy of this world. To every one Death is the end of the world in his own
respect. In one sense it is against nature, because it destroys the particular
being: In another it is according to nature, for it is no less natural to dye
then to live. Yea Death is a consequence of life, we must dye because we live;
and we dye, not because we are fick and wounded, but because we are animals
borne under that Law.

Wherefore considering Death in the natural way, as Charron does; I approove
what he says that we must expect Death in a steady posture, for it is the
term of nature which continually draws nearer and nearer. But I cannot
approove that which he adds, that we must fight against Death. Why should we
fight against it seeing we cannot ward its blows? It is more unreasonable then
if he had said that we must fight against the rain and the wind, for we may
get a shelter from these, none from that: Wherefore as when it raines we must
let it rain, so when Death is coming (and it comes always) we need but let
it come, not thinking it more strange to live then to dye. In stead of fighting
against Death, we must acquaint our selves with it. Indeed they that fear
Death, must fight against that fear.

Of them that fear Death there are two sorts. Some fear it for its own sake:
Some for that which comes after. The former which are more in number, that love
the present world, and cannot fix their thoughts upon that which is to come,
imagine, that when they dye they lose all. A great folly! They cannot lose that
which is none of theirs. They have the use of the world only til their Lease be
out. Death is the great proof of that fundamental Maxim, which I so often
urge, and no oftener then I need; That the things that are out of the
disposition of our will are none of ours; and such are riches, honors, our
body, and life it self. To them that are so far mistaken as to think
themselves owners of these things, death is an undoing; not to them that
acknowledge themselves tenants at will, and look continually to be called out
of their tenement. The goods of the world are held by turns: When you have
enjoyed them a while you must give place to others. Make your successors case
your own. How should ye like it, if a certain number of men should be
privileged to monopolize to themselves the goods of all the world for ever, to
the perpetual exclusion of all others?

This reasoning belongs to few persons, for it presupposes plenty and
prosperity. But how few have plenty? and of those few again, how few have
prosperity with it? One would think that distressed persons have no need of
comfort against death. Yet they that have the greatest sorrows in the world,
many times are the most unwilling to leave it. But certainly, if life be evil,
it is good to go out of it. All men being born under the necessity of
suffering, and misery being universal in all conditions; Death which ends all
misery of life, is the greatest benefit of Nature. Blessed be God, that there
is no temporal misery so great but has an end.

Take me a man that has nothing but debts, that lives merely by his shifts
and tricks, that has the stone in the bladder and ten suits in Law, that
flies from the Sergeants to his house, and then flies out of his house
relanced by the scolding of his perverse wife. If in that flight he be
suddenly killed in the street by the fall of a tyle or the overturning of a
Cart, that happy misfortune delivers him from all other misfortunes. The
Sergeants overtake him and let him are All attachments and Subpoenas against
him are vacated. He is no more troubled where to get his dinner. His debts
break not his perpetual sleep. He is thoroughly healed of the stone; and his
wife, now desperaetly crying because she seeeth him insensible for ever and
unmoved at her noise. Certainly Death is a shelter against all in^uries. Death
puts an end to endless evils. It is the rest after a continual toil. It is
the cure of the sick, and the liberty of the slave. So Job describes that
quiet state. Job. 3.7. There the wicked cease from troubling, and there the
weary be at rest. There the prisoners rest together, they hear not the voice
of the oppressor: The small and great are there, and the servant is free from
his Master. It is a great folly to fear that which cannot be avoided, but it
is a greater to fear that which is to be desired. When we have considered the
evils of life, those that we do and those that we suffer, after that to fear
Death what is it else but to be afraid of our rest and deliverance? And what
greater harm can one wish to him that will not dye, but that he may live
always, and be guilty and miserable for ever.

If it be for the pain that we fear Death, for that reason we ought rather
to fear life, for the pains of life are far more sensible then the pains
of Death; if in Death there is any pain; of which I see no great likelihood.
For why should we imagine the revulsion of the soul from the body to be very
painful, it being known that the vital parts, as the heart and the liver, have
little or no sense: No more sense has the substance of the brains though the
source of the senses; for the headache is in the tuniques. When the brains is
benumbed and weakened, the sense of pain is weaker over all the body. And
generally when strength decreaseth, pain decreaseth together. Hence it is that
most of them that are sick to Death, when they draw near their end, feel
themselves very much amended. That state is called by the Italians il
meglioramento della morte.

The decay of senses in that extremity is a fence against the troublesome
diligence, talk, and cries, more troublesome then Death, wherewith dying
persons are commonly persecuted. But as a man upon the point of death is too
weak to defend himself against all that persecution, he is too weak also to
feel it much.

Then, all suffocation is without pain, and that is the most ordinary end of
life. In the most violent death, pain is tolerable because it is short, and
because it is the last. It is a storm that wracks us, but casts us upon the
haven.

To that haven we must look continually, and there cast anchor betimes by a
holy hope, conceiving Death not so much a parting as an arrival; for unto well
disposed souls it is the haven of Salvation.

The fear of that which comes after death, makes some men's lives bitter, and
through fear of dying after Death they have already eternal death in their
Conscience. They have eyes to see Hell open gaping for them, but they have none
to see the way to avoid it. In others, that fear is more moderate, and is an
ill cause working a good effect, inducing or rather driving them to seek, and
then to embrace the grace and peace that God offers unto them in Jesus Christ,
and together to do good works which are the way to the Kingdom of heaven. A
man cannot afeare God too much, but he may be too deeply afraid of his Justice;
And the fear of that death after death must be swallowed up by the faith in
Jesus Christ who by his death has delivered them who through fear of death
were all their life subject unto bondage. Heb. 2.15. He has made death the
gate of life and glory, to all that trust in him and do good. Godly men will
not fear death; for the sting of it is plucked off by Christ. It is the terror
of evil consciences, but the joy of the good. It is this pleasant meditation
that sweetneth their adversities and makes them joy, Our light affliction which
is but for a moment works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory; 2 Cor. 4.17. The troubles of life are soon ended by death; and after
death comes a life without trouble, and a glory without end. Men may deprive us
of life, but they cannot deprive us of death; which is our deliverance.

The same meditation will make us relish prosperity when God sends it; for none
can enjoy the goods of this life with delight but he that is prepared before to
leave them. Then are they delightful when they are possessed without care, and
without, that which makes prosperity bitter, the fear to lose them. Whether I
have little or much let me always say, Praised be God for his temporal
gifts. Here is more then I need to live and dye well. But these are not the
goods that he promised me, and to which he calls me by by his Gospel.

O when shall that day come, when I shall be satisfied with the goodness of
his house even of his holy Temple. Psalm. 65.4. My desire is to depart and to be
with Christ. Phil. 1.23.

The imprisonment of our immortal Soul of heavenly nature, in a body
cosingerman to the beast, where it lies heavy, drowzy and mired in the flesh,
ought to make us think that a happy day, when we shall be awake, quickened, and
set at liberty. Children in the womb sleep continually: Men (if you take their
whole age together) sleep well nigh half their time. But after death, the
spirit which is the true man, has shaken off all his sleepiness: The
faithful soul is no more in darkness. She receives light no more at two
little loope-holes. She is all eye in the presence of God, who is all Light.
She is free, holy, joyful, all virtue, and all love, and all glory; for seeing
God, and being seen by him, she is changed into the same image; And to that
blessed state death is the way. Who so knows so much of the nature of death,
and yet fears it as a terrible evil, shows that he is very far within
another death, which is the death of sin, and that he has more flesh then
spirit, that is, more of the beast then man.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Interior of Man.
FRom that which is altogether without us and out of our power, and may be
taken from us by others or by death; Let us turn our eyes within us, upon that
which is more ours, our soul and her endowments, natural and acquisite,
either by study or infusion. Not to examine very exactly their nature, but
enough to judge of their price, and what satisfaction may be expected of them.

Because I have restrained solid content to those things that are within us,
and which cannot be taken from us, I acknowledge my self very much perplexed
about some things within us, and doubtful whether they be ours or no? seeing
that many things within us may be taken from us without our consent, and
therefore are not ours absolutely. Is there any thing that seems more ours then
the illumination and dexterity of our wit, and our learning, and prudence got
by study and experience? for those were the goods which that Philosopher owned
with so much oftentation, who carrying nothing but himself out of a Town, taken
by storm and pillaged, answered the victor that gave him leave to carry our
all his goods, I carry out all my goods along with me. But how could he make
good that possession, there being no Wit so clear, no Philosophy so sublime,
but a blow upon the head, or a hot fever may overturne it? Epictetus
accounts nothing ours but our opinions, our desires, and our actions, because
these alone are in our power. But in an understanding maimed by Phrensy, that
power is lost. It is true, it is not the soul but the Organe that is vitiated:
But howsoever you cannot dispose of your soul when that organ is out of tune.

Here to say that death will set the soul at liberty and then the spirit shall
enjoy himself, and all his ornaments, is to bring a higher question to resolve
a lesser. For there is no doubt but that the spirit loosed from the matter will
recover that liberty of his faculties which was obstructed by material causes;
but it is a point of singular difficulty to judge, whether he shall retain all
the skill he had got in this life.

As for mechanical Arts, altogether tied to the matter, it is not likely that
the spirit will retain that low skill, when he lives separat from the matter.
But as for higher intellectual sciences, it seems very unreasonable that a
Spirit polisht and sublimated by long study, and stored with a great treasure
of knowledge, should lose all in an instant by the death of the body, and that
the soul of a great Naturalist, as my Lord of St. Albans, be left as bare of
learning and acquisite capacity as the soul of a skavenger. And when the soul
not only is made learned but good also by learning, were it not lamentable that
death should have the power to make it worse? Neither would holy writ press
this command upon us with so much earnestnes, Get wisdom, get understanding,
forget it not, if wisdom were an acquisition that the soul must lose with the
body.

The difficulty lies, in picking among the sciences those that will be sure to
stick unto the separat soul; It is much to be feared that those sciences which
cost most labor will be sooner lost, and will go out together with the lamp
of life. For since the dead have no share in all that is done under the sun, it
is like that great students who have fraught their memory with histories, both
ancient and modern, shall lose, when they dye, the remembrance of so many
things that are done under the Sun: By the same reason Lawyers Linguists and
Professors of Sciences and arts depending upon humane commerce, should leave
all that learning behind them. But I doubt whether the contemplators of Gods
works, as the Naturalists, shall lose their learning when they dye seeing that
it is the duty, and the perfectioning of the rational creature to know the
wisdom and the power of the Creator, in his wonderful works. And I am
inclined to believe that those things that are done under the Sun in which
the dead have no share, are the actions and businesses of men, not the works
of God; but that Naturalists shall learn the science of Gods works in a
higher and transcendent way. Also that Astrologers shall need other principles
to know heaven; to which their forbidden curiosity to foretell humane events
out of the Stars, will rather be a bar then a furtherance Nec quicquam tibi
prodest aerias tentasse domos morituro.

Among all the spiritual ornaments there is one which we may be confident to
keep for ever when we have it once really, and therefore it is properly our
own. That rich and permanent Ornament is heavenly wisdom, of which Solomon
says Prove. 3.16. Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left hand
riches and honor: Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are
peace. She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her, and happy is every
one that retains her. That wisdom consists in knowing, loving, and obeying
God and trusting upon him. It is good studying that wisdom, that gives
eternal felicity and glory.

We find but two things in the interior of man, which we may be sure not to
lose by death: The one is the substance and intellectual faculties of our soul
of immortal nature, which cannot be so offuscated with the mists of the flesh
but she is cleared of them, when she is freed of the body; The other is that
supernatural wisdom, when it pleases God to endow our mind with it, even
his knowledge, his love, conformity of our will unto his will, and faith in his
promises. Of other ornaments of the soul we cannot certainly say, what we shall
keep and what we shall lose. It will be therefore wifely and thriftily done to
labor for that which we may be sure to keep when we have got it; and of
which, death, that takes away all other possessions, shall deliver us a full
possession. It is a great discouragment to them that stretch their brains upon
Algebra and Logarithmes and arguments in Frisesmo, as it were upon
tenterhookes, to think that all that learning so hard to get, will be lost in
a moment. Who would take the pains to load himself with it, seeing that it
gives nothing but vexation in this life, and leaves in the soul neither benefit
nor trace after death; unless it be the guilt sticking to the soul to have
misspent the strength of wit upon negotious vanities, and neglected good studies.

Yet am I not so austere and peremptory as to despise all the spiritual
endowments which we are not sure to keep after death. For many of them are
such, that as we are not certain to keep them after death, so we are not
certain to lose them by death. Many of those perishable ornaments are
nevertheless good gifts of God. But our mind must be so disposed that in
these several ornaments of the soul we seek a contentment proportionate to the
assurance that we have of their abiding with us. We are most certain that the
knowledge and love of God are permanent possessions, and impart to their
possessor their permanency; there then let us apply our study and place our
permanent content. We are not certain whether the other spiritual ornaments
will continue with us after this life. Then let us not bestow our principal
study about those things which we are not sure to keep; nor place our chief
content in them. Let the Soul lose none of her advantages, let her glory in her
eternal goods and there fix herself: Let her rejoice also in those goods
which she has for a time, according to their just value, which must be
measured by their use.

Before we consider the several ornaments of the soul more particularly, we
must consider her substance and faculties. The Soul is immateriall and
Spiritual bearing in her substance the image of her creator, and more yet in
her faculties, and natural endowments, which before her fall were in an
eminent degree of perfection: for to be made after the likeness of God
includes all perfection, in so much that this high expression, to be adequate
unto man, has need to be contracted to the proportion of a created nature.

Of that primitive perfection the traces are evident still, in that reasoning
quickness, and universal capacity, that goes through all things and
compasses all things, that remembers things past, that provideth for things
to come, that inventeth, judges, orders, and brings forth ingenious and
admirable works. The principal is that the soul is capable to know God, love
him, and commune with him: A privilege special to Angels and Souls of men
above all creatures; as likewise they are the only creatures capable of
permanency, which is a participation with Gods eternity, such as finite natures
may admit.

Humility would not give us leave to conceive high enough of the price of our
soul, but that the only Son of God, God himself blessed for evermore, has
showed the high account that he made of her; So high that he thought it worth
his taking the like nature in the form of a servant, and suffering death with
the extremity of pain and ignominy, that he might recover and save her when
she had lost herself.

The soul being of such an excellent nature, and after her decays by sin
restored to her primitive excellency by grace, is a rich possession to
herself, when God gives us the wisdom to obey that evangelical and truly
Philosophical precept of Christ, Luke 21.19. In your patience possess your
souls; not giving leave to the impatience of cupidity and fear to steal that
possession from us. But the soul never has the right possession of herself,
till she have the possession of God. To possess God and to possess our soul
is all one, for the spirit cannot be free, nor happy, nor his own, but by his
union with his original Being, whereby God and the soul have a mutual
possession one of another; A blessed union begun in earth by grace, and
perfected in heaven by glory. The contrary state which is to be separated from
God is the perdition of a man, and the extremity of bondage, want, and misery.

Here to undertake an exact anatomy of the soul would be besides my theme, and
more yet beyond the possibility of right performance. For as the eye cannot see
it self, the spirit of man cannot look into his own composure; and in all
the Philosophical discourses upon that subject, I find nothing but
conjectural. It is more profitable and easy to learn the right government then
the natural structure of the soul. It is part of the knowledge of the soul, to
know that she cannot be known; and that her incomprehensiblenesse is a
lineament of her Creatours image.

The spirit of man is more quick and stirring then clearsighted, and many times
is like a Faulcon that flies up with his hood on. He has a good wing, but he
is hood winkt. How many wits take a high flight and know not where they be? And
where shall you find one that understands thoroughly the matter that he
speaks of? The Authors that write of all animals and plants, understand not
the nature of a caterpiller or a lettice, how then shall they understand the
nature of intellectual substances? Certainly all our Philosophy of the nature
of things is but seeking and guessing. Job 8.9. We are but of yesterday and
know nothing, because our days upon earth are as a shadow, says Bildad. Our
life is a shadow because it is transitory, but more because it is dark. The
Earth where we live is inwrapt in clouds, and our soul in ignorance as long as
we live upon earth; and yet we are as resolute and affirmative in our Opinions
as if we had pitched our Tabernacle in the Sun: We could not speak with more
authority if we were possessed, as God is, with the original Idea's and the very
being of things. A wise and moderate man will not be carried away by that
presumption, neither of others nor his own, but with humility will acknowledge
the blind and rash nature of the spirit of man, that knows nothing and
determines of all things, that undertakes all and brings nothing to an end.
Pure truth and full wisdom lies in the bosom of the Father of lights: Our
souls are little, unclean, narrowmouthed vessels, incapable to receive it but
by small drops, and that little we receive we taint by our uncleanness.

In our soul we conceive two intellectual faculties, the understanding and the
will; In the understanding three, imagination, memory, and judgment.
Imagination is that which makes all the noise, enters every where, inventeth,
reasons, and is always in action. To it we owe all the ingenious productions
of eloquence and subtility. Its the inventor of arts and sciences, the learner
and polisher of inventions. It is of great service, and gives great content,
being well managed, and employed in good things. The office of imagination
being to transform itself into the things that it takes for objects: it is
transformed into God when it applies itself unto God, and is transformed into
the Father of all evil, when it applies itself unto evil.

Memory is the Exchequer of the soul, keeping that which the imagination and
judgment commit to her trust. In the primitive ages when the world stood in
need of inventions, a quick and fertile imagination made able men. But in these
last ages, a well furnished memory makes a rich and a full mind; so she be not
destitute of the two other faculties. In vain does the imagination invent and
collect industriously, and the judgment prudently determine, if the memory be
not a faithful keeper of the inventions of the one, and the determinations of
the other, and together a ready prompter at need of that she has in keeping.
It is memory that keeps this good treasure of which the Lord Jesus speaks,
Matthew. 12.35. A good man out of the good treasure of the heart brings forth
good things. But she keeps evil as well as good, and often more firmly then
good. An evil man out of the evil treasure, of his heart brings forth evil
things. Of her nature she is indifferent to good and evil, as a paper to write
what one will upon and a chest that will keep, any thing. According to the
things that are put into that chest, it is either a cabinet that keeps jewels,
or a sink that receives ordure. If we will have the right use and content of
our memory, we must furnish her with good and holy things, that she may always
prompt matter to our mind, to commune with God, and to direct and comfort
ourselves. For when she is fraught with evil and vain matter, she will thrust
evil and vain things upon us, when the occasion and our own mind calls for
things good and serious, as an idle servant that brings his Master a pare of
cards when he calls for a Book of devotion. Many times we heartily desire that
we could forget certain things, which our memory importunately sets before us
on all occasions.

Judgment is the noblest part of the soul, the Chief Justice determining what
the imagination discusseth, and the memory registreth. Imagination makes witty
men, memory learned men, but the Judgment makes wise men. The wise man is he
that judges aright, not he that discourses finely, nor he that learneth well
by heart.

For the strength of the several faculties the natural temper of the brains
does much, but study perfecteth them, the judgment especially; for some have
made themselves a judgment by use and experience, who had none in a manner by
nature.

Of these three faculties, the Imagination, which is the seat of wit and
invention, has a nearer kindred with judgment, then memory with either; for
wit will ripen into judgment, and in distracted brains both are imbezelled
together, while memory remains entire. It is ordinary to see dull fools have
a great memory. And it is credible that the largeness of the memory
(especially when it is streacht with overmuch learning) lesseneth the two other
faculties; as in three rooms of a floor, if the one be made very wide the two
others must of necessity be little.

The Judgment calls all things before his tribunal, and examines them upon two
points, whether they be true or false, good or evil. There he stays, when the
subject requires contemplation only; but when it requires action, then the
determination of the judgment makes the will to move toward that which the
judgment has pronounced to be true and good; for to move toward that which
we judge to be false or evil, we cannot. For although our will follow many
times false and evil objects, the judgment always considers them to be true
and good, in some respect; Neither would our will so much as bend toward any
object, unless our judgment did before warrant it to us, true and good. Truth
and falsehood have their springs without us: But moral good and evil, as far
as they concern our innocence and guiltiness, have their springs within us;
and both spring from our judgment, to which we must atribute what is ascribed
to the heart by Solomon (in whose tongue one word signifies both.) Prove. 4.23.
Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of life.

Herein then lies wisdom, the worker and keeper of contentment of mind, to
give a sound judgment of objects, and thereupon to give good counsel to the
will for embracing that which is good, and resisting all oppositions to it by
the arms of righteousness on the right hand and on the left, so that the
soul, as a well balasted and a well guided ship, cuts her way through the
waves, and makes use of all winds to steer her course to the haven of
salvation and Gods glory, possessing calm within, among the storms abroad.
But for that wise and blessed temper, there is need of a higher wisdom then
the strength of Nature and the precepts of Philosophy can afford to the
judgment.

By the Judgment, men are wise; but by the Will, they are good. Wisdom and
goodness always go together; when they go asunder, they are not worthy of
their name. For that man is not wise that instructs not himself to be good;
and that man is not good that does good actions, not out of wisdom and
knowledge, but out of superstition or custom.

The chief virtue of the understanding is the knowledge of God, and the chief
virtue of the Will is his Love. These two virtues comprehend all others, and
help one another. They jointly give tranquillity and content to the soul, when
we exercise our selves in the knowledge of God, because we love him; and when
we love and obey him, because we know him to be most good, most wise, most
perfect, and most worthy to be loved and obeyed.

The right bent and true perfection of the will man is an entire concurrence
with the will of God in all things, both to execute the will of his command and
undergo the will of his decree; in both walking so unanimously with God, that
man have no other will but God's. He that has thus transformed his will into
Gods will, possesses a quiet and contented mind. For when we will always what
God wills, our will is always done.

The will is the reasonable appetite of the soul; besides which there is in the
soul joined with the body an appetite half reasonable and half seusitive
which comprehends all the Passions, some of which have more of the reasonable,
some more of the sensitive part, according as they stick more or less to the
matter. They must be the subject of the next Book.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Ornaments acquisite of the understanding.
WE are so blind at home that we know less our natural then our acquisite
goods: Yea without acquisite goods we are little sensible of the natural goods
of the soul. The natural Ornaments of the Understanding, quickness of wit,
fidelity of memory, and solidity of judgment are seen only in the
acquisitions made by study and use, for they that trade not with that patrimony
of Nature, lose most part of it and differ little from beasts. The acquisitions
of the understanding may be reduced to these two heads; Science, and Prudence.

Science is the husbandry of the soul, a field whose virtue is never known
till it be husbanded. Prudence is above Science in dignity, but Science
precedeth Prudence in order, as the means go before the end.

This position that prudence is the end, and sciences are the means, gives the
true light to choose those sciences that deserve a ferious study. Sciences are
multiplied to a great number, and grown to a goodly perfection in this
Western world. They have their several uses and beauties. But because it is
impossible to entertain them all, the prentiship being long and life short,
those especially should be followed which are ways to true Prudence, teaching
men to live well and dye well. It is the Learning, so much recommended by
Solomon, Prove. 4.13. Take fast hold of instruction, let her not go, keep her,
for she is thy life.

Of those that court learning some do it out of necessity, to get their living;
They choose sciences as they do their wives, those that are fittest for
housekeeping. Others that have wealth and leisure, choose sciences as they
choose their Mistresses, the fairest and most recreative. But of sciences as of
women, the most recreative are not always the most honest; as all sciences
that are buzy about predictions for the future.

Of humane sciences the most part has more luster then price: Learning in
tongues is a fine Ornament, and of great use, yet not answerable to the labor
and time that it stands in. When we have learned to name heaven and earth five
or six several ways, we know their natures never the better for that. A
wiseman will rather seek the use then the luster of languages. And for his
own use he ought not to deny to himself that innocent delight to be able to
relish the eloquence of the tongues, which with great reason have the vogue
among the learned; there being nothing that does more sweeten and polish the
mind then good matter clad with a style simple and elegant, like a smooth and
well colored skin laid over strong brawny limbs.

There are studies that have little luster and less price, and yet by their
severe garb go for wise and serious. Such is Schoole-philosophy which for
three or four hundred years has reigned in our Universities, and roughcast
Divinity with barbarous terms and crabbed distinctions. For as if Schoolmen
would outdoe Pilates soldiers that crowned the head of our Savior with
thorns, they have habited his doctrine with thorns all about from top to toe,
so thick that themselves can hardly see the day thorough. The writings of
Schoolmen are like Labyrinths, which in a little piece of ground have a very
long and intricate way. For the learning of those ages being confined within a
short compass, those resolute and irrefragable Doctors (for so they style one
another) not being able to travel far, and yet eager of going, did but turn
and wind within their narrow limits, and crossed a thousand times the same way.
It is scarce credible how little there is to learn in all that huge mass of
harsh subtility. It is true indeed that in all studies of men there is vanity,
and the learning that succeeded that rusty learning has a merryer vanity. But
since it is so, that there is vainity in both, give me rather a fair and
smooth vanity then a grimme and rugged. Si nugae, saltem sint canorae. Serious
fools are the most troublesome.

Arts that regard the civil good are of so much price as they bring utility to
the public, and benefit to the professors. Every one must get skill enough in
his art to be useful for society, and to live in the world. But there are some
sciences, which, though especially professed by some, belong alike to all, and
regard the profession of man as he is man. For God has created and placed us
in the world to learn three things; How the world is made, What the world
does, And what we must do in the world. How the world is made, we learn by
natural Philosophy, the Sphere and Cosmography. What the world does, we learn
by Histories. What must be done in the world we learn out of Ethics and
Politiques and especially out of Divinity. These Sciences are beneficial and
delightful; and to be altogether ignorant of these, is to live in the world not
knowing for what. A prudent man will pick out of these what is most fit for his
principal end, which is to glorify God, inform his judgment, order his life,
and content himself.

All the Learning that we lay up must end in Prudence. Wherefore those studies
that form the judgment, must be more carefully tended then those that
exercise the imagination. Mathematical sciences are admirable, but this they
have, that they take off the mind from matters of judgment and prudence, and
fix it altogether upon quantity and material proportion.

Prudence is the guide of all virtues, and marches before to give them light.
Yea she comprehends them all, for nothing is ill done but for want of prudence,
and the great prudence is to be religious, just, constant, and temperate.
Nullum numen abest, si sit prudentia. Solomon giving such an express charge
and so often repeated, to get prudence, thereby recommendeth all virtues, and
above all, the fear of God which is the beginning of wisdom. Prudence is that
eye which the Lord Jesus calls the light of the body, Matthew. 6.22. that is the
conduct of life. And whereas virtues consist in keeping a just temper between
extremes, they owe that skill unto prudence, for unto it belongs the ordering
and disposition of things. Prudence shows what is requisite for every virtue.
Prudence governs all the free actions of life.

My end here is to know the price, not to give the rules of prudence: But those
Authors cannot be excused, that have set out treatises of prudence, without
giving any counsel for the direction of a man's behavior in public or private
occurrences, but only definitions expounded at large, divisions, and
disputations whether it be a virtue moral or intellectual, contemplative or
practical, Whether the actus elicitus of prudence be to know or to will, and
what difference there is between acting and doing. Goodly instructions to
form a Councellor of State, and to underprop a tottering Commonwealth. Could
these Doctors have done worse for themselves, if they had undertaken to
justifye the ordinary reproach against learning, that prudence lies out of the
circuit of Schollership, and that it is incompatible with learning? This they
justifye more yet, when they pass from contemplation to practice. For, in
Council, though but a mean corporation, tradesmen many times will speak more
pertinently thet great Scholars.

Of this the fault lies not in Learning, which is the right way to Prudence,
but in not choosing the right learning for prudence, and applying ones mind to
other things: For neither Transcendents nor Modals, not Hesychius nor Suidas,
nor Apogees nor Excentriques teach a man wisdom. It were a wonder if they
that never learned wisdom, understood it: There are two ways to get it,
Science and Experience. These men have neither, that have spent all their study
about Syllogisms or Horoscopes. But take me a Scholar that has made prudence
his study, and bent all his learning to that mark, seeking it first in Gods
Book, the spring of all wisdom, then in the writings of wisemen both ancient
and late, and in history which is the Mistress of life; Let him study men and
business, as well as Books. Let him converse with the wisest and best versed
in the world, and consummate himself in experience. When such a man shall
speak in a Council of State among unlearned men, it will appear how rash and
injurious that sentence is, that learning and prudence are incompatible; and
how far the learned go beyond the ignorant for deep insight into businesses,
and healing or preventing public evils.

Because we seek here the just price of things, we must not attribute too much
unto Science and Prudence. These two together make a goodly match: By knowledge
and and wisdom a man differs from a beast. But both are subject unto
vanity. For knowledge, take the verdict of two the most learned of all the
Canonical writers, Solomon and St. Paul. The first will tell you He that
increases knowledge, increases sorrow. Eccl. 1.18. The other, Knowledge
puffs up. 1 Cor 8.1. Sorrow and pride are the ordinary effects of Learning,
but when it meets with a strong and meek spirit upheld with Gods grace. Pride
will easily get into those that have some, but little learning; for it is a
point of ignorance for one to think he is learned when he is not. But when we
are advanced in learning, we learn that we know nothing, and discover the
uncertainty of sciences; that they perform not what they promise, that new
writers give the lie to the old, Eccl. 12.12. that of making many Books there
is no end, and much study is a weariness of the flesh. A wise man that will
reap from learning utility and content, must expect no more of it then it can
afford. He will deal with learning as with money, he will not be a servant to
it, but make it his Servant. When he is past the drudgery of the School, he
will (if he can) make his study his pastime, not his task.

Prudence is no less subject to vanity then Learning, but rather has more
uncertainty. For sciences have certain objects, since they consider universals,
which are always the same, what change soever happen in the particulars. But
prudence, having no object but particular things casual and uncertain, cannot
have but an uncertain seat upon such an unstayed bottom, for though there be
general rules of prudence, they must continually be bowed and made longer or
shorter according to the accidents and circumstances; which being every where
different require also every where a different manner of conduct. After a wise
deliberation and an industrions managing of a business, an unfortunate end
many times will follow. How often has the most mature prudence bin overcome by
folly and precipitate rashness? Of which the principal cause is the
provocation of Gods jealousy by humane wisdom, when it grows to presumption.
Isa. 24.15. Woe unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the Lord,
and their works are in the dark, and they say, Who sees us? and who knows
us? For God who is called only wise by St. Paul, Romans 16.27. for which he will
have him to be glorified for ever, is highly offended when any pretends to
share in that title which is his only, and takes a delight to blow upon
projects made up with great art, to show to the wise of the world that they are
but fools.

To judge wisely of the businesses of the world, we should see the wheels and
inward motions of them, but they are hidden from us. We can hardly pry into the
counsels of men, how can we penetrate into the Decrees of God, those great and
secret motions locked up in the closet of his wise providence? In the greatest
revolution of our age, we are eyewitnesses how the wisest counsels of a party
have always turned to their ruin, and the faults of State on the contrary
party have always bin fortunate. To one side prudence and imprudence have bin
alike pernicious. To the other prudence and imprudence have bin alike
advantageous. Let us look up to God whose ways are not our ways, and his
thoughts are not our thoughts, and against whose will no strength and no
counsel will hold. The future being to us a dark empty space where we see
nothing, no wonder that humane prudence seldom hits right in her forecast for
the future. The prudent man has as much advantage over the imprudent as one
that has good eyes over a blindman, but when both are in the dark one sees
no more then the other. Many future events are as dark to the wise, as to the
unwise. And when wisdom is most clear sighted, it can but regulate the
counsels, but cannot dispose of the events.

The wiseman has this benefit of his wisdom, that if his counsels succeed
well he can make good use of prosperity: And if his good counsels have an
unhappy success, either he declines the blow, or gets a lenitive to it by
prudence and patience; or he makes advantage of it for some good; and which way
soever the staff fall, he never repents of a good counsel.

Of all the acquisite endowments of the understanding Prudence is the best,
therefore beyond all comparison more precious then all the goods of body and
fortune: But together let us acknowledge that it has a short sight, and a
tottering bottom. Wherefore the great precept of wisdom, is, to mistrust our
wisdom and repose ourselves upon Gods wisdom and love. Let our prudence
depend altogether upon his providence.

It is a great abatement of the price of humane prudence that death cuts it off
with the thread of life. Eccl. 2.17. This was a cause why Solomon hated life,
even because the wiseman dies as the fool. Yet had he wisely pondred the
matter before ver. 13. I saw that wisdom excels folly as far as light
excels darkness: The wisemans eyes are in his head, but the fool walks
in darkness: but I perceived also that one event happenth to them all. It is
enough to disdain the vanity of life, and of human wisdom better then life,
to see a great Statesman that made a Kingdom to flourish and the neighboring
States to tremble, to be cut off in the midst of his high enterprises and deep
counsels, all which dye with him. Psalm. 46.4. His breath goes forth, he
returns to his earth, in that very day his thoughts perish. That plotting
brains from whose resolution the fortune of an empire depended shall breed
worms and toades. And truly it should be unreasonable that this kind of
prudence which has no object but worldly and perishable, should remain
permanent. But it is very consonant to reason that a higher prudence which
applies itself to permanent things, remain permanent. It is that permanent
wisdom which our Savior recommends unto us, Luke 12.33. Provide yourselves
baggs which wax not old, a treasure in the heavens that fails not. It is
that wisdom which Solomon calls a tree of life to them that lay hold on her,
because she lives after death, and makes the soul live for ever. Judge you of
the price of these two sorts of wisdoms; the one that perishes, and many
times makes men perish; the other that endures for ever, and will certainly
make them that embrace her, eternally blessed.

CHAP. XIX. Of the acquisite Ornaments of the Will.
THe end of the instruction of the Understanding is the ruling and ordering of
the Will in a constant goodness, so much better then science and prudence, as
the end is better then the means; unless by prudence we understand that
wisdom which is employed about man's duty to God, and comprehends all virtues;
for as in God all virtues are but one, which is his Being; likewise when we
take virtues in a divine sense one virtue comprehends many, as having some
participation with the divine nature.

Commonly by virtue we understand uprightness of the will, because without it
the virtues of the understanding, science, intelligence, and prudence, deserve
not to be called virtues, and the more able they are, the more pernicious.

Virtue of all acquisitions is the most precious; without it the goods of body
and fortune become evils, serving only to make a man guilty and miserable; for
then the goods of the body give the faculty, and the goods of fortune give the
opportunity to do evil; but without them Virtue alone is good, and fetches
good even out of evil.

By virtue man is made like God who is the original virtue. Virtue gives glory
to God, utility to the public, tranquillity and joy to the conscience,
relief to some, counsel to others, example to all. Virtue is respected of
all, even of them that envy it. They that love not the reality of virtue, yet
study to get the name of it, and to put upon their false coin the stamp of
virtue. All the hypocrisy in the world is an homage that Vice pays unto
Virtue.

A virtuous man may be stripped of his estate by his enemies, but of his virtue
he cannot. Because he keeps it, he is always rich. Virtue strengthens him in
adversity, moderates him in prosperity, guides him in society, entertaines him
in his solitariness, advises him in his doubts, supports him in his
weakness, keeps him company in his journeyes by sea and land. If his ship
sink, virtue sinkes not; and he whether living or dying saves it and himself.
By virtue he fears neither life nor death, looking upon both with an equal
eye, yet aspiring to depart and to be with Christ; but bearing patiently the
delay of his departure, because he is already with Christ by a lively hope.
Virtue steering the soul makes it take a straight and safe course to heaven,
and there abides with him eternally, for virtue as well as glory is that
treasure in heaven, where neither the moth nor the rust corrupt, and where
thieves do not break thorough and steal. Math. 6.

Philosophy considers three virtues in the will, Justice, Fortitude, and
Temperance, excellent virtues, the first especially, which in effect contains
the two others; for it is the right temper of the will, not drawn aside from
the integrity of a good conscience, either by oppositions of adversity against
which fortitude stands fast, or by allurements of prosperity from which
temperance witholds the appetite. Good conscience (of which we have spoken in
the first Book) is nothing else but justice.

For these virtues wherein man's duty and happiness consists it were hard to
find Elogies equal to their worth. But there is great diffecence between the
excellency of Virtue in it self, and such virtue as is found among men. The
exactest justice that man is capable of, is defective and infected with sin.
All our righteousnesses are as the defiled cloth. Wherefore the description of
a just counterpoise of the will, never swarving either on the right hand or the
left, never shaken from his square cubus either by afflictions or temptations,
is a fair character fit to set before our eyes, to imitate as near as we can;
as fair pictures, in the sight of breeding women: But truly such a perfect
virtue subsisteth not in any subject under heaven. In this world to be just, is
only to be somewhat less evil then others.

If a perfect Justice cannot be established in the private policy of a man's
soul, it is not to be looked for in public Policies. Justice being pure in her
original, becomes impure and maimed being kneaded by the weak and unclean
hands of men Job 14.4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Of this
it were easy to give instances out of the forms of Justice, and out of the
very Laws in all States. But it is a point of justice to respect her in those
hands to which divine providence has entrusted her, and to add strength to
her weakness by our voluntary deference.

Man being weak in justice, cannot but be so in her appurtenances, fortitude
and temperance. The highest point unto which human precepts endeavor to raise
fortitude is to make patience a remedy to evils remediless. But how short the
bravest men come of that remedy in their pains and griefs, daily experience
shows it. The vulgar places the virtue of fortitude in striking and
massacring, which is rather a barbarous inhumanity; and if it be a virtue,
tigers are more virtuous then men.

As for Temperance, her very name sounds weakness. For he that is not subject
to be corrupted by evil suggestions, has no need of temperance. That man is
temperat that knows how to keep himself from himself; who therefore is
naturally evil, and prone to vicious excesses: Wherein men are inferior to
beasts, which are not tempted with covetuousnesse and desire of superfluities,
but keep within the bounds of nature and necessity.

Where there is a complete virtue, there is neither fortitude nor temperance;
Therefore these are not in God, who is the original virtue. He has no need of
fortitude, for he has no danger to overcome; and no use of temperance, for he
has no affection that need to be restrained; whence it follows that man also
when he is once brought to his perfection of virtue which is his full union
with God, shall have neither fortitude nor temperance, as having no evil to
oppose, and no ^upidity to repress. Justice is the only virtue that outliveth
the body, and lives eternally with God; not that justice established in the
Polities of the world, for in heaven there is neither selling nor contracting,
which are the subjects of communicative justice: And as for the distributive,
which has two offices, to recompense virtue and to punish vice, humane justice
exercises but the last; recompense is accounted an act of grace, and is rare:
Whereas Gods justice regards so much more reward then punishment, as a
thousand is more then three or four, as it is expressed in the precept against
Idolatry. Exodus 20.5. and 6.

That justice of good Christians which outliveth temporal life is the
uprightness of their will, which in the passage of the soul to the high seat
of perfection will be wonderfully mended and sublimated. While the spirit
lives in the flesh, though the will were never disturbed from its uprightness
by the tumult of passions, yet it could not be raised to a degree of
uprightness above the proportion of the illumination of of the understanding.
Now the understanding is obscured in this world with a mist of error,
receiving but some few rays of the Sun of righteousness through a cloud.

I like very well the setting forth of a fair and complete notion of Virtue,
filling the soul with joy; which is not a chimera and a fiction, for every good
soul must once be really brought to that perfection in his final union with
God, who is the sovereign good of man, the original perfection, and virtue in
substance. But I wish together, that while we set before the eyes of men, a
high character of a wise and virtuous man, complete and happy in himself, we
put them in mind of the fickly condition of man's soul, as long as she dwells in
the flesh, that none be deceived with those Idea's of imaginary perfection
which Pagan Philosophers ascribe to the wise man living according to nature.

To the Christian only it becomes well to describe virtue in a perfect
character, 2 Pet. 1.4. partaker of the divine nature, and though it be above
his pitch, yet to aspire to it; for he knows whom he has believed, and where
he may get a perfection exceeding abundantly above all that he asks or thinks
according to the power that works in him, Ephesians. 3.20. yea so far as to be
filled with all the fulness of God. But in the mouth of Philosophers that
expect no perfection but from their own nature, nor a longer duration of their
virtue then of their natural life (and of such men there are more in the world
then one would think) those high expressions of the greatness and happiness
of a virtuous man are illegitimate, unsuitable, and unbecoming; for either
these characters are true, and then they were not made for them; or they are
productions of a wild and fantastical pride. Seneca describing his wise man
says, that he cannot be shaken with any thing and that he marches equal with
God. Alas poor little man! Do but discharge a pistol at his ears, though
charged with powder only, you shall see that stout champion, which marches
equal with God, mightily shaken and discomposed in his march. There needs but
the sting of a tarantola to make him skip and dance, put his virtue out of
tune, and turn all his Philosophy upside down. Another was saying virtute mea
me involvo, I wrap my self about with my virtue, as if it had bin an armor
cannonproofe and thunderbolt proof. Though it had bin so, and impenetrable to
temptation besides, yet it is not impenetrable to death, for these disciples of
nature only, pretend not to extend the life of their virtue beyond the life of
nature. To what purpose all those bravado's for a mortal virtue; that the
wiseman is always free, always rich, always happy, that he wants nothing
because he has himself, that he is King of the universe and Master of
fortune, that in all conditions he is safe, steadfast, and content, and finally
that he is always in health; but when he has got a cold, as Horace jestingly
adds. This is stretching man beyond man. That wiseman after all that flourish
is a calamitous creature weak, needy, unstable, subject to err, to sin, to
suffer, and in the end to dye. Certainly if among all the Philosophical virtues
humility and faith be wanting, they serve but to puff up a man and make him
burst and perish. Let us before all things humble ourselves before God, who is
the only wise and righteous, mistrusting ourselves and putting our trust in
him. Then let us seek wisdom in his wisdom; and to frame our spirit upon
it let us implore the assistance of his Spirit. After that, moral virtues will
become easy to learn, and pleasant to practice. They shall obtain a good
reward in heaven; and in earth work their own recompense.

CHAP. XX. Of the World and Life.
HAving looked within and about us and beheld the course of the World in its
parts, let us now behold it in the great. Which may be done two ways, Either
in the outward scene of men's actions, or in the inward motions of Gods
providence that are visible to us in some part. In both these respects the
World is incomprehensible; in the former for its great variety and confusion,
in the latter for its infinite deepenesse.

The outward face of the world is a stage of wickedness, vanity and misery.
Wickedness is universal; for although in Policies there be some face of order
and justice, without which no society can subsist; Yet if one look to the
reality of the actions and intentions of men, the two great trades of the World
are fraud and oppression. There is a general maxim which every man denies,
and every man (in a manner) practices, That wisdom consists in thriving by
other men's harms: Public and private contracts, bonds, sureties, and
hostages, are fences against that general inclination, and yet many times are
employed to execute it. All securities both by strength and law are grounded
upon that Opinion that none abstaines to do harm but he that wants power. In
the best composed States governed with most integrity, particular interesse
bears the sway, howsoever public good be pretended. Wherefore that is the
best form of State where the more good the Sovereign Magistrate does to the
public, the more he advances his own private interess.

Rapine is the universal practice of the World. Whole Nations live of nothing
else. Indeed the Europeans follow it with some outward reservednesse. There is
no less wickedness among us then with the Arabians and Moors, but there is
more hypocrisy. We do not rob caravans of Merchants, and take no men upon the
Christian coasts to make them slaves, but we suck out their blood and marrow by
quillets of law, we overthrow our Country to build our houses with the public
ruins. Phil. 2.21. All seek their own not the things of the Lord Jesus. We
give indeed that respect to piety and virtue that we will be reputed good, but
we are afraid to be so. Little scruple is made of unlawful profit and
pleasure, only care is taken to do ill feats with little noise. The life of
the World is a play where every one studieth, not to do his duty really, but to
act his part handsomely. I leave out more notorious crimes, because they are
eminent, and set themselves out by their infamy.

To the wickedness of the World is joined vanity weakness and folly. For one
cunning man there is ten thousand Idiots, whose blindness and rash credulity
is a servant to the covetousness and ambition of a few crafty dealers. And yet
the most crafty are not free of the captivity of custom and superstition,
whereby a man's spirit is hooded with error, and starts at truth and good
counsel. The World is a crowd of giddy people justling one another, A company
of blind people following one another and holding by the cloak them that go
next before. If the former fall, so will the others; and it would be thought
want of civility to stand when the guides are falling, or to offer to see when
all the company is winking, and to refuse to sin a la mode. Youth is foolish,
old age is doting. Orators tell us idle tales with much gravity. To please the
people one must deceive them. The vulgar is set in an uproare upon light
occasions, and for light reasons pacifyed again. They leave the substance to
run after the shadow. Passion not reason makes them turn now to evil now
to good; in both the more impetuously, the more weakly. They have some good
Opinion of virtue, and esteem it by hearsay, till it come near, and then they
cannot abide it, laboring to destroy virtuous men, and after they are
destroyed esteeming them again, and calling for them when they are no more.
Gallants are slaves to other men's Opinions, neglecting the duty for the
ceremony, leaving health and convenience for a conceited decency, living at a
venture, and dying at random.

The life of the World is a false game, where there is perpetual justling out
one of another whether it be at great sets, when one nation drives another away
by invasion, and one faction in the State puts down the contrary; or by playing
every one for himself, each one catching what and where he can, whosoever be a
loser by it.

Out of that hideous confusion a woeful misery must needs follow in the world,
where for one winner there are a hundred losers. Man by nature is miserable,
composed of a sickly body, and a spirit that is his own tormenter. But as if
all that were not enough, he is destroyed by his own kind. There is but two
sorts of men in the World, oppressors and oppressed; Psalm. 74.20. The dark
places of the earth are full of the habitations of cruelty, which is also
Solomon's contemplation. Eccles. 4.1. I considered all the oppressions that are
done under the Sun, and beheld the tears of such as were oppressed and they had
no comforter, and on the side of their oppressors there was power, but they had
no comforter. Wherefore I praised the dead, which are already dead, more then
the living which are yet alive. Yea better is he then them both which has not
yet bin, who has not seen the evil work that is done under the Sun.

This argument of the wickedness vanity and misery of the world is so ample,
so known, and so well treated by others that I may excuse my self of further
insisting upon it. All this is but the exterior face of the world: But the
inward motions, and the secret order of Gods wise conduct among all that
disorder, has never bin sufficiently considered; though there be enough to be
seen on the dyal of that great clock to judge at least of the wisdom of the
great workman, and acknowledge that there is a deep and divine art in that
hidden machine of the counsel^^^y, of his providence. A considering eye may
mark how both by the concourse and the opposition of so many free, stirring and
disorderly agents certain orderly and unavoydable events are produced,
determined in Gods eternal decree. How many different ends and intentions
which all serve for Gods end. Yea though they be evil, God fetches good from
them, and turns them to his glory. Wherefore after we have thoroughly known
the world as wicked as it is, weak, blind, confused, and turbulent: yet let us
acknowledge that all that disorder is useful, and that among so much evil
there is nothing but does good. The insolency of some serves to exercise the
patience of others and form them to virtue. Gods indulgence pouring plenty
into the mouths that blaspheme him teaches his children to do good to their
enemies, and not to be more hasty then God to see justice executed on the
wicked. It is a goodly study to be a disciple of Gods providence.

Consider how the States of the World are maintained by their own diseases.
France is swarming with poor and vagrants, and idleness is thought there to
be essential to gentile blood; but hence it comes that the King gets armies as
soon as the drum beats, and is the terror of his enemies and support of his
friends, Whilst other States whose policy is so provident as to leave neither
poor nor idle person among them, are put to hire soldiers of all nations with
great labor and cost, and commit their safety to outlandish and uninterressed
soldiers. States as well as wine have need of some lees for their
perservation. Among the Turks, Muscovites, and Tartars, the tyrannical
unlimited power of the Sovereign and the blind obedience of the people, keep
the State in peace which otherwise would be torn with civil wars. Gross
stupid ignorance keeps some nations in concord at home; Whilst other nations by
their wit and learning are disquieted with endless factions. The savage and
uncivil humor of some people makes them considerable, and they are respected
of all because they respect no body. Many times a State by a foreign invasion,
and by divisions at home has learned to know his strength, and is become
warlike and formidable to his neighbors. The natural want of necessary things
in a Country, too little for the many inhabitants, have caused the people to
traffic over all the world, and made the abundance of all regions tributary
to their virtue. Covetousness penetrates both the Indies, and compasses the
world about like the Sun, to bring us pearls to hang at the ears of our
Mistresses, and pepper to strew over our cucumbers. For that end great
companies of Merchants are associated, and the fortunes of Princes and
Commonwealthes are ventured in in great Sea Fights. But out of that hazardous
folly which certainly is a great disease of the mind, a great bulk of new
knowledge in natural things accreweth to the public stock of learning, and
thereby a great gate is open for the propagation of the Gospel. So admirable
is Gods providenee, who by small weights setts great wheels on going, and
makes use of the vanity and unsatiable greediness of men to bring near the
remotest parts of the world by the bond of commerce, and advance his Kingdom.
Thus among the giddiness of public commotions, the iniquity of great actions,
and the vanity of their motives, the wisdom and goodness of the first cause
brings under his subjection, the folly and the wickedness of inferior agents.
Romans 3.17. Destruction and misery is in their ways and the ways of peace they
have not known: But they are in Gods hand, who will bring all to a good end.

The reason why we complain of the badness of the time is that we see but one
piece of it. But God that beholds with one aspect the whole course of time from
its spring in the creation unto the mouth where that great river disgorgeth
itself into the Sea of eternity, sees that all which seems evil by
parcells is good when all parts are taken together. And not only he beholds
it, but he conducts it most wisely, and to that wise conduct we must humbly
leave the rectifying of all that seems amiss to us in the course of the times.
It is a great comfort to our mind, and a great help to our judgment in
public disorders and private crosses, that we may be certain that God is an
agent above all agents in all things, even in the worst, which he makes
instruments; to some of his justice, to others of his bounty, to all of his
wisdom.

Among so much evil yet there is some virtue in the world, and where it is not
obeyed yet it is respected. If the torrent of the perversity of the time
becomes so rapid that good men cannot row against it to any preferment, it will
never bar them from all havens of retreat; and to force them to a retreat
many times it is to compel them to their good and rest; for as they are
further from the favor of great men, they are freer also from their factions.
During the tempest one may sleep at the noise of the waves. There is no place
so unsafe and full of trouble, but the God of peace may be found in it; And
they that trust in him, repose themselves safe and quiet under his wing. The
world shall never be so wicked and so contrary to good men but that they may do
good to the world against its will.

One thing must make us look kindly upon this world, that it is the Hall of
Gods house, where we wait expecting to be advanced to Gods presence; and all
things that happen to us in this life help to bring us to that Land of
Promise. All creatures not corrupted by sin speak to us of God. Yea every
thing, good and bad, gives us matter to lift up our thoughts unto God. Nature
smiles upon them that love God. Then his law directs us, His promises comfort
us, He guides us by his Spirit. He covers us by his providence. He shows us
from above the prize kept for us at the end of the race. By which means we are
less weary of the world then they that ground their hopes upon it. And after
we have balanced with a calm judgment the good and evil that is in the world,
we find that the world goes better with the good then with the bad; life
cannot be very bad, if it be a man's voyage to God.

OF PEACE AND CONTENTMENT OF MIND.
THIRD BOOK. Of the Peace of Man with himself, by Governing his Passions.
CHAPTER I. That the right Government of Passions depends of right Opinion.
THe right employment of a Christian Philosopher that will have peace at home
is to calm the tumult of Passions. For the sensitive Appetite is in the soul
as the common people in a State. It is the dregs and the lowest part of the
spirit, that has a near affinity with the outward sense, greedy, rash,
tumultuous, prone to discontent and munity. Reason in a man's soul holds the
place of a Sovereign, which many times is ill obeyed. She is like the coachman,
and the Passions like the horses, fierce and hardmouthed, pulling hard against
the bridle, which many times they pluck out of her hands.

Of this a cause is given, which is natural and good. That the first years of
life before a man be capable of the use of reason are altogether under the
empire of the Appetite, which being used to rule does not willingly become a
subject to Reason, when age and instruction awake that higher faculty; and in
many that rebellion holds till they be far gone in their life, or to the very
end. Wherefore it will be a wise part to tame the opiniatre appetite of
children, beginning at the first year of their life, to teach their eager will
to be denied. He that was used to yield to his Nurse, has already taken a ply
of obedience, and will more readily bow to reason when age brings it.

That tender age breeds another cause of the disobedience of Passions to right
reason: That the child's judgment is dyed with false Opinions of the objects
which his appetite imbraceth. For in the age when the Appetite is sole regent
in the soul, the Fancy and the Memory are filled with images proportionate to
the outward appearance, making the child take all that is gilded for massy
gold, all glittering things for precious, and feathers and sugar plums for the
Sovereign good. Which first imaginations, being somewhat cleared of their
grossest fogge by age and experience, yet leave these false notions in the
mind, that things are within such as they appear without: and that wealth
gallantry and the pleasure of the taste, are the best things of the world;
Opinions which presently prove seeds of covetuousnesse ambition and luxury,
which in short time (as all ill woedes) will grow strong and fill the soul with
trouble and misery.

Then the first, yea the only course to free the Appetite of vicious Passions,
is to heal the understanding of erroneous Opinions. The Appetite cannot but
go astray when the understanding is blind. When the understanding is free of
error, the Appetite is free of Vice. For although many times Passion run into
disorder contrary to the light of the understanding, that never hapens but when
the understanding has consented for a while to some false opinion seduced by
flattery of Passion, that strokes him and puts her hand before his eyes; for
it is impossible for the Appetite to embrace that which Reason sees and
pronounces to be altogether evil.

The great error of the understanding, which makes the passion to apply it
self to an evil object, or to a good object otherwise then it should, is a
mistake in the true price and true inconvenience of things; Which being once
well known, we shall bate much of our desire and fear of most things which we
seek or avoid with great earnestness, and shall become earnest to get other
things which we neglect, and to avoid other things which we desire.

I have endeavored in my second Book to represent the just price of the chief
things that we commonly esteem and desire, and the true inconvenience of things
that we disesteeme or fear. But because it would be an endless labor to
treat of all the several objects of our Passions, I will but recommend to
every person that loves the cleerenesse and tranquillity of his mind, never to
set his love and desire upon any thing, before a mature consideration of what
it is and what it is worth, and never to be angry or sorry for any thing before
we has calmly and leasurely examined whether it be evil, and if so, then in
what measure; weighing as carefully and impartially the qualities and
circumstances that contradict our inclination as those that contribute toward
it. Thus he that delights in a glass must remember well that it is a glass;
and after he has sufficiently considered the pureness of the matter and the
handsomeness of the fashion, he must consider also that it is brittle stuff,
and that it will last but till the next knock; So shall he learn to love it
according to its true price, and no more; his love will last no longer then the
glass, and when it is broken he will say, I knew before that it was a glass.

Thus also to love and desire a dear person as much as it is fit, and no more,
we must well consider her nature and just value; And when Passions will
overvalue her with Idea's of perfection above her just size, Reason will bate
of it, saying, With all this perfection she is a humane creature, and therefore
faulty, mutable and mortal, and as such I must desire her before I have her,
cherish her when I have her, and mourn for her when she is taken from me. Let
us proportion our affection to the quality of the subject, and we shall love it
as we ought.

Thus for other Passions, right Opinion is the moderator. It keeps fear from
increasing dangers, pride and rashness from lessening them, hatred and choler
from making our enemies appear more deformed and guilty then they are,
sadness from aggravating evils, joy from disappointment of false hopes. In a
word, right opinion is the faithful guide of the appetite, the rule of equity,
the preserver of tranquillity.

But because when the objects show themselves the violent commotion of the
passion, without warrant from the judgment many times will shake reason from
right Opinion; it must be studied upon, when the mind is at rest, and reason
confirmed in it by long and careful institution, and strengthened by holy
resolution.

The first thing of which we must have a right opinion, is God: Not to presume
to comprehend the Incomprehensible, but to have a reverend belief of his
goodness, justice, power, and wisdom, of his constancy in his promises and
love; and of his eyes ever open and bent toward (...) both to keep us and to
take notice of our thoughts, words, actions, and affections.

The next thing of which we must be careful to get a right opinion is our
selves, to know our own strength, that we repose not a groundless trust upon
it, and to mark the weakest places of our souls, and those avenues by which
temptations set upon our passion, that there we may double our guard.

Then we must endeavor to get a right opinion of the course of the world, the
genius of the times, and the nature of men and businesses, particularly of
those men that we must converse with, and of the businesses that concern us.
Of those things also that use to flatter or fright our Passion, lest we be
more moved to get or avoid them then they are worth, and lest we neglect them
if they be worth seeking or shunning.

Thus in matter of seeking Preferment we must think soberly before, whether it
be worth the necessary pains to get it, and whether it will recompense the
cares, the envy, and the opposition that attend it. The like when we are
tempted by unlawful profit and pleasure, the advantage that is hoped by it
must be calmely weighed with the disadvantage of displeasing God and troubling
our conscience. And so when anger sets us upon revenge, we must endeavor to
get the right Opinion of the use of revenge, what comfort, what benefit it may
bring, and whether meekness and pardon of the offense for Gods sake be not
more capable and likely to bring us content and real utility.

It is an old and a wise counsel to make a pause every time that we feel some
strong commotion in our appetite, to give time to reason to consider of it.
That pause must be employed to scatter all the clouds that Passion spreads
before the eyes of the understanding, and help reason to recover the sight of
right Opinion, that we may obey that wise and rational command of the Lord
Jesus John 7.24. Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous
judgment.

CHAP. II. Entry into the discourse of Passions.
MY end is to bring Passions under the obedience of right reason, not to
describe exactly their nature. A task where Naturalists come short of
performance; And no wonder, since they take a subject in hand where reason
sees nothing, as if one would make an Anatomy in the dark; for in nothing is
our soul so blind as in the composure of herself: Yea the truest natural
contemplation of Passions is of no great use to govern them: What does it
concern him that studyeth the moderation and the right use of Passions to know
that Joy comes by dilatation of the spirits, Sadness by contraction of the
same, Love by diffusion, Hope by elevation? For my part because I seek
utility, I will be more careful to find the moral counsels by which Passions
are moderated, then the natural ways by which they are moved. And if in the
following discourse of Passions I keep not exactly the order and number
received in the Schools, or treat of some mixed Passion among the simple, it
will not be out of singularity, but because I understand not perfectly those
distinctions.

The first thing to be considered about Passion is whether we must have any, or
utterly destroy it, as the Stoicians and Epicureans would do. This question,
whether we may have Passion with virtue, is as if one asked whether there may
be wool with cloth, for Passion is the stuff of Virtue, and Virtue is but a
passion wisely moderated: If there were no Passion there would be no virtue. If
then the Passion be sick, it must be healed, not slain, and much less must it
be slain when it is in health lest it fall sick.

It may be said for the Philosophers that would cut off or rather root out
Passion, that it is an error that does little harm: for man being naturally
too passionate we must pull to the contrary extreme to bring him to a virtuous
moderation; for after we have rooted it out as much as may be, there will
remain still too much of it.

Beasts have also their Passions, and by them men are allied with beasts. But
the Appetite of the beast is merely sensual, the appetite of man is partly
sensual partly intellectual. Passions may be marshalled into three orders,
according to the three principal faculties of the soul; The inferior order is
of them that are only in the sensitive Appetite, and have their motions for
the body only, as hunger and thirst; Over these reason has less power, for
she cannot persuade him that is hungry not to be so, but she may retard the
satisfaction of the appetite.

Other Passions are lodged in a higher story, and seem to be seated in the
Imagination, as the Passion that one has for curiosities and images of
perfection increased by the desire. These are more capable to be ruled by
reason.

The third and highest order is of intellectual passions, as the love of
learning and contemplation. These are more immediately in the power of reason.
It is the part of reason to form and moderate those passions which are merely
under her jurisdiction, and keep a short bridle to those passions that are
moved without her leave, by nature, chance, or fancy.

As in a well governed kingdom all is done by the King, the faculties of the
soul must be kept in such order that within us all be done by Reason: When that
Sovereign is wise and well obeyed, peace is in the inward State of man. But
when the Sovereign is made subject to his natural Subjects, the sensual
Passions; then the soul is like a body with the heels upward, and the whole
policy of the mind is turned upside down.

Being to speak of the Passions as the winds that stir and toss that inward
sea of the soul, I must also speak of the Virtues that serve to repress
them. Not to treat of each severally and prolixely, but to bring them to
action, and to minister to every Passion its proper remedy.

CHAP. III. Of Love.
LOve is the first of all Passions, and the cause of most part of them. It is
the motion of the soul toward objects that promise rest and contenument. By
Love men are good or evil happy or unhappy, as that Passion is applied to good
or evil objects.

In every soul there is a Master-love which bears rule over all the other
Passions and subjecteth them to its principal object. According to the quality
of that object, love is perfect or unperfect, for as the objects of the sight
change in some sort the apple of the eye into their color and shape, so by
receiving the image of the beloved object into our soul, our soul is
transformed into it, and wedded to its qualities. He that loves a sordid thing
becomes sordid. Does any love his hounds with that principal love? his soul
becomes of the same quality as his hounds. He that loves a high object becomes
high by that love. He that loves God the sovereign good receives the
sovereign good into his soul.

Many causes contribute to the contentment of mind but the chief cause of it
is a worthy love. And it may be truly said that neither in heaven nor in earth
any thing is pleasant and contenting but Love. God himself is love, says St
John, 1. Ioh. 4.16. And I conceive (as much as a finite mind dares conceive of
the infinite God) that in the substantial love embracing the three persons of
the Godhead consists both their personal union and their felicity.

I have spoken before of the virtue of love which unites us with God, and
showed that it is man's great duty and soverain felicity. And hereafter I must
speak of the Christian love due to our neighbors which is called charity; and
of the love of society which is friendship. In all these relations love is a
virtue, either acquisite or infused. But here we consider it as a natural
Passion, which yet we must endeavor to raise to a virtue, and for that we
cannot but return again to the love of God.

The most natural love is the love of the sex. A Passion merely sensual, and
common to men with beasts. And yet it is that Passion which keeps the greatest
stir in man's heart and in the world. That love softeneth magnanimous spirits,
and draws down the soul from the heaven of holy meditation to the dregs of
the matter. But for that Passion, a man might come to a degree of Angelical
purity in this world. Wherefore there is great need to learn how to repress
it. To root it out (if one could find in his heart to do it) would be
destroying nature, and resisting the ordinance of God, who gave that
inclination to all animals for the propagation of their kind. But because God
gave also reason to men above other animals, and his knowledge to Christians
above other men; the love of the Sex has need to be led by a better guide
then Nature, else it is brutish, and that which is innocent in beasts is
vicious in men. By it men instead of the pleasure which they hunt after so
hotly, find sadness, remorse, infamy, destruction of body soul and estate. It
is a fearful sentence that no whoremonger nor unclean person has any
inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God. Ephesians. 5.5.

It is a criminal and deplorable folly to turn into a snare of damnation that
volupty which the indulgence of the wise creator has given to all animals to
invite them to the continuation of themselves in their posterity; and to climb
up at the window with peril to steal pleasure with crime, whilst marriage
opens the door to it, unto which God, men, honesty, duty, utility, and
facility, invite us.

Love altogether carnal does not affect the person but the pleasure, unless by
the person a mansselfe be understood. Love of beauty is love of onesselfe, not
of the desired person, since beauty is desired for pleasure. When that love of
the sex is joined with a true affection to the person, and that affection
grounded in virtue, and encouraged with mutual love, then love and friendship
meet and increase one another; And if marriage follows, it may prove the
greatest of temporal contentments.

But as in unlawful love there is need of continence to refrain it, so in the
lawful there is need of temperance to moderate it. Temperance is the preserver
of love, and of pleasure also; Both are lost by excess. As the flame of a
taper turned upside down is quenched by the substance that feeds it, so love
goes out by too much plenty of aliment. But though love and pleasure could
maintain themselves in the excess, neither body nor mind losing any thing of
their vigor, yet there would be more loss then gain in it; for fervent
passion troubles the serenitie of the soul, and any thing that subjecteth the
understanding to the appetite degradeth the soul of her excellency, especially
when the appetite is merely sensual.

Because in conjugal life two loves meet, the love of the sex, and the love
of society, It will be a wise course, to tie the last with all the bonds of
benevolence. These bonds are piety, sweet conversation, tender care of the
beloved person, patience to bear with her infirmities, and a little winking
not to see all that might diminish love, omitting nothing to make the best of a
bargain which cannot be undone. That indissoluble knot which unto fools makes
marriage a heavy yoke, is unto the wise a help to contentment, for by that
necessity they are taught to love what they must love, and to seek their
delight in their duty.

The greatest fervor of love is not in matrimony, for there one has always
at hand wherewith to cool his thirst; nor in unlawful lust, where also one
knows how to allay his heat, though with the detriment of his conscience; but
in woing, and in longing desires tending to marriage. That heat is increased by
the lawfulnes of the end, and the suggestion of a bewitched reason unto the
conscience, that one that loves honestly cannot love too much: And if that
heat meet with opposition, it increases again by difficulty, and often there
is more love where there is less hope. Quo que minus sperat, hoc magis ille
cupit. Passion will frame in a man's fancy an advantageous image of the beloved
object which stands continually before him; appears to him in dreams, breaks
his sleep, interrupts his best thoughts, and his most important businesses,
makes his spirit a sea in perpetual agitation; and his most quiet intervalls
are sadness and a brown study. The worst is, that God is forgotten, and the
love of heaven is put out by the love of the world.

Many not only of the vulgar sort but of the bravest minds having split their
ship upon this rock, there is need of extraordinary care to avoid it. So much
greater, because our Christian Philosophers have taken less care to
appropriate their remedies to this sickness; for when they inveigh against
carnal and vicious love, those lovers who are persuaded that their love is all
virtuous, because they would not though they could, unlawfully possess the
beloved person, esteem that these censures belong not to them: And yet, God
knows that their love is too carnal, though they were virgins in their very
thoughts, for even the immoderate love of a mother to her child is carnal and
vicious.

They need then to be put in mind that their love cannot be pure in the
quality, as long as it exceeds in the quantity, excess of love for a worldly
object being a most impure quality; for that Master-love which rules in the
soul and brings all other Passions under, is due unto God alone, who will be
loved with all our heart, with all our soul, with all our strength, and with
all our understanding. This the Lord Jesus calls the first and the great
commandment. The great, because it is the chief duty of man, which
comprehends all other duties. And the first, because it is a comment upon the
first precept of the law, Thou shall have none other Gods but me. As then we
must adore none but God alone, we must love none but God alone with that
Masterlove which gives to another the soverainty over ourselves; for that love
is a true adoration, whereby all the faculties of the soul bow and prostrate
themselves before the beloved object. When carnal love is the Master-love in a
soul, then the soul has another God then the true God; and that Passion makes
a burnt-offering of the heart to a false God, some weak sinful creature.
Certainly those impetuous burning fits of carnal love are violent rapines of
the proper rights of God, for to him belongs the heart, and upon him those
raptures and strong agitations of love should have been bestowed; him only we
ought to love with all our soul and with all our strength. O how far are
these violences from those which must take the Kingdom of God by force! And
how many tears and plaints of smarting remorse must fond lovers power, to do
penance for so many tears and plaints of carnal love, that opinatre
imbecility, whereby a man pines and torments himself for the love of another!

Sometimes these two sorts of tears proceeding out of such different causes
have met together in generous and religious souls, who being transported with
those violences of humane love were at the same time strongly moved with godly
jealousy, the conscience grieving and expostulating with the Appetite for
yielding unto any but God the seignory of the heart: Then the love of God
oppressed in the heart under the weight of the world and the flesh, powerfully
bestirred himself, and getting strength by opposition overcame that rival
love, and became in the end Master of the place.

But alas, one victory does not end the combat; For carnal love, when we think
that it is shut out, will re-enter, having the porters of the soul, the senses,
on his side, which open the gate to its objects without the leave of reason,
and help it to make strong impressions upon the fancy; Whereas the immaterial
beauty of God has no help from the senses, and makes no impression upon the
imagination; but in recompense it does immediately illuminate the understanding
and work upon the affections, and so sanctifyeth and strengthens them, that
after many combats, carnal love is subdued; And if it plead nature for
staying with us, yet it is brought to such a subjection that it moves no more
but orderly, and within the limits of piety and reason, possessing but such a
parcel of the affection as it pleases the love of God to allow nature to hold
under him.

The limits and rules of reason about the choice of the subject of that love
are possibility, lawfullnesse, and convenience. The measure of love must be
according to the price of the subject. But when it comes to wedlock another
measure is requisite, that of oblgiation and duty; before wedlock, love is
prone to overvalue his subject: Let lovers remember that the most perfect
persons are humane creatures, therefore a humane love is fit for them, not a
divine service; for then we serve them as God alone must be served, when we
make them Mistrisses of our heart, Take the best of them, their beauty will
fade, their sweetness will sour, and their persons must dye; this bates much
of their price. Fair Diamonds would not be so dear, if they could grow pale
and wear out. Know once the most lovely persons, you shall not admit them to
competition with God for the possession of your heart.

Love aspireth to perfection. He then must be beloved above all things who
makes them perfect that love him. It is more then Ladies can do, though never
so perfect. But by loving God who is the sovereign perfection, we become like
him in our measure and are changed into the same image.

And since delight is the bait of love, we must love him above all things that
satisfyeth us with true delight. Psalm. 16.12. God in whose presence is fullness
of joy, at whose right hand there are pleasures for evermore. Carnal love
makes the heart sick. It is sullen, fantastical and tumultuous. It conceives
great hopes of content and comes short of them; It gives for one pleasure a
thousand sorrows. But the love of God is a continual enjoyment, a constant
peace, a solid joy; and if sometimes one suffer for him, he repayes for one
sorrow a thousand pleasures.

Many lovers of beauties are not beloved of them. But who so loves God must be
sure that God loves him. Yea that God loved him before he loved God; the love
which he bears to God is an effect of the love which God bears to him. And is
it not a great encouragement to love, when one is sure to be accepted and
beloved again? That subject which only deserves to be loved with all our
heart is easy to be won to a mutual love: Other objects of our love, being
infinitely under that prime subject, are far more difficult to win.

Our love of God is not crossed with absence as the carnal. For him we fetch no
unheard sighs, and shead no unseen tears. God is always near them that sigh
for him, and puts up their tears in his bottle. Psalm. 56. The Lord is nigh to
all that call upon him. He travelleth with them abroad, He keeps house with
them, yea in them; He sweetens their griefs, he answers not only then words
but their very thoughts.

Many times we love them that can do us no good, though they love us; many
times also we are impoverished by the love we bear them. But our love to God
makes us rich, for it gets already possession of God, who is the Author of all
good gifts. Psalm. 36.10. With him is the fountain of life, and in his light we
see light. To love him is to raise ourselves to sovereign honor and felicity.

Briefly if one will have favors, gracious countenance, sweet individual
company, possession, enjoyment, fulness of joy for ever, let him turn the
point of his love heavenwards. Divine love will make him good and happy in the
highest degree. These benefits are not to be expected of carnal love. A
sickness which is the same in the appetite as a fever is in the blood,
sometimes in a cold, sometimes in a hot fit. It is a perpetual ebb and flow of
fear and hope, and it cannot but be continually shaking and wavering, since it
pinnes the felicity of a man upon another, who has not felicity, enflaming his
heart to a subject weaker many times, and more necessitous then himself.

And if these inconveniences be found in the honestest love of the sex, how
much more in the unlawful and unchaste love?

Of this sickness the most usual but not the best remedy is to drive out one
Mistress with another; but the way to get liberty is not to change service. In
stead of getting out of the storm into a harbor, they are tossed from one
rock to another. He then that will expel one love by another love, must betake
himself to a love that may change his servitude into liberty, which the love
of God will afford, and none else. So the grand remedy of carnal love is to
exercise ourselves in the love of God, and gladly to consider what a
sacrilegious part it is to erect a little idol of our sensual appetite in our
heart which is Gods Sanctuary, and what a heinous rebellion it is to choose
another Master then God.

Thence (without an extraordinary mercy of God) one of these two evils will
follow. Either God, jealous that we love another more then him to whom all our
love is due, crosses our designs, and makes us miss that which we sought
after with so much eagerness: Or, in a greater indignation he gives us that
which we prefer before him, and whence we expect our highest happiness,
which afterward turns into bitterness and ruin. You shall see many impetuous
corrivals, suitors of an evil woman, as fishes justling one another, striving
for a mortal bayte; The strongest and most unfortunate drives he other away,
and by taking is taken and destroyed. Solomon who had but too much experience
in this matter gives this account of it. Eccles. 5.26. I find more bitter then
death the Woman whose heart is snares and nets, and her hands as bands. Who so
pleases God shall escape from her, but the sinner shall be taken by her. Women
might say little less of men. There is no cheat, no witchcraft, comparable to
that of carnal love, neither is there any thing that works sadder effects. Of
which the most ordinary is, the loss of the tranquillity of the soul. A loss
not to be recompensed by all the love-pleasures that lust can suggest to the
imagination.

No Passion sins more against that rule truly Christian and Philosophical, to
dwell at home, and not to seek our content out of ourselves, which is the same
thing as to seek it in God, for in God is our true being, and God is found
within us, if we have the grace to seek him there, as we ought. But carnal
love makes a man to seek all contentment out of God and out of himself, so
that he is never at home, always abroad, and always under the power of others.

Neither does any other Passion so enormously transgress in the two
extremes, both to overvalue and undervalue the price of things. For a lover
will raise the price of the beloved object above Nature and possibility; and
together cast away his estate, his honor, his conscience, and hazard his life,
as things of no account, to get that idolized object.

It were a wonder if young people, being all naturally inclined to that burning
fever did not get it after so much pains taken to bring them to it. For how
many books are written for that very end? How many amorous fables, which to
write and to read is the business of them that have none? There young men are
taught, that virtue consists in being passionate beyond all extremity, and
that great feats of arms and high fortunes and atchievments are only for
lovers. There maids learn to be desperately in love, disembling, proud, and
bloody, and to believe that all is due to their supremacy, seeing in those
books the world torn with wars by the jealousy of some Princes lovers and
rivals, and many thousands of men's lives sacrificed to the fair eyes of a
Lady. There also they learn to be crafty Mistresses and ill wives; they have
need to learn obedience, but in these books they learn soverainty. Women
being more given to these books then men, show that though they have less
fougve of love then men, they have nevertheless a more constant inclination to
it.

Who so will keep himself holy in body and affection and preserve his soul
serene and free from the tempest of that turbulent Passion, must avoid the
reading of such books whose proper office is to raise those storms in a man's
blood and appetite. And I know not whether it be more dangerous to read
dissolute books which make of carnal love a jigg and a matter of sport, openly
showing the ordure and the folly of it; or doleful amorous fables which make
of it a grave and serious study, and under the color of honesty and constancy
of love, managed with an artificial and valourous carriage, hoodwinke and
bewitch the readers mind with a pertinacious Passion, making their brains
run wild after chimera's and hollow imaginations, whereby some have run
mad. Indeed one cannot follow the fancies of romances without straying from
right sense; Neither is there any thing that makes the heart more worldly and
carnal, and brings it further from God. I will be judged by all good souls
that would betake themselves to exercises of piety, when they were newly come
from this kind of reading, Let them say in conscience how far estranged from
God they found themselves, and ill disposed to every good work.

Sure it is not without reason that these writers set up false Gods, as being
conscious to themselves that their writings are deviations from the true God,
and ashamed to name the God of truth among their fables. Also because with some
of them, it is a prime piece of love-complement to make discontented lovers to
wreake their anger upon the Deity, they will have this excuse ready, that they
are not blasphemies against the true God, but against the gods of Homer and
Hesiod's making. But from these blasphemous expostulations with false gods the
readers learn to do the like with the true, and to avenge themselves upon him
of all things that cross their impetuous Passion. The same books set up the
murtherous discipline of duells, as a gallantry of love, whereby lovers seal
their affection to their mistresses by the blood of their rivals or their own.

There are other matches of the wild fire of carnal love which must be
carefully avoided, wanton discourses, vicious companies, occasions to do evil,
conversation with vain malicious women whose chief aim and task is to catch
all the men that come in their way, not that they may keep them, but triumph
over them, and cast them away, and feed their own vanity with the
disappointment of their suitors.

Take heed of idleness, it is Satan's pillow, the counselor of vice, and
especially the procurer of lust. He that does nothing, thinks on evil. Take
heed of intemperance. Carnal love is so inbred with the matter, that whatsoever
heateth the blood sets the appetite on fire. Wherefore Jeremiah sets
intemperance and incontinence together, Jer. 5.8. They were as fed horses in
the morning, every one neighed after his neighbors wife.

There be two great remedies to take down that heat, The one corporal which
is marriage, instituted by God for that end, a holy and honorable state: When
both the parties are good, and love one another, it is the greatest sweetenes
of life. But whether a man be married or desire to be, he must think on the
vanity and short continuance of the most pleasant things of this world, the
frailty of life, the certainty of death, the uncertainty of the hour; thence to
infer the conclusion of St Paul, 1. Cor. 7.29. But this I say, brethren, that
the time is short, It remains that they that have wives be as they that have
none, And so they that are woing must be as though they were not woing; that is
they must impose moderation upon their affections out of a wise apprehension of
the vanity of the world and life, ver. 31. using this world as not abusing it:
for the fashion of this world passes away. Wherefore should we love with so
much fervency that which we cannot keep when we have got it, which we must
leave, or which must leave us?

The other duty is Spiritual, and it is that great and perpetual duty to Love
God. Let that holy Passion always rule in our hearts. Let us give to God his
proper right, which he demands in his word, Pro. 25.26. My son give me thy
heart, and let us keep such a watchful guard about it that none steal it from
him and us.

Our love to a worthy Consort being so moderated will become both lawful and
pleasant. Humane condition has nothing so delightful as a reciprocal love:
Yea of all things to which man's will does contribute, it is the only pleasant
thing. But, as navigable rivers enrich a country with commerce and plenty, when
they keep within their shores, but ruin it when they overflow with a violent
landflood: Likewise, love while it keeps within limits, brings pleasure and
utility; when it exceeds them, it brings displeasure and destruction.

Love that is not reciprocal will wear away in time. But a wise man will
shorten the work of time with reason, and will not obstinately court a person
that will not love him. For of what price soever she be, in our regard she is
of no price if she be not for us. We must love our enemies, but we must let
them alone.

CHAP. IV. Of Desire.
DEsire has a near kindred with love, for it is the motion of the appetite
toward the beloved object; This is the difference, that Love regards the
present, Desire aspireth to the future.

Some desires are natural, some besides nature. Natural desires are good and
easily satisfied, as long as they keep within their mounds, the first whereof
is nature, then reason to rule nature, and piety to rule reason. But we must
take heed of mistaking corrupted nature for pure. Pure nature is contented with
little, but corrupted nature runs to excess and embaseth natural desites with
the allay of desires besides nature. It is natural for a man to desire a woman,
but it is besides nature that he will have her so noble and so rich; that he
increases the desired object with imagination, and kindles his passion by
difficulty. It is natural to desire meat, drink, clothing, but it is besides
nature to desire great feasts, gay garments, and costly buildings.

Reason, indeed, was given us to embellish and enrich nature, but Reason (if it
be well taught) will in all occasions make use of nature to rule the desire, and
teach it, that besides Nature there can be no necessity. Thus if your coach
break far from the town, instead of grieving and fretting, remember that
Nature did not give you legs to sit in a coach, and that it is not necessary
for you to be carried, as long as you can go. If you be repulsed in the
pursuit of an Office, remember that God made you not a Treasurer or a
Counselor of state, but a man; and that to discharge the Office of man
worthily, there is no need to be a Treasurer or a Counselor of State. Apply
this to all the crosses whereby your desire is opposed, you shall find in
nature lessons of reason and piety to rule it, and keep every where
tranquillity of mind.

But when a man makes no account of the limits of nature, and the Appetite
takes license to desire as much as it can, the whole world becomes too little
for him. Nature has bounds, but ambitious desire has none. If a lustful
greedy tyrannical man had as much power as desire, he would violate the
honesty of all handsome women, and crush all the Empires of the universe, no
man's life could escape his anger, God himself should not be safe in heaven.
There are many such men in the world; But the world may praise God that those
that have the vastest desire have the shortest power, and are kept by necessity
within their limits of nature, even when their ambition most licentiously
transgresses those limits. An idle wisher will lie raving in his bed, raising
his greedy thoughts by many steps of imaginary conquests as high as the crown
of China; and then seriously deliberate whether he must make war upon the
Tartar or Japan; till he be suddenly called down by his need from the height
of his imperial projects to the low care of raising the wool of his old
thredbare cloak, and spinning the coorse relics of his Sunday-dinner to save
him from the shambles till the middle of the week. Prove. 13.4. The soul of the
sluggard desires and has nothing.

Need does not so much breed greediness, as greediness need; For need many
times limiteth greediness, and keeps the Appetite busy about things necessary
and near hand; but wheresoever there is greediness, there is need, even in
the midst of plenty. A great King invading his neighbors Province thereby
confesses himself needy, since he has not enough of his own. So long as a
man does not reckon what he has, but what he would have, he never has his
reckoning; for when he has what he would he would have more, and all that he
has not is wanting to him; yea he wants even that which he has, since he has
no satisfaction in it.

This evil being wisely managed may prove a remedy to itself. For the
insatiablenesse of man's desire, helps us to these two thoughts. The one that
all that the world affords is too little for man, since it cannot satisfy his
desire. The other, that, among that corruption, an image of Gods infinity is
shining; for man's desire is infinite, and nothing less then infinity, which is
God himself, can satisfy him. These thoughts ought to breed a resolution in
us, not to labor any more in vain to fill our infinite desire with things
finite and inferior unto us, but to raise it to the infinite good, as only
adequate to it, and the only object where we may find infinite satisfaction.
They, and they only must expect satisfaction of their desire, that may say
after Isaiah, Isaia. 26.8. In the way of thy judgments O Lord have we waited
for thee; the desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee.

Let us look lower. For as long as we live in this house of flesh, we have
inferior desires for the use of the flesh. Natural desires are formed upon the
information of the senses; let us take good heed that upon their natural
information we form not desires beyond nature, but let us proportionate our
desires to the true and simple information of our senses, not to the false tale
of our imagination, swelled and besotted by our greediness. For the appetite
and the imagination, help to cozen one onother. The turbulent appetite
stretches the imagination, and the imagination thus stretched presents to the
appetite greater images then the natural.

As in the clay upon the potters wheel if you trace a small circle it will
stretch and grow wider as the wheel turns and the clay spreads; likewise, a
little image of the desired object traced by the common sense in the
imagination will grow as the imagination is dilated by the agitation of the
desire. Hence it is that the first impression that the fancy receives of an
ordinary beauty becomes in short time the Idea of a more then humane
perfection; and the splendour of a gaudy equipage and attendance, having caused
an agitation in the desire, is soon imagined much greater then it is.

But as in popular rumors which are growing as they run, the first relator
must be examined; likewise, to know the true state of things, of which the
imagination and the appetite increasing one another make so much noise and
show, we must examine the first relator, the outward sense, to undeceive the
overheated desire by an information in cold blood. It is true, that the senses
perceiving nothing but the outward show will make sometimes a disadvantageous
report of the objects, but when they stir not the desire, but misinforme the
imagination which does the like to the judgment, whereby the object appears
evil, contemptible, or less desirable then it is indeed. Wherefore I would
not trust altogether the report of the senses, but so examine them by reason
that the soul be not seduced by the report imputed unto them. And indeed this
will be no small prevailing over the appetite, if we can bring it to desire the
things that truly belong to the senses, by no other Idea then that of their
simple report, so shall we limit the merely sensual desires, according to
Nature.

But because this might be thought an austere rule to keepe-in the desire
within the limits purely natural, something must be yielded to custom and
convenience; Let the desire be allowed to walk a little beyond these limits of
Nature, but so led by the bridle of piety and reason, that it make no wild
escape. Let us desire things just, facile, neerehand, and inviting our hope,
not troubling ourselves about things remote and difficult.

To stay our desires, we must stay our thoughts before, and weane our minds of
that false popular opinion, that thoughts are free; for it is the
licentiousness of thoughts, that makes the desire licentious. He that
permits to himself to think what he should do with a hundred thousand
pounds a year, if he had them, will not be long ere he desire to have so much.
He that consulteth what women he should choose if it were lawful and possible
for him to keep as many as the Turk has in his Seraglio, will presently wish
it possible though it were not lawful; and this fancy will set his appetite on
fire; Evil thoughts are next neighbors to evil desires; there is but one
step between. He that will keep himself from an infamous house must not take
the lodging at the next door.

The best way to satisfy the desire of temporal things is to abridge it; A
counsel comprehending these two, Not to depend of the future, and to be content
with little for the present: Both are effects of an entire confidence in Gods
goodness and providence. Of not depending upon the future I shall have several
occasions to speak hereafter. To be contented with little is an unspeakable
treasure. That way one may with much ease get plenty, which a covetous man
cannot get by heaps of money scraped up with a greedy labor. He that desires
only what he can have, obtaines easily what he will have; And he that desires
nothing but what pleases God, has obtained it already, All things smile on
him because he receives all things at the hand of God, whom he knows to be
good and wise. Little and much are all one to him, for both serve alike for
contentment, as it pleases God to extend a blessing upon it. Let us apply this
to the three principal desires that cause so much tumult and disorder in the
world, Covetousnes, Ambition, and Voluptuousnes.

CHAP. V Of Desire of Wealth and Honor.
What I have said of wealth and honors will persuade any man of good sense
that they are not satisfying objects of a man's desire, and therefore not to be
eagerly followed. It is our Saviors consequence, Luke 12.15. Take heed and
beware of covetousnes, for man's life consists not in the abundance of things
which he possesses: It is also St John's consequence, who forbids us to love
the world and the things that are in it, because the world passes away; 1 John
2. These are two powerful reasons to moderate the desire of the things of this
world, drawn from their nature: The one that they are not necessary, the other
that they are transitory: And yet the covetous and ambitious seek after them
as if life consisted in them, or they were to endure for ever. Which they
cannot thus desire without turning their affection from the only necessary and
permanent thing which is God; Matthew. 6.24. You cannot serve God and Mammon,
says the Lord Jesus. For as when a channel is cut for a river in a ground
lower then her bed, all the water will fall where it finds a slope, and leaves
her former channel dry. Likewise the desire of man, whose true channel is the
love of God, will turn the whole affection of the soul toward low earthly
things when that slope descent of covetousnes and ambition is made in the
heart, and nothing is left for God.

For it is improperly spoken that a man pretending to great worldly honors is
aspiring too high; Rather he is stooping too low, for the most precious things
of the world, yea and the whole world, are very much under the excellency of
man's soul, and more yet below the dignity of Gods children. Who so then
enslaveth his soul of heavenly origin, and called to a divine honor unto
temporal things, which in this low world cannot be but low, debaseth his
dignity most unworthily. And in all earthly things, high or low condition makes
but little unequality, for still it is earth; Hills and dales are alike,
compared with their distance from Heaven.

But what? as the Israelites quitted Gods service to worship the golden calfe,
the luster of gold and honor will so dazell men's eyes and inflame their
desires that they transport unto things of this world that devout love which
they owe unto God. Wherefore St Paul says that covetousnes is idolatry. Col.
3. And it is no wonder, that the sensual objects prevail more upon Nature then
the spiritual.

Yet covetous and ambitious desires are not properly natural, but enormities of
nature; for little provision serves nature, whereas if all the waters of the
sea were potable gold, they would not quench the thirst of covetousnes. Nature
is contented with a mean degree, but crowns heaped up to heaven would yet be
too low for ambition. Greedines is an unthankful Vice. It makes a man so
thirsty after that he has not, that he forgets what he has, and thinks not
himself advanced though he see a great many behind, as long as he sees yet
some before him. He cannot enjoy that he has, because he hangs upon that he
has not. Thus he is always needy, discontented, unquiet, and spares his
enemies the labor to find him a continual vexation. And whereas the proper use
for which Desire was given to man, is to supply his necessities, he makes use
of his desire to multiply his necessities.

To that sickness these are the proper remedies. The first is to abridge our
desire, and be contented with little. To him that contenteth himself with
little, little is much: But to him that is not contented with much, much is
little.

To abridge our desire we must bear down our pride: That which makes a man
think a great wealth to be too little for him, is his too great esteem of
himself. Whereas the humble and meek, though they have but little, think they
have more then they deserve. Who so will calmly compare what he deserves with
that which God has given him, shall find great matter to humble himself, and
praise God, and silence the murmuring of his greedines. Let us remember our
beginning. Being borne naked a little milk and a few baby clouts served us.
Who would think that some years after, whole kingdoms could not satisfy us?
Yet our need since that time is not much increased. 1. Tim. 6.8. Having food
and raiment, we may be therewith content. A little is sufficient for necessary
desires, but for curious and superfluous desires the whole world is too little.

Let us employ our greedy desire to heal it self, considering that this
greedines for the wealth and honor of the world spoils the enjoyment, and
takes all content from it; for no man has joy in these things but he that
uses them as not using them: That greedines makes us seek them with torment,
possess them with unquietnes, and lose them with anguish. Yea many times
greedines hinders the acquisition. Good fortune seldom yields to them that
will ravish her, but to the wise and moderate, who though they lose no
opportunity, woe her as little concerned in her, and are always prepared for
the repulse.

That we spend no more about worldy fortune then it is worth, Put in one scale
the splendor of honor and the plenty of wealth. Put in the other scale the
labor to get them, the care and vexation to keep them, the peril, the envy,
the loss of time, the temptations offered to the conscience, the stealing of a
man's thoughts from God, and the danger of losing heaven while we go about to
get the earth; Then the incapacity of those goods to satisfy the desire, their
weakness, their uncertainty, and how one unfortunate moment destroys the
labor of many years, and then judge whether they be worth enflaming our
desire and enslaving our affections.

With the uncertainty of these possessions consider the uncertainty of the
possessours, that nothing is frailer then man's life, nothing more certain then
his death, nothing more uncertain then the hour. What need we lay up much
treasure since we must lose all? What need to get up very high to fall to the
ground, and there to rot?

And whereas the tranquillity and contentment of man consists in the things
that are within him, not in them that are about him, When he turns his
principal desire and the whole bent of his mind to things that are without, he
goes out of himself, and subjecteth himself to another; He begs of another
that which none but God and himself can give him: He makes his content to
depend on that which is out of his power. A wise man will take heed of that,
and will call-in his desire to his own breast, where he shall find God if he
seek him well, and in God his only felicity. Let us be covetous to be rich in
God, and ambitious to draw near him.

Indeed since our body and life are maintained with things that are without us
we cannot but desire them, as things which our necessity calls for. Besides
which, our condition and the course of the world makes many outward things to
become necessary which in themselves are not so. All these we may desire, so
it be with an infericur desire, quietly subjected and subordinate to that
Master-desire which must make a whole burnt-offering of the soul to God alone,
that we may say to God with an entire and free heart, as Isaiah did, Isa. 26.8.
The desire of our soul is to thy name, O Lord, and to the remembrance of thee.
With my soul have I desired thee in the night, yea with my spirit within me
will I seek thee. Blessed we! that our spirit needs but to seek within
himself, to find the full satisfaction of his desire, if he have the grace to
desire what he ought.

CHAP. VI. Of Desire of Pleasure.
IT is easy to rule the Desire of Volupty when we have once well apprehended
the nature of it. The body has the greatest share in the Pleasures which the
world runs after, we must not then for their sakes subject our mind unto our
body. The pleasures of the body are short, we must not then for a short
enjoyment entertain a long desire.

They are light and of a faint taste, we must not then have a great Desire for
a little Pleasure. They promise much to the Desire and perform little; Our
desire then being forewarned of this, will not lightly trust their fair
promises, and will look more, to their capacity then their invitation.

Some pleasures are altogether unlawful. Of which therefore the desire must be
cut off altogether. And before we give any admission to their flattery into our
souls, we must take time to consider the design of him that sets them on
work, the Devil. By them he seeks to blindfold us that he may lead us into
perdition, which he will be sure to do if we entertain his false caresses, for
after blindfolding comes blindness in earnest, error in the understanding,
misrule in the affections, beggary, infamy, hardness of heart, a late remorse,
and eternal damnation. Prove. 6.16. By means of a whoorish woman a man is
brovght to a piece of bread, and the adulteress will hunt for the precious
life. Prove. 7.26. She has cast down many wounded, yea many strong men have
bin slain by her. Her house is the way to Hell, going down to the chambers of
death. He that has the grace to consider so much before, will step back when
these inticements are offered unto him, and say, I will not buy a desperate
repentance so dear.

Pleasures in themselves lawful, become unlawful by accident, when they are
desired or enjoyed with excess. Moderation is the balance of justice and the
nurse of pleasure. Without it, Desire turns into sorrow, and Enjoyment into a
severish fit.

Those pleasures in which a beast has no share are more worthy of a man, as
those that are en^^^^^ by contemplation. For them we may allow (...) ^^ger
tedder to desire. For those that are (...) ^ost between the body and the
spirit, as (...) ^^ghts of picture and music, the tedder must be tied
somewhat shorter, not giving too great a scope to curiosity. For the pleasures
merely corporal, the tedder must be the shortest of all; Yet in all humane
delights, whether of the body or the mind, excess is vicious and marreth the
Pleasure. Solomon found it in the noblest of humane delights. Eccles. 1.18. In
much wisdom (says he) is much grief, and he that increases knowledge
increases sorrow.

It is one of the greatest proofs of the vanity of man's condition that in all
humane things where the pleasure kindles the desire, the pleasure is
afterward choked by the very desire: for either we seek in them the pleasure
which they cannot afford, or we seek it otherwise then we ought, and even by
seeking we lose it. Which inconveniences are prevented or mitigated by
moderation in the desire and pursuit. For it will bring one of these two
conveniences: Either we shall more certainly get what we would have; or, if we
miss it, we shall not have the grief to have lost much labor about it.

It were easy to draw a platform upon paper of the most delightful and
complete estate that humane desire can aspire unto in this world. And that
estate should be compounded with the three sorts of life, contemplative,
active, and fruitive. A condition abounding with leisure to employ it in the
contemplation of things good, noble, and pleasant; having businesses enow^^ be
useful in society, and not so many as to weary a man's body and mind about
things inferior to the dignity of his soul; enjoying sufficiency of worldly
goods with peace and wisdom, and a mediocrity of degree exempted from
contempt and oppression; relishing the innocent contentments of life with
sobriety and simplicity, not fixing the heart upon them, and therefore
possessing the true use and and delight of them; All that seasoned with health
of body and serenity of mind and with a good conscience aspiring continually
to a higher felicity, enjoying it already by hope and by a present sense of the
blessed peace of God.

But we have not the liberty to cut our coat out of the whole cloth. The skill
of a good engineer does not consist in making a regular Fort upon a parchment
or a ground chosen at will that has all the natural advantages; but in bowing
his art to the nature of the place unto which necessity engages him, and
overcomming by industry the incommodiousnesse of the seat: Likewise, a wisemans
work is not to frame to himself poetical felicities, but to take things as he
finds them, and use them well; for in man's condition on earth there is no seat
so strong but is commanded, or if it be not now it will be another time, as
being seated upon an unstable sand, to day even, to morrow uneven, which no
humane strength or forecast can keep unmooved. The life of man being compounded
of so many different pieces, in which virtue and prudence have but little
share, why should our desire be so eagerly bent upon those thungs which are
besides the reach of our industry?

Though you had attained once to that high point of human happiness that you
might contemplate freely and with leisure, do useful and illustrious actions
in society, enjoy well-gotten wealth, an honorable degree, and a cheereful
heart, in a sound body; how long can ye maintain that state? how many rubs
shall you meet with in the fairest way? A lawsuit will make you go up and
down and lay-by your contemplation: Envy and obloquy will cross and blast
your best actions. A little sickness will take from you the taste of all the
pleasures of life. I leave out great calamities. The torments of the stone and
the gowte, The sudden floods of war, The total ruins by false accusations,
things which may happen to all because they happen to some; Accidere cuivis,
quod cuiquam potest.

The most desirable things of the world being thus casual, and no delight
constant, The wisest and happiest are they that seek not their constant
delight in the world, but stay their desire upon the right object, which gives
a sincere and durable content, not subject to the tossing of worldly fortunes.

Let us have no fervent desire but for those things that are truly ours when
we have them once, and which we cannot lose against our will, for in them
consists true pleasure. Those things are, the true knowledge of God, his
love, and union with him, as much as human nature is capable of in this life.
For that union with God will breed in us a resemblance of his virtues and a
participation of his serenity, tranquillity, constancy, facility and
delectation in well doing. These in which true delight lies, are also the true
objects of our desire. And here we must let the raines loose to Passion. Since
to possess God is the infinite good and sovereign delight, the measure to
desire it, is to have no measure.

CHAP. VII. Of Sadness.
Sadness is the dolor of the soul, and the beating down of the spirit. This
seems to be the most natural of all Passions, as hereditary to man from his
first parents: For to our first mother God said, Genesis 3.16 I will greatly
multiply thy sorows and thy conception; in sorrow shall thou bring forth
children. And to our first father, v. 17. In sorrow thou shall eat thy bread
all the days of thy life. No wonder then that sorrow is the inheritance of all
their posterity. That first couple dejected with the sense of their sin and
punishment, left a calamitous progeny. Job. 14.1 Man that is borne of a woman
is of few days and full of trouble.

But although this be a natural Passion yet it is an enemy to Nature, for it
makes the flower and vigor of body and mind to wither, and obscureth that
goodly light of the understanding with a thick mist of melancholy.

Some sadness is necessary in its end, as that which belongs to contrition, and
the zeal of Gods glory. Some is necessary in its cause, as that which proceeds
out of a sharp bodily pain. There is a constrained sadness, when one is sad out
of good manners, and for fashion sake; Such is the mourning of heirs, whose
tears in funerals are part of the ceremony. Many times we are sad in good
earnest for being obliged to be sad in show. Then there is a wanton sadness
which soft spirits love to entertain, for weeping is also a point of curiosity
and delicacy. No doubt but they find delight in it, for none ever does any
thing of his own accord, but for his own content.

Of Sadness necessary in its end, I have spoken in the chapter of Repentance,
and must again in this, after I have given some counsels for repressing the
other sorts of Sadness. Those are less capable of counsel that are necessary in
their cause; as when the senses are pincht, for then no reason can persuade
them not to feel it, or hinder the mind to have a fellow feeling of the pains
of the body. A Physician and a Surgeon will be fitter to abate that Sadness then
a Philosopher, yet not then a Divine; for Divinity makes use of the very pains
of the body to raise up the soul of the patient to God; In deed the counsels
of piety do not take away the pain, but they overcome it by the sweet
persuasions of Gods love to us.

As for constrained and ceremonious Sadness, we must avoid the excess of it,
and the defect also; choosing rather gently to yield to custom, then to be
singular, and contradict all that we approve not; keeping always serenity
within, in the midst of these ceremonies, more grievous many times then the
grief that occasions them.

Wanton and delicate Sadness, cannot be justified by the allegation of heavy
losses and great wrongs. For besides that most part of the evils that men
grieve for, are such only in the imagination, as a disdain, a reproach, a
slander, the loss of some goods that did them nothing but harm; suppose that
all the evils that we grieve for, be evils indeed, it follows not that we
must grieve for them according to their grievousnesse, unless it appear that
they may be mended by grieving. But never any dead man was raised from the dead
by the tears that his widow shed upon his hearse. Never was a wrong repaired by
the sadness of the wronged party. Adversity will cast down poor spirited
persons, but raises the spirits of the generous, and sets their industry on
work. The deep sorrow that seizes upon a weak woman at her husbands death
makes her incapable to overcome the difficulties where he leaves her: But a
virtuous and wise widow has no leisure to weep six months close prisoner in
a dark chamber; rather she comfort herself with following her businesses.

Also since time dries up the most overflowing tears, and a second wedding
will take down the great mourning veil; it will be providently done to
moderate sorrow betimes, that the disproportion may not be too eminent between
Sadness and Joy.

To attain that moderation we must take away that false excuse of good nature,
and love to the deceased person from immoderate mourning, for in effect it is
no other love but the love of ourselves that afflicts us, and not their loss,
but ours.

The true causes of immoderate sorrow for the things of this world are, these
two great errors, against which I am so often necessitated to give warning to
my readers, as the springs of all the folly and misery that is in the world.
The one is the ignorance of the price of things; for he that will value money,
honor, and credit according to their just price, and no more, will not be much
afflicted if he lose them or cannot get them. The other is, that we seek out
of ourselves that happiness and rest which is no where to be gotten but within
us, from God and ourselves; and take those things for ours which are none of
ours, but depend of others, and thereupon run toward those objects thus
mistaken with a blind impetuositie. These are the true roots of Sadness, which
roots if we could pluck out of our breasts, we should never be sad for any
thing of the world.

But it is very hard to pluck out that weed; for Sadness is like a nettle, a
malignant stinging weed spreading in the soil where it has once taken root,
and sucking all the vigor and substance thereof. It makes a man murmr
against God, and envy his neighbors, always discontented, always needy,
suffering neither himself nor others to be at rest, odious to God and men and
to his own self.

The life of man being subject to occasions of Sadness, a wise man will not
add voluntary sorrow to the necessary. And since by sorrow of the heart the
spirit is broken, Prove. 15.13. and a broken spirit dries up the bones, Prove.
17.22. so that Sadness is the ruin both of body and mind; he will take so
much care of the preservation of both, of which he is accountable to God, as to
banish from his breast with his utmost industry that fretting consumption.

The best course for that is to exercise ourselves in the love and
contemplation of God, and faith in his promises. By these Sadness is cast out
of the heart, and the soul is set in a pleasant and serene frame. Next, this
wisdom must be learned of Solomon, Eccles. 5.17. It is good and comely for a
man to eat and drink, and to enjoy the good of all his labor that he takes
under the Sun all the days of his life which God gives him, for that is his
portion.

Obstinate Sadness is unthankful to God, for it drownes the benefits of God
in an ungrateful oblivion, and takes away the taste of them even while we
enjoy them. And what a double misery is that for a man, to make himself guilty
by making himself miserable?

For two things voluntary Sadness is lawful and useful, for the evil that
we commit and the evil that others commit. Sadness for our own sins is
contrition. Sadness for the sins of others, is the zeal of Gods glory, both
commendable and necessary. He that has not a sad resenting of his own sins,
must not hope for pardon, and is so far from finding it that he cannot so
much as seek it, for he that feels not his sickness shall never look for the
remedy. Mat. 11.28. Come to me (says Christ) all ye that labor and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest. None are invited by the Gospel but such as
labor and are heavy laden, none but they can find rest unto their sonles.
This comes to that I was saying lately, that we must be sad for no evil but
such as can be mended by our Sadness; Such is contrition for sin, for it
helps to heal it, making us cast ourselves upon the great Physician the Lord
Jesus, whose merit is the Sovereign remedy to that great sickness. So, that
Sadness ends in Joy.

We must grieve also for the sins of others, for since we must love God above
all things, we must be very sensible of the dishonor offered unto his holy
name. This made Daniel and Nehemiah to fast and pray, and God showed that their
Sadness was acceptable unto him.

Sadness then is of good use for these ends, so that we never seek merit nor
praise in it, remembering always that Sadness is evil in itself, and good
only by accident. Sadness of contrition and zeal is good as Purges and
letting of blood, which are good only because there is some evil in the body;
If all were well, there would be no need of them. As then we must take heed of
too much purging and blood-letting, so we must of too much Sadness either for
contrition or zeal. The use of Sadness in contrition is to make repentance
serious, and to humble the spirit, that it may be capable and thirsty of the
grace of God. The use of sadness in zeal is to sympathize with Gods
interesses, and thereby bear witness to God and our own conscience that we
aknowledge our selves Gods children. For these ends it is not required at our
hands to grieve without term and measure; For since the greatness of Gods
mercy is as high above our sins, as Heaven is above Earth, (it is David's
comparison) our faith and joy in Gods mercy must also be very much above our
sadness for our sins. And as God says that our sins are cast into the sea,
Mich. 7.19. meaning the deep Ocean of his infinite mercy, likewise our sorrow
for our sins must be drowned in the joy of his salvation. Whereas also the
blasphemies and oppositions of Gods enemies, by his great wisdom and power
turn to his glory, our sadness for these oppositions must end in joy for that
almighty power and sovereign glory of our heavenly father, to which the
greatest enmity of Satan and the world is subject and tributary, for by pulling
against it they advance it.

The consideration of the subjects of Sadness shows more then any other,
that man knows not himself, there being nothing in which one is sooner
deceived. For many times we think ourselves to be sad for one thing, when we
are sad for another, mistaking the pretense of our Sadness for the cause. Many
will impute their sadness to the sense of their sins, but the true cause is
in their hypoconders swelled and tainted with black choler, oppressing the
heart, and sending up fuliginous vapors to the brains. No wonder that so
often all the reasons of Divinity and the sweetest comforts of godliness
cannot erect a spirit beaten down with sadness; the plaster is not laid to
the sore, for spiritnall remedies purge neither the spleen nor the gall nor
the brains, whose peccant humors breed all those doubts and fears whereby
melancholy persons so pertinaciously vex themselves and others.

Indeed the resolution of a serene and religious spirit will preserve body and
soul in a sound and quiet state: But that resolution, which is excellent for
prevention of the evil, will not overcome it when the humors of the body are
generally dyed and infected with melancholy. Wherefore let us beware betimes
that Sadness settle not in our heart; for the indulgence showed to wilful
Sadness will in short time sour all the humors of the body, and vitiate the
whole mass of the blood, and the magazine of vital and animal spirits with
melancholy: Then when the mind has made the body melancholy, the body does the
like to the mind, and both together contribute to make a man miserable,
timorous, mischievous, savage, lycanthrope, and a heavy burden to himself.
When that habit of melancholy begins by the spirit, it is more grievous; when
it begins by the body, it is more incurable.

To draw a man out of that deep gulf, all spiritual and material helps are
of small virtue, unless it please God himself to fetch him out of it by strong
hand and a stretched out arm; And of him, before and after all remedies, we
must beg the remedy against Sadness: Melancholy is the seat and fastness
of the Devil, whence none but God alone can thrust him out. Every time that
Sadness offers to deject our spirits, let us raise them again presently,
chiding ourselves as David did, who three times in the XLII, and XLIII Psalms
took up his drooping mind with this encouragement, Why art thou cast down, O
my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? Hope thou in God for I shall
yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance and my God.

CHAP. VIII. Of Joy.
JOy is the acquiescence of the Appetite in the acquisition of a desired good,
or in the expectation of it.

Joy is more natural then sadness, for sadness, though natural, yet is an
enemy to nature, but Joy is natures friend. Then, sadness is never without
some degree of precedent constraint, and even they that are obstinatly sad, are
sorry to be so: But the heart applies it self freely to Joy; Sadness is ill
in itself, and is good but by accident; but Joy is good in itself, and is ill
but by accident. Therefore considering both naturally, joy upon a false ground
is preferable to sadness upon a true ground, for joy is a true good (at least
for a time) though the ground be false; but sadness is a true present evil,
be the ground true or false.

But considering these passions morally, by the effects which they produce by
accident, joy does more harm in the world then sadness. For Joy naturally
dilating the spirits brings the mind to a loose carriage and takes the fence of
wariness from about it; commonly joy is the mother of rashness. But Sadness
contracting the spirits, keeps the mind within the limits of soberness, and
brings it to serious thoughts. Eccles. 7.2. Hence it comes that it is better to
go to the house of mourning then to the house of feasting, for that is the end
of all men, and the living will lay it to his heart. Eccles. 3.4. Sorrow is
better then laughter, for by the sadness of the countenance the heart is made
better. The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning, but the heart of
fools is in the house of mirth.

For of passions we may say as of men. Our friends flatter us, but our enemies
tell us our faults. Joy, which is a friend of nature, does flatter it into
error and seduction; but sadness which is an enemy to nature, undeceiveth it
and lays open before a man his fault and his danger. The sanguine temper
which is most given to joy, is most subject to folly; But the temper where
melancholy bears a moderate sway is the fittest for prudence. But there are
melancholy as well as sanguine fools; And sadness gives evil counsel, as
well as Joy: The ill counsels of joy are more frequent and hot, and make more
noise. The ill counsels of sadness are less frequent but they are dark and
mischievous, and recompense their rarity with their malignity. The Italians
call mischievous and dangerous men huomini tristi.

It is a fine consideration how these two passions, though contrary, yet are
next neighbors; and how in Joy there is an air of complaint, and in sadness
a tickling of pleasure. That contemplation is more natural, then moral: It is
more useful to learn, how Joy brings to sadness than how it is mixed with it.

It is an old expostulation that the case of men is miserable to have their
joys attended with crime, and their pleasures ending in a bitter farewell of
remorse, and sometimes of despair. But that is an unjust re-jecting of the
fault of the persons upon the things. The reason why our Joy is attended with
crime and misery is because it mistakes both the matter and the manner. We
neither rejoice for what we should, nor how we should.

The first mistake is in the object. For our desire aiming at Joy, applies it
self to false objects, and very often misseth them, or when it obtaines them,
finds not in them what it sought. And because the appetite obstinately bends
itself to find in them more joy then their capacity can afford, and goes
about to stretch them beyond their strength, it marres them, and loses the use
of them; whence necessarily joy is turned into pettishnes and grief.

There is no sincere joy, but that which arises out of our inward wealth,
which no outward opposition can take from us; But we make it depend upon things
without us, and are so unreasonable as to require a solid permanent ground of
joy, of things weak and transitory. Can we expect any thing but sorrow from an
ill grounded joy, since by placing our chief joy upon unsound and deceitful
objects, we bereave ourselves of the true and solid ground of joy which is our
union with God? For my people has committed two evils (says God by his
Prophet Jeremy) they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and hewed
them out cisternes, broken cisternes that can hold no water. Jer. 2.3.

Then as we choose poor and weak subjects for our joy, we choose weak and
evil ways to obtain them; yea so far, that many times the joy aimed at, is
made more precious and commendable unto us by the crosseness and unluckinesse
of the way. Some hold that there can be no honest joy, and all lawful
pleasures are tastlesse unto them because they are lawful; These reap
commonly a suitable harvest to their seed, Or if they get lawful joys by
lawful means, they make then unlawful by their impetuosity: And as women
with child that use wicked means to be delivered before their time, lose their
fruit; likewise, hastiness brings but an abortive joy, and fervent desire
loses its fruit by precipitation.

Here is then a very ill account of all human joys. They that seek them miss
them commonly, or when they have gotten them they find no solid content in
them. To come near them, they go far from God. They corrupt them by evil
ways. They lose them by rashness and excess. The worst is, that the men lose
themselves also, for while they seek to glut themselves with bastard joys,
they cast themselves head long into endless sorrows.

What then? must we seek no Joy in any thing of this world? It is the opinion
of some more grave then wise, not mine I profess it. Rather I think that there
is nothing in the world but affords matter of rejoicing to the wise Christian.
Two rules only must be observed that we may rejoice as we ought in God and
his creatures, and all the accidents and occurrences of life. The one is, to
hold it for certain that there is no solid Joy in any thing displeasing to
God, for all such joys will bring great sorrows; Wherefore that we may have
Joy in all things, we must in all things seek to please him by a filial love
confidence and obedience.

The other rule, that we may find Joy in all things that are either of good
or indifferent nature, is, to seek it according to the kind and capacity of
every thing. To that end we must be careful that the Joy that we take in God
be as little under him, as it is possible to us; and that the Joy that we take
in other things, be not above them. Since then God is all good, all perfect,
all pleasant, the only worthy to be most highly praised and most entirely
beloved, we must also most exceedingly rejoice that he is ours, and we his,
and that we are called to be one with him. As for other things let us
judiciously examine what Joy they can give us, and lose nothing of the content
which their capacity can afford, looking for no more; For there is scarce any
sorrow in the world, but proceeds from this cause to have expected of humane
things a Joy beyond their nature.

Now this is the great skill of a mind serene religious and industrous for his
own content, to know how to fetch joy out of all things; and whereas every
thing has two handles the one good and the other evil, to take every thing
dexterously by the right handle. A man that has that skill will rejoice in his
riches with a joy sortable to their nature. And when he loses them, in stead
of grieving that he shall have them no longer, he rejoices that he had them so
long. If he lose one of his hands, he rejoices that God preserves him the
other. If he lose the health of his body, he praises God for preserving to him
the health of his mind. If slandering tongues take his good name from him, he
rejoices that none can rob him of the testimony of a good conscience. If he
be in the power of them that can kill his body, he rejoices that they cannot
kill his soul. If he be condemned being innocent, his joy that he is innocent
drownes his sorrow that he is condemned.

Love and Joy are the two passions that serve to glorify God and praise him
for his benefits. A thankful admirer of Gods wisdom and bounty has a
cheerful heart. All things give him joy; the beauty, variety, and excellency
of Gods works makes him say with David. Psalm. 92.4. Lord I will triumph in the
works of thy hands. He rejoices in hope to see better works, and the Maker
himself in whose sight and presence is fullnes of joy. If he look up to
heaven, he rejoices that he has a building of God, a house not made with
hands eternal in the heavens. 2 Cor. 5.1. If he look upon his body, he
rejoices that in his flesh he shall see God. If he look upon his soul, he
rejoices that there he bears the renewed image of God, and the earnest of his
eternal adoption. If he be poor, he rejoices in that conformity with the
Lord Jesus. If he see wealth in the house of his neighbors, he rejoices that
they have the plenty and splendour of it, and that himself has not the cares
and the temptations that attend it. As many miseries as he sees, so many
arguments has he to glorify God, and rejoice in his goodness, saying,
Blessed be God that I am not maimed like that begging soldier, nor lunatic
like that bedlam, nor going in shackles like that fellon, nor a slave like that
Counselor of State.

He will keep account of Gods benefits, and considering, sometimes his own
infirmities and natural inclinations, sometimes Gods wise providence in the
conduct of his life, he will acknowledge with a thankful joy, that God has
provided better for him then himself could have wished; that his crosses were
necessary for him, and that if he had had a fairer way, he might have run
headlong to ruin by his rashness.

It were infinite to enumerate all the subjects of joy that God gives to his
children; for his benefits are numberless, his care continual, his compassions
new every morning, and the glory which he keeps for us eternal. Which way can
we turn our eyes, and not find the bounty of God visible and sensible? Here
then more evidently then any where else our happiness and our duty meet in one.
It is a pleasant task to work our own joy. Now it is the task of Gods
children, in obedience to his express command by his Apostle, 1 These. 5.16.
Rejoice evermore. See how urgent he is to recommend that duty. Phil. 4.4.
Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say Rejoice.

CHAP. IX. Of Pride.
I Contend not whether Pride must be called a Vice or a Passion. It is enough
for me, that it is an affection too natural unto man, the cause of many
passions, and a great disturber of inward tranquillity.

Pride is a swelling of the soul, whose proper causes are, too good an opinion,
and in consequence, too great a love of ones self: and whose most proper
effects are, ambition of dignity, and greediness of praise. Wherefore these
two effects cannot be overcome, unless we first overcome the cause which is
presumption, and a blind immoderate love of a man's self.

It is impossible for a man to be tranquil and safe, as long as he sits upon a
crazy and tottering bottom. Pride then making a man to ground himself upon
himself, cannot but keep him in a perpetual unquietness and vacillation. How
can ye believe (says the Lord Jesus to the Jews) which receive honor one of
another and seek not the honor that comes from God only? John 5.44. A text
which taxes Pride of two great evils, That is robbes God of his glory, and
that it shakes the the foundation of faith; For a proud man seeks not the
glory of God but his own; and his own glory he does not seek of God, but
will get it of men by his own merit. Also it turns his heart away from his
trust in God to trust in his own self Psalm. 10.13. The wicked boasts of his
hearts desire, says David, that is, he is confident that by his own strength
he shall compass all his projects; And again, The wicked through the pride of
his heart will not seek after God: for the one brings the other. He that
trusts in himself, and is highly conceited of his own wisdom, is easily
persuaded that he has no need of God.

That disposition of the mind is the high way to ruin. Prove. 16.18. Pride
goes before destruction and a haughty spirit before a fall. For God to whom
only glory belongs cannot but be very jealous of those that will ingross it to
themselves, and declares open war against them. Psalm. 18.27. He will bring
down high looks. Jam. 4.6. He resists the proud, but shows grace unto the
humble. Prove. 8.11. I hate pride and arrogance, says Sovereign wisdom, which
is God. As the wind hurts not the stalks of herbs as long as they are supple
and bowing, but breaks them when they are become dry and stiff. The meek and
humble spirits that bow under Gods hand escape the storms of his Judgments;
But the hearts stiff with pride are broken by them. They that acknowledge
their weakness, and seek all their strength in God, find it, and may say
with St. Paul. 2 Cor. 12.10. When I am weak then I am strong. But such as are
high conceited of themselves, and with their wisdom will save the labor of
Gods providence, provoke him to confound their counsels, and unravell the web
of their crafty projects; Luke 1.51. for he scatters the proud in the
imagination of their heart. Isa. 5.21. Woe unto them that are wise in their
own eyes and prudent in their own sight. But blessed and wise are they that
humble themselves before God and rely upon his wisdom. A proud man lays
himself open to blows by his presumption, and like bubbles of soape water,
the bigger he grows the weaker he is and swelles till he burst.

There is a deep wisdom in this sentence of Solomon; Prove. 29.23. A man's
pride shall bring him low. For besides the judgments of God which soon or
late will sink a proud man, Pride it self while it goes about to raise a man,
brings him extreme low, for it makes him bisognoso d'honor, needy of respect
and praise: It makes him beg from door to door to get the approbation of
strangers, upon which he wholly depends, and without it thinks himself undone.
It makes him a slave to the opinion of others, thereby confuting the good
opinion he has of himself, and making him tacitly confess, that he is
indigent, empty, and hungry.

Also a man's Pride brings him low, when it makes him put on the vizard of
ceremonious and hypocritical humility, and give to all men more respect then
belongs to them, that he may receive of all more respect then he deserves. Of
the same kind are they, that despise themselves that they may be honored, and
reject praise to get praise thereby, aspiring in a carnal abusive sense to the
benefit of Christ's promise, that, He that shall humble himself shall be
exalted. Mat. 23.21. As in that humility there is pride, so in that pride there
is a base mind.

There are two correctives of pride, two seeming contrary virtues, humility and
generosity, yet agreeing very well and helping one another.

That prime Philosopher of our age Monsicur des Carts says, that Generosity
as well as Pride consists only in a good opinion of ones self, and that
these passions herein only differ, that this opinion is just in the one and
unjust in the other. It is judiciously spoken: yet their passions consist not
in that only, for generosity is a greatness of courage standing firm in
itself, but Pride is a weakness of spirit, begging greatness from others.
Generosity looks in contempt upon those things where Pride looks for glory;
for although good things and good actions give matter for Pride, if you look
well to it, it is not the substance of good things that Pride sticks unto, but
the circumstance. It is not the goodness of an action but the pride and luster
that goes along with it which makes a man proud. But it is certain that Pride
and generosity are near neighbors. He that has a good and a just opinion of
himself, slips easily from a just to an overweening opinion; and a worm of
pride will soon breed in a high and generous soul: Especially when praises,
the bellows of Pride, blow on all sides upon a man, it is a wonder if the wind
get not into him.

There is need then of humility, the other corrective, to keep generosity from
degenerating into Pride. Humility is the free acknowledgment of a man's own
weakness and imperfection, producing a voluntary depressing of himself. This
definition is proper only to the humility of sinners, not to the humility of
the Lord Jesus, who being all perfect has nevertheless humbled himself more
then any. Whence we learn, that perfection gives yet more matter of humility
then imperfection, and that the more a man is virtuous and like Christ, the
more he must be humble. For there are two roots of humility, the one the sense
of our own indignity, the other an obligation to yield unto God all the glory
of the good that is in us. Out of this last root only, grew the humility of
Jesus Christ; But our humility holds by two roots, and more by the first then
the last.

The sense of the good that is in ourselves may strengthen our courage with
generosity, to reject all that is vain or evil and unworthy of us. Yet at the
same time the sense of our imperfection must humble us before God, who is most
perfect, and his eyes most pure and all-seeing; And before men also, because
appearing so unworthy before God, we must account ourselves unworthy of any
deference from his creatures, and because if there be any good in us above
others, it is the virtue of God not ours.

These two virtues well tempered together will set our mind in a right frame,
and keep it tranquil and content. But we must begin by humility; for
contrition, repentance, and faith itself, belong to humility, which teaches
us to mistrust ourselves and have our refuge to God, to find pardon of our
sins in his mercy, and a supply of our weakeness in his virtue. Upon whom, when
we ground ourseves by a sound faith, and by it are sealed with the holy Spirit
of promise bearing witness to our spirits that we are Gods children, then a
holy generosity is bred in our hearts by the sense of that high quality, which
makes us look with contempt, not only upon the pollutions of the world but
even upon its luster, as things far under us, and reject all the temptations
to evil, bayted with pleasure honor and profit, as unworthy of our degree;
For is there any thing so much worth in the world that a thild of God should
displease his heavenly Father to get it?

Keeping that temper we shall walk always before God with fear and joy
together, and among men with charity and modesty; Romans 12.16. Minding not high
things but condescending to men and things of low estate, not being wise in our
own conceits; for it is a point of generosity for a man to know his
weakness. One may have his spirit above in heaven and yet condescend to men
and things of low estate. Yea the more our spirit is sublimated by faith and
heavenly hope, the more easily do we accommodate ourselves with mediocrity in
earthly things, according to St Paul's reasoning. Col. 3.1. If ye then be risen
with Christ, seek those things which are above where Christ sits at the
right hand of God; Set your affections on things above, not on things that are
on the Earth. This is the true remedy against pride. Have we high worldly
thoughts? Let us raise our thoughts higher yet; Let us set our thoughts and
affections on things above, not on things on the Earth: Let us never think our
selves mounted high enough, till we be where Christ sits on the right hand
of God. When the glory of the world fills a man's thoughts, while it does lift
him up with pride, it brings him down by cupidity under those things that are
under him: But when the glory of God rules in our hearts, it brings us low
with humility, and together raises us up by faith and a holy generosity, far
above all humane things, even as high as the right hand of God with Christ,
there to rejoice in his love and sweetly repose our hearts upon his fatherly
care.

None shall attain to that blessed state of the soul, which is already a
heaven upon earth, unless he beat down his pride; A vice, which makes a man
incompatible with God, for it pretends to that which to God alone is due, which
is glory; incompatible with his neighbors, for it persuades him that all
things are due to him; and that the honor and advancement bestowed upon any
but himself, is ill bestowed; and incompatible with himself, for it tortureth
a man's mind with envy, makes him secretly murmr against God and men, and
renders him incapable of the grace of God, which is only for the meek; and of
his kingdom, which is only for the poor in spirit, Matthew. 5.3.

Here this method must diligently be observed to rectify our opinion first,
that we may rule our Passion. To bring down the tumor of Pride let us get a
right opinion of ourselves; How we are begotten like beasts, borne in
lamentation, lying a long time in our ordure, living in a sickly flesh, wild
and foolish in our thoughts, corrupted in our affections, vain and wicked in
our conversation; blind, wretched, and guilty before God, and after a few evil
days returning to the ground of our ignoble principle. In the midst of the
gaudy luster of the world; let us look to our end, a winding sheet,
putrefaction, worms, mourning of our heirs for a little while, and then
perpetual oblivion. Let us bear these things in mind, and then be proud if we
can.

Many Passions have their origin from Pride, which must be called to our bar
after their Mother.

CHAP. X. Of Obstinacy.
OBstinacy is a compound of pride and ignorance. It is an overthrow of the
right polity of the soul, where the will must consult reason; but Obstinacy
makes reason to consult the will, so that a man will do or maintain a thing,
not because it is reasonable, but because he did it and maintained it before.
Ignorance begins, which hoodwinks the understanding with error: Then comes
Pride, which pins that hood fast about his eyes, pretending that it is a shame
for a man to go from his opinion.

By Obstinacy a man comes to that desperate case of the soul, which Philosophy
calls feritas, that is, a savage brutishness incapable of all virtue and
discipline. For he must be either in god or beast that takes his instinct for
his perpetual rule and sets before him his present will and doing as an
immutable pattern of that he must will and do for ever after.

When Obstinacy has thus shut the door unto discipline and stopped a man's ear
against counsel, one of these two evils follows, Either he is hardened in
evil without remedy; Or if by chance he light on the right side, he spoils it
as far as in him lies; maintaining truth and equity, not because it is so,
but because he will have it so.

There is no greater enemy to Christian wisdom then that stubborn
disposition. For thereby a man stands in direct opposition against God,
challenging to himself that which belongs to God alone, even to make his will
a reason and a law. When the light of reason, or the word of God, or the
manifest course of his providence, declares to us what the will of God is,
nevertheless to set our will against it, out of a pretended constancy in our
former opinion and inclination, what is it else but to make war against God?

As Obstinacy is odious to God, so it is odious in society. It makes a man
troublesome, ridiculous, and the undoer of himself; And of his Country also,
if he be assisted with power, and has many persons and businesses depending
upon him. Expect neither wisdom nor fair dealing, nor serenity within, nor
good actions abroad, where the will takes no counsel of reason. There is no
place left for amendment, when one thinks himself obliged never, to alter his
mind.

As Obstinacy hardens opinions it does the like to passions, to those
chiefly that have melancholy for their fuel, as sadness, hatred, envy, and
love also, for of these grown once inveterate many times a man can give no
reason, but that he will continue as he has begun.

This vice is a bastard imitation of Constancy, whose name it borrowes, but
very injuriously: for constancy consists not in steadfastness to a man's own
will, but in a firm adhering to goodness. That which is good one time,
perhaps will not be so another time. Righteousness indeed is always one and
the same, but variety of incidences and circumstances makes it change faces. As
the needle of the compass that stands so fixed upon the North, not to be moved
from that point by the greatest tempests, yet will in an instant turn to the
South when the ship is gone beyond the Equinoctial line, and to that contrary
point will keep with the like steadfastness so long as it is in that
hemisphere: Likewise, a wise and good man will be firm in his resolutions,
where his duty calls him; So because his duty lies not at all times the same
way, his resolutions also are not bent at all times the same way, but will
turn with his duty. Jeremiah desired sincerely the preservation of the
Kingdom of Juda, and the liberty of his Country; But after that Zedekiah had
taken the Oath of allegiance to the King of Babylon, he advises Zedekiah and
his people, to yield Jerusalem to him.

In vain Obstinacy aspireth to the praise of a great and brave spirit, it is
rather a womanish narrowspirited weakness. It was the proper saying of a
femall, Mean incoepto desistere victam! Must I be overcome and desist from my
purpose! Great houses have some rooms for winter, some for Summer, and
several apartements for several Offices; But in small cabines the kitchen and
the bedchamber are all one, and the same still in all seasons: Even so great
spirits have a space for diversity of counsels, according to the diversity of
occurrences, and various constellations of times and businesses which
continually alter; but they are narrowbreasted men that have but one resolution
and one course to carry them through all things and times. It is for a low and
timorous spirit to be afraid to change fashion, and think himself lost when he
must travel by a way that he never went before, whereas great spirits are
complying, facile, universal; and their knowledge of the world, makes them
find nothing new or strange.

Obstinacy should be overcome from the cradle. Even then a child should be used
to be contradicted, and as soon as the light of reason beginns to dawne in his
young soul, he must be taught to subject his will unto reason. Grown men,
hardened in that vice by ill breeding and the flattery of men and fortune, yet
may be healed if they will remove the causes of the disease. Since then
Obstinacy is a compound of ignorance and pride, they must strive against both;
Good instruction will expel ignorance, and as knowledge grows, especially
that of God and themselves, Pride will decrease, and they will become docile
and susceptible of better information.

And whereas Obstinacy puts reason out of her seat, subjecting her to passion
her natural subject, they must endeavor to restore reason to her right place
and authority, forbidding the will to determine before reason has given her
verdict; or to give a resolution for a reason, for if the resolution be
unreasonable, one must go from it, the sooner the better. It is unworthy of a
man to have no reason but his will and custom, and being asked why he
persisteth in this course, not to give his reason for answer but his Passion.
Indeed obstinate men will give many reasons of their fixednesse in their
opinion; but let them examine soberly and impartially, whether their opinion be
grounded upon those reasons, or whether they allege those reasons, because
they will be of that Opinion.

While we go about weaning of our mind from obstinacy, we must take heed of
falling into a contrary evil a thousand times more dangerous; which is, to
betray truth and righteousness, to complie with the time. For we must never
balance whether God or men must be obeyed. We must not follow the multitude to
do evil, though the world should charge us with Obstinacy. If our conscience
tell us, that we deserve not that charge, we may rest satisfied; for we are
accountable to God of our opinion, not of the opinion that others have of us.
It is Constancy not Obstinacy to maintain truth and good conscience, even to
the last breath, despising public opposition and private danger. I join
truth with good conscience, because if the question be of a truth which may be
left undefended without wronging a good conscience, it would be a foolish
Obstinacy to swim against a violent and dangerous stream to defend it. But
if it be such a truth as cannot be baulked without breaking faith with God and
turning from a good conscience, we must persist in it, and resist unto blood
when we are put to it. And better it is to be called opiniatre, then to be
perfidious.

CHAP. XI. Of Wrath.
I put Wrath among the retinue of Pride as descended from it. To this one might
oppose, that wrath is attributed to God in many texts of Scripture; And that
the Apostle says, Ephesians. 4. Be angry and sin not. And therefore that anger is
not evil, and must be fathered upon a better Author then Pride.

These objections will help us to know the nature of wrath. It is certain
that there is no passion in God. But it is certain also, that if anger were a
vice it should not be attributed unto God. The wrath of God is an indignation
declared by effects showing a resenting of the offense offered unto his glory.
As then, the anger of God proceeds from his glory, so the vicious anger of man
proceeds from his pride which is a bastard glory.

As for the other objection out of St Paul's precept, Be angry and sin not,
whence it follows that one may be angry and not sin, we must distinguish
between good and evil anger. The vicious anger comes out of pride, which is
the evil glory of man, The good anger comes out of the glory of God; for the
anger of Gods children when they hear his name blasphemed, or see some
horrible crime committed with the ceremonies of devotion and justice, is a
sense which they have of Gods glory, whose violation moves them to jealousy.
It is good to be angry for such occasions; but because anger is prone to run
into excess, and to mingle particular animosities with the interesse of Gods
glory, the Apostle gives us a caveat to be angry and sin not.

Then the vicious and the virtuous anger differ in the object chiefly; the
virtuous regards the interesse of God, the vicious the interesse of a man's
self: but both proceed from glory, and have their motions for the vindication
of glory. For as religious anger has for its motive the glory of God, the
motive of vicious anger is particular glory, and the resenting of private
contempt, true or imagined. The proudest men are the most choleric, for being
great lovers of themselves, and valuing themselves at a very high rate, they
deem the smallest offenses against them, to be unpardonable crimes.

Truly, no passion shows more how necessary it is to know the nature and price
of things, and of our selves above all things; for he that apprehends well how
small a thing he is, will not think the offenses against him to be very great,
and will not be much moved about them. The certainest trial to know how
proficient we are in humility is to examine whether we have fewer and easier
fits of choler then before.

Ignorance of the price of things, and owning things that are none of ours, are
the chief causes of disorder in all Passions; but they are more evident in the
Passion of anger, because it is more violent, and puts forth those errors to
the outside, which other Passions labor to hide.

Besides these causes, Anger flows out of more springs, as great and rapid
rivers are fed by many sources. Weakeness contributes much to it, for although
a fit of anger look like a sally of vigor and courage, yet it is the effect
of a soft spirit. Great and strong spirits are patient, but weak and imbecill
natures can suffer nothing, and like doors loosely hung, are easily gotten off
the hooks. The wind stirs leaves and small branches, seldom the bodies of
great trees. Light natures also are easily agitated with choler, solid minds
hardly.

All things that make a man tender and wanton, makes him also impatient and
chollerick, as covetousness, ambition, passionate love, ease, and flattery. The
same effect is produced by the large license given to the wandering of
thoughts, curiosity, credulity, idleness, love of play. And it is much to be
wondered at, that anger is stirred by contrary causes, prosperity and
adversity, the replying of an adversary and his silence, too much and too
little business, the glory to have done well and the shame to have done evil;
so fantastical is that passion. There is nothing but will give occasion of
anger to a peevish and impatient spirit.

The causes of anger being past telling, our labor will be better bestowed to
consider the effects, sufficient to breed an horror against that blustering
passion, even in those that are most transported by it, when they look back
upon that disorder in cold blood. Fierce anger is dreadful when it is assisted
with power. It is an impetuous storm overthrowing all that lies in its way.
How many times has it razed Cities, turned Empires upside down, and
extermined whole nations? One fit of anger of Theodosius one of the best
Emperors of the whole list, slew many thousands of men assembled in the
amphi-Theater of Thessalonica: How many then have bin massacred by the wrath of
wicked Princes? And what slaughter should there be in the world, if mean
fellows had as much power as wrath?

What disorders anger would work abroad if it were backed with power, one may
judge by the disorder which it works within a man's soul; for with the
overflowing of the gall into the mass of the blood, wrath at the same time
overflowes all the faculties of the mind, suffocates the reason, maddes the
will, and sets the appetite on fire; Which is to be seen in the inflammation
of the face, the sparkling eyes, the quick and disorderly motion of the limbs,
the injurious words, the violent actions. Wrath turns a man into a furious
beast. If man be a little world, wrath is the tempest of it, which makes of the
soul a stormy Sea, casting up mire and foame, and breaking it self against
rocks by a blind rage.

In the heat of such fits many get their death, or do such things which they
repent of at leisure afterward; for wrath brings forth an effect fortable to
its cause; it comes out of weakeness and it weakens a man, there being nothing
that disarmes body and mind more, and exposes a man more to injuries. Indeed,
when anger is kept within mediocrity, it sharpens valor, and awakes subtility
and readiness of wit. But when it is excessive, it makes the sinews to
tremble, the tongue to stutter, and reason to lose the free exercise of her
faculties, so that a man out of too much will, cannot compass what he wills:
Latin Authors calling that weak violence ira impotens, impotent anger, have
given it the right epithete, for it strips a man of his power over his own
self and of strength to defend himself.

In that tumultuous overthrow of the inward polity, what place remains for
piety, charity, meekness, justice, equity, and all other virtues? for the
serenity of the soul is the temperate climat where they grow, but the heat of
choler parcheth them; they are not plants for that torrid Zone.

I know that many times virtue is a pretense for choler. Angry men justify
their Passion by the right which they maintain, thinking that they cannot
mantaine it with vigor enough. Thus whereas other passions are corrupted by
evil things, this it corrupted by good things; and then (to be even with them)
it corrupts those good things: for there is no cause so good, but it is
marred by impetuous choler. The great plea of anger is the injustice of
others; But we must not repel one injustice by another. For although an angry
man could keep himself from offending his neighbor, he cannot excuse his
offense against God and himself, by troubling the serenity of his soul, which
is expelling the image of God (for it is not reflected but in a calm soul) and
bringing in storm and confusision, which is the devils image. As when a
hogshead of wine is shaken, the dregs rise to the top, and when the sea is
raging, the mire does the like; a fit of raging choler does thrust up all the
hidden ordure, which was settled before by the fear of God or men.

The wrong done by others to piety and justice, is no just reason for our
immoderate choler. For they have no need of such an ill champion, which is
rather a hinderance then a defense of their cause, and to maintain them
transgresses against them. To defend such reasonable things as piety and
justice, there is need of a free reason and a sober sense. And whether we be
incensed with the injury done to them, or that which is done to us, we must be
so just to ourselves as not to lay the punishment upon us for the faults of
another, or make ourselves miserable because our neighbors are wicked.

To that end we must remember that in the violation of justice, God is more
interessed then we are, and knows how to punish it when he sees it
expedient. And if God will not punish it as yet, our will must not be more
hasty then his; and it becomes us not to be impatient for our interess, when
himself is patient in the wrong done to his own. Let the cause of our anger be
never so holy and just, the sentence of St James is of perpetual truth, Jam.
1.20. The wrath of man works not the righteousness of God. If it be the cause
of God that we defend, we must not use that good cause to bring forth evil
effects; and the evil that incenseth us can hardly be so grievous, as the
loss of humanity and right reason, of which a man is deprived by excessive
wrath; for Wrath is cruel, and anger is outrageous. Prove. 27.4. It rests in
the bosom of fools, says Solomon, Eccles. 79.

Our good opinion and love of ourselves which (when all is said) are the chief
causes of anger, ought to be also the motives to abate or prevent it: for would
any man that thinks well of himself and loves his own good, make himself
vile and brutish? Now this is done by letting the raines lose to choler:
whereas the way to deserve the good opinion of ourselves and others, is to
maintain ourselves calm and generous, never removed from the imperial power
over ourselves by any violence of passion. Pro. 16.32 He that is slow to anger
is better then the mighty, and he that rules his spirit then he that takes a
city. I account not Alexander the Great, a great Conqueror, since he was a
slave to his anger. A man that never drew sword and is master of himself, is a
greater Conqueror then he.

That calm disposition shall not want many provocations from those with whom
we must of necessity live, servants especially, and servile souls, like unto
cart horses that will neither go nor drive unless they feel the whip, or be
terrified with a harsh angry tone. Seneca gives leave to the wiseman to use
such varlets with the words and actions of anger, but not to be angry; A
difficult task: It is to be feared that by counterfeiting anger, we may
become angry in good earnest; and a man has need of a sound premunition of
reason and constancy, before he come to use those ways; so easy it is to slip
into anger when one has cause for it, and is persvaded that the faults of an
idle servant cannot be mended without anger; But anger is a remedy worse then
most diseases, and no household disorder is worth the disordering of our souls
with passion. Better were it to be ill served, or not served at all, then to
make our servants our Masters, giving them power to dispossess us of the
command of ourselves, whenever it will please them to provoke us to anger.
Yet a wiseman may express indignation without anger, and an effectual vigor;
making others tremble, himself standing unmooved.

Out of the anger of others we may fetch three good uses. The first is to
learn to hate that passion and take heed of it, seeing how it is imperious and
servile together, ugly, unbecomming, unreasonable, hurtful to others and more
to a man's self.

The second use is, to gather carefully the wholesome warnings which an angry
adversary will give us: for he will be sure to tell us all the evil he sees
in us, which ourselves see not. A benefit not to be expected from our discreet
friends.

The third is the noblest use, To study the science of discerning the spirits,
considering with a judicious eye the several effects of every man's anger, for
no passion discovers so much the nature of persons. It lays a man stark
naked. Ifone be a contemner of God, as soon as he is angry he will be sure to
wreake his anger upon God with blasphemies. If he have piety and ingenuity, he
will make them plead for him, but lamely, as discomposed by anger. If he be a
coward, he will insult over the weak; and if he find resistance, you shall see
him threaten and tremble together, like base dogs then barking most when they
run away. If he be haughty, his anger will express it self in a malignant
smile, and he will boast of his blood and valor.

The occasions of anger will better discover what a man is inclined unto; for
every one will be sooner moved for those things where he is most interessed.

As in anger, so in reconciliation, a discerning eye will read a character of
the several humors. The vain and haughty man after he has done wrong, stands
upon reparation. The baseminded man is threatened into submissions after the
injury received. The covetous wretch will have reparation in money, and puts a
rate upon every bastinado. The conscionable, meek, and generous man is facile
both in giving and receiving satisfaction, and easily pardons another man's
anger, his own with much ado.

From this let us reflect to the first use that we must make of the anger of
others. He that will mind well how wrath betrays a man, and lays open his
infirmities; and how the man that has no rule over his own spirit, is like a
city that is broken down and without walls, will fence himself against that
treacherous passion by Christian meekenes and moderation, and will learn to be
wise by his neighbors harm.

To that meekenes we shall be much helped by the remembrance of our sins,
whereby we daily provoke God, and for which we might have bin cast headlong
into hell long ago, but that he is slow to wrath and abundant in goodness.
Exodus 34.6. To expect that God our father be slow to wrath toward us, while we
are hot to wrath against our brethren is the extremity of injustice and
unreasonablenesse.

To conclude, since we seek here our tranquillity, which we have found every
where inseparably conjoined with our duty, let us observe our Saviors precept,
grounded upon his example, Matthew. 11.29. Learn of me that I am meek and lowly
in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls. That way the Lord Jesus the
great Master of wisdom found rest unto his soul, the same way shall we find
rest to ours.

CHAP. XII. Of Aversion, Hatred, and Revenge.
AVersion is the first seed of Hatred, and has a larger extent; for hatred
regards only persons or actions, but many have Aversions for unreasonable or
inanimate things; wherefore those Aversions are commonly unreasonable, whether
it be out of natural antipathy, or out of fancy and wantonness. Persons
subject to those Aversions have commonly more Passion then reason, and are such
as are made tender and are soft spirited by ease. Ladies have many antipathyes,
but among country wives and milkmayds you shall find but few that will swound
at the sight of a spider or a frog.

A wise man must impartially examine those Aversions, if he have any, whether
they consist in fancy or nature, and not flatter himselse in such capricious
weaknesses. He shall do much for his rest and credit if he can weane himself
altogether from them. He that can command himself to have no Aversion, of
which he may not give a reason, will train his passion that way, to have no
unreasonable Hatred against any person.

Hatred is an indignation for an injury received or imagined, or for an ill
opinion conceived of a person or action. This description is common to it with
anger. Herein they differ, that anger is sudden and has a short course; but
hatred is meditated at leisure, and is lasting: Also that anger seeks more a
man's vindication then the harm of others, but hatred studieth the harm of
adversaries.

Hatred, as anger, is a compound of pride and sadness. (I mean the vicious
hatred and the most common.) It proceeds likewise out of ignorance of ones
self, and the price and nature of things. This Philosophy we learn of St.
John 1 John 2.11. He that hates his Brother is in darkness, and knows not
whither he goes, because that darkness has blinded his eyes; for ignorance is
the darkness of the soul. As then blind men are commonly testy, the blindness
of ignorance will make men prone to hate their neighbors, and hatred
afterward increases that blindness. By the same ignorance whereby we love
some persons and things without knowledge and reason, we hate also some persons
and things without reason; and many will choose rather to lose a friend then a
shilling.

Hatred is naturally good, serving to make us avoid things hurtful, and it is
morally good when we use it to oppose that which is contrary to the Sovereign
good which is God. When we hate that which God hates we cannot do amiss, so
that we be very certain that God hates it; such are the unjust habits and
actions condemned by his word and by that law of nature written in man's heart:
But as for the persons, because we have no declaration of Gods love and hatred
to this or that man, we must love them all, and never fear to offend God by
loving that which he hates, for we cannot offend him by obeying his
commandment. Now he commands us to love our neighbors as ourselves. No doubt
but we must love many persons which God hates, neither will it be time to hate
them till we have heard the sentence of Gods personal hatred pronounced
against them.

I say, Gods personal hatred, because there is a hatred of iniquity in God
against those that oppose his glory; which obliges us to hate them also with
that hatred of iniquity, and to oppose them vigorously, as long as they oppose
God. Of that hatred spoke David when he said, Psalm. 139.21. Do not I hate them
O Lord that hate thee, and am not I grieved with them that rise up against
thee? I hate them with a perfect hatred, I count them mine enemies. But we
must take heed lest the hatred of iniquity, bring the hatred against the
persons; and the persons must not be afflicted more then needs, for the
repressing of iniquity: The more difficult it is to keep that temper, the more
earnestly ought we to endeavor to render all offices of charity and personal
humanity to them whose party we justly seek to defeat; for to love our enemies
and to overcome the evil with good, is the most ingenuous imitation of the
Godhead. It is his command, joined with his example, Matthew. 5.44. Love your
enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them which despitefully use you
and persecute you, that you may be the children of your Father which is in
heaven, for he makes his Sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends
rain on the just and on the unjust.

There is need of a great measure of grace and wisdom to observe these two
precepts together. Psalm. 97.10. Ye that love the Lord hate evil, and Matthew.
22.39. Thou shall love thy neighbor like thy self, hating iniquity in the
wicked, and loving their persons, and both for Gods sake.

The chief use of hatred is, to be incited to good by the hatred of evil. For
that end, it is not necessary that the greatness of hatred equal the
greatness of the evil, and we are not obliged to hate evil things as much as
they deserve; otherwise the great current of our affection would run into the
channel of hatred, and leave the channel of love, dry. Now it is in loving
the Sovereign good with all our strength and with all our soul, that our duty
and happiness consists, not in hating the evil with all our strength, and
with all our soul. The hatred of evil is not requisite of it self, but by
accident, as a consequence of the love of good. If the hatred of vice persuade
us to virtue, we shall be more yet persuaded to it by the love of goodness.

Many effects of hatred are the same as the effects of anger; for there is no
anger without hatred in some degree, if not to a person, at least to an action.
But there is some hatred without anger, when one forethinks in cold blood the
ways to destroy an adversary.

All the destructions of the world where the will of man is an agent are
wrought immediately by hatred. They have many remote causes anbition,
covetousness, carnal love, emulation and all the violent passions; but they
destroy not, but by accident, till some opposition has driven them into
hatred, which in the inward polity of the soul has the same office as the
hangman in a City, for it is the executioner and avenger of wrongs. Unto
hatred all the cruelty of tyranny and malice must be imputed. And yet all the
blood spilt, all the ruins and inventive torments outwardly wrought by hatred,
are nothing so grievous as the inward disorder wrought by it in cruel and
revengefull souls, and the separation which it works between God and man. It
is the final and most grievous effect of hatred, that, by hating our
neighbors we become Gods enemies. 1 John 4.20. If a man say I love God, and
hates his brother, he is a liar.

Hatred is a bitter venom which being once diffused and soaked into the soul
turns a man into a hell-fury, contrary to all good, ready and industrious to
all evil. But with all the pain that such a man takes to do harm to others
he does more harm to himself then to any, consuming his spirits with a
continual malignant fever, and banishing from his soul serenity, charity, and
meekness; virtues which are the soil of other virtues, and the givers of rest
and contentment to the soul.

It is often seen that while a man is gnawing his heart with a fierce hatred,
the person he hates is healthful, merry, and quiet, as if imprecations made
him prosper. An ill grounded hatred draws Gods blessing upon the party
unjustly hated and persecuted. Psalm. 109.18. It was David's hope Let them curse,
but bless thou.

Hatred is conceived for one of those two ends, Either to avenge ourselves or
to avenge injustice which is Gods cause.

As for the first: Before we think of revenging an injury, we must examine
whether we have received or done the greater injury: for it is ordinary that
the offender is harder to be reconciled, that it may not be thought that he is
in the wrong.

Then we must calmely consider, whether the revenge may not do us more harm
then the injury, though we had nothing to do but to break our lances
against a dead stock incapable to resent it. For besides that there is no enemy
so little but it is better to let him alone then to provoke him; the harm that
hatred does within us cannot be recompensed by any sweetness of revenge, though
there were no other harm in hatred then to find delight in robbing God of that
he has reserved to himself: Now he challenges revenge as his own,
exclusively to all others; Heb. 10.30. Vengeance belongs unto me, I will
recompense says the Lord. To become incapable of rest, incapable of doing
good, incapable of pleasing God, are sufficient evils to deter us from
harboring that inhumane passion, enemy of men, of God, and of ourselves. Pro.
11.17. The merciful man does good to his own soul, but the cruel troubles
his own flesh.

It is a right godly and philosophical study to strive against that tenderness,
quick to pick offenses, slow to take satisfaction. And we must be ingenious to
devise causes of patience. Are you condemned being guilty? acknowledge Justice.
Are you innocent? bow under authority. Are you newly offended; It is too soon
to resent it. Is the Sun gone down since? It is too late. Has any wounded
you? look to your cure, not to your revenge. Are you well again? let not your
mind be harder to heal then your body. Are you offended by a friend? remember
the friendship more then the offense. Are you offended by an enemy? Do your
endeavor that he be so no more; returning him good for evil. Is he too strong
for you? It is folly to contend with him. Is he too weak? It is a shame. Is he
your superior? you must yield to him: Is he your inferior? you must spare him.

And since Pride, of which none is altogether free, represents our enemies to
us under a vile and unworthy notion; let us fetch some good out of that evil;
Let contempt help patience to bear with their provocations, for if a dog did
bite us, we would not bite him again, nor kick at a ass that kicks against
us.

Also when some body offends us, let us remember that we have offended some
body. The fault that we find in another, is in our own bosom. It is too
great a flattery of self love to look to be excused, and excuse none; We are
evil and infirm, and live among persons evil and infirm. All have need to
put on a resolution of mutual forbearance.

Above all things we must remember that we are all guilty before God, and
stand in need of mercy, and unless we forgive them that trespass against us,
we pray against ourselves, and ask our condemnation every time that we say
the Lords Prayer.

The meditation of death will conduce much to lay down hatred. To wish one
dead is among the vulgar an expression of the greatest hatred. If then we may
be satisfied with the death of our enemies, we may be sure that all our enemies
shall die; but we must be sure also, that they may expect of us the like
satisfaction. The worst we can do the one to the other, is to bring us to the
end which Nature leads us unto. As while two little fishes are fighting for a
fly, the Pyke comes, that devoures them both; while we quarrel about small
things, death is coming, which will swallow him that is in the right and him
that is in the wrong, the victor and the vanquished. Look upon the broils of
the age of our fathers; What is become of the long and opiniatre quarrel of the
Leagve in which all Christendom was involved? death has decided it. It has
cooled the * Titles that the Leagvers assumed.
Ardent and the Zealous; It has stopped the full careere of hatred assisted with
valournd power. It will do the like to the quarrels of our days. Let us not be
so hot in our dissensions; Death will quench our heat within a few days, and
send us to plead our causes before our great judge. It will go ill with us if
we appear in that judgment, before we have made peace with our judge by a
true repentance and faith, which without charity with our neighbors cannot
subsist. Why should our hatred be long, since our life is short?

The same consideration will serve to temper the hatred of iniquity, which for
the most part is a pretense whereby we cozen ourselves and others, to palliate
personal hatred. If we take Gods cause sincerely in hand, we must conform
ourselves to his will and wisdom, expecting till he send his messenger, which
is death, to attache the wicked before his judgment. Psalm. 37.8. Cease from
anger and forsake wrath, Fret not thy self in any wise to do evil, for evil
doers shall be cut off; 10. Yet a little while and the wicked shall not be.

If we hate wickedness, we may be sure that God hates it more yet, and he will
punish it; but in his own time, to satisfy his justice not our fashion.
Certainly if we hated iniquity in good earnest, we would hate it in ourselves.
Though our enemies be wicked, we must love them for Gods sake: and, because we
also are subject to the like infirmities, we must love them for our sakes.

CHAP. XIII. Of Envy.
HEre is one more of the Daughters of Pride, and therefore a grandchild of
Ignorance and Self love. She is much like Hatred her elder Sister. In this
they differ, that Hatred is bent against the evil; and Envy, against the good.
But to show herself descended from Ignorance, she mistakes the false goods for
the true; For no man will envy the Christian virtues of his neighbors, nor the
riches of his mind, but the goods of fortune which often deserve rather to be
called evils. Let a man grow in learning and holiness, let him be a Saint upon
earth, let him have Seraphicall raptures no man will envy him for it, but let
him once get favor at Court, let his degree and his rents be augmented,
presently the arrows of envy will be shot at him on all sides. Indeed great
Orators, great Warriors, and men eminent in civil prudence are much envied
by idle droanes; but if you look to the ground of that envy, it is not the
virtue and capacity of those brave men that begets it, but the fame and credit
which they get thereby. Think not that Satan envieth God because he is good and
wise, if he did he would endeavor to be so: He envieth God because he is
Almighty, and because he is worshipped by men and Angels, whereas himself would
have all power in heaven and earth, and every knee to bow unto him. It is not
virtue but the reward of virtue, that moves envy. If it were in an envious
man's power to distribute all the wealth, spiritual and temporal which is
among men, he would not dispute to his enemies the possession of all the
virtues, but he would keep to himself all the rewards.

This is the cause of that disposition. When an envious man sees others enjoy
wealth, he fears there will not be enough left for him. But as for Virtue, he
is sure that the plenty of it with others, will not hinder his own possession
of the like; So he does not envy it. For nothing moves envy but such things as
have moved cupidity before: Cupidity is for light and glittering stuff, and
envy keeps pace with cupidity. Virtue is a substance too dark and solid for
their turn. Learn we then to store ourselves with those goods, which provoke
no envy, and which we may possess, no body being the poorer by our riches.

Envy is a great enemy to tranquillity of the suol. It is the rottenness of the
bones says Solomon, Prove. 14.30. which is a pregnant character of a passing
malignant and corroding passion. It has two unnatural effects, The one that
an envious man is afflicted with the prosperity of others, the other that he
punishes himself.

The first effect is particular to Envy, and herein it does not enter commons
with any other Passion. The envious man is sick, because his neighbor is well.
He grows lean, because another grows fat; he thinks that he loses all
that another gets, and makes of his neighbors prosperity his adversity. He is
directly opposite to Christian sympathy and the commandment of the Apostle,
Romans 12.15. Rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with them that weep, for
he is weeping with them that rejoice, and rejoicing with them that weep.
Whereas the Apostle says, that Charity is not envious, 1. Cor. 13.4. we may
invert the terms, and say that Envy is not charitable: yea, of all vices it is
most incompatible with charity. Envious men are the only kind of men, to whom
without form of justice and without breach of charity we may do harm, since
to do them harm we need but do good to their neighbors.

But it is needless to do harm to an envious man, or wish him more harm
then he does to himself, vexing his mind and drying up his body by a
continual and just punishment. This is wisely expressed in the CXII Psalm,
where after the promise made to the just that his righteousness endures for
ever, and his horn shall be exalted with honor, the text adds. The wicked
shall see it and be grieved, he shall gnash with his teeth, the desire of the
wicked shall perish. And it is very probable that in the outward darkness where
there is weeping and gnashing of teeth, that burning fire and that gnawing and
never-dying worm is Envy, biting the damned to the quick, while they are
thinking of the glory and felicity of God, and how the Saints whom they have
despised and oppressed in the world are filled with joy and crowned with glory,
while themselves are infamous and miserable. That comparison is a maine article
of their misery,

The envious man cannot suffer as much as he deserves, since he sets himself
against God and all that God loves, controuling His distribution of his goods.
He that is grieved at the good he sees, deserves never to have any good, and
it were pity he should have any, if he can get no good but by his neighbors
harm.

Besides the causes of envy which I observed before, there are two more that
are great contributours to that wicked vice. The one is want of faith; for a
man becomes envious because he believes not that God has enough in his store
to do good to him and others, or that God does wisely to give him superiors
or equals. Which unbelecfe makes him to murmr and fall out with God. Matthew.
20.15. His eye is evil, because God is good.

The other cause is Idleness. It makes men envious, but it makes them poor
before; for when they are grown poor through idleness they look upon the
wealth of their neighbors with envy. The soul of the sluggard desires and
has nothing and the thing he desires is his neighbors estate, which he looks
upon with an evil eye. Hence wars, robberies, and piracies. For while
diligent men grow rich by their industry, idle and envious men study only to
have strength on their side to rob the industrious, or at least to put a stop
to their increase.

This search of the causes of envy opens us the way to the remedies. Since all
disorder in the appetite begins by error in the understanding, we must before
all things heal our understanding of that error and ignorance which occasions
envy, even that false opinion that the wealth and honor of the world make a
man happy; whereas they are instruments of wickedness and misery unto weak
souls; and to the strong, hindrances and seeds of care. They are the ropes
wherewith Satan draws men into perdition; For one that uses them well, a
thousand are corrupted and undone by them. And who would envy slaves and
miserable persons?

Then we must beat down pride and the excessive love of ourselves, with the
study of humility charity, and meekenes. Let nothing be done through strife or
vain glory, but in lowlines of mind let each esteem other better then
themselves. Look not every man on his own things, but every man also to the
things of others, Phil. 2.3. If once we can get an humble opinion of
ourselves, and a charitable opinion of our neighbors, we shall not be vexed
with envy seeing their prosperity, for we shall think that they deserve it
better then we. In stead of an envious comparing of our neighbors estates with
ours, let us compare what we have received of God, with what we deserve of
him, and that will quell our pride and envy.

An especial care must be taken to cut our desire short, which is the next
cause of envy. He that desires little shall envy no body; For so little as he
needs, he would not strip another to cloth himself.

If sometimes the luster of worldly advancements dazzle our eyes and breed in us
some motions of envy, let us consider what those advancements cost them that
have attained them, how much time, money, and labor they have spent, how many
doors of great persons they besieged, how many frowns from their superiors,
how many justlings from their emulatours: Then, how many temptations, how many
shifts were they put to, even to disguising of truth and wresting of justice.
Let us think well whether we would have bought preferment at that rate, and
that if we have it not, we did not spend for it what others did. We have not
broken our sleep with cares, we have not bin many years tottering between
fear and hope: We have given no thanks for affronts. We have not courted a
porter and a groom. We have not purchased with gifts a Clerks favor. We have
not turned the whole bent of our mind from the service of God to the service of
the world. In a word if we have not the wares, we have not paid our money for
it. And if we would not have spent so much about that advancement, we have no
reason to envy them that have bought it so dear

The chief remedy against that fretting disease is, faith in the power
goodness and wisdom of God, with an entire submission to his holy will. Why
should we afflict ourselves for Gods gifts to others? Romans 10.12. The same Lord
over all, is rich unto all that call upon him. He has enough to enrich us all.
Let us not look what he gives to others, but let us humbly ask him that which
he knows to be fit for us, and thankfully receive what he gives us, being
sure that all that he gives is good because it comes from his good hand. If we
can truly say, with David's faith, The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance,
Psalm. 16.5. how can we after that look upon our neighbors portion with envy.

It is also an antidote against envy to be always; well employed for idleness
makes a man to leave his business to look upon his neighbors work, and doing
nothing control them that do well.

As for the envy which others bear to us, we have reason to rejoice that our
condition is such as deserves envy, at least in the opinion of others: It is
true we must not refer ourselves to the opinion of others, but to our own
self about the happiness or unhappiness of our condition; but because we are
not sensible as we ought of Gods benefits toward us, and many times complain
when we should praise God, our neighbors envy serves to awake our sense of
Gods mercies, and to move us to thankfulness.

CHAP. XIV. Of Jealousy.
JEalousy is much like Envy. In Greek one word serves for both. Yet are they
of different nature. For a man is envious of that he has not, but he is
Jealous of that he has.

Besides they are of different extractions. Envy is the daughter of Pride, for
to pride the envious man owes the opinion he has to be more worthy of the
advantages conferred upon others; but Jealousy is the offspring of a base mind
that judges himself unworthy of that which he possesses, and fears that
another be more worthy of it.

Jealousy is a various and fantastical medley of love, distrust, revenge,
sadness, fear, and shame. But that compound is not lasting, for love soon
turns into hatred, fear and shame into fury, and distrust into despair.
Solomon says that jealousy is the rage of a man. Prove. 6.34.

The predominant passions in Jealousy (for Jealousy is many passions together)
are, fear not to possess alone what one loves, and shame of what the world
may say of it; this last especially tears amans soul with extreme violence; so
slavish is the voluntary subjection of weak spirits under the opinion of
others.

A wise man will keep himself from that sharp yet imaginary evil, by a
sincere love to his party, for perfect love casts out fear. 1 John 4.18. He
that loves his wife well will trust her, and that trust will make her
faithful, or nothing will. Fidelem si putaveris facies.

To that counsel of trusting his wife, the husband must join a resolution not
to mistrust himself. For here one may lawfully put on a good opinion of
himself, the question being only to compare himself with others about
pleasing a woman, which is obliged to study to please him; and cannot, without
grievous crime and conceiving an enormous disproportion of merit between him
and others, bestow upon them that love which is due to him. A husband betrayeth
himself and tempts his wives weakness, when he discovers a distrust of
himself, and a fear that she prefer other men before him. This shows her
the way to value them above her husband, and she thinks herself justified so
to do by her husbands judgment.

He must learn also to be credulous for his own content, and of hard belief
in the causes of discontent. For here it is better to be deceived in evil then
in good, and it is better always not to search an evil without remedy, then
to find it; especially when by seeking it, we make it come. The dishonor of
cuckoldry consisting only in opinion, it is healed also with opinion, and he
that feels it not, has it not.

This inconvenience is prevented by making choice of a virtuous wife, and using
her well, for restraint and hard usage does but draw the evil; Also by keeping
us free from defiling our neighbors bed; This will give us a great confidence
that God will not suffer any to defile ours; Most jealous men are adulterers,
fearing what they have deserved.

But when one has made an ill choice, neither kindness, nor justice, nor
prudence, can keep a light and ungrateful woman to her duty; When the wrong
is so manifest, that it is impossible for the husband not to know it, and
dissembling would be imputed to insensibility or even to consent; the right
counsel for the exterior is, to be divorced from a wicked wife. But if one
can neither marry again, nor live without a woman, and fears that he shall
hardly be able to keep himself from harlots; of all harlots let him make use
of his own. It is better yet to keep a lawful whore, then an unlawful.

As for counsels for the interior, one must practice the grand remedy to
remediless evils, patience. God, in this as in other sorrows of life, will
find ways of comfort and relief for those that trust in him, even where
there is no way: The good company of so many brave men that are in the same
row, is a help to bear it. A wiseman will make no more strange of it, then of
wearing a hat a la mode.

He must keep fast to that true Maxim, that he cannot be dishonored but by
his own faults, not by the faults of another. A virtuous man's honor hangs not
upon a light woman's behavior. If it did, it should lie very unsafe. No more
does it depend upon his neighbors opinion. Persons of honor and judgment
will never disesteeme an honest man for it. And as for the talk of the vulgar,
honor and good fame depend no more of it, then of the gabbling of geese.

CHAP. XV. Of Hope.
I Have spoken in the first Book of the Christian Virtue of Hope. Here I speak
of a natural Passion. Yet it is certain, that they differ only in the degree
of perfection and in the object. Natural hope is wavering, Divine hope is
fixed; Divine hope regards eternal goods, Natural hope looks for natural
and civil goods; Yet the object of Divine hope is not denied to the natural,
but when that passion is determined by grace unto supernatural goods, it
becomes a virtue.

Hope is a compound of courage, Desire, and Joy; but has more of the first and
second ingredient then of the third. Also a grain of fear enters into the
composition; for if there were none, it would not be hope but expectation; as
on the other side there is a grain of Hope in fear, for if there were no
Hope, it would not be fear but despair.

Hope has this common with love and desire, that it regards a good object, at
least in the intention. But Hope considers four particular qualities in her
object, That it is absent, that it is future, that it is possible and likely,
and that it is yet uncertain, at least in some regard; if not in the
substance, at least in the circumstance; for even the certainest Hope of all,
that of eternal goods grounded upon Gods immutable promises, is nevertheless
uncertain of the degree, the manner, and the time of the enjoyment hoped for.

Laying aside that prime object of hope, it is hard to say, whether Hope does
more good or harm in the world; For on the one side it raises the courage and
animates good enterprises with vigor; On the other side it blinds the reason,
which instead of good chooses a disguised evil, or turns good into evil, by
rashness and unquietness. Hope sets the mind on gadding and aspiring higher
then it can reach, all ways discontented with the present and hanging upon the
future. And how deceitful are the promises of Hope! Of ten, one comes not to
effect. With hoping good and suffering evil, man's life passes away.

Yet must we acknowledge the obligation that men have to hope, for it makes
them subsist, even while it deceives them. What makes Negro's confined to the
mines, there to eat and drink? It is Hope. What makes gally slaves to sing
while they are rowing? It is Hope. And would so many persons whose days are a
continual torment consent to maintain their wretched life, but that in a
bottomless gulf of evils they will obstinate themselves to hope well; and
after all goods are flowne away, Hope stays behind. Hence it comes, that many
unfortunate persons will stir up their industry, awake their virtue,
strengthen themselves in faith, and live to see better days.

So to answer the question whether Hope must be reckoned among the goods or
among the evils, it may be said that it is the evil of them that are at ease,
and the good of the miserable: For such as have means and dignity have also
many designs and chained hopes, which keep them hanging in chains, while
cares and fears, like ravens, are tearing their hearts. Besides, they that are
enchanted with many worldly hopes, conceive christian Hope but remissely.

Whereas they that are in adversity being not tickled with those delicate hopes
which a man dares not recommend unto God, will fix upon just hopes, suggested
by necessity. And if they have any godliness in them, they will show it in
grounding those just hopes upon Gods mercy and promises. The less invitation
they have to flatter themselves with worldly hopes, the more will they
strengthen themselves with the hope of heavenly goods.

In both the fortunes, a wise lover of his tranquillity will not feed or swell
his hope, but for one object, which is, The fulness of his union with God;
For any thing else he will clip the soaring wings of that aspiring passion, and
will not let her fly too high nor too far.

In the appetite, as there is a predominant love and a predominant desire, so
there is a predominant Hope. When it is anchored upon the only good perfect and
immutable object, it keeps the soul firm and tranquil. If it be moored upon
quick-sand (and such are all the things of the world, in which there is no safe
anchorage) it will be carried away by every wind and tide, and never keep in
a quiet station.

The vulgar thinks it a wise and courageous part to be obstinate to hope well.
But a firm and unmooved hope, ought not to be conceived or resolved upon, but
for firm and unmoved goods, even those only that are the subject of the
promises of the Gospel. But for things about which we have no divine and
especial promise, the more one is obstinate to hope well, the more likely is
he to speed ill, because the obstinacy of Hope puts the judgment out of his
office and leave t^ no room for Prudence. And the ill success is made more
bitter by the preceding obstinate hope; Whereas to him that stands prepared for
the worst, nothing comes against Hope; And if good come, he tastes it better,
for his success has exceeded his Hope.

The way to be little disappointed, is to hope little; and the way not to be
disappointed at all is to confine our Hopes within us, as much as we can, and
to the things above, which the true Christian finds already within; depending
upon no future things, but his perfect reunion with God. Whosoever will
proportion his hope to the nature of the objects, shall never entertain great
hopes for worldly matters. For there is a great imprudence in that
disproportion to have great hopes for small things.

CHAP. XVI. Of Fear.
Fear is a feeling beforehand of an evil to come, yet uncertain, as least in
the circumstance; And when the evil is come, Fear ends, and turns to
sorrow or despair.

Fear is one of the most simple and natural Passions. It is found even in the
most unperfect animals, for God has put it in all for their preservation. The
very Oysters will shrink for Fear, when the knife does but touch their shell.

As there are two evils to which men are obnoxious, pain and sin; there are
two fears answering these two evils, the fear of suffering and the fear of
sinning.

Of the first none is altogether exempt, although the Spanish Scholar examined
at Paris about his proficiency in Moral Philosophy, and demanded what Fear
was, covered his ignorance with this bravado, In nostra patria nescimus quid
sit timor. In our Country (said he) we know not what Fear is. But without
fear, a man can have neither prudence nor valor, for he that fears not the
blow guards it not, and is slain without resistance.

The principal use of Fear is to prevent or avoid evil. But when the evil
is unavoidable, and now at hand, then resolution must repress Fear: Although
even at that time fear does good service, for the fear of losing honor or
life erecteth a man's courage. Valor in combat is as often out of fear, as out
of magnanimity; and it is often hard to discern which of these contrary causes
puts valor into a man. The certainest mark of valor by fear is cruelty,
when he that has disarmed his adversary in a duel kills him without mercy,
and after a field won puts all to the sword; for he shows that he fears
his enemy, even when he is out of combat. But he that gives him his life
shows, that he seares him no more alive then dead.

The most valorous are not they that have no fear, for it is natural to all
men; but they, that know how to moderate it.

A man cannot Fear too little, for no evil can be avoided by fear, but may
much better be avoided by judgment.

To fear things which neither strength nor forecast can prevent is an
anticipation of the evil. It is a great folly to lose our present rest out of
fear of future trouble, as though it were not time enough to be afflicted when
affliction comes.

But Fear does more then to bring near remote evils, it creates evil where
there is none. And many evils which shall never come and are altogether
impossible, acquire by fear a possibility and a real being. We laugh at an
hypocondriaque that thinks himself to be made of snow, and is afraid to melt
at the Sun, because he fears that which cannot happen to him. But a rich man
tormented with fear of falling into Poverty, is much more ridiculous: For
which of the two is the greater fool, he that fears that which cannot happen,
or he that makes it happen by fearing it? The hypocondriack cannot melt at the
Sun by the fear he has of it, but a covetous man by his fear of being poor,
is poor in good earnest; so poor, that he wants even that which he has,
for he loses the enjoyment of his wealth by his fear of losing it.

It may be truly said that there is no vain Fear, since all fears whether
true or false are real evils, and Fear itself is one of the worst evils. It
makes a man more miserable then a beast, which feels no evil but the present,
and fears it not but when the senses give her warning of the near approach of
it. But man by his fear preventeth and sends for the evil, stretching it by
imagination very far beyond his extent; many times also forging evil to
himself where there is none, and turning good into evil, for it is ordinary
with us to be afraid of that we should desire.

For remedy to that disease we must learn our Saviors Philosophy. Matthew.
6.34. To every day is sufficient the affliction thereof. If the evil must
come, we must expect it, not go fetch it. Let us not make ourselves miserable
before the time. Let us take all the good time that God gives us. Perhaps the
evil will come, but not yet. Perhaps it will not come at all. There is no
Fear so certain, but it is more certain yet, that we are as often deceived
in our fears, as in our hopes. And this good we reap out of the inconstancy of
humane things, against which we so much murmr, that it turns as soon
toward good as toward evil. Habet etiam mala fortuna inconstantiam, or if it
turn not to good, it turns to another evil. The arrow shot against us with a
small declination of our body will miss us, and hit our neighbors head. A
little wind will turn a great storm; A sudden commotion in the State will
create every where new interesses. He that held us by the throat will be
suddenly set upon by another, and will let us go to defend himself. If we see
no way for us to escape, God sees it. After we have reckoned all the evil that
our adversary can do, we know not what God will do. In the creation he made the
light to shine out of darkness, and ever since he takes delight to fetch the
comfort and advancement of those whom he loves, out of the things they fear.
That which we fear may happen, but it will be for our good. Unto many the bed
or the prison has bin a Sanctuary in an ill time. Unto many the public
calamity has bin a shelter against the particular. Many times that which
looks grim a far off, smiles upon us near hand. And what is more common
then to be promoted by those things which we feared most? Exile and
confiscation condemn us often to a happy tranquillity, taking us from the
crowd and the tumult to set us at large and at rest.

These considerations serve to decline, not to overcome the evil. Wherefore
there is need of stronger remedies. For that we may be healed of Fear it is
not enough to say, Perhaps the evil will not come, or will not prove so
terrible as it looks. Say we rather, Suppose the evil must unavoydably come,
I do imagine the worst; Say it be poverty, close prison, torture, the scaffold,
the axe; All that, can take nothing from me that I may call mine; God and a
good conscience are mine only true goods, which no power and no violence can
take from me; All the rest is not worth the fear of losing: Isa. 12.2. Behold
God is my salvation, I will trust and not be afraid, for the Lord Jehovah is my
strength, and my song, he also is become my salvation.

Then the remedy to the shaking ague of fear consists in knowing these two
things. The evil and the liberatour; The evil cannot be very great since it
has an end, No evil of this world but ends by death, Death it self is good
since it ends evils; how much more when it begins eternal goods? to the right
Christian, death is not a matter of fear but of hope. Let us take away from
the things we fear that hideous vizard which imagination puts upon them,
calmely looking into their nature, and getting familiarity with them by
meditation. Let nothing that is incident to humane condition seem strange or
new to us. What happens to one may happen to any other. The ordinariest cause
of fear is surprise. That we be not surprised we must think betimes upon all
that may come, and stand prepared for all. So nothing shall seem strange when
it comes.

But the chief remedy against fear is to lift up our hearts to the great
Liberatour that has goods and evils in his hand, that sends afflictions and
deliverances, that brings down and brings up again, that gives us strength
according to the burden which he lays upon us, and multiplyeth his comforts
with our afflictions. Being persuaded that God is most wise and most good, and
that all things work together for good unto them that love him, we will
repress our fear of the accidents of life and second causes, saying, The will
of the Lord be done; we are sure that nothing but good can come to us, since
nothing can come but from God.

Wheresore instead of fearing to suffer evil we must fear to do it, which is
the safest course to prevent suffering. He that commits sin is more unfortunate
then he that suffers pain, for suffering moves Gods mercy but sin moves his
indignation. That man cannot but fear sin that bears in mind that God
hates it and marks it; There then we must fear, and the chief deliverance
that we must ask of God is, that he deliver us from every evil work. 2 Timothy
4.18. As we fear sufferings because of themselves, so must we fear evil
works, because of the evil that is in them, besides the sufferings that
attend them soon or late. This Fear of love and revecence toward God, puts
out all other Fears: He that fears God, needs not Fear any thing else.

CHAP. XVII. Of Confidence and Despair.
OF these we need not say much, having spoken before of Hope and Fear, for
confidence is the extremity of Hope, and Despair is the extremity of Fear.

Confidence, which otherwise may be called a firm expectation, is a certainty
that we conceive of a future desired good, or of the love and fidelity of a
person, whereby the heart is filled with joy and love.

Despair is the certainty that the mind conceives of a future evil very
odious, or of the enmity or infidelity of a person, whereby the heart is seized
and in a manner squeazed with sorrow and hatred.

These Passions being so opposite yet ordinarily will pass the one into the
other, I mean Confidence into Despair; from Despair to pass to Confidence,
it is rare. The surest course to avoid falling into Despair for things of the
world, is to put no great confidence in them: Moderate hopes being frustrated
turn into moderate fears and sorrows. But a great and joyful Confidence
being disappointed will fall headlong into extreme and desperate sorrow, as
they that tumble from a high precipice get a heavy fall.

One subject only is proper for man's entire Confidence which is God, all good,
all mighty and all wise: Without him all things that men use to repose their
confidence upon, are waves and quicksands. Men are mutable, and though they
could give a good security for the constancy of their will, they can give none
for the continuance of their life. The goods of the earth fail our
expectation, or come short of our satisfaction, or slip from our possession.
They will leave us, or we them. No wonder if they that repose their full and
whole confidence in them are seen so often to fall into despair. Here then
the true counsel for tranquillity is to trust wholly upon none but God; on
other things according to their nature and capacity. They shall never deceive
us if we require nothing of them above their nature.

There is a kind of Despair improperly so called which is no more but to give
over hoping a thing which upon our second and better thoughts we have found
either inconvenient or impossible. That Despair will rather bring rest then
trouble to the mind. Wisemen are pliable and easy to be satisfied with reason.
It is wisdom to despair and desist betimes from unlikely and unfeasable
designs.

It is a true Despair when one sees himself absolutely disappointed and
excluded from the object of his chief love, desire, and hope, at which the
soul is smitten with such a sorrow that she hates all things, yea the very
thing that she desired so much, and herself more; the smaller and unworthyer
the object is, the more shameful is the despair about it, but in recompense
it is more curable; For then one is easily brought to consider in cold blood
that the thing was not worthy either of his affliction or affection. But when
the object is great and worthy, the despair is more guilty and less curable,
Wherefore the worst Despair of all is when one despaireth of the grace of God
so far as to hate him, for nothing can be worse then to hate the Sovereign
good, only worthy to be beloved with all the soul.

Many distrust the grace of God who are not therefore desperate, though they
think themselves so to be. Let them ask of themselves whether they hate God,
and let them know that as long as a grain of Gods love remains in them, there
is together a grain of faith, though oppressed and offuscated by melancholy. For
it is impossible that God should be their enemy and their Sovereign evil,
while they love him. To them this comfort is addressed, Prove. 8.17. I love them
that love me, and those that seek me early shall find me. And this likewise, 1 John 4.19. We love him, because he first loved us. If then we love him we must
be sure that he loves us, and we must fight against the temptations of
despair, saying with Job, Though God stay me yet will I trust in him. Job.
13.15. and with Isaiah. Isa. 25.9. Lo this is our God we have waited for him
and he will save us; This is the Lord, we have waited for him we will be glad
and rejoice in his salvation.

Confidence is good according to the goodness of the subject that it reposeth
upon. Wherefore Confidence in God the only Sovereign good, perfect, solid, and
immutable, is the best of all, and the only that can give assurance and
content to the soul. He that is blessed with that confidence is half in Paradise
already: He is firm, safe, meek, serene, and too strong for all his enemies:
Psalm. 84.12. God is to him a Sun to give him light, heat, life, and plenty
of all goods; and a shield to guard him and shelter him from all evils: ver.
13. He gives him grace in this life, and glory in the next. O Lord of hosts,
blessed is the man that trusts in thee.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Pity.
Pity is a Passion composed of love and sorrow, moved by the distress of
another, either true or seeming. And that sympathy is sometimes grounded upon
false love, because we acknowledge our selves obnoxious to the same calamities,
and fear the like fortune.

Pity is opposite to Envy, for Envy is a displeasure conceived at another man's
good, but Pity is a displeasure conceived at another man's harm.

The Passion of Pity must be distinguished from the virtue that bears the
same name, for they are easily confounded. The Pity of the vulgar, which is
imputed to good Nature and Christian charity, comes chiefly out of two causes.
The one is an error in judgment, whereby they reckon many things among the
great goods, which are good but in a very low degree, and likewise many things
among evils which are not evil. Hence it is that those are most pitied that
dye, and the best men more then any, as though death were evil to such men;
and they that lose their moneys, which are called goods as though they were
the only good things; and they that lose their lands which are called an
estate, as though a man's being and well being were estated in them.

The other cause of the Passion of Pity is a sickly tenderness of mind easy
to be moved; wherefore women and children are more inclinable to it; but the
same tenderness and softness makes them equally inclinable to choler, yea to
cruelty. The people that sees the bleeding carcass of a man newly murdered
is stricken with great pity toward him, who is past all worldly sorrows, and
with great hatred against the murderer, wishing that they might get him into
their hands to tear him to pieces. But when the fellon is put into the hands
of Justice, condemned and brought to execution, then the heat of the peoples
Passion is altogether for pity to him, and that pity begets wrath against the
executioner when he does his office. So easily does the passion of vulgar
souls pass from one contrary to another, from pity to cruelty, from cruelty
to pity again, and from compassion for one to hatred for another. But all
these sudden contrary motions proceed from one cause which is the tenderness
and instability of weak souls whose reason is drowned in passion, and their
passion is in perpetual agitation.

But the Virtue of Pity, which is a limb of charity, is a firm resolution to
relieve our neighbor that stands in need of our help, and it has more
efficiency then tenderness. This is the Pity of generous and religious spirits
aspiring to the imitation of God, who without feeling any perturbation for the
calamities of men, relieveth them out of his mercy.

And whereas the Passion of pity is for the most part caused by the ignorance
of the goodness and badness of things, he that is less mistaken in them is
also less inclined to that passion, for he calls not that misery which others
call so. Nec doluit miserans inopem, aut invidit habenti. Or if a wiseman pity
one dejected by poverty, it will not be his poverty, but his dejected spirit
that he will pity. And so of him that is weeping for a slander; a wiseman will
pity him, not because he is slandered, but because he weeps for it, for that
weeping is a real evil, though the cause which is slander be but an imaginary
evil. He will labor to get such a firm soul that neither the good nor the
evil that he sees in or about his neighbors, be able to work any
perturbation within him.

The world being a great hospital of misery, where we see wellnigh as many
miserable persons as we see men: if we were obliged to have a yearning
compassion for all the miserable we should soon become more miserable then any
of them, and must bid for ever Adieu to the peace of the soul and contentment
of mind. It is enough to give power to our neighbors to command our counsel,
our labor, and our purse in their need; but to give them power over the
firmeness of our soul to shake and enervate it at their pleasure, it is too
much. Let us depend of none, if it may be, but God and ourselves. Let none
other have the power, be it for good or evil, to turn the stern of our mind
at his pleasure.

It must be acknowledged that Pity, as weak as it is, has more affinity with
Virtue then any other Passion, and turns into virtue sooner then any. That way
weak souls handled with dexterity are brought to meekeness and charity; and
that way many Pagans have bin brought to the Christian verity. We owe the great
conversions to the sufferings of Martyrs which moved the beholders to
compassion, for that compassion made a breach into the heart, and gave entrance
into the understanding to that good confession which these holy men made in the
midst of the fires; for nothing is more persuasive then Pity, neither is there
any fitter hold to draw and turn the soul.

But such compassionate souls may be as soon drawn to evil as to good by
that hold. Factious men brought to the gallows for sedition, have from that
pulpit sown the seed of mutiny into the minds of a compassionate multitude,
and those seeds like the teeth of Cadmus his Serpent have brought forth since a
dismal harvest of intestine war. If then any good is formed in our minds by
compassion, we had need to lay a stedfaster foundation under it; for the mere
motions of Pity are but fits and starts, and are not actions but shakings of
the soul.

A wise man will learn how to take hold of the spirits of men by Pity, but
together will take heed that others hold him not by the like handle, which
therefore he will shorten, and leave no hold but reason for others to take him
by.

CHAP. XIX. Of shamefacednesse.
SHamefacednesse is such a compounded passion that it may not be described in
few words. It is a sadness out of the sense or apprehension of a dishonest
evil. It is a self condemnation, especially about matters of love and desires
which one would satisfy in secret. It is also a sudden amazement out of a
diffidence of ourselves when we are surprised by some inopinate occurrence,
where we fear that more will be expected of us then we can perform: And to
give a more general character: It is a sad ressenting of ones own infirmity
with some inclination to goodness.

It is a cowardly Passion, found only in timorous natures, yet in the more
tender age and sex it is pardonable, and useful too, so it be not excessive,
for by good instruction it may be formed into a virtue, but weak, and suitable
to the capacity of the subject. Stronger spirits dyed with piety and wisdom
abstain not from evil out of Shamefacedness, but out of knowledge and
resolution. But because strong spirits have bin weak when they were under age,
and the boldest have bin timorous, unless they be altogether dull and bestiall
by nature, there is a time to frame them to virtue by shamefac'dnesse, which
may be called a necessary infirmity in the beginning. And it is not expedient
to remove it too soon from young minds by Stoicall precepts, least they
wanting that natural bridle of the appetite, and not being yet well trained
and confirmed by reason, let themselves loose to evil.

Children in whom no mark of Shamefacednesse appears are perverse and ill
natured, and though they be merry sparks they shall never be good nor able
men. Shamefaced children are towardly and disciplinable. But in conscience is
not the nature of men very weak and poor, since their best natural
dispositions are infirmities, and that there is need of those infirmities to
bring them to some good?

Some natures are timorous in all the ages of their life by their native
temper, therefore more obnoxious to Shamefacednesse; these are less capable of
a great and heroical virtue, which is a compound of righteousness meekness
and magnanimity, but they are docible for a less eminent virtue: and their
inclination to shamefacedness is a pliable subject for good discipline. That
disposition must be well managed, as the seed of modesty, and in women, the
mother of pudicity, their chief virtue. How powerful Shamefacednesse is with
that sex the known example of the Milesian Virgins shows it.

There is another kind of shame recommended in Scripture. That of Daniel, O
Lord righteousness belongs unto thee but to us confusion of face. Dan. 9.7.
That of Ezra, O my God I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face unto thee.
Ezra 9.6. And of the penitent publican, that stood a far off, and would not
lift up so much as his eyes to heaven. Luke 18.13. But that shame which is a
godly contrition for sin committed, and fear to commit more, is proper to a
spirit fixed and confirmed in the love and fear of God, and has nothing common
but the name with the passion of shame, which with all her utilities is but a
weakness of mind and a childish perplexednesse.

A wise and godly man must be ashamed of nothing but sin. The remembrance of
the greatness, presence, justice, and holiness of God, and the sense of our
own imperfection must keep us in perpetual respect and humility, which is
that good shame of Daniel, Ezra, and the repenting Publican. But for our
conversation with men, when we are come to man's age, let us weane ourselves as
much as we can from boyish Shamefacednesse, which dejecteth and perplexeth the
spirit, and makes a man lose the fairest opportunities of doing good.

OF PEACE AND CONTENTMENT OF MIND.
FOURTH BOOK. Of Virtue, and the exercise of it in Prosperity and Adversity.
CHAPTER I. Of the virtuous temper requisite for Peace and Contentment of Mind.
THis Book is but a result of the two precedent, for who so has got a right
Opinion of things, and learned how to govern his Passions, wants nothing for
virtue and tranquillity; these two articles being not only the materials and
the rules of the building, but the whole structure. And the order is as
essential, as the matter, for the understanding must be illuminated and
satisfied about the right judgment of things, and know how far they are
worthy that our appetite should stir for them, before we undertake to
instruct our appetite how to behave ourselves with them.

Out of the right opinion and the well governed Passion arises the true temper
of Virtue; which is a calm state of the Soul, firm, equal, magnanimous,
meek, religious and beneficial to a man's self and to others. All the
imperfection that is in our Virtue is a defect in one of these two, or in both.
And who is not defective in them? Who has not error in his Opinions, and by
consequent unrulinesse in his Passion? Wherefore our descriptions of perfect
human Virtue are accidents without substance. But what? we must not set before
us any less pattern then perfection. Matthew. 5.48. Be ye perfect even as your
Father which is in heaven is perfect.

The School gives definitions and divisions of the several moral Virtues,
which is no more then is necessary. Yet to speak properly there is but one,
even that equal temper and just proportion of all the faculties and motions of
the soul which is Justice, producing the like just temper abroad in all the
parts of conversation; for to be just is to do all the parts of a man's duty,
toward God, toward himself, and toward his neighbor.

Temperance and Fortitude are handled in the Schools as virtues by themselves,
which is to very good purpose, for a more distinct exposition; but in effect
they are parts of justice, for Temperance is the just proportion of the
appetite; and Fortitude is the constancy and magnanimity of the will requisite
to keep one just. Neither is fortitude a Virtue different from temperance; for
whereas of those two duties sustine and abstine, to sustain and to abstain,
the first which is resisting oppositions is ascribed to fortitude, the other
which is abstaining from the inticements of sin is reserved unto temperance,
yet both belong equally to fortitude, seeing there is as much, if not more,
strength of mind requisite to stand out against alluring temptations as to
encounter violent oppositions.

There are then two virtues in all, the one intellectual which is Prudence,
the other moral which is Justice. I have spoken of the first, and this whole
treatise is but an exercise of it: And of the second also, of which the most
essential part is the fear of God and a good conscience: that is truly the
prime Justice. All human laws, if they be good are dependances of it; if they
be evil, they are deviations from it. Natural equity sanctified by grace
rules both public and particular duties, and both the outward and the inward
man, which is far more then common and civil law can compass. In all
policies of the world Justice has diverse faces. The body of the Law
(especially in great and ancient States) has statutes and cases without
number, which instead of clearing justice confound it. All that legislative
labor regards outward action and the public peace: But piety and true
Philosophy rule the inward action, and settle the peace of the soul with the
right and primitive Justice. Besides, human laws are most busy in forbidding
evil, and for that end make use of fear, and the terror of punishment;
whereas the inward law of Virtue is most busy in prescribing good, and for that
end makes use of the motive of love and reward. But whether we need the motives
of fear or love, we have a Sovereign Court within our breast where the great
Judge of the Universe is sitting continually. There his Law is written and laid
in view, entering into the eyes of the understanding, which sees it even when
he winkes that he may not see it. And there a man's own thoughts stand divided
at the bar, some accusing, some excusing him, out of that law compared with
the records of the memory. Of that Court St. Paul was speaking that the very
Gentiles and heathen show the work of the law written in their hearts, their
conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing
or else excusing one another. Romans 2.15.

Before that Court (that is before God himself and before us) we must labor
to be declared just, and more to be so indeed. There justice must be settled.
There it must be practiced. It will be well done to know and obey the forms of
justice which public order has set over us, but our maine task must be to
labor for an niward and habitual justice. Let us obey cheerfully all good or
indifferent human laws, but before all and after all let us seek and pray for
that law of the spirit of life, which may set a rule to all the unrulinesse
within us, and make righteousness and peace to kiss each other in our souls.

The ordinary definition of justice, that it is a constant will to give to
every one his own, as it is commonly understood, regards only the least part
of justice, which is the rule of duties between man and man. But let us give
it a fuller extent: for to give every one his own we must pay all that is due,
first to God, next to ourselves, and then to our neighbors. Certainly the two
former parts of justice are far more considerable then the third which is the
only cried up, though ill observed, in the world; for a man may and does often
retire from the society of men, but he can at no time retire from God and
himself; and though a man were alone in the world, yet should he have with him
the chief subjects to exercise the virtue of justice.

We shall give God his own by loving him with all our soul, and with all our
strength, obeying his will carefully, and cheerfully praising him for his love
to us, and for his own greatness and goodness with a thankful and a joyful
heart, setting him continually before the eyes of our mind, as always present,
that we may walk unto all pleasing before his pure and all seeing eyes, and
stick fast unto him by meditation, affection, and entire confidence. And
whereas man is the bond and the natural mediator between the material world
and the spiritual; who alone must render for the whole Nature the due homage
unto the great Creator; Justice calls upon us to do that right to God and
Nature, to knit Nature with God by our love, faith, obedience, and praises.

Thus also we shall give to ourselves our due, for to draw near unto God is
our good, Psalm. 73.28. to separate from him is our destruction. They that
observe lying vanities forsake their own mercy, says Jonas, Jo. 2.8. meaning
that they forsake him of whose goodness their being and wel-being depends. This
thought will renew the ancient characters of the natural notions of justice
engraven upon the marble of our hearts, upon which the corruption of the world
and our own has bred as it were a thick moss, which hides these characters.
But with the fear of God that moss is rubbed off, and the law of God the
original justice written there with Gods finger appears plain and legible.
Who so then will do right to himself and recover his primitive dignity must
study to know, fear, and love God, perfect his union with him, and associate
himself with his Angels, by obeying his will and tending his praise. His
saving eternal light is for us, Wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption are for us, for he gives them to us liberally in his Son; We do
but right to ourselves, when we study that those blessings which are for us may
be ours. And to lose such inestimable graces by our neglect, is, besides
ungratefullness toward God, a crying injustice against ourselves.

A maine point of that justice which we owe to ourselves is, to labor to make
ourselves possessors of ourselves, and masters at home; so untyed from all
outward ties, that our content depend of none but God and ourselves: and that
rule over ourselves is attained by yielding unto God the rule, ver us.

To that end our first labor must be to train well the Passion of love, which
is the great wheel mooving all the other passions; for according to the
subjects that we love, and as we love them well or ill, we are good or evil,
happy or unhappy. To love what we ought and as we ought, is the whole duty and
happiness of man.

Next, our desires and hopes must be cut short, which is not cutting down
Nature, as greedy minds may think: It is cutting off our bonds, and getting our
liberty. That way plenty, pleasure, and joy, are bought at an easy rate, for
very little will content a mind weaned of superfluous desires; and he has
little or no matter left for sorrow, fear, anger, hatred, and envy, the
tormentors of the soul. What is able to disquiet that man that thinks nothing
to be his but God and a good conscience, and possesses the things of the world
as not possessing them? But to quiet the murmr of love and desire, which are
querulous and unlimited passions, we must do them such equal justice, that
while we stop them one way we open them another; Being kept short for the
things of the world, let them have free scope toward heavenly things, to love
God, and desire his spiritual and permanent goods, without limit and measure.

The great injuries are those which a man does to himself, when to obey lust,
or anger, or coveteousnesse, one makes himself guilty and miserable; when for
the love of the world, one loses the love of God; when out of miserableness
the body is denied his convenient allowance: When for things of no worth a man
prostitutes his health, his life, and his conscience. When men will sin for
company, cast themselves into ruinous courses out of compleasance, and damn
themselves out of gallantry. Who so will seriously think what he owes to
himself and what account of himself he must give unto God, will endeavor to
keep the precious health of his body, and the golden serenity of his
conscience; he will enjoy with simplicity that portion which God gives him of
the contentments of life, and above all things he will carefully keep his only
good, which is God.

Justice being well administered within us will be practiced abroad with
facility and delight. Romans 13.7. Render to all their dues, tribute to whom
tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom
honor. Let the debtour be more hasty to pay then the creditour to receive.

All the Law-bookes are but comments upon this precept of Justice to render to
every one his own. Yet they omit the most essential parts of it, the duties
of charity, humanity, and gratefulness: Which being without the rules of civil
laws, have the more need to be learned and observed by ingenuous and religious
souls. And we must believe, contrary to the vulgar opinion, that they are
debts, and that doing good to them that stand in need of our help is not
giving but restoring. Therefore the works of mercy are represented in the CXII
Psalm as works of Justice, He has dispersed, he has given to the poor, his
righteousness endures for ever. Let us then be persuaded, that when we do all
the good of which God gives us the faculty and the occasion, we do but
justice. Let us pay due assistance to him whose need claims it, counsel to
him that is in perplexity, kindness to them that have showed us kindness,
pardon to them that have offended us, good for evil to them that persecute us,
love to them that love us, support to the weak, patience to the impatient,
reverence to superiors, affability to inferiors. All these are debts. Let us
omit no duty to which we stand obliged by the laws of civil society; Yet that
is too scant, let us omit no duty to which we have the invitations of piety and
generosity. All the good works that we may do, are so many duties. It is the
large extent that St. Paul gives to our duty. Phil. 4.8. Finally brethren,
whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, and if
there be any praise, think on these things. And the fruit of that study in the
following words is that which we seek in this Book, the Peace of the Soul and
our union with God. Do these things and the God of peace shall be with you.
Truly peace quietness and assurance are the proper effects of righteousness,
and are as natural to it as the light to the Sun. Isa. 33.17. The work of
righteousness shall be peace (says Isaiah) and the effect of righteousness,
quietness and assurance for ever.

Considering Justice as the solid stem in which lies the substance of all
virtues as her branches, I will not follow every bough of that that tree; Two
Virtues only I will stand upon as the preserving qualities of that universal
Justice. These are, meekeness and magnanimity. They are the necessary
dispositions to frame a right virtue in the soul, and peace with it.

Under meekeness I comprehend humility and docility, which are but diverse
aspects of the same face, that meek and quiet spirit which is in the sight of
God of great price. 1 Pet. 3.4. As, for great edifices there is need of deep
foundations, likewise to edify the soul and build virtue and peace in it,
there is need of a profound humility; which being joined with faith is the
foundation of the structure, and the perfecting also: for we must be humble
that we may be virtuous, and the more we are virtuous the more we are humble.

With that meekeness the word of God must be received, which is the doctrine of
Virtue and salvation. Jam. 1.20. Receive with meekness the engrafted word
which is able to save your souls, says St. James. Isa. 61.9. God has
anointed his Son to preach good tidings unto the meek: Psalm. 25.9. The meek
will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach his way. A mind
well-disposed to Virtue and the peace of the Soul, will distrust himself as a
shaking unsound foundation, to repose his trust wholly upon God. He will labor
to heal himself of all arrogant opinions and obstinate prejudices, being
always ready to receive better information and submit himself unto reason.

It belongs to that meekeness to be free from the impetuosity of the appetite,
for that which St. James says of the wrath of man, that it works not the
righteousness of God. Jam. 1.21. may be said of all other Passions; they are
evil if they be vehement; for in a spirit agitated with vehement passions
justice cannot settle, that very vehemence being an injustice, and a violation
of that sweet and equal economy of the soul fit for justice and peace.
Passion goes by skips and jolts, but Reason keeps a smooth even pace; and that
pace is fit to go on Justice's errand.

To meekness magnanimity must be joined. Meekeness makes reason docile and
pliant in goodness. Magnanimity makes her constant in it. Both are the framers
and preservers of righteousness; meekness because it humbles us before God
and subjecteth us under his good pleasure; magnanimity, because it raises our
minds above unrighteous ends and ways, and makes us aspire to that great
honor to have our will conformable unto Gods will, and become partakers of his
Nature, which is Righteousness itself. St. Paul makes use of magnanimity to
solicit us to holiness. Col. 3.10. If ye be risen with Christ, seek those
things which are above, where Christ sits on the right hand of God. Set your
affections on things above, not on things on the earth. As nothing makes the
mind more magnanimous, so nothing makes it more holy, then that doctrine which
teaches Gods children that all the world is too little for them; and that God
alone, who adopteth them and calls them to the inheritance of his Kingdom, is
worthy to possess their whole heart. For would any that is so highly dignifyed
stoop so low as to subject his affection to the things of the earth? or would
he be so ungrateful as to return him disobedience for so much love? Rather his
high condition will fill him with high thoughts, and according to the Apostles
exhortation, he will endeavor to walk worthy of God who has called him to
his Kingdom and glory: 1 These. 2.12. O, could we apprehend the excellency of
this high calling by a serious faith, with what contempt would we look upon
those things that captivate the passions of men! How should we laugh at that
which others desire or fear! We should look upon the actions of men as
beholding the earth, from heaven, seeing the clouds of cares and sorrows
gathering far under our feet, and tumultuous desires busling and raising
storms; where we should have no other share but compassion of those that are
tossed by them: Neither temptation nor persecution should be capable to trouble
our heavenly serenity. The false profit and pleasure of sin should not tempt
our desire, but provoke our scorn and indignation, as unworthy of men, and
muchmore of Gods children, coheires of Christ in his eternal Kingdom, called
to be Kings and Priests unto God and their Father.

The same magnanimity will breed in us agodly ambition to imitate God our
Father, keeping righteousness in all things because the righteous Lord loves
righteousness; Psalm. 11.7. using charity and liberality, giving and forgiving,
because the Lordis good, and his tender mercies are over all his works. Psalm.
145.9. Doing good to our enemies, because God fills with his goods the mouths
that blaspheme him; And, because God gives always and receives nothing, we
must think it more happy and divine to give then to receive.

From magnanimity reflect again to meekeness. Let all that is done
magnanimously be done meekely together, with simplicity and reality, without
noise and ostentation. These virtues going hand in hand, meekness and
magnanimity, are the two supporters of Justice, and the teachers of all
goodness. A meek and magnanimous spirit is the fruitful soil of all
virtues. To express them in other terms more familiar to the Church, They are
humility and faith, which with the love of God, the true essence of Justice,
make up the greatest perfection that a man is capable of upon earth, whereby
the mind is sanctified, sweetened, and raised; and filled with goodness,
peace, contentment, and assurance.

CHAP. II. Of the exercise of Virtue in Prosperity.
IF I treat not methodically and severally of all Virtues, the title of this
work may excuse me; I seek not here the definitions and divisions of Virtues,
but the use; And of all the uses that which conduces to the peace and
contentment of mind. Besides, all that we have said before and all that we have
to say, is an exercise of virtue, which cares not much by what name she is
called, justice, fortitude, temperance, or what you will, if she may have leave
to do her effect, which is to maintain the spirit every where in a virtuous
tranquillity.

Her principal work is, so to inform, or rather form the mind, both for
Prosperity and Adversity, that it be neither corrupted by the one, nor dejected
with the other. That work is the result of our second and third Book. Who so
has learned to have a right Opinion of the things that the world desires or
fears, and to rule his passion accordingly, is fenced against all
inconveniences of both fortunes. But because it is a work of the highest
difficulty and importance to make the right use of these two different
conditions, and go through both with a serene and equal spirit, Let us
consider them with more care, and learn to behave ourselves virtuously in both.

Let us begin at Prosperity, as that which requires more virtue. Infants will
greedily graspe the bright blade of a new knife, and cut their fingers; The
like is done by grown men, dazzled by the gay show of honor, wealth, and
pleasure; they lay hold on them eagerly, and hurt themselves, for they take
them the wrong way.

We need not say that Prosperity is good in itself; He that would say the
contrary should not be believed. Yea none would believe that such a man
believes what he says. But by the evil disposition of those into whose
bosom prosperity falls, it becomes evil, yea far worse then adversity. For
one that is ruined and brought to despair by adversity, ten are spoiled and
undone by prosperity; because adversity makes a man to retire within himself,
and warnes him to arm his mind with prudence, piety, and resolution. But
prosperity relaxeth the mind, and by it weak brains are made weaker,
imprudent, arrogant, and profane; acknowledging no virtue, and no God, but
Fortune; Which they think to be so enamoured with their person and merit, as
not to have the power to disgrace them. Such is the character that David gives
of a man corrupted with prosperity. Psalm. 10.5. His ways are always grievous,
thy judgments are far above out of his sight, As for his enemies he puffs
at them. He has said in his heart, I shall not be moved, for I shall never be
in adversity. It is an unhappy prosperity that makes men dissolute, outrageous,
puffed up with pride, blinded with self love, sometimes heavy with a drowzy
sloth, sometimes transported with an insolent joy. The most dangerous and most
ordinary abuse of prosperity is the diverting of a man's thoughts and love from
God and a better life, to fix them upon the world. Wherefore David speaking of
men enclosed in their own fat, calls them men of the world whose portion is in
this life, Psalm. 17.14. intimating that they have no portion in the other life.
Truly prosperity is a slippery place; With most men it is a fair walk ending
in a precipice. And the least harm it does is to enervate the mind; and dull
the edge of industry.

The abuses of prosperity are diverse, according to the different humors of
men. Some of a joviall and inconsiderate humor glut themselves with
prosperity; and become fierce and violent. Others of a dark and timorous
constitution are oppressed with wealth and honor as with heavy weights, dare not
enjoy what they have, and live in an anxious care to lose all. Eccles. 5.12.
The abundance of the rich will not suffer them to sleep. They ought to thank
him that should ease them of that heavy burden, their riches.

Of the sicknesses that attend prosperity I have said much, and of their
remedy. It comes to this. To consider maturely the worth of things, that we may
not love them above their worth, or expect of them a satisfaction above their
nature; not to anchor our confidence upon their uncertainty: not to love any or
trust in any with all our heart but God, the only perfect and permanent good;
To use the world as not using it, and enjoy the things we love best in it as
having the use of them not the possession, aspiring continually to a better
inheritance. This is the way to get a sincere taste of all the good that
worldly prosperity is capable to afford.

Now there is need of a singular prudence to pick that good among all the evil
and all the trash that worldly prosperity is made of, and not to mistake
superfluity for necessity, and that which is good in effect from that which is
good in opinion only. For that man whose curiosity has turned superfluous
things in to necessary, and whom the tyranny of vice and custom suffers not to
delight in any thing but unlawful, is made guilty and unfortunate by his
prosperity.

Also, to use prosperity wisely, and get the true benefit of it, a man has
need to weane himself from presumption and self love. Whence comes it that so
many spoil their prosperity by lavishness and insolency, others lose the taste
of it by insatiable greediness of adding and increasing? It is, because they
have such a high esteem and love of themselves that they think all the goods
of the world to be too little for them, either to spend or to lay up: Whereas
he that has an humble opinion of himself tastes his prosperity with
simplicity and thankfulness, for he thinks that he has much more then he
deserves. He that cannot bring himself to that low conceit of his worth, shall
never be contented, though God should pour all the treasures of the world into
his lap, and though he were mounted to the top of the wheel, and had nailed it
to the axeltree to keep it from turning.

Who so will enjoy true prosperity must keep fast to this Maxim, that no true
good can be got by doing ill. So whereas vice and unrighteousness insinuate
themselves under the baits of pleasure, honor, and profit, there is great
need to make provision of faith and good conscience as antidotes against the
general corruption. As carefully as we walk armed, and look about us when we
travel through forests infested with robbers, we should walk armed with the
fear and love of God among the enticements of worldly profit, honor and
pleasure, for Satan lies in ambush every where. But whereas robbers will lurk
in hideous and savage places to do their feats, Satan does his in the most
delicious places. It was not among briers and thorns that he set upon man yet
innocent, he made use of a tree good for food, pleasant to the eye, and to be
desired to make one wise. Genesis 3.6. And he made use ever since of beauty,
daintyes, and curiosity to destroy mankind: Conversing among these is walking
upon snares; Job. 18.8. There is great need of wisdom and godliness to avoid
them, and of a merciful assistance of God to get out when our foot is ensnared
in any of them.

To the pleasures honors and plenty of the world, faith must oppose other
sweeter pleasures, more sublime honors, and riches infinitely greater, even
the pleasures for evermore at Gods right hand, the honor to be of his
children, and the plenty of his house. These he has promised and prepared to
them that love him, not to those that choose rather to fill themselves with
unlawful delight and unrighteous gain than to walk before God unto all
pleasing, waiting for the fullfilling of his promises. David expected to see
Gods face in righteousness, Psalm. 17.15. thereby supposing that without
righteousness he could not see Gods face. St. Paul expected the Crown of
righteousness; he must then be righteous before he have the Crown, and he must
fight the good fight and keep the faith before he be crowned. Could the height
of that felicity enter into our low understandings, what it is to be filled
with the contemplation of Gods face, and receive at his hand the Crown of
righteousness, hardly would we venture the missing of that glory for all the
deceitful delights and profits of iniquity.

Without looking so far as the recompenses and pains of the life to come,
even in this life a godly, temperate, and conscionable life, is a thousand
times more desirable and pleasant then a riotous dishonest life, and
advancement gotten by oppression. Even those Pagans that looked for no good
after this life, and laughed at infernal torments as old wives tales, yet
could say, Nemo malus felix, No wicked man is happy; for unlawful delight and
gain leave behind them a sting of remorse, yea many times sin smothereth
pleasure at its birth; besides the disfavour of God and men which commonly
follows. We cast our reckonings amiss if we make account to possess a happy
and a wicked prosperity; It cannot be happy if it be wicked, for it is virtue,
it is innocence, it is the love of God and faith in his promises, it is justice
and charity, that give the pleasant relish and the very being of prosperity.

But suppose that the acquisition of the delights and advantages of the world,
be neither accompanied with sin, nor followed with remorse, yet they are weak
and transitory; riches are burdens, honors are fetters, pleasures are
feverish, fame is a wind, friendships are seeds of cares and sorrows, and yet
in all these we seek a solid and permanent content, who can wonder that we
find it not? For I do not insist yet upon the principal thing, that we should
fix our desires upon God alone; But I say now, that to enjoy humane prosperity
we must proportion our desire and expectation to the capacity and durablenesse
of humane things, and to the power we have to dispose of them and keep them:
If we expect more, we are disappointed, and lose the true taste of our
prosperity.

But there may be defect as well as excess in the desire and enjoyment of
worldly prosperity. For there are some whose wild devotion kneaded with a
timorous and savage humor, is afraid of all temporal comforts, be they never
so simple, natural, and innocent; seeking virtue and merit by misusing of
themselves, and sowring all the prosperity that God gives them, with an
unthankful melancholy. It is more then God requires at their hands; but he
will require an account at their hands how they have enjoyed their health and
the fruits of his fatherly indulgence, which he had given them to use with
moderation, comfort, and thanksgiving. Either there is pride and hypocrisy in
that fantastical marring of their prosperity; or if they are in earnest, their
brains is crazed, oppressed by the black vapors of their spleen. Abstinence is
laudable and necessary to be joined sometimes with prayer, to subject the body
to the spirit. But the spirit must not deal with the body his subject, as the
worst of Tyrants do with their people, whom they utterly ruin to keep them in
subjection. That voluntary self depriving of the innocent conveniences of
life, is reproaching God as being too blame for making nature plentiful and
delightful, and then placing man in the midst of his goods, and giving him
senses to relish them, and reason to use them.

But the contrary fault is more dangerous and more ordinary, to hunt after
temporal goods with a rash eagerness, and when one has them to lose the
benefit of them by lavish intemperance, or even to turn those goods into
evils by getting them by ill means, and using them to ill ends. If Prosperity
mar us, it is but even with us, for we had marred it before.

The true way to be content every where, and purchase prosperity at an easy
rate, is to desire little and be contented with little. Not he that has most
but he that desires least, is the richest. The less a man desires the less
he wants, and the more resemblance he has with God, who dedesireth nothing,
and wants nothing. It is unjust for us to solicit the world to give us riches,
while we have means at hand to enrich ourselves without troubling the world,
which is, To desire nothing. Why should I ask of another that which I can give
to myself?

But when all is said, desire is natural and will stretch itself upon
something. Now God alone is able to fill it. He that has fixed his love and
desire upon God, and is already possessed with him by faith, may after that
easily put that Philosophy to practice, To desire nothing out of himself, and
to ask nothing of the world. He may tell Fortune that he needs none of her
gifts, for having God he has all. But he that wants that possession which
only gives true satisfaction to the soul, deceives the world and himself
when he braveth Fortune, and bids her to keep her gifts to herself, saying
that he asks contentment of none, being able to give it to himself; that he
carries all his goods along with him, that he is rich and free because he is
master at home. Truly if he that speaks so, has nothing but himself, he is
very weak and needy. Yea unless he possess God, he cannot possess himself;
and in that resolution to cut off his worldly desires, wanting the satisfying
object, he is like him that makes a resolution not to come near the fire
though it freeze hard, and himself be thin clad. Whereas he that will cut his
desires short, being enricht with Gods grace, is like him that will not come
near the fire, because he is clad with warm furs.

To such a man rich in God it becomes well to say, I will not beg wealth and
comfort abroad since I may have it at home. Finding tranquillity and
sufficiency within my breast, why should I make my self unquiet and needy by a
greedy and worldly desire? I will sweetly enjoy the temporal goods because
they are Gods gifts, and receive them at his good hand with thankfulness: I
will also endeavor to increase them by industry, if I may without fraud to
others, and vexation of my self. But I will importune no man to give me, as
long as I may obtain of my self not to ask. I will spare to others the pain
to deny me, and to my self the shame to be denied, having such a short way at
hand to satisfy me, which is, To ask and desire nothing. The less I court the
world, the less power shall I give it over me. This Philosophy is easy to him
that can say with David, Psalm. 16.6. The Lord is the portion of mine
inheritance, and of my cup, thou maintainest my lot; The lines are fallen unto
me in pleasant places, yea I have a goodly heritage.

Moderation of desires makes prosperity sweet: And that moderation is harder in
prosperity; for misfortunes rather breed fear then desire, but good successes
are bellows that swell cupidity, and cupidity making us depend of the future
takes from us the enjoyment of the present. For we enjoy not what we have, when
we complain that we have not enough, and reckon not what we have got but what
we would get.

And because in Prosperity men will grow proud and forget what they are; The
higher that God raises our degree, the more let us humble ourselves, and keep
our minds within the limits of modesty. If advancements smile upon us let us
think rather to tread surely then to make have, and to sit safe then to rise
high. As they say of Xanthus that being in drink he laid a wager that he would
drink the whole Sea; they that are drunk with prosperity are prone to undertake
more then they are able to perform. The Apostles precept has need to be pressed
upon them, Romans 12.3. that no man think of himself more highly then he ought
to think, but think soberly; When we stand on a high tower our stature is
never the higher then when we walk on the ground, but our brains is many
times the weaker, as being dizzy with the height. So, dignity and high
prosperity does not increase a man's capacity by raising his place, but rather
makes him wild and giddy. Whereas then prosperity makes men over-confident, it
ought to make them more cautious, fearing least some of the windiness of the
place where they stand get into their head: Let them study to know themselves
and the world, that they may trust neither, as things beyond the verge of their
power, and whose subsistence depends not of their will. Let us look upon the
prosperities of this world as upon fair crystal glasses, the clearer the
frailer; to day they shine, to morrow they break: If you never trust them,
they will never deceive you.

Honors, riches, and temporal pleasures are but the outside and the bark of
prosperity. And it is a saplesse bark, where a good conscience and reciprocal
love between God and the soul is wanting. But where that is, either it brings
outward prosperity or supplieth the want of it. Psalm. 65.4. O God, blessed is
the man whom thou choosest and causest to approach unto thee. We shall be
satisfied with the goodness of thy house, even of thy holy temple.

CHAP. III. Of the exercise of Virtue in Adversity.
PRosperity and Adversity are near neighbors; for prosperity makes
preparatives for Adversity by blinding men's minds with cupidity, swelling them
with pride and thrusting them forwards with rashness, whereby they cast
themselves headlong into precipices; and generally by making sin to
multiply, which draws punishment from Gods justice. Besides the inconstancy
of humane things which in a moment turns from fair to foul weather.

On the other side, Adversity many times mends the harm done by prosperity,
for it represseth temerity, opens the eyes blinded by Passion, and brings the
sinner to repentance; Thereby making preparatives for prosperity, which is
never relisht till one has bin schooled by affliction. Then evil fortune has
her inconstancy as well as the good, and the calm will come after the storm.

The proper exercise of virtue in Adversity is to imitate God, who fetches
good out of it, and makes it a discipline of godliness, wisdom, and
tranquillity to his children. It is not enough to hope that after the storm
the calm will come, we must study to find tranquillity in the very tempest,
and make profit of our damage.

Having spoken of the particular Adversities in the second book, I will
endeavor here to set down general remedies for all sorts of Adversities,
saving one, the Adversity which a delicat man creates to himself out of a
conceited tenderness; for to such wilfully afflicted persons the counsels of
reason are useless, till they be afflicted in earnest. They have need of real
afflictions to be healed of imaginary. To them that are sick with too much
ease, a smarting Adversity is a wholesome plaster. As to the hypocondriaque
who had a false opinion of a wound in his left thigh, the surgeon made an
incision in the right, to make him feel the difference between real wounds
and imaginary.

Indeed the most part of persons afflicted, are more so out of opinion then any
true ground; but the wanton melancholy of some, that were; all their time
dandled in fortunes lap, adds to that epidemical disease. We will let them
alone till they have reason to complain, and desire them that groan under
some apparent Adversities to examine seriously whether they be such as they
appear; For there are some Adversities, or called so, which rather are
prosperities, if they that complain of them can obtain of themselves rather
to believe their own sense then the opinion of others, and to have no
artificial and studied sense but merely the natural.

Thus he that is fallen into disfavour whereby he has lost wealth and honors,
and has kept liberty, and bread enough to subsist retired remote and
neglected, is very much obliged, first to the envy, and after to the contempt
of the contrary prevailing faction, if God give him the understanding to enjoy
the prosperity created by his adversity. It is a happy misfortune for a little
bark, to be cast by the storm upon a smooth shore, where the Sea ebbing
leaves it dry but safe, while the rest of the fleet is torn by the tempest.
The wave is more favorable if it thrust the ship upon the haven. Now the godly
wiseman finds a haven any where, because God is every where. Sitting under the
shelter of his love and providence, he looks with compassion upon the blind
rage of parties flesht in the blood of one another, praising God that he was
hurled down from a stage where they are acting a bloody tragedy, that he may
be an actour no more, but a beholder only, disinteressed from the public
contradiction. His ruin cannot equal his gain, if by the loss of his estate
he has bought his peace, and the uninterrupted contemplation of God, himself,
and the world.

It would be a long task to enumerate all the commodious adversities, for
which nevertheless comfort is given and received with great ceremony. Many
accidents bitter to us for a time turn afterward to our great convenience.
Some should have missed a great fortune had they not bin repulsed in the
pursuit of a lesser. Many tears are shed upon the dead, but more would be
shed if some of them should rise again. God has so enterlaced good and evil,
that either brings the other. If we had the patience to let God do, and the
wisdom to make use of all, we might find good in most part of our
Adversities.

Many persons ingenious to their own torment are like the boulter that lets
out the flower and keeps the bran; they keep disgraces and misfortunes in
their thoughts and let Gods benefits go out of their mind. It had bin better
for them to resemble the rying seeve that lets out ill seeds and keeps the
good corn, taking off their thoughts from that which is troublesome in every
accident of their life (unless it be to remedy it) and setting their mind upon
that has which may yield profit or comfort. Thus he that received some offense
in company by his indiscretion, in stead of making that offense an occasion of
quarrel must make it a corrective of his rashness. He that is confined within
the limits of a house and garden, instead of grieving that he has not the
liberty of the street, must rejoice that he has the liberty of a walk. And
how many crosses come upon us, which being wisely managed would bring great
commodities, if anger troubling our judgment did not make us forgo the care
of our convenience to attend our appetite of revenge? Could we keep every
where equality and serenity of spirit, we might escape many Adversities, or
make them more tolerable, or turn them to our advantage.

All afflictions are profitable to the wise and godly. Even when all is lost
for the temporal, there wants never matter for the principal Advantage which
is the spiritual. There we learn to know the perversity and inconstancy of
the world and the vanity of life, that we may not repose our trust and bend
our affection upon it. Since a curse is pronounced to the man that trusts in
man, and to him that trusts in his riches the way to the kingdom of heaven
is as impassable as the going of a cable through a niedles eye, and, we
notwithstanding these divine warnings are so prone to trust and love the world,
God therefore in his wisdom and mercy suffers that unsound reed, which we
lean upon, to break in our hand, and our love of the world to be paid with
its hatred, that we may learn to settle our confidence and love in a better
place.

Hereby also a man comes to know his sin and Gods Justice. Though we be prone
to attribute the good and evil that comes to us unto second causes, there is
such an affinity between sin and punishment, that even in the most obdurate
hearts affliction brings sin to mind, and gives remorse to the conscience; But
in godly souls, that remorse is salutary. David having said to God, Psalm.
32.5. Day and night thy hand was heavy upon me, my moisture is turned into the
drought of summer, adds, I acknowledged my sin unto thee and mine iniquity
have I not hid; I said I will confess my transgressions, and thou forgavest
the iniquity of my sin.

And whereas the appetite will run wild, when prosperity opens the broad gate
of licentiousness, Adversity coming upon that, holds a short hand upon the
appetite, and awakes piety and wisdom. David speaks of this experimentally.
Psalm. 119.67. Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now have I kept thy
word. ver. 71. It is good for me that I have bin afflicted that I might learn
thy statutes. Prosperity is an evil counselor, and all her adresses are to
the appetite; but Adversity crossing the appetite, calls upon the judgment.
Repentance and Faith are seldom set on work by prosperity; but Adversity
raises our hearts to God, and the fear of danger makes us flee to his
Sanctuary. A wise godly man will manage affliction for that end, not contenting
himself with the first pious motions suggested by fear and sorrow; He will
husband that accidental heat of distress to warm his zeal, and having
sought God out of necessity, he will seek him out of love. The unkind
entertainment he finds in the world will help him to take off his affection
from it, and transport his heart where his treasure is. Acknowledging Adversity
to be the wages of sin, he will learn to walk before God in fear, and from
the fear of his judgments he will rise to the fear of his holiness,
esteeming that the greatest Adversity, not to bear his heavy plagues, but to
transgress his holy will.

This filial fear of God is the way to prevent or avert many afflictions; for
they that humble themselves in prosperity need not to be humbled by Adversity.
Many times the repentance of the sinner has wrested the destroying sword out
of Gods hand: Many times when good men have bin beset on all sides, the fear
of God has opened them a gate to go out; for he that fears God shall come
forth of all. Ecces. 7.18. Many are the afflictions of the righteous, but the
Lord delivers him out of them all: he keeps all his bones, not one of them
is broken. Psalm. 34.19. Many are the afflictions of the righteous, because God
forms him to patience and perfecteth his faith by long exercise, which ends
in comfort; as he wrestled with Jacob a whole night, and blessed him in the
morning. He deals otherwise with the wicked, for he lets them thrive a while,
but when he takes them in hand with his justice he destroys them utterly.
Psalm. 92.7. When the wicked spring as the grass, and when all the workers of
iniquity do flourish, it is that they shall be destroyed for ever. God exercised
his people of Israel with diverse trials for forty years in the wilderness,
but he extermined the Cananites suddenly. God forbid we should be of those to
whom he gives but one blow. Rather let him wrestle with us a long time with his
fatherly hand, which with the trial brings strength to them that are tried,
and gives them the crown in the end of the combar. Here is the patience and
the faith of Saints.

Our very nature ought to acquaint us with adversity: For suffering is the
natural condition of men. Job. 7.1. Is there not a warfarre appointed to man
upon earth? To be cast down with sorrow for the adversities incident unto man's
life shows ignorance of our condition. The way not to be surprised with any
thing is to be prepared for all; and to think that the evil which happens to
one man may happen to any other, since all are men alike. As at dice whosoever
plays is subject to all the casts of the dice; he that is engaged in the game
of life is subject to all the events incident to the living, and must be
prepared for them.

But because it is not fortune but providence that disposes of the accidents
of life, the greater is our obligation to bear good and evil accidents with a
holy equanimity, because all that happens to us is unavoidable, as ordained by
a fatal and eternal law.

Upon that we must conceive as well as we can that humane events and several
personal interesses are so interwoven by that high providence, that they have a
mutual dependence among themselves; and their meetings, which in our regard are
casual, are twice necessary in regard of God, both because they are decreed in
his counsel, and because they are requisite for the execution of many things.
To which if we add, that God all-wise and all-good does nothing and
permits nothing but for a good end, we cannot reasonably complain of any
cross befalling us, though we had not deserved it: For we must consider
ourselves, as pieces of the universe, and engeenes which that great workman
sets on going for the execution of his ends, which being all good, all means
also tending to them are good in that regard. Our crosses then being determined
and directed to some good by the good hand of God (which we must firmly
believe) we must also believe them to be good, because they serve for Gods end
which is always good. So not only we must bear them with patience, but
receive them with content, yea with thanks; rejoicing, as happy, that even in
suffering we are instruments in the good hand of God, to do his work and
advance his glory; which many times we see not, but he sees it, and that must
silence and content us.

Being thus disposed, this advantage we have above many of the wheels and
weights of that great machine of Providence, that whereas some of them have no
will, some an ill will, our will is acting with Gods will, and our love to him
boweth our self-love to his pleasure, so that for his glories sake (into which
all things end) our afflictions appear good unto us; and so they are indeed,
since by them God is glorified.

Events being thus chained up and interlaced together, it is a great injustice
against God and the order by him settled in the universe, to grudge at any
thing that happens to us, as though we would have God to unweave in our
behalf the web of his providence, create a new decree, and make a new
counsel-booke for us. Let us go willingly where Gods decree leads us, for go
we must howsoever; Is it not better to go straight forward where God will
have us to go, then to be dragged backwards?

Indeed there is no need of a high reach of reason to persuade a man to bear
with, unavoydable accidents, and to will that which it were to no purpose not
to will. But when we consider besides that it is the will of God, if we be
his true children we shall will cheerfully what he wills.

When we are in prosperity there is no praise to will what God wills, for then
God wills what we will. But that is pleasing to God to consent to his will
when he smites us, and to say after the Lord Jesus, the pattern of all
perfection. Father not as I will but as thou will. That resolution brings a
great rest and a great perfection to the soul; for by that means our will is
changed into Gods will. The way to have all our will is to will nothing but
what God wills.

When God sends us affliction, thereby He gives us a great matter to glorify
him and to draw a blessing upon ourselves; For whereas unavoydable Adversities
make us worse when we pull against them, they work in us a peaceable fruit of
righteousness, when we not only bear them patiently, but receive them joyfully
as coming from God. I verily believe that God beholds nothing from heaven that
pleases him more then a will so subjected and united to His, that in the midst
of afflictions he finds Gods will good, pleasant, and perfect; and says, Gods
will bed one, He is all good and all wise. And since he is as absolute and
irresistible in his power as he is good and wise in his will, it would be as
foolish a part for me to hope to overcome it, as impious to offer to contradict
it. This is the principal counsel against all Adversity, yea the only, for we
should need no other, if we were come so far as to have no will but Gods will.

But to that high counsel many inferior counsels are subservient. Such is
this: When God sends us adversity, that we may not think it strange to be so
used, let us compare ourselves with so many others that are in a worse case. If
we be prisoners in ourowne Country, let us remember so many Christians that are
captives of the Turks and Moors. Have we suffered some loss in our estates?
we need not go far from home to see whole nations driven out of their
ancient possessions, shut out of their Country, and reduced to mendicity. Are
you lame of a leg? Look upon your neighbor that has lost both his legs
by a cannonshot. Thus the evils of others will be lenitives to yours.

It is a wholesome counsel to be more careful to keep a reckoning of the
goods that remain with us then of those we have lost. He that has lost his
land, must thank God that he has kept his health. He that has lost health and
temporal goods, must thank God that none can take from him the eternal goods.
And whosoever has less then he desires must acknowledge that he has more
then he deserves. It is the way to keep ourselves in humility before God and
men, and in tranquillity at home, and turn murmuring into thanksgiving.

And whereas the remembrance of dead friends and lost goods fill us with
sorrow, it ought to fill us with joy. If the possession of them was pleasant
why should the remembrance be sad? Why should we entertain more sadness
because we lost them, then joy because we had them? it is the ordinary
unthankfulnes of the world to reckon all the goods of the time past for
nothing. At the least affliction a long course of precedent prosperity is lost
and forgotten; like a clear stream falling into a sink, and losing its
pureness in ordure. Let us thank God for all the good days of our life, so may
me make present ill days good by the remembrance of good days past, and
obtain of God new matter of thanksgiving. We must use the world as a feast,
using soberly and cheerfully the fare that is before us, and when it is taken
away, We must rise and give thanks. We may justly be taxed as greedy ghests
unthankful to the master of the feast, that has so liberally feasted us, if
we Grudge when he calls to take away, instead of Thanking him for his good
cheer. As he is our magnificent Inviter he is our wise Physician. Sometimes he
sets his good plenty before us, sometimes he keeps us to short diet: Let us
receive both with an equal and thankful mind. All his dealing with us is
wisdom and bounty.

Here let us remember this Maxim which I laid before as a maine ground of our
tranquillity, that the things which we lose are none of ours, else we could not
have lost them. We were borne naked, all that was put about us since, is none
of ours. Yea all that was borne with us is not ours, Our health, our limbs, our
body, our life, may be taken away from us by others. We must not then reckon
them as ours. But our soul which cannot be taken away, and the best riches of
our mind, are truly ours. All losses and pains fall only upon the least part
of ourselves which is our body, and the senses and passions that are most
conjoined unto it, if we may call that a part of man, without which a man is
whole. But the true man which is the soul is out of the worlds reach, and with
it all the Christian virtues. For which reason our Savior bids us not to fear
them that can kill the body and cannot kill the soul. To be much cast down
with temporal losses shows emptiness of spiritual riches; and to be very
impatient of the incommodities of the body shows that one has more commerce
with the body then with themind, else a man might find matter enough of joy in
the soul to conterpoyse worldly losses and bodily pains.

As a body that has the noble parts sound will easily inure it self to bear
cold and heat, and all the injuries of the air; Likewise, he that has a sound
soul, and is strong within in faith, integrity, divine love, and right reason,
wherein the true health of the soul consists, will easily bear with all
Adversities; and retiring within himself when he is assaulted without, he will
take care before all things that it may be well with his inside, and that
nothing there, be put out of order by the disorders without.

That serene state of the soul is the fittest for the virtue of prudence and
the exercise of it in Adversity. For to get out of the difficulties of life we
must maintain our judgment free and our conscience sound: And if the
Adversity be of such a nature that it be past the help of prudence (such as
are sharp and incurable pains;) yet there is none but may be eased by reason,
faith, and the comforts of Gods love. For what? Life is short, no evil is very
great when it has an end, No bodily pain can last longer then our bodies, and
no Adversity of Gods children either of body or spirit can continue longer then
life. But the inward assurances of our peace with God, and the sweet
entertainment of his love to us, and ours to him, are earnests and beginnings
of a felicity without end. By them the soul shut up in this prison of flesh
looks out with her head forth, ready to fly away. She rises again with
Christ in this very world by a lively hope. Col. 3.1. She seeks those things
that are above, where Christ is sitting in the glory of his father. She is in
heaven already, and has only the body upon earth.

To this the afflictions of our body contribute much. 2. Cor. 4.17. For our
light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory. While we look not at the things which
are seen but at the things which are not seen; for the things which are seen
are temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal; for we know that
if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved we have a building of
God, an house not made with hands, ternal in the heavens.

This is a high point of resolution and joy in afflictions, which pagan
Philosophy could never reach, to bear the afflictions of this life
cheerfully, out of hope of eternal felicity after death. It is pitiful to
behold what pain these old Philosophers took to arm themselves against
death, and how the seeming lofty peace wherewith they marched toward death is
like that of a starting horse blowing and pricking up his ears at the entry of
a dark place, whereas the good Christian goes gently to it, with simplicity,
joy, and considence. Why? the Pagans knew not whither they went, and conceived
of death as of a ghastly dark den; but the right Christian sees his way,
and thinking of death, says, I know whom I have believed. He gives thanks to
the father who has made him meet to be partaker of the inheritance of the
Saints in light: His desire is to depart and to be with Christ, remembering that
Christ went before, and said to all his disciples, both present and to come,
when he went up to heaven, I go to prepare a place for you. So whereas pagan
Philosophy seeks comforts against death, Christian Philosophy presents
death, as a comfort. Fellons condemned to the gallows hear not with so much
joy the grace and pardon that gives them life, as good Christians hear the
glad tidings of their approaching death; for death is a grace unto them, since
it opens them the prison door. If they be dangerously sick, the way to cheer
them up is not to say, Be of good heart, you shall recover, but, be of good
heart, you must dye; for they conceive of death as of their haven of salvation
after a stormy voyage. That hope sweetens all their Adversities. It is a cork
that keeps up their spirits above the most raging waves, not suffering it to
sink under any sorrow: It is the charm of all cares which makes the Christian
to say when he loses his earthly goods, Now I am unloaden of that luggage, I
am the lighter for my journey to the Kingdom of heaven, and there I have my
true goods which no man can take from me. So were the Hebrews disposed, that
received with joy the spoiling of their goods, knowing in themselves that they
had in heaven a better and an enduring substance. Heb. 10.34.

This also makes the Christian digest injuries, and contemn contempt, saying,
Earth is not the Country where am I to expect glory, I shall have enough in
heaven shortly. I am little concerned in the Opinion of men during this life of
few days, and I am yet less concerned in that they shall say of me after my
death.

Of all sufferings, the sufferings for righteousness have the surest comfort,
Christ saying so expressly, Matthew. 5.10.12. Blessed are they that are persecuted
for righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of God. Rejoice and be
exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven. Since by many afflictions
we must enter into the Kingdom of heaven, we perceive by the thorns which we
were told we should find in the way, that we are in the right; Any way is
pleasant that leads us to salvation.

Finally this heavenly hope abates the tediousness of sickness, and the
chagreene of old age. For the godly soul finding her house of flesh ready to
fall, prepares herself with joy to come out at the breach; and finding the
race of this life near done, stretches herself toward the prize, which the
great Savior holds her up, from heaven. Thus faith is found to be the most
sublime Philosophy, for it takes off the heart from things transitory, and
raises it up to the eternal. It is the chief valor, for it is victor over
dolor, and armeth the weak with invincible strength. It makes the Christian
to walk in the midst of calamities with a resolute and undanted march, and to
grow familiar with death, finding in the principal subject of humane fears
the great subject of his confidence and joy, and in the cross a ladder to glory.

OF PEACE AND CONTENTMENT OF MIND.
FIFTH BOOK. Of Peace in Society.
CHAPTER. I. Of Concord with all men, and of Meekness
OUr first Book has bin employed about the Peace of man with God, The three
following about the peace of man with himself. To confirm himself in these,
his next care must be to have peace with his own kind. For in vain should we
hope to keep peace with God and our own selves, if we live in wilful discord
with our neighbors; these are things altogether inconsistent. If a man say, I
love God and hates his brother, he is a liar; for he that loves not his
brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen? and if
a man be at odds with God and his brother, how can he have peace at home?

We are commanded to follow peace with all men. Heb. 12.14. Which because it is
more easy to follow then to obtaines the Apostle St. Paul prepares us to meet
with opposition by these terms, If it be possible, as much as lies in you,
live peaceably with all men. Romans 12.18. Now what lies in us (with Gods
assisting grace) to live peaceably with all men, is expressed in two counsels in
the words next before, The first is to recompense no man evil for evil. It is
impossible to go through the crowd of the world and not to be thrust. Fools
return the like and thrust again, and thrusting brings striking; The wise
pass quiet and unconcerned. As we must bear one with another for Gods sake
that commands it, we must do it for our own sake to keep tranquillity of mind;
the loss whereof cannot be recompensed by any satisfaction of revenge, if
revenge ever brought any. Most part of injuries consisting in opinion the
remedy consists in the same. They hurt not him that resents them not.
Injuriarum remedium est oblivio. But if the injury be such that we must needs
resent it, Pardoning is the best resenting, and the honorablest revenge of all
is, To recompense good for evil.

The other counsel is, Provide things honest in the sight of all men. For
whether we live with good or bad men, which are the greater number, it were
impossible for us to compass all our designs if they were laid open in the
sight of all men, they must be so honest that when they are ripe for the
knowledge of all men we need not be ashamed of them. And if in the following of
honest and beneficial designs we meet with opposition, we must behave
ourselves with so much meekenes that we make it appear that we seek not our
advantage by the ruin of others, and together with so much vigor that none be
encouraged by our pusillanimity to cross us.

There is no harder task then to keep ourselves free from dissension in this
age; which may be called the reign of discord. Here then we must bestow the
greater care to keep tranquillity in our conversation, and more in our mind.

As for public quarrels, a wise man will wedde himself to no party with
eagernes; and if it be possible, he will look upon the game, and himself
neither play nor bet. He will leave the zeal of State to them that hold
themselves unworthy to be exempted from common distresses. He will remember
that he is a citizen of a better country then that where he was borne. Who so
takes a great interesse in public affairs, shows thereby that he has a
great love to the world, and esteems it more then it is worth; for we may be
sure that, which party soever prevail, fools will prevail, for such are all
men, and in the commotion of a State, as of a muddy river, the mire and foame
will always be the uppermost. If it be past our power to part them, let them
fight it out, and let our part be to look with judgment and compassion how
the vials of Gods wrath are powered first upon the minds of men to confound them
with a fierce and blind impetuosity, whereby they run and prey one upon
another, and next upon Empires and states to turn them upside down. Of which
an image is represented in the sixteenth Chapter of the Revelation where a
vial is powered upon the Sun whereby he is made hot and scorching beyond
measure, and presently another vial is powered upon the seat of the Beast,
wherewith his kingdom is filled with darkness, and infested with sore and
smarting plagues. For a man's spirit is within him that which the Sun is in
the world. When the spirits of a people are kindled with a malignant heat, a
dark confusion of the State and the miseries of the particular members of it
will follow. That man is blessed who in such an epidemical turbulent heat,
keeps the meekenes and serenity of his mind. And although it be hardly
possible for him not to be carried away by the stream of that party where his
private interesses happen to be engaged, yet he keeps his soul free, heavenly,
peaceable charitable to his greatest enemies, and praying for them that
persecute him.

In all times and places a wise Christian will abhor war. It is the very
empire of the Devil; and in nothing so much does he show himself the Prince
of this world. It is the discipline of robbery and murder. It is the deep gulf
of all misery. It is the sinck of all wickedness and vilany. Yet the best men
are often engaged in it even out of conscience and duty, for every one owes
his life to the defense of his Country. But for one to love the trade of
Manbutcher, and delight in the hunting of man his own kind, as others do in
the hunting of the wolf or wild boar, is an unnatural barbarousnesse, not
valor. Who so will keep the integrity and serenity of his conscience, and
hops for the salvation of his soul, must keep himself free from that
inhumane inclination, the true image of Satan, who was a murderer from the
beginning. Gods children are children of peace, which they entertain in their
mind and advance by their prayers and counsels.

There is another war in the midst of peace, little better then that where
the quarrel is decided by the sword, the war of lawsuites, the discipline of
cutting men's throats with a pen. There robbery is committed by the due forms of
law, there men are flayed alive for others to cloth themselves with their
skin. There the profession of giving to every man his own, is turned by the
professors into an invention to make every man's goods their own. The
contentions infinite in number and length, and the devouring trade of law
tricks, is the great plague of these Western Provinces of Europe, and the
great shame of Christendom while the Mahumetan Moors, our neighbors,
dispatch suites in an hour, without appeal or writ of error. He that knows
how to value that precious peace with God and himself, and desires to keep it,
will endure great extremities before he try that remedy worse then most
sicknesses; following St. Paul's lesson, 1 Cor. 6. There is utterly a fault
among you because ye go to law one with another. Why do you not rather take
wrong? Why do you not rather suffer your selves to be defrauded? And if he be
yet to chose his civil profession, he shall do wisely not to betake himself
to those professions that live by the contentiousnesse of others. But if he
find himself necessarily engaged in the practice of Law, he must behave
himself in it as a child of peace, sewing up again, as much as in him lies,
what others have rent; like good Princes which never draw their swords but to
have peace. Look upon that tumultuous clamorous, and mischievous bustle, and
then account it no small happiness to live far from an air so contrary to the
tranquillity of mind, and the integrity and serenity of conscience.

There are other dissensions without law, and many times without conscience,
which begin in envy, suspicions, credulity to reports, and in words ill
intended or ill taken, proceeding from words to blows and many times ending in
destruction. The worst effect is within, the breach of the inward peace with
God in a man's self, and the inbittering of the spirit, both of the offender
and the offended, unless he be of a very mild, and godly, and Philosophical
temper.

To avoid those troublesome encounters, Solomon's precept must be observed.
Prove. 22.24. Make no friendship with an angry man, and with a furious man thou
shall not go. But because those that must of necessity converse with many
cannot pick their company, and much less change the manners of those with whom
they converse, they must so govern and temper their own, by piety and
judgment, as never to give a just provocation to any.

Truly there is no fence against unreasonablenesse; and proud anger will be
offensive though unprovoked. Our part must be to break such men's choler with
patience, as woolsacks and gabions full of earth are set before the battery of
cannons. St Paul's precept to give place unto wrath, Romans 12.19, is as wise as
it is holy; for wrath grows by opposition, but spends it self when one gives
it place. If you be fiercely persued by a serpent, do but step aside, the
serpent will rush straight on and miss you. And if you be set upon by
impetuous choler, give it place by a gentle declination, it will passe-by
harmless. Or if you receive real injury from an angry man, expect no
satisfaction from him while he is so, but appeal from him in hot blood to
himself in cold blood.

Contentious insolent men being generally persons of small worth, it is a
sordid and unworthy employment to contend with them: For as friendship makes
friends equal, quarrels works the like effect. If we contend with a drunkard
or a loggerhead, we make him our fellow. Prove. 26.4. Answer not a fool
according to his folly, least thou also be like unto him. If you debate with a
fool, you must imitate him, for the debate obliges you to follow him in all
his extravagancies.

That contention may not reach us, we must stand far from the contentions of
others, and free ourselves of that popular folly to run and crowd to hear
unknown persons that are at high words, and be presently interessed in the
quarrel, as when two dogs are fighting, all the dogs of the street will run to
them, and take parts. A good and wise man will seek to make peace where
possibility invites him, but where he sees that he can do no good to others he
will not venture to do harm to himself. Mediations unless they have a great
measure of goodness and discretion, make the differences wider and bear the
blow on both sides.

To that end a wiseman will be none of the forwardest to give his judgment of
every thing, and none of the affirmative and great disputants, that will set
forth all their opinions, and evince them by strength of argument: but he will
be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath, as St. James commands Jam.
1.19. In which words he gives a character of a wise man in conversation, that
hears all, makes profit of all, determines of nothing, and is moved at nothing.

And whereas there is in all men good and bad a certain respect of truth and
righteousness, which at the hearing of untruth and unrighteousnes will work a
sudden aversion in the mind, if we will keep an inoffensive course in
conversing with the world, we must learn to silense that aversion, and not let
it appear abroad without an especial order of our serious judgment,
accustoming our eyes and ears and countenance to an unmoved patience, not
thinking ourselves obliged to oppose all the lies and impertinencies of every
one that we meet with, but only when the good name of God is notoriously
blasphemed. We ought to bear in mind that things true and just in our opinions
in the opinion of all others. That we cannot justly claim the liberty of
enjoying our opinions unless we leave the same liberty to others. That our
minds, as all the rest of mankind, are shortsighted and wrapped up in error.
And we are to give account of our own, not of other men's follies. For one to
bear himself as the repairer of all wrongs and reformer of all that is amiss
in the world, is an humor that has much of the vein of old romanses. Crafty
and ambitious dealers have often got strength by that weakness of vulgar
souls, yea have made even the true zeal to Gods glory tributary to their
ambition.

Truly for so high a subject as Gods glory our reason, our will, our Passion,
our words, and our actions must be set on work. But we must take a careful
heed of mistaking madness for zeal, and superstition for religion. Neither must
we think that for such good ends as we may conceive any way is lawful; there
being nothing more cruel and pernicious then a bastard and fanatical zeal. It
is the plague of religion, the ruin of the State, and undoing of human
society. Better were it to live a slave in the chains of Tunis and Tripoli,
where the bodies are misused without violence to the conscience, then to be
yoaked to the tiresome conversation of a fierce, scrupulous, and clamorous
bigot, that will be at peace with no man unless every one believe at his mode,
though himself knows not what he believes; and allows rest neither to
himself or to others. Who so loves his peace will keep himself from the
torture of such an odious companion, and will be yet more careful to keep his
mind free of that impetuous weakness disguized with the name of holy zeal and
wisdom. Iam. 3.15. That wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly,
sensual, devilish; For where envying and strife is, there is confusion and
every evil work. But the wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then
peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits,
without partiality and without hypocrisy. And the fruit of righteousness is
sown in peace of them that love peace.

The chief way to keep peace in Society, is meekenes. It takes up quarrels,
and tyeth again the knot of love when it happens to be untyed. It is the
balsame that heals the wounds made in friendship. It is the lenitive of
injuries. It is the preserver of peace with God, with men, and with ourselves.
Psalm. 37.11. The meek shall inherit the earth, and shall delight themselves
in the abundance of peace.

There is a bastard meekenes which is nothing else but a base and timorous
nature, whereby a man yields all and to all, because he is afraid of all. If
that disposition serves sometimes to prevent discord, it serves more often to
provoke it; for it invites contempt, and gives fair play to insolence. It is
far from maintaining peace within, as true meekenes does; for it keeps the
mind in perpetual fear, and fills it with diffidence and superstition. But
true meekenes is a compound of humility, charity, and generosity, whereby we
keep concord with our neighbors because we love them; And to avoid quarrel,
call prudence and sometimes disdain, to the help of patience; letting ill
words go by, as hail clattering over our roof, and after a noise without
effect, falling to the ground, and melting of itself.

A meek generous man will be ingenious to devise excuses for them that offend
him: alleging for them, sometimes the age, sometimes the sex, sometimes the
sickness of the body, sometimes that of the mind: He will say, This man is
otherwise discontented; affliction makes men froward, he deserves rather pity
then anger: That other man has offended me unwittingly, or he was ill
informed; If he lays a false imputation upon me, he shows that he knows
me not, I must not be angry with a man for mistaking me for another. If he
deal unrighteously with me, I must consider that all unrighteousnes proceeds
of error; He has more need to be taught then punished; I must not hate a man
because he is out of his way: In the offense done to me God is offended first,
God then must first ressent it; Vengeance is Gods not mine. If he that
offends me is one of Gods children he is beloved of him, and I must not hate
him whom God loves. If he be wicked and will never repent of his wickedness, I
need not procure him evil, God is his enemy, and will be sure to make him
eternally miserable: But because, for any thing I know, he may repent and be
reconciled with God, which I must wish and hope for, I must not be enemy to him
that may be Gods friend eternally; He and I were best to be friends on earth
least we never meet in heaven.

As in wrestling, so in injuries, that man is the strongest who is less moved.
The best victory over an enemy is to make him our friend. It is double victory;
for so a man overcomes both his adversary and himself.

CHAP. II. Of brotherly Charity, and of Friendship.
TO live in concord with our neighbors we must love them, otherwise all our
compliance and dexterity to keep concord will be but dissimulation, and though
it get us peace abroad it will not give us peace within. My little children;
says St. John let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but indeed and in
truth. 1. Ioh. 3.18. Then he adds that hereby we know that we are of the
truth, and assure our hearts before God. A text, showing that charity to our
neighbors fills the mind with says, peace, and assurance: a doctrine,
justified by the experience of meek and charitable souls. The same charity
that unites us with Christ as our head, unites us also with our neighbors as
his members, or at least as his creatures that bear his image: In the one or
the other of these relations we must love all men for Gods sake, and render to
them all possible duties of humanity.

To the practice of these duties we are more especially called by the necessity
of our neighbors, and by their virtue. Necessity affords us a perpetual
occasion of charity. Matthew. 26.11 For ye have the poor always with you, says
the Lord Jesus. Others that are not poor in estate are poor in counsel, or
health, or friends, or comfort: Let every body give of that he has, to him
that has not, and he shows charity to the rich if he do him good expecting
no reward.

Works of charity do good both to him that is relieved and to him that
relieveth. But he that does good, gets more relief by it then he to whom it
is done: for it is a thing more happy to give then to receive, Act. 20.35.
says St Paul after Christ; first because of the good treasure which is laid up
thereby for the future, Pro. 11.25. The liberal soul shall be made fat, and he
that waters shall be watered also himself. Giving charitably is casting a
seed bringing an everlasting harvest. It is sending up sweet vapors to heaven
which are thickened there into a rain of blessings to shower down upon the
head of the charitable person. To which we may join the great and present
content accrewing to the soul in the very act of giving, for good works give
a ready pay to the doers. This made Solomon to say The merciful man does good
to his own soul, Prove. 11.17 for the works of mercy give a great joy to the
doer. And he that gives his bread to the poor is more satisfied with it then
he that eats it. It is a divine felicity to do good to many, for it is the
greatest imitation of God, who gives to all and is never weary of doing good.
Herein only dignities and riches are good, that they enable a willing mind to
do much good.

As the necessity of our neighbors invites us to charity so does their Virtue,
which is the better invitation. The first sort of Charity, which regards more
the need then the worth of the person, is humanity and mercy; that which
regards Virtue is friendship, or at least a beginning of it.

Friendship, to deserve fully that name, must be reciprocal, the parties
loving one another dearly because they deserve it, and because they see the
graces of God each in the other. Friendship that regards profit and pleasure
deserves not that name since it is neither for the love of God, nor for the
love of the person that such a Friendship is contracted, but out of self-love.

Friendship cemented by Virtue, and riveted by likeness in inclinations,
manners, and opininions, is the sweetest of all human things. For besides
counsel and mutual help, and the delight of enterchanging thoughts and
discharging cares in the bosom one of another, the union of affections, and
the assurance to be beloved of the beloved person, is a content not to be
expressed; and there is something heavenly in that harmony. It is a little
imitation of the union between the persons of the Trinity which make themselves
happy by their mutual love. There is nothing neither in heaven nor in earth
that gives content but friendship. Nothing is pleasant without it. And if I
were asked what is the greatest of all joys, I would say that it is to love,
and to be loved again, and know it.

But it must be acknowledged that this perfection and felicity is more in Idea
then in reality among men, and we must go higher then human Society, to find
it. For whereas it is hard to find a virtuous man in the world, it is harder to
find two. And it is harder yet to make these two meet in opinions, in
inclinations, in interesses, in place of habitation, and in the like course of
life; for the want of one of these particulars hinders the knitting of the bond
of friendship, or makes it shortlived, or abates the comfort of it.

The description which Pagan Philosophy forgeeth of perfect friendship is a
fair imagination of an impossible thing; They require two friends or three at
the most, but such as were never found, endowed with perfect virtue; That for
that virtue these persons love one another, without any other obligation or
collateral respect. That these perfect souls be so plunged and blended one
within another that they can not own themselves singled and asunder. That they
be but one soul dwelling in several bodies. That a friend give himself so
absolutely to his friend that he live no more but for him, yea in him; and that
his goods, as himself, be his friends, whose interesses he wholly seeks, not
his own.

I wonder that among Christian Philosophers none has hitherto observed (for
any thing I know) what it was that bred that Idea of friendship so high and
remote from the nature of things, in the fancy of Pagan Philosophers, which yet
placed virtue and felicity in living according to Nature; and why they have so
universally adored that chimera which is found no where among men, like the
Athenians that had set up an Altar to the unknown God.

This is then the origin and ground of that high imagination of those Pagans.
They had found by searching the nature of man, that nothing can make him happy,
but love; And that for a beatificall love a man has need of an object all
good, all wise, and all perfect; so perfectly united with him, yea so totally,
that both pass the one into the other and make a mutual free and absolute
gift of themselves. But the poor men did not know that object of transcendent
goodness, only worthy to be loved with all the heart and soul: and if some of
them acknowledged God to be the Sovereign good, they believed not that he could
have such a communication with man that both might enterchange a mutual gift
of their own selves; so, that man should dwell in God, and God in man.
Thinking not then that there might be a contract of friendship between God and
man, and seeing that it is friendship that must make man happy, they forged
that Idea of friendship between man and man, of which the condition of man is
not capable, requiring for that friendship that which indeed is requisite for
felicity, but together is impossible to nature. For so far they say true,
that for a perfect love the soul of a friend must pass into his friends soul.
But that being improperly and hyperbolically ascribed to love between men, is
true and real in the friendship between God and man sanctified, especially
when he is glorified; For God graceth man so much as to make him his friend,
and to call him so, I have called you my friends says Christ to his Disciples.
Joh. 15.15. And in that friendship there is such a strict union between God and
the soul, that thereby the soul is refunded into her original being. The spirit
of God gets into man's spirit, and the spirit of man poures it self into Gods
spirit, as the river falls into the Sea and the Sea flows into the river;
Their wills become one, their interesses one, the glory of God and the
salvation of man become the same thing; Man seeking above all things to
glorify God glorifyeth himself, and is advanced by debasing himself out of
his love to God, till finally seeing God, and being seen of him, 2. Cor. 3.18.
he is changed into the same image, and made partaker of the divine nature. 2.
Pet. 1.4.

When the Pagans from their contemplations upon friendship pass to examples,
they show how remote their imaginations are from the nature of things, and that
their characters of friendship are fitter to be looked on than copied out. For
none of these paires of friends, which Antiquity extolls, is come near those
complete Ideas which they fancy. Most of them that would strive to express
them in their practice have made themselves miserable, and their friendship a
bondage. Also among the virtuous examples of friendship, they set forth vicious
presidents; as that of Blosius who being convented before the Senate about the
sedition of Tiberius Gracchus, whose intimate friend he was, and asked what he
would have done for him, answered that he would have done any thing at his
request. And what (said the Judges) if he would have requested thee to set the
Temples on fire, would thou have done it? I know, replied he, that Gracchus
would never have had such a will, but if he had desired it of me, I would have
done it. I am scandalized to see that answer commended by Christian writers,
Montagne and Carron. Let them comment upon it as much as they please, it is
certain that such a deference to a friend's will, is the highest homage that
the creature can make unto the Creator, whose will is the only rule of
righteousness. If any prefer his friends will before the observation of that
Sovereign will, his amity is enmity against God, and becomes a plot and a
conspiracy to offend him.

These old characters of perfect friendship persuade some to imitate them, but
commonly they are young men, that know neither how to choose what they ought to
love, nor how to love what they have chosen; and they that choose a friend with
most judgment, and preserve him with most care soon find that human nature,
though inricht with grace, affords neither the perfect objects, nor the firm
bond, nor the solid content of Friendship.

Yet since we live in the world, we must make friends in it, and leaving
heroique characters to romances, content ourselves with such as the earth
bears, and neighborhood presents; choosing them such as have, at least, piety,
honesty, and ingenuity; matching ourselves with our equals, or rather a little
above us then under, preserving their love by respect and good offices, and
conversing with them with a cheerful and innocent facility

But seeing that a great affection is a great servitude, filling the mind with
care and fear, he that loves his own tranquillity will take heed how he
engages himself in a friendship whose value does not recompense the interesse
he takes in it, and will not suffer his affection for any person to grow to the
loss of his liberty and peace of mind.

It is a great folly for one to make himself miserable out of too much good
nature, and to lose the sweetness of friendship by a perpetual carfulness
and allarum. Good things become evil to us when we love them beyond measure.
There is but one friendship where we may love without any measure, and where
the greatness of the affection brings rest and serenity to the soul. It is the
friendship with God, the only Good perfect and worthy of all our love, who
being so great yet is able to contract friendship with us that are so little.
If we have the grace to entertain that friendship, which fills the soul with
joy and goodness, we shall easily be comforted about the rarity, and
weakeness, yea and the loss of humane friendships.

CHAP. III. Of Gratefulness.
I Have observed two duties of charity, which contribute much to the Rest and
content of the soul; The one is to relieve them that need it; the other, to
love them whose virtue deserves it. These two duties require the company of
another, which is, To be grateful to them of whom we have received some
benefit. For speaking now to generous souls, I may observe that nothing lies
more heavy upon their heart, then this reproach of their own mind, that they
have not sufficiently showed their gratefulness unto their benefactor.

Our first benefactor is God, for to him we owe all, even what we owe to men.
We owe him all that we have, and all that we are, our being and our wellbeing.
To him then we must do homage for all; and our life being well sustained by a
continual influence of his love, must also be a continual course of
thankfulness. That duty we must tend with our words, with our thoughts, with
our actions, and more with our affections.

But because the creature cannot properly give any thing to the Creator,
because all is his, who gives all, and receives of none but himself; our
gratefullness to God must be showed to them whom he has employed to do us good.

We must begin by paying debts. If a friend has opened his purse to us in
our need, or has helped us with his commodities of which he makes profit,
expecting our convenience to pay for them; It is not only a theft to be slack
to satisfy, it is ungratefulnes, which is far worse; for the plain thief
abuses not the goodness of his friend; but the ungrateful man renders evil for
good, and defraudeth his friend because he had pity on him. One may do
greater and more profitable kindnesses then lending of money; Yet there is none
where ungratefulnes is more sensible, because of the love that every one bears
to his money, and the trust that is reposed upon it as the staff of life:
Wherefore conscience and generosity must solicit the debtour to pay, and be
stronger then bonds and compulsions of law to bring him to his duty.

St Paul enjoines us to owe nothing to no man but to love one another; A text
full of Philosophy: For there are some debts which we must not owe long, as
debts for things borrowed and taken upon trust. There are other debts, which we
must always pay, and always owe; and though we must repay them presently, yet
we must owe them still after we have paid them: Such are the duties of mutual
love, and thankful acknowledgement of kindnesses. Pecuniary debts must be paid
that we may be no more in debt; but as for the debt of love, that debtour is an
ill paymaster that looks for an acquittance when he has paid it. He that is
truly grateful desires always to pay, and always to owe.

Civil life is a perpetual commerce of kindnesses, a continual giving and
returning. It is like a source that springs at the root of a great oak, and
is kept cool by that green shade which it keeps fresh and verdant. Neither
nature nor human society can subsist without mutual giving and receiving. But
fruitful soiles, and generous spirits, will yield much more then they receive:
Now because it is impossible for us to live in the world without receiving
benefits which cannot be returned, it is some gratefulnes to show to him that
obliges us that we delight to be obliged to him. Est animi ingenui, cui multum
debeas, eiaem plurimum velle debere It is a proud and savage humor for one to
refuse a kindness because he knows not how to repay it in the same kind or
value. It is turning friendship into a bargain: They that will stick to that
Maxim are soon forced to go from it, though they be never so powerful; for
they that have most, are most needy of help, which cannot at all times be
repayd. Saepe etiam dives a paupere plura petebat. Man's condition is so needy
that every one depends of his neighbors kindness. And though we must aspire
to that evangelical happiness, rather to give then to receive, and study to
overcome our benefactours by a noble emulation of beneficence, we must not
pretend to that advantage proper to God alone, to oblige all men, and be
obliged to none. The satisfaction that we may give to ourselves when we are
obliged to one with whom we are like never to meet, or who is so high above us
that our benefits cannot reach him, is to do good to others that are unable to
do us the like. Then prayers to God are a commerce, whereby the lowest persons
may benefit the greatest. And we must endeavor to make God a surety for us,
beseeching him to be the remunerator of those benefits which we cannot requite.

CHAP. IV. Of Satisfaction of Injuries.
AS thankfulness for benefits, so satisfaction for injuries, is necessary to set
a generous and religious mind at rest; I mean of injuries that we have done,
not of those we have received. Yet we must learn how to behave our selves in
both.

As for jniuries received, as a wise Christian must willingly forget the good
that he has done, being content that God remembers it; so he must forget the
injuries that are done to him, and be content that God, to whom vengeance
belongs, keeps them in remembrance. He must also remember in what need he
stands of pardon before God, and that without forgiving he must not expect to
be forgiven.

If he be so offended that he be obliged to ressent it, he will implore Gods
assistance to find honorable and peaceable ways of satisfaction, and keep
himself clean from blood and revenge. And if he think his honor to lie at
the stake, he must think also that charity and discretion are more honorable
then impatience, yea then valor. To keep integrity and peace of conscience
let him sadly consider the horrible consequences of a duel, in which a man
either deliberately takes away the life of his neighbor, or himself, loses
his own in the act of murder. Let him fear a perpetual biting remorse, the
cry of blood pursuing the murderer, and the late repenting when one is fallen
out with God and his own conscience for an unprofitable revenge.

Be the laws of honor among swordmen never so severe, a wise and godly man
shall never want ways, which Gods mercy and wisdom will suggest to his
prudence, to come out of quarrels with credit and integrity. Eccle. 7.18. He
that fears God shall come forth of all. Truly he can come forth of a
challenge by refusing it, and keep both honor and conscience, after the
example of many brave men, who are with good reason honored for their free
opposing of that popular madness.

That ordinary term of taking or giving satisfaction with the sword, is as
much against common sense as it is against justice; for how can one give
satisfaction for an injury by a greater? Is that satisfying a man whom you have
offended to go about to kill him? Or is it satisfying your self when you have
bin offended to run the hazard of being killed by the offendour, and put him in
possibility of getting double victory and double triumph over you?

That new point of honor for which men massacre one another, not so much out
of hatred as to obey the tyranny of custom, was not known in old time among
the bravest men. The Romans did not practice it in the flower of their valor,
which conquered the world. But as much as men are decreased in valor, so much
are they increased in peevish impatience, which in effect is but weakness. The
strongest trees are less stirred by the wind, and the strongest spirits are
less moved with injuries. As the tops of Atlas and Tenerifa are not beaten
with hail, for they stand above it; high and magnanimous spirits stand above
the insolence of rash men, and in that litigious storm keep their serenity.
It is a good rule, to be moved with no fault but such as we commit. If my
neighbor offend me, the offense is his, not mine; To him, not to me, it
belongs to ressent it.

Wherefore the injuries, of which we must see the satisfaction made, are those
that we have done. If unwittingly or otherwise we happen to do injury to any
man with words or actions, it lays a sad weight upon our conscience, which we
must hasten to unloade, by satisfying the offended and ourselves more, for the
offense is more in the offendour then in the offended; and when we make
satisfaction to him to whom the injury was intended, we do more for ourselves
then for him.

Reparation must be made to God in the first place, for in all offenses he is
the first offended party, and this is done by repentance, of which we have
spoken before. That reparation which we make to our brethren, may be acceptable
to God it must have these three qualities of godly repentance; It must be
speedy, free, and total. As the Sun must not go down upon Our wrath, let it
not go down upon that of our neighbor provoked by us, if we may prevent it.
It is in us (with Gods assistance) to disprove the Maxim which the practice of
the Italians has made true among them, Chi offend non perdona may. The
offender (say they) never forgiveth. It is a great shame indeed to have given
offense, but the offense is greater to refuse to mend it. The Lord Jesus our
great Master having taken care to heal the wound that his Disciple had made,
shall we refuse to heal the wounds which we have made ourselves? God says,
Vengeance belongs unto me, I will recompense; there he speaks of the injuries
done to us: But as for the injuries done by us, vengeance belongs unto
ourselves, so far as to make recompense to them whom we have wronged. Which
recompense unless we make, God will make it. Our wisest course then is to make
that recompense sincerely; so may we ease God of that care.

CHAP. V. Of simplicity, and dexterity in Society
PEace with men consists in doing and receiving no injury. The first (with
Gods asisting grace) depends of us. Toward the second, though depending of
others, we may do much. For the cause why some are wronged and abused, commonly
lies not so much in the insolence of others, as in their own imprudence.

But the end of this Book (the same as that of our lives) being not only peace
by doing and receiving no injury, but content by doing and receiving good, we
must study both how to lead a safe and inoffensive course of life, and how to
be useful to ourselves and others.

That skill we learn of the great Master of wisdom, who has comprehended it
in these two short precepts. Matthew. 10.16. Be ye prudent as serpents, and
harmless [or simple] as doves. These two he makes into one, because they make
together an excellent compound, and because they must never be disjoined.
Simplicity without prudence would serve only to make us sheep for the wolves
to eat. Prudence without simplicity, though it could get us some peace and
utility with men would forefeit our peace with God and our conscience, and so
prove mere folly in the end.

How essential simplicity is to prudence it is seen in all the parts of
conversation, which are reducible to these two heads, Words and Actions.

As for words, it is certain that simplicity is the most requisite quality,
what use soever they be put to, public or private, religious or civil. And
even the discourses made only for elegancy and delectation cannot attain their
end without simplicity; for that gracious expression, and powerfullness of
words, which gets the fame of eloquence, is nothing else but simplicity managed
with dexterity. They that go far from it and make their style dark to make
it show deep, or bombast it with extravagant conceits, and new ill coined
terms, lose elegancy by hunting too eagerly after it; there being no such
deadly enemy to grace in speech as affectation. Besides it is found that
discourses full of affected difficulty are like olive stones, which are very
hard because there is nothing in them; and styles puffed up with words are
empty of matter, as some cheating women have bin seen, that appeared great
with child when they were big with a pillow. The knowledge of things, the
solidity of reason, and the sincerity of the mind, are the three magazines
affording good and gracious discourses. Where those three meet, the more the
style is simple the more elegant it is. And in matter of speech, the best
service that dexterity can do to right reason, is to deliver in clear terms
those thoughts which the mind has well disgested. So shall one satisfy others
and himself.

Affectation is alike ungracious in Words and Actions. Affected persons have
that hard fortune that while they study to disguise themselves, they discover
themselves most; there being nothing that betrays a may so much as affectation
does. His forced countenance, his studied gesture, the odd quaintnes of habit,
give an evident character of a mind disordered by pride, and a nature drowned
in foolish artifice. Such men are displeasing to God, who loves truth and
simplicity in the inward parts, Psalm. 51. and therefore cannot but be
displeasing to themselves, destitute of peace of conscience and contentment of
mind. Melancholy is an inseparable companion of constraint, for who can take
delight in that which he does against nature? Therefore stage buffoones when
their jigge is done are very sad and froward, because they have extraordinarily
constrained themselves.

There is a deeper and craftier simulation called hypocrisy, which knows how
to personate plain honesty, and put upon fraud the face of simplicity; as
indeed without that it is impossible to cozen. Simplicity and Integrity are of
such price among men, good and evil, that without the substance, or the show
of them, it is not possible to entertain any commerce in the world: And men
that have but the show of these, desire to deal with them that have the
substance, because they are true and sure dealers. As wicked as the world is,
uprightness is the safest course to advance a man: for every one will say, He
is an honest man, It is safe dealing with him. The principal is, that thereby
we keep good intelligence with God and with our conscience.

The chief prudence then, is to be honest: They that seek to appear such,
and are not, are imprudent; for to enjoy the benefit of honesty before men, the
sure way is to have it indeed. Counterfeit honesty is false coin, not safe to
trade withal; and in the end, it turns to the undoing of the false coiner.
But honesty and prudence have need to be more in reality within, then in show
without. For to make a great show of honesty gives a great suspicion of
hypocrisy; and to make a great show of prudence is asigne of shallowess. It is
better to show honesty then prudence, because honesty is of greater price, and
because every one ought to have it and profess it: Whereas it is a great point
of prudence to conceal it, for that man is not very crafty that shows his
craft. He that sets out much policy in discourse, commonly keeps but little in
reserve.

Next to integrity, which is the first counsel of wisdom in conversation,
the best counsel is to know ourselves, the business that we take in hand, and
the persons that we have to do with; measuring our strength and what we are fit
for, that we never meddle with any thing above our capacity, or that we may
desist before we be too far engaged. It is a great point of wisdom for one to
be able to adequate his employment to his capacity and inclination. But because
the choice of our employment for all our life is commonly made in our nonage by
our parents who are many times mistaken in our genius and ability, or employ us
where they can, not where they would; we must by a virtuous resolution, bow our
genius to our employment, and supply the wants of nature with dexteterity.

For this there is need of that virtue which the Italians and French cry up so
much, called accortezza or accortize. A word, which I recommend to my readers,
to be made by their countenance free denizon of England, if they like it; Let
me not be the only writer of these times that dares not coin new English.
Accortize is a pliableness and dexterity to fit oneselfe to all businesses and
persons and times. And first for businesses, a wise and accort man must make
unto himself an universal and complying spirit, versatile ingenium, to whom
nothing seems strange or new, and not so much affected to some certain things,
as to be unfit for all other things. Thales the Milesian Philosopher, being
mocked by some Merchants of Miletus, upbraiding him that he declaimed against
riches, because he felt himself incapable to get them, began a traffic
whereby in one Summer he engroced the whole trading of the Town to himself;
Then having showed what he could do, he left trading, and returned to his
Philosophy. It is a shame for a man of reasonable parts to be fit but for one
thing; but certainly if one can sort his employment to his proper genius, he
shall do much for the liberty of his actions, the success of his enterprises,
and the contentment of his mind.

As we must comply with buzinesses, so we must with persons, whose several
natures we should therefore study. To this, natural Philosophy will help us
much, for the inclinations and manners of men will commonly follow the temper
of their body. But experience and observation are the best schools for that
skill. We must carefully observe the humors of those persons that are within
the sphere of our activity that we may take every man in his humor, marking
what things they are most bent upon, and wherein they are most impatient to be
crossed. Of all the miraculous gifts of the holy Ghost which are ceased, I find
none so much wanting as the gift of discerning the spirits, for want of which
we miss so often the compassing of our ends with our neighbors, either for
their good or our own. Jer. 17.9. The heart of man is deceitful, who can know
it? And some natures are harder to know then others, and need a longer
observation. Some having planted orchards with great care and cost, at thirty
years end begin to perceive that the soil was not fit for trees. And many
fathers have missed that comfort which they might have had from their children,
because they have known their nature too late, and set them upon a course of
life unsuitable to their minds and abilities. If fathers are thus short in the
knowledge of their own children, and ourselves with much ado attain the
knowledge of our own nature; how shall we be able to know the nature of so
many persons with whom we must converse, having to do every day with new men,
which show nothing but a plausible and artificial outside?

In that great art of Discerning, the proper handles to lay hold of the several
spirits, which is the great work of acccotize, honest and worthy men must have
an emulation not to be overcome by impostors and juglers that make it their
whole trade. Truly the children of light have need in this point to turn
disciples of the children of darkness. They know how to persuade the generous
with honor, the timorous with fear, the covetous with profit, the voluptuous
with pleasure, the proud with praise, the devout with conscience. Of that
manner of commerce, of which something is to be taken, something left, the
sincere and prudent must learn enough to avoid circumvention, and to know the
several avenues of the spirits with whom he is to converse.

Accortize having taught a man to fit himself for the several buzinesses and
persons, her third work is to make him discern the nature of the times, and
comply with them as far as he may with a safe conscience. Every age of the
world has its proper genius, which a wiseman must observe; daily studying the
reigning humors, the ebbes and flows of customs, and the signs of
approaching revolutions, either to make benefit of the tide, or to decline it
with as little harm as may be, if it suite not with his conscience and
inclination.

He that will maintain or advance himself in a time full of revolutions and
quick turns, has need to be of the nature of ivy, which takes hold of all
that stands near, gets root every where, even upon stones, and follows all
the turns of the tree or wall that it sticks unto. Many might have advanced
themselves in the world, had their conscience bin as nimble as their industry.
But it is not advancement but the peace and contentment of mind that a wise
and godly man must look for. Conscience and simplicity are not able to follow
all the giddy turns of the world, especially when one has a public
employment, where it is as impossible to be hid as it would be treacherous to
be indifferent. But when conscience lies not at the stake, a wiseman finally
must yield if he cannot overcome. He must not blow against the wind, nor justle
against a windmill turning with impetuosity. The difficulties of life being
great and many, and every one being more clear sighted in his neighbors case
then his own, we must in our difficulties ask counsel of those whom we know
to be wise and honest, and to have no interesse but our own in the buzinesses
upon which we consult them. It is better to consult those that are less wise
then ourselves, then to take counsel of none but ourselves in things
important. For two eyes see more then one; Though another have not better eyes,
he may look upon the buzines by another by as; and if he be not capable to
give us counsel, he is able to form objections, which will be so many
overtures of counsel. We must hear all 1. These. 5.21. Prove all things, hold
fast that which is good: be free and benevolent to all, trust but few; but show
no mistrust to any without necessity.

Two contrary faults are the ordinary ruin of businesses, The one is too much
fervency and haste to bow the occasion to our desire, whereas we should gently
bow our desire to the occasion, and stay till it be ripe. The other is
negligence and security, presuming of ones own merit and fortune, despising
oppositions and letting occasions slip. But many times rash men from one of
these contraries pass to the other, for fiery and hasty men will soon relent,
and utterly ruin by their negligence what they had spoiled before by their
hastines.

It would be endless and beyond my subject to specify all the precepts of
prudence. Others have eased me of that labor. I do but recommend the study
and practice of them to such as will enjoy peace and contentment of mind. We
are not Mastes of events, but we ought to be Masters of counsels. If a good
counsel be followed with a sinister event, we bear it more easily when we can
bear witness to ourselves that it is not for want of a wise, diligent, and
honest care. But he that has ruined his business through his imprudence has a
double affliction, for his misfortune, and for his folly. I may excuse my-selfe
from speaking more of prudence in this Chapter, for all I have said hitherto
and have to say hereafter, is nothing else.

CHAP. VI. To have little Company and few Businesses.
I Spoke lately of Prudence in Business; But the greatest prudence in business,
is to have but few; it being impossible to have many without disturbing the
peace of the foul. And what imprudence is it, to lose the end for the
accessories? especially when one is deceived in those accessories, and mistakes
for the helps of his content, the instruments of his misfortune. The more we
converse with men, the less we converse with God. Yea the content which we
might expect by our conversation with men is lost by too much conversation. For
whereas among men there are more wicked then good, and among good men there are
more unwise then wise, it follows that in great companies (taking them one
with another) there is more evil then good, and more folly then wisdom, and
the greater the worse. It is in few friends well chosen, that the sweetness and
utility of conversation consists. The lesseyou appear in the crowd the less
shall you be crowded, the less secret envy and open quarrel shall you
incur, the less evil shall you learn and do. It is no wonder that young
men are inveigled with temptations, embroyled in quarrels, and made the prey
of cheaters; The poor youths are newly come into the world, and to see it they
seek great meetings, they gaze upon all they see, sin for company, or to get
experience. But when a man has seen enough of the world to know it, and has
learned wisdom out of the folly of others, and the miscariages of his own
imprudence, he will content himself to see the ctowd afar off, and will not
thrust into it, and meddle too far with this wicked, foolish, and dangerous
generation.

We must not speak thus out of a presumptuous singularity, so despising the
world that we esteem none but ourselves: We must acknowledge that we have the
world in our heart, and that we also are wicked, foolish and of dangerous
conversation. If the world corrupt us, we also help to corrupt the world.
Wherefore as bodies that have the itch; so spirits infected with vice must lie
asunder, else they shall increase one another infection, and the infection
must needs be greater where there is a greater number of infected persons:
Where the crowd of men is, there also is the crowd of ill customs and popular
errors. And if it be hard to resist the temptations of vicious persons when
they set upon us single, how can we stand against them when they fall upon us
together in a full body? How can we think on any thing but evil when we see
and hear nothing else? How can we lift up our hearts to God and converse with
him, in a confused noise and tumultuous hurrey, which is the Kingdom of the
Devil?

These considerations have moved some holy Fathers to retire into deserts, to
have no other company but God, and tend the work of their salvation without
disturbance. But because God will be glorified by us in the duties of humane
Society, and has not sent us into the world only to tend our salvation, that
Retreat from the world is excusable in those only, that can do as much, or more
good to the world living far from it as living in Society. Such were those
who in their hermitages enricht the treasure of the Church with their divine
works, confuting heresies and increasing the stock of holy learning. But to
leave the world to do good to none but ourselves, is frustrating the end which
God made us, for since he has made us for Society, as it appears by the ten
commandments, most of which regard our duty to our neighbors. A man of good
parts that leaves all Society to meditate, and gives no fruit of his
meditation to the world, is like the Jordan whose fair and quick water is lost
in the lake of Sodom, called the dead Sea; It is to dye living, and lose the
quickness of the mind in a gulf of unprofitable idleness. It is leaving the
world in the worst sense, for it is forsaking mankind and denying to Society
that Service which we owe. A consideration able alone to trouble that
tranquillity which Hermites and cloystred men seek in solitariness. Neither can
they make amends to the world by their prayers; for as they pray for us that
live in in the world, we pray for them that live out of the world, and so we
are even with them.

The Lord Jesus has taught us how to use solitarines; for he retired by night
into the mountain to pray, and in the day time he taught the people, and when
he was weary of the multitude he withdrew himself to the company of his
disciples, who were a choice of persons whom he honored with the title of his
friends, so sharing his time between his particular communication with God,
his service of the public and his communication with his singular friends.

One may leave the world, and yet keep it in his heart; and one may converse
with the world, and yet leave it. A godly wiseman may find retirednes in the
greatest cities. He may pass through the crowd and not stay in it or mingle
with it, as the river of Rhosne goes through the Lemane lake. He will do
service to all if he can, but converse with few. He may enjoy himself in a
multitude of unknown persons, as if they were the personages of an
Arrashanging; for a man is alone where he knows no body, and acquaints
himself with none.

For his acquaintance he will pick those whose life is virtuous, the spirit
meek, and the conversation plain and easy. He will endeavor to deserve their
good will with his own; being ready and assiduous with them when he may serve
them, but out of that making his visits short, to oblige them to the like;
always leaving his friends company before they be weary of his. In his choice
he will take men such as they be, not depriving himself of the benefit of
conversation out of a preconceit of perfect Idea's of worthy subjects of
friendship; but since all men are evil and weak, he will be content with
those that have less evil in them, and that have wisdom enough to know
their own weakness. Knowing himself full of imperfections he will bear with
the imperfections of his friends, expecting of them the like forbearance.

He must labor to have a soul with many stories, which may stoop and rise
according to the several conditions and capacities of men, not fearing to
speak to Kings, not disdaining to converse with peasants, every where equal,
modest, generous, and reasonable, respecting good sense wheresoever he finds
it, and he will find it as often under the russet jerkin, as under scarlet and
gold lace.

Because he must look for error and impertinency in all sorts of acquaintance,
let him put every one upon the discourse of those things that he understands
best; so shall he do a kindness to the company, for every one loves to speak
of that wherein he is expert, and he shall benefit himself, fetching from
every one the best that is in him.

Let him also fit his mind for all kinds of buzinesses, thinking none too
great when they are not above his capacity; for those affairs that have more
dignity have not always more difficulty: And on the other side thinking no
buzines too low when it is necessary, or when it gives him occasion to do good.

But in general let him charge himself with as few buzinesses as he can, I
mean those buzinesses that engage a man's mind in the tumult of the world,
without which he may find buzines enough to keep him self well employed. Want
of preferment is better than want of peace. Let him avoid those employments
that give, vexation and yet draw envy, where a man must continually stand upon
his guard, imbark himself in factions, and live in perpetual emulation and
contention. The man to whom God keeps the blessing of a quiet life shall be
kept by him from that glittering rack and golden fetters, but the man whom he
will aflict shall be given over to be tossed between the competition of others
and his own ambition. David shows us how great is Gods goodness which he
has laid up for them that fear him, namely that he will hide them in the secret
of his presence from the pride of man, he will keep them secretly in a
pavilion from the strife of tongues. Psalm. 31.19.20. But what! there are some
spirits that love noise, and live by Contradiction, and when old factions are
worn out, hatch new ones, sowing quarrels that they may be sticklers, and in
such sort arbitrating differences as to make them immortal that so they may
never want business. To such men no worse imprecation can be made then that
they may always have the business which they love; for as they serve the
father of discord they are like to share in his reward.

But those are worthy of his compassion, whose serene religious souls, capable
and desirous of high contemplation, are aspiring toward the God of peace, but
are distracted with contentious businesses, and pressed down with worldly
employment, though perhaps too high for their condition, yet too low for mind;
which measuring the height of things by their distance from heaven, finds the
great Offices of the State very low, because they are deeper in the earth, and
further from heaven; then other Offices of an obscurer note. Who would not
pity a great person that has scarce time to eat and sleep, that must have a
light brought to his bed to make dispatches before day, and when he goes to
the Court has much ado to get out of his yard through the crowd of suitors?
and in that clogge of businesses, what time has he to examine the state of his
conscience and labor to advance his union with God? Where is any gain able to
countervaile that loss?

But there are more persons undone for want of businesses, when they have not
the capacity to find themselves work of some utility, especially when the love
and fear of God have not taken root in their hearts. For there being in the
soul three Offices or audits, the first for contemplation, the second for
passion, and the third for action; when a man's mind is unfit for contemplation,
and wants action, he gives himself wholly unto passion: Then a man tickleth
himself with evil desires and vain hopes, gnawes his heart with envy and
spite, and torments himself with impatience; these vices being bred and fed by
idleness. Such men having nothing to do, devise evil or useless businesses,
going up and down all day long like swallows that fly round not knowing for
what, walking from one end of the Town to the other to visit one that will not
be at home when they ask for him, or is put to his shift to be rid of their
company. Of that kind are most of those that thrust one another in the street,
as buzy as if they had three Chancery suites to solicit; then return home
late, weary, and sweating, having found the invention to tire themselves and do
nothing. In effect, an idle life is more painful and wearisome then an active
and negotious life. It makes one sad, troublesome, and vicious. He that does
nothing cannot but do evil, as grounds left untilled will bring thistles

But he that has an ordinary employment, of some utility to the public, has
no leisure to attend vain and evil actions, nor to be sad; By doing good he
contenteth his conscience and maintains the serenity of his mind, so that he
embrace no more then he can hold: They that will do too much good, do it ill,
and do harm to themselves. It is a preposterous diligence when it brings
vexation to a mansselfe.

Rich old men should do wisely to give over busy employments of the world
which require a whole man, to give themselves wholly to the office of man, as
he is a man and a Christian. If they be speculative, judicious, and experienced
men, they may do more good to the world in their retirement then in the crowd
of businesses.

They that lead an active life ought not to give but lend only their mind to
the businesses of the world. A wise man will follow his worldly occasions with
diligence and industry, but he will not transubstantiate himself into them. In
our busiest employments let us retire often within, to enjoy God and ourselves,
laboring chiefly to preserve his favor and our peace. Without these, all
labor is superfluous or evil, and gain becomes damage,

CHAP. VII. Of Moderation in Conversation.
IT is a most necessary provision for any man that will lead a peaceable life,
in this age and these regions, torn with diversity of parties; Men's minds
being so generally exulcerated, that in casual meetings either they cast a
suspicious eye upon their Contreymen because they know them not, or abhor
them because they know them. Here then there is need of a meek, compliant
industrious and universal mind, retired within himself, and healed of that
epidemicall itch of light-brained men, to declare all their opinions, and
inclinations, and quarrel with all that are otherwise disposed.

It is an old and useful observation, that God has given us two ears and one
mouth, to teach us that we ought to hear more then speak. To which it may be
added, that we have no eare-lids to keep our ears from hearing, and often must
hear against our will; but our mouth shuts naturally, and we may keep our
tongue from speaking, unless by our intemperance we lose that privilege of
nature.

God indeed has not given us a tongue to hold our peace: But, that we may use
it so that our neighbors may receive good by it, and we no harm, there is
need of a great measure of charity and discretion.

To that end a wise man will not be the chief speaker in an unknown or
dangerous company, but be content to second those that are more able or more
willing to speak, unless the discourse be like to turn to a contentions
matter, for then it will be prudently done to put the company upon some
innocent discourse acceptable to all. But companies are apt to speak of that
which has the vogue; of points of State in factious times, and of points of
religion almost at all times.

As for points of State any man may be bold to interrupt the discourse, saying,
Let us leave State businesses to Statesmen.

The discourse of religion, the great occasion of falling out, must be turned,
if we can, to the use of comfort and amendment of life, rather then arguing
about points of belief. Indeed we we are commanded to be always ready to give
an answer to every man that asks us a reason of the hope that is in us, 1
Pet. 3.15. Which when we are called upon, we must do it as the text modifieth
it, with meekenes and fear; not with bitterness and contention. And the Apostle
requires of us to be ready to answer, not eager to question. Reason serves to
convince, but charity is the chief and welnigh the only way to persuade.
Vehemence will make an adversary stiffer, for even the force of an insoluble
argument, though calmely propounded, makes no other impression upon prejudicate
spirits but to make them startle; and finding no help in reason, to lean the
more fiercely upon passion. Though you stop your adversaries mouth, you shall
not thereby convince his reason; and though you convince his reason, you shall
not turn his belief: For that, you must win his affection, and affection is
not won with Syllogisms; for I speak of men not such as they should be,
altogether ruled by right reason; but such as they are for the most part,
blind and heady, having their reason enslaved to custom and passion. There is
great difference between convincing and converting: The first may be done by
the goodness of the cause, or the subtility of the disputant; But converting is
the work of God only. It is enough to persuade us that spirit and soul are
too different things, when we see spirits capable of the highest Philosophical
reasons to be unable to understand plain reasoning about matters that concern
their salvation. In vain shall you convince the spirit with reason, unless
God open the ears of the soul.

In such meetings, in stead of seeking wherein we differ, and falling out about
it, we should seek wherein we agree, and praise God for it. If news were
brought to us of the discovery of a great Christian Empire in Terra Australis,
where they believe the holy Scriptures, and the Creed, and receive the four
first General Councels; No doubt but it would rejoice us much, and we would
love them though they differed from us in the doctrines built upon those common
grounds. And why do we not bear with our neighbors and contrymen who
agree with us in so many fundamental points, who worship the same God, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost; who embrace the promises of the Gospel in Jesus Christ,
and endeavor by the love of God and the exercise of good works to glorify
God and attain to his kingdom? Could we abhor one another more if one
party worshipped Christ and the other Mahomet? Even where the quarrel was
only about points of Discipline, the dissension was heated even to
confiscations, battles, and sacking of towns; So furious is superstition, and
funest in its effects, what party soever it take; for it is found in good and
evil parties, being natural to all weak and passionate souls: If it
maintain falsehood it dishonors the truth by putting a wrong byasse upon it.
It is a compound of ignorance, pride, rashness, and cruelty; All which molded
with a bastard zeal, and infused in black choler, make up the most malignant
venom of the world.

For one that is of the stronger party it is insolence to provoke him that is
of the weaker in the most sensible point of all, which is conscience. And for
him who is of the weaker party to provoke him that is of the stronger, it is
both insolence and folly.

In a mild and well composed spirit, the dangerous errors of others moove
pity not hatred; And if pity sets him on to reduce them to the saving truth,
prudence will take him off betimes from that design when he sees it
impossible; And it is impossible when charity will not do it, which must not
be violated for any pretense whatsoever. Psalm. 85.10. Mercy and truth shall
meet together, righteousness and peace have kissed each other. Truth cannot be
established without mercy, nor righteousness without peace. Making breach in
charity to preserve faith is demolishing the roof of the Church to mend the
walls. Having found by the trial of a hundred years that battles and
syllogisms will bring no general conversion, let us fight no more but by
prayers, and let all parties strive for the palm of charity and moderation.
The two rivers of Danubius and Sauns falling into one channel go thirty
leagves together unmingled. If the difference of our opinions will not suffer
us to mingle, yet we may join. Let us go quietly together in our common
channel, the State where we live, tending to the same end, the public peace
and the glory of God. This conceit I owe to that blessed son of peace, that
rare teacher and high pattern of moderation and tranquillity of mind the
right Reverend Bishop Hall, who has not written one only book of Christian
moderation; but all his learned and gracious works, and the whole course of
his wise and religious life are a perpetual comment upon that golden virtue.

When we confer of any matter with persons of a different tenet, our end must
ever be to find the truth not to get the victory. And that end must be sought
with a meek and moderate way. That mild course will yield us a double
benefit, for it will preserve the liberty of our judgment, which is taken away
by the heat of dispute and precipitation. A hasty disputant will soon be
brought to non plus. Besides when good sense is assisted with moderation, it
sinks better into the adversaries reason, as a soft shower soakes the ground
better then a stormy rain. A moderate rational man either shall win the assent
of his adversary or his good opinion.

Railing and insultation are offensive, more to him that uses it then to them
that are misused by it, for when passion rises high in words, it gives a
prejudice to the hearers, that reason is out of combat. Anger is an ill help
to reason for it disableth reason from helping itself. Dogs that bark much
seldom bite, for it is fear that makes them bark.

Great and good works are done with little noise. So was the work of
salvation done, the best of all works: Of the Author and finisher whereof
Isaiah says, He shall not strive, nor lift up, not cause his voice to be heard
in the streets: Isa. 42.2. Wherefore when Devils possessing men's bodies cried
out in his presence, He commanded them to hold their peace, for the Devil
loves noise and tumult, but God loves peace, meekness, and serenity.

It is a precept fit for the Gospel of peace, Let your moderation be known of
all men. Phil. 4.5. The word of the Text (...), properly signifies equity. Of
that equity the grand rule is to do to others as we would have others do to
us. Which in the point of conversation, our present matter, ought to make us
deal with others with that patience respect and moderation, which we expect of
them; not setting forth our opinions imperiously, nor rejecting the opinions of
others arrogantly, remembering that all men by their natural condition (never
thoroughly mended by grace in this life) are inwrapt in a deep mist, and that
all our reasoning is groping in the dark; Let us pass gently over the errors
of our neighbors to oblige them to the like kindness.

If we knew how few things we know, and how lamely, we would make use of reason
and discourse rather to seek instruction then to pronounce aphorisms. If we
find ourselves capable to clear a matter, let us do it without awing the
company with peremptoriness, or wearying it with multitude of words. No
discourse is profitable when it is tedious. In every matter there is commonly
but one essential reason, or two at the most. More reasons serve for
illustration, or to fill up, and many times to invalid the true reason. Three
good reasons for the same thing, are worse then one.

The greatest use, and indeed the greatest trial of moderation in conference,
is to avoid confounding the interesse of the thing with the interesse of the
person, of ones self especially. For where shall you find those serene
unmoved minds, who hearing their opinion taxed of ignorance and folly will not
presently start and take more pain to prove, that they are no fools then to
weigh the reasons, and judge impartially where the truth lies? Most men being
thus disposed, he that will oppose their opinions must proceed with great
moderation, lest that, being touched in credit and personal ressenting, they
make the truth suffer for their private interesse. We must charitably consider
that every one loves the productions of his own brains, as his children, and
is sensible of the abuse offered unto them. And we must bring our charity to
this belief that every one is in good earnest of the opinion which he
professes, and thinks himself to be in the right. Il proprio parer non ha may
torto. You believe he is in an error, he believes the same of you, And he will
never think himself to be in the wrong, till it be represented to him with
solid reason, sweetened with singular meekenes and respect.

Moderate and ingenuous spirits (O how rare they be?) finding themselves pressed
with reason and truth, will freely yield the bucklers; They win, when truth
overcomes. But it is a flight, to use fradulent shifts, opposing right reason
with sophistry, and when a man is overcome, and is ashamed to yield, throw dust
in the eyes of his adversary. That peevish and ungenerous point of honor is
learned in our Schools, never to yield any thing as long as one can maintain
it by right or wrong. One error is defended by another, and a man comes to
believe in earnest, that which he had alleged before out of despair.

It is also a point of moderation to consider maturely what it was that gave
occasion to the opinions and practices which are deservedly condemned. There is
no doctrine so horrible, no disorder so foul, but there is much to learn out
of it. Look to the source: Something will be found obscure or ill expounded
in the terms of the received doctrine, or some excess or defect in the
ordinary practice, which gives occasion of exceptions, and then of separation,
and again of opposition and faction to scrupulous and turbulent spirits. There
is no rebellion but was occasioned by some fault in the Sat. Let us never
look upon those public transgressions but with a reflection upon the causes.
Which if they be past our mending, we must try whether we may mend ourselves by
them; learning by the faults of others and the occasions, moderation in our
judgment, and compassion of humane weakeness, which is incapable of a sincere
and constant keeping of any good, loses the benefit of good things by turning
them to the wrong side, labors to cure one evil by a greater, and kills
the patient to heal the disease.

Solomon who had beheld all the good and evil of the world with a judicious
eye, upon that discourse gives us this precept of moderation. Be not righteous
overmuch, neither make thy self overwise. Eccles. 7.16. He that censureth too
magistrally the evil that is done in the world by error of judgment and
rashness of passion, considers not enough the infirmity of mankind and his
own, and shows that he knows not the world. Error, vanity, superstition,
the ruins of war and the vices of peace, fair pretenses and ill deeds,
private ends cloaked with public good, the advancement of few men consisting
of the depression of many, the zeal of idiots setting up a ladder for the
rising of the ambitious; All these are the course of the world. So it went
before our time; So it will go after. Eccles. 7.10. Say not thou what is the
cause that the former days were better then these? for thou do not inquire
wisely concerning this. Wisemen are amazed at nothing, and make profit of all.

OF PEACE AND CONTENTMENT OF MIND.
SIXTH BOOK. Some singular Counsels for that end.
CHAPTER. I. To content ourselves with our Condition.
We have sought peace with God, with ourselves, and with our neighbors. To
that end we have endeavored to fortify our souls against wrong opinions and
unruly passions. And that we may walk with an even and steady march through
Prosperity and Adversity, we have studied to dye our minds with the right
temper of virtue. Our harvest is done. This last Book will be but gleaning in
the same field. Let us gather some singular counsels proper for our main end,
either omitted before, or worthy to be further insisted upon.

Let the first Counsel be that great preserver of tranquillity, to content
ourselves with our condition. This counsel depends of another, much urged
before when we spoke of the exercise of virtue in adversity, which is to will
what God wills; a right Christian and reasonable lesson. To any that is in his
right sense this reason ought to be sufficient to make him contented with his
condition, that it was so disposed by Gods wisdom. He will haveit so. It is
rebellion and folly to have a contrary will.

This ought not to be a bar to our industry and keep us from mending the
incommodities of our condition; for God putting us in an uneasy condition, does
not oblige us thereby not to seek to be better. Those to whom God has given no
other stock but their industry, have reason to think that God will have them to
make the best of that excellent patrimony. Piety and Philosophy are no
counselors of lazinesseand neglect of ourselves. A poor man is content with
his condition when he is pleased with that necessity which God lays upon him
to maintain himself by his diligence, and supply by his virtue the want of an
inheritance. A condition commonly more happy then that of great heirs whose
intellectual parts are many times dulled or corrupted with plenty, which
puffs them up with Pride and enflames them with lust. He that is kept in
humility and temperance by his short means must praise God for it, and make
the best of the benefits of poverty, the chief whereof is, that it helps a
man to weane his heart from the world, and raise it unto God.

The rich and great having more cause to be contented with their condition have
nevertheless more need to be exhorted unto it, because they are more subject
to be discontented, for ease breeds wantonness and makes a man to be incommoded
with his own commodities. This is that sore evil which Solomon saw under the
Sun, namely riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt. Eccles. 5.17.
Many rich men eat their bread in darkness all their days, and with a
covetous or envious sorrow make their plenty their cross.

That ungrateful sorrow proceeds from an excessive love of ourselves and the
world. We love ourselves so much that we think nothing good enough for us; And
the world so much that we can never have enough of it. Now al immoderate love
is accompanied with great care, and that care sowreth all the sweetness of
our life.

These two loves then must be cut very short. He that will love and esteem
himself but little will be content with little. And he that withdrawes his
love from worldly things, shall soon have as much of them as he needs.

To weane ourselves from the love of ourselves and the world, we must study to
get a strong persuasion of the wisdom and goodness of God, and a firm
confidence in his love. Suppose that God should spread with his rich and
liberal hand all the treasures of the world before us, and give us our free
choice to take what we would; Could we do more wisely then to put the choice to
him again, and beseech him to choose for us, because he knows what is fit for
us better then we do, and loves us better then we love ourselves? Well, this is
our condition; God has chosen for us; Let us stand to his choice with humility
and thankfulness, and rest contented.

It is an appurtenance of the condition which God has allotted us, that we
must continually labor to mend it; though we should have no design to raise
it: for our temporal is condition like our houses, which must often be
repaired, else they would sink down. All humane things are in a continual
decay; But God has given prudence to man to underprop his tottering fortune,
or to build it anew, and make it more commodious: So much we may do and yet be
content with our condition, gently submitting our minds to that general law of
the life of our vanity (as Solomon calls it) which binds us to toil
continually to maintain ourselves. In that toil if the success smile upon us
and invite us to advance, though we were content with our condition before, we
may better it. If notwithstanding our industry our fortune go back, our desire
also must go back with our fortune, and be content with less; in both
conditions looking up to the good hand of God, whose actions are all mercy to
them that love him and trust to him.

To that end we must ask of God a meek, religious, equal, and constant mind;
not seeking content in things that are about us, but in things within us,
laboring to have God there; for when all is said and tried it is the only way
to be content in all conditions. God being always the same, he that possesses
God is partaker of that divine attribute in his measure, and in the ebbings and
flowings of his temporal condition remains always the same, because the
possession that makes him happy is within him and in heaven together, not
subject to exterior changes, not tied to things under the Sun.

As he that has a vigorous body, and the noble parts sound will eat brown
bread and gross meat with good appetite, but to a sick man pheasants are
unsavory. So to him that has a sound conscience, and God abiding in it, the
meanest condition is pleasant; but a man of an ill conscience that has the
burning fever of covetousness and ambition, takes delight in nothing, though
he had all things. He that possesses God has this advantage above all other
men that he he is content with much, and with little, and with nothing.
Therefore, to speak exactly, we should not say that he that possesses God is
content with, but in his temporal condition; for it is not from his condition
that his contentment arises, it is from God.

CHAP. II. Not to depend upon the Future.
THis Counsel is part of the precedent: for that we may be contented with our
condition, it is necessary for us not to depend upon the future. He that can
bring his mind to that, shall not live suspended with desires and expectations,
and shall not lose the enjoyment of the present to catch at that which is to
come. When the sufferings of the present makes us long for the future, it is
less strange and more pardonable. But it is ordinary that covetousness,
curiosity, and wantonness, produce the same impatience in some men, as
extremity of pain in others. Many sick of too much ease will speak like Job,
in his torments; Job. 7.4. When I lay down I say, When shall I arise and the
night be gone? And I am full of tossings to and fro unto the dawning of the
day. Is the day dawned, they wish it were done. This perpetual agitation is a
most evident sign of a sick mind, which makes his sickness worse with that only
thing whence he hopes for amendment, which is change. The future which afar
off seemed pleasant unto him displeases him when it is become present; neither
does any thing please him but what he has not and cannot have. By this
expectation of the future, a man has his head torn between fear and hope as
a stagges head between two hounds, so sore they bite and torment the mind.
There is no condition more miserable, and no state of the soul more contrary
to the nature of God whom his children ought to imitate: Nothing sets a man
further from God, who expects no new thing from the future, because all is
present to him. With whose constancy we have some participation when we stay
ourselves upon him, our present and eternal good, and depend not upon the
uncertain future. The godly wiseman aspires only to one certain future, the
full possession of his sovereign good, which as yet he does but unperfectly
possess; As for the doubtful future he leaves it to Gods providence, in whose
respect that which is doubtful to us is certain and infallible. Since our care
can alter nothing in it why should we vex our heart about it? If evil must
come, let us not hasten its coming by our apprehension; and if good must come,
let us not spoil it by our impatience.

The consideration of the decrees of Gods providence which ought to ease us of
care must not bereave us of prudence, for the prudence of man is employed by
the providence of God for the execution of his counsels. So when prudence
calls upon us to give order for the time to come, we need but follow this
rule, To do what we ought and can do, and let God do what he will. By that
means we shall keep the wise medium between diffident care and imprudent
negligence: Following with an ingenuous simplicity the dictates of prudence and
conscience, trusting in God, and doing good, we shall not be distracted between
trembling fears and ardent desires for the time to come, being confident that
whatsoever may happen to us, either good or evil, all will turn to our good,
as long as we stick fast to our sovereign good which is God.

That we may not depend of the future we must study to keep our mind free of
that disease of the vulgar sort, the curiosity of things to come, whether they
concern them or no, only because they are to come. This is a natural
inheritance of the presumption of our first parents who would know that which
belonged to God only to know. For the knowledge of the future belongs to God
only, and yet men pretend to it. Both the knowledge which is proper to us and
that which is forbidden, is set down in this divine lesson, Deuteronomy. 29.29. The
secret things belong unto the Lord our God, but those things which are revealed
belong unto us and to our children for ever that we should do all the words of
Gods law.

Neither is that curiosity excused with the desire of avoiding evil to come;
for if it must come it cannot be avoided by knowing it before. It is enough to
expect inevitable evils, we need not send for them by our curiosity.

Observe that the most curious of the future are none of the best men, but
persons of an unbridled greedines, and set upon ill ends. None consulteth
southsayers to do a virtuous action. A good soul, that trusts in God and
fears him, will patiently expect his good pleasure, saying, Isa. 12.2. Behold
God is my salvation I will trust and not be afraid; Come what will, it will
come from God, and nothing but good can come to me from that good hand, since
God is my father. But evil consciences tremble at the thought of the future,
and at the same time burn with desire to know it, and because they cannot know
it of God they are easily persuaded to ask it of the devil.

As they are none of the best so they are none of the wisest that are most
carried away by that curiosity, but the weakest natures, as simple maids, that
easily find inventions to see in their sleep what they desire when they are
awake. Persons of the meanest condition and capacity are most eagerly set upon
the knowledge of the future, and finding some fright in their conscience when
they go about those inquisitions, they stop their eyes not to see the iniquity
of their ends and ways.

That wilful blindness is increased by the craft of Satan, presenting ways in
themselves indifferent to these silly curious minds, which consider not that
the harm does not consist in using such words or gestures, but in ascribing to
them an unnatural virtue without warrant of the Master of nature, and in
seeking to see that which God has hidden. Certainly since God has hidden the
future, to go about to lay it open, is a work proper to the professed undoer of
Gods works.

Curiosity of the future carries many so far as to make a covenant with the
devil. Who yet stands not so much upon his points as to refuse to be consulted
by those that have made no covenant with him. No doubt but this pride is
tickled with a mischievous delight when he sees men seeking to him for that
which is proper to God and herein yielding to him divine service.

Which service that he may receive in a civil and occult way from the fine sort
of wits, he has devised some seeming sublime divinations, persuading them that
the decree of God about humane events is written in the motions and several
aspects of the stars, and therefore that this sort of divination is lawful,
yea divine.

The evils that come from that persuasion are numberless, for the silly
reverence which vulgar spirits defer to these predictions makes them wild,
and sets them upon the fullfilling of them, because they account them
unavoidable. The worst evil is, that thereby man's mind which ought to dwell
at home is transported out of himself, and instead of reposing upon the love
and wisdom of God is suspended upon the Dragons tail and the Ascendant of an
Horoscope.

The histories of the Greek Emperors Alexius and Manuel are lamentable
examples how credulous persons are undone by the imposture of Astrologers when
they expect from the Stars those successes which ought to have bin wrought by
piety, prudence, and valor. That unlucky art cuts the sinews of industry,
and makes men idle, greedy, and inconsiderate.

This reasoning I recommend to the calm judgment of the lovers of that
Science. All affirmation is grounded either upon reason or authority. The
assertions of judiciary Astrology are of the last kind, for no reason can be
given of their Maxims. Now the authority upon which these Maxims are grounded
must be either divine, or humane, or devilish. They are not grounded upon
divine authority, but are expressly forbidden by it. God will not have us to
be dismayed at the signs of heaven, for the heathen are dismayed at them, Jer.
10.2. and threatens the Astrologers, the starre-gazers, and monthly
prognosticatours, that they shall be as stubble, and the fire shall burn them.
Isa. 47.13. Human authority in this case is of no weight, for who has given
power to men to dispose of the several Offices and preheminences of celestial
bodies? It remains then that these maxims are grounded upon diabolical
authority. In effect, since they are not grounded upon reason, either they are
forged by men, or delivered by revelation; and if that revelation come not from
God, it must needs come from the devil.

The truth of this sentence, that man is an enemy to his own content, is seen
in nothing so much as in that itch of curiosity to inquire after the future.
Whereas we ought to acknowledge that our ignorance of the future is the only
infirmity which we have reason to be well pleased with. God has done much for
mankind to have hid the future from them. For if besides present afflictions we
had distresses to come before our eyes, there is no constancy but would break
under that weight. Many owe their present tranquillity to their ignorance of
the calamities that wait for them.

But it is not the hope of future wordly content that must hold up our minds.
The life after this life is the only future, upon which we must depend. And
after we have sublimated our hopes and untyed our affections from the earth, if
it please God to send us some worldly prosperity, it will be the more welcome
because it will come unexpected, as a gain over and above the bargain.

CHAP. III To retire within ones self
HE that has learned to know the world and himself, will soon be capable of
this counsel. The world being foolish and wicked, it will be a wise part to
retire (as much as the duties of conversation will permit) from that contagion
which may impair us. Persons that have some goodness in their soul have a
closset where they may retire at any time, and yet keep in Society.

That closset is their own inside. Whereby I understand not all that is within
man, for the Appetite is not the closet but the outward Court where all the
tumult is; there the Passions are entertaining the external objects, or
quarrelling with them. But that inside to which the wiseman must retire is his
judgment and conscience, thence to impose silence to passions and hush all the
noise below, that with a calm and undisturbed mind he may consider the nature
of the persons and things which he converseth with what interesse he has in
them, and how far they are appliable to Gods service and to the benefit of
himself and others.

We judge better of things when we are little interessed in them, for then we
are less apt to forestall our judgment with our affection. Then to possess a
clear, free, and uningaged judgment among the things of this world, we should
learn well how little interesse we have in them, and that we are strangers in
earth; whence infer St. Peter's doctrine Dearly beloved, I beseech you as
strangers and pilgrims abstain from fleshly lusts. 1 Pet. 2.11. For why
should we entertain any eager desire for things that concern us but little?
Even among Pagans the wisest looked upon the goods of this world as things which
they needed not, and retired within their own breasts, which they called their
home, there to enjoy virtue their only good. The wise Christian having that
high advantage that he may enjoy within his breast both virtue and God
himself, has more reason to keep within that home, and look upon things
without, with an indifferent eye. For when as Pagan Philosophers called
themselves Citizens of the world, the Christian acknowledges himself
astranger in it; for he does but travel through the earth to his heavenly
Country, which they knew not. A traveller looking out of the window of his Inn
upon a country Fair, does but lightly amuse his eyes with the variety of
course pedling wares, and the buzy stir of buyers and sellers; but his mind
is upon his journey, and he will not make one in that crowd. With the like
indifference the wise Christian looks upon the hurry of the world, and the
confused diversity of humane things, not crowding for them, or setting his
heart upon them; for his journey toward heaven calls him away, and to heaven he
has already sent his heart before.

That disinteressed disposition toward the things of this world ought not to
make us careless and negligent; neither must we do any business by half:
Keeping that prudent and godly temper to apply our mind, not our heart, to
worldly things; never forgetting, while we tend them with diligence and
industry, that they are unworthy to possess the whole man, who is made for
better things.

There is no possession sooner lost then that of ones self. The smallest
things rob us of it. A sight worthy of contempt, if not rather of compassion,
is a man sharp-set upon play, whose spirit hurried out of his true home by the
greedines of gain, is swelled with hope, and quaking for fear hanging upon
the chance of the dice. Had one driven us from our house we would cry aloud for
justice against him; But we dispossess ourselves from the possession of our
reason by our violent passions, and refuse to do justice to ourselves. How many
for a Mistress or a preferrement lose their meat and their sleep, have no
other thought all the day long, and no other dream all the night? their souls
are no more at home, but dwell with their neighbors, if we may call dwelling a
perpetual running after hopes that fly from them. To such men this counsel
is most proper, Tecum habita, Dwell at home. Keep possession of your soul.
Suffer not any thing to steal you away from your self. There is neither
profit nor pleasure worth so much, that the soul should go from home to get
it. Let none sooth up his eagernes about his sports with the plea of lawful
pastimes; Nothing is lawful that steals the soul from God and a man's self.
When I see a man running after his bowl, and following it with blessings or
curses: Another melting with sweat in a tennis-court, more overheated yet in
his passion then in his body, contending with high words about a chase; then
say I with compassion. Alas here is a soul put out of possession of herself,
a man that has forgotten his origin and his dignity, having his reason
enslaved to his passion, and his passion subjected to things of no value; which
being in their nature incapable to be his masters, he has found a way to make
them so by his wilful slavery. One is always a looser at that game which
robbes his soul of serenity. It is an unlucky game that gives to the noblest
part of man those great irregular motions which should not be pardonable for
the conquest or the loss of an Empire. Nothing is so great that for it we
should set our mind out of frame. A wiseman neither in jest nor earnest ought
to subject himself to any external object, or suffer his soul to stir out
of her place, and run into disorder. Utility and Pleasure sought by
disorderly motions are lost even by seeking.

Of this counsel to retire within onesselfe, this is a branch, To keep company
with a few well chosen persons, lending ourselves freely to them but giving
ourselves to none but God, nor suffering friendship to grow to slavery. With
all sorts of men we must deal ingenuously, yet reservedly, saying what we
think, but thinking more then we say, least we give power to others to take
hold of the rudder of our mind, the thing that all crafty negotiatours aim at.
Let them not be admitted by too much familiarity to know the weak avenues of
our souls. For in all souls there are some places weaker then the rest. These
every one should endeavor to know at home, and view them diligently, there to
double the fortifications of piety and wisdom, taking heed of lying uncovered
that way.

Also to enjoy that selfe-retirement we must keep ourselves, as much as we
can, impartial among the diversity of parties and opinions. Where the question
is not absolutely of our duty and salvation, we must put on the patience to see
and hear, and say nothing. How many truths in the world are of that nature,
that it is better not to defend, yea not to examine them, then to trouble the
world or onesselfe about them? How many rights, which it is better to leave
altogether undefended, then to wrong our serenity to maintain them? And how
many controversies of which the pro and con is false? Some contentions in this
age are such, that a man of good sense must not care where is the right or the
wrong. Among so many turbulent actours, he must content himself to be a
beholder, judge of the blows; and stand out of their reach.

CHAP. IV. To avoid Idleness.
THis counsel will be a grain of salt to season the precedent. For it is the
excuse of idle persous that will appear contemplative men, to say that they
will judge of all, and meddle with nothing; whereas they should be employed
about their own buzinesses, that they might have no leisure to meddle with the
buzinesses of their neighbors.

Indeed the practice of this counsel is necessary for the observation of the
three counsels of which I spoke last. To be content with our condition we must
avoid idleness, for the soul of the sluggard desires and has nothing, says
Solomon, Prove. 13.4 Idleness makes a man needy and covetous. But diligence makes
his condition eazy. A great delight it is too see the fruit of our own
industry.

Likewise that we may not depend from the future, we must avoid idleness: for
idle men are gaping after the future, because lazines makes the present time
bitter unto them. Days and hours seem to go a slow pace to him that expects
of fortune what he might and will not obtain of his diligence.

And as for the third counsel of retiring within ones self, idleness is very
much contrary to it, for a man that does nothing grows tedious to himself,
and seeks out of himself how he may cozen the wearisome hours, Act. 17.21.
All the Athenians and all the strangers that were at Athens spent their time in
nothing else but either to tell or to hear some new thing: For idleness is
the mother of curiosity. It makes a man's mind to gad a broad and keeps it in a
perpetual pilgrimage; for the mind is never at home but when it keeps near
God, and is employed in some good thing.

The mind is never content till it be fixed, and it will not be fixed but upon
employment. Who so will content his mind let him do what he ought to do, for
nothing brings more sadness to the mind then a wandering idleness. I call
idleness not only to sit with ones arms a cross but to give oneselfe to an
evil or useless labor. For many have no other labor but to diversifye their
idleness and give themselves more pain to invent how they shall lose their
time, than would have cost them to employ it well. And when the mind is once
softened and enervated with idleness, he will give ear to any evil counsel,
for he that does nothing is soon induced to do evil, and even by doing
nothing he does evil. Time idly and viciously spent makes a man sad and
peevish; all things displease him, and himself more then any thing.

None can excuse his idleness saying that he has nothing to do, for there is
always some good to be done; and none shall ever be idle who has as much
will as occasion to do good. To do good is the proper labor of those who by
their wealth and quality are commonly exempted from labor. Of that condition
likely were some of the Thessalonians of whom St. Paul says, that they did not
work at all but were busy bodies. 2 These. 3.11. Yet without respect of any
quality he gives them this charge, Now them that are such we command and exhort
by our Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietness they work and eat their own
bread. But ye brethren be not weary in well doing. He will have them that live
curiously, working not at all, to work, and eat their own bread, and to work
first before they eat. Of which if they excuse themselves, saying that they are
not men of labor, the Apostle shows them what work God requires at their
hands, It is that they faint not in well doing. Then his exhortation that with
quietness they work eating their own bread intimates this assurance unto them
that an innocent labor will give a good taste to their bread, and that they
shall enjoy Gods gifts with quietness and content.

CHAP. V. To avoid Curiosity in divine matters.
CUriosity in the things of God is one of the principal hindrances of the
peace of the soul. In nothing the propagation of the first sin is more evident.
It is the right slip of the folly of our first Parents, upon whom God had
bestowed the whole plenty and beauty of Nature gathered in one spacious garden,
planted with choice trees. In that garden nothing was denied them but so much
as was hurtful, The tree of science of good and evil; A Science which God
kept to himself. Yet in the midst of that overflowing wealth, they were
distasted with all that was given them, out of a greedy desire to taste that
which was denied them; and for tasting of the tree of science of good and
evil, they were driven far from the tree of life.

We likewise their sinful progeny put our selves far from the tree of life,
by stretching our hand unto that unlucky fruit of forbidden knowledge. And many
speed so ill in their curious search, that while they are about to make
themselves like God, by their knowledge, they become like Satan by their
audaciousnesse.

But how does it come to pass that the study of the knowledge of God, which is
the Sovereign good of man, serves to make him guilty and miserable, and that
too often they that soar highest to draw near to God, are found most remote
from him? It is because they go the wrong way to work. For whereas they
should study his love (a gulf where a man is allowed to wade above his
stature) they search his hidden and inscrutable counsel: No wonder if they
that will creep into Gods secret will, lose the benefit of his declared good
will; as Adam presuming to lay his hand on the forbidden fruit lost the
possession of so many fruits, the enjoyment whereof was free to him before.

Moses having made that high request to God, Exodus 33.18.23. I beseech thee
show me thy glory, God answered him, Thou shall see my backparts but my face
shall not be seen. A mysterious Text, which being well understood assigns
the just extent and sets the certain limits to humane reasoning in divine
matters. It is allowed to seek God, a posteriori by his effects, they are Gods
back parts; It is the just extent of our contemplation. But to seek God, ab
anteri^ri, by his counsels which are the first causes, it is attempting to see
Gods face, an undertaking no less unlawful then impossible. My face shall not
be seen. That limit^ne sets to our contemplation.

Were this well studied and comprehended aright, more labor should be bestowed
upon the meditation of Gods works of nature and grace and of his revealed
will, for by these only it is possible to man living in the flesh to see God
in some measure. And the dark questions of Gods eternal counsel should be
laid by.

The doctrine of predestination settleth the soul in a steadfast assurance, when
it is apprehended by faith; but the same brings trouble and perplexity to a
man's heart when one will fathom Gods counsel with the plummet of reason. In
that point Reason is prone to frame objections against the justice and wisdom
of God. Wherefore ere it go too far, the bridle of piety must give it this
short stop, Romans 9.20. O man who art thou that replyest against God? If about
the actious and decrees of God you cannot satisfye your reason, remember that
reason was made for man not for God, and be ye quiet.

Likewise these in incomprehensible points of the concurrence of Gods grace
with man's will, and how his invariable decree may consistwith the free actions
of men, reason must altogether silense her inquiry, acknowledging that in that
meeting of the finite with the infinite, reason being finite can comprehend
nothing but things of her kind. Since then there is something of infinity in
that meeting, the comprehension of it must be left to the infinite God, to whom
alone it belongs to know his infinite works. In that meeting all that belongs
to us is to have no other will but Gods, embrace his grace with a free and
ready heart; trust in his promises, and commit ourselves to his providence. A
wise counsel, easier to observe then to comprehend, is this, That in the work
of our conversion and sanctification we must give to God the whole glory and to
ourselves the whole task.

And so of the resistance of so many men's wills against Gods will, which
nevertheless they promote, even by resisting it, that holy will having no part
in the evil which they do; And of the wisdom of that high moderatour, who
for his glory tolerateth the kingdom of the devil in the midst of his
kingdom, we must acknowledge that they are matters for admiration not
inquisition. It is a goodly study to be a disciple of Gods wisdom and
providence; but where we find our contemplation brought to non plus, we must be
contented to believe that God is all wise and all good. Let him do his
pleasure and let us do our duty.

The holy Scriptures are the clear spring of life. Our Lord Jesus commands us
diligently to search them, because in them we hope to have eternal life. Ioh.
5.39. The texts less perspicuous, as they require more study, they require
also more modesty. And better it is to say of a hard text, I understand it not,
then to wrest it with a forced interpretation. The writers of Comments upon
whole books of Scripture are often put to that choice. Yet how few are extant
that will say ingenuously, This text is above our understanding, and we must
expect till he that has locked up the sense of it, give us a key to open it.
Scripture must be put to the uses attributed to it by St Paul, doctrine,
reproof, correction, instruction in righteousness. That the man of God may be
perfect thoroughly furnished unto all good work. 2 Timothy 3.16. For these uses
there be so many clear texts that we need not beat our brains against the
hard ones.

It is a commendable study to seek to understand Canonical prophecies; God
himself gave them to the Church to be studied. And seeking the intelligence of
them is obeying Christ's command to search the Scriptures drligently. But in
that command he means the prophecies fullfilled which speak of his first
coming, not the prophecies yet to be fulfilled: Which yet we may search but
with that reservation, that we content ourselves with so much as is clearly
revealed, and presume not to seek into that which is hidden. Wherein the style
of prophecies is a sure guide, for we must believe that the Holy Ghost has
hidden them in obscure terms that they should not be understood; and if God
will not have us to understand them, it is folly and arrogance for us to go
about it. Why should we fecke to see that which God has hidden? he has hid it
because we should not see it. I am inclined to believe (yet submitting to
better judgments) that the end of most prophecies is not so much that we might
foreknow things to come, as that we might admire the wisdom, and
preordination of God, when they are come; and to comfort us in the assurance
that the whole course of the conduct and trials of the Church, and her
deliverance and glory in the end, is foreordained in Gods counsel. Let us stay
a little. Events will expound predictions.

As we must not curiously examine the word of God, we must not scrupulously
search the work of his Spirit. Many devout souls yield a wrong obedience to
this precept of St Paul, Examine your own selves whether you be in the faith,
2. Cor. 13.5. for instead of examining their own selves they examine God,
seeking with a trembling and overbuzy care what degree of comfort and assurance
of their salvation they feel in their hearts, which is the work of God not of
men. And as in the searches of jealousy, when a man seeks for that which he
fears to find, they draw upon them that which they fear by seeking it with
too much curiosity, and frame doubts to themselves by examining of their
confidence.

To heal themselves of that timorous curiosity they should not take for Gospel
whatsoever godly men have written of the manner how the holy Ghost is working
in the conscience; for it is certain that he works diversely according to the
diversity of natures, and does vary the dispensation of his graces according to
his good pleasure.

Wherefore when we examine whether we be in the faith, it is not the work of
God that we must examine but our own. And we must call ourselves to account
whether we love God and our neighbors, and what care we take to serve him:
whether we keep his commandments, and receive his promises with obedience of
faith. In these things where the work of Gods grace is joined with ours we
have but our performance to examine, looking upon Gods work with reverence,
and ascribing to him all the good that is in us. Which reverence must be
redoubled when we consider in us that work of grace where the work of man
has no share, and such are the heavenly comforts and spiritual joys. Of these
we must not curiously examine the manner and measure, as though the seal of
our adoption consisted in these: for it is not in feeling comfort but in
departing from iniquity that this seal consists; as we learn of St Paul, 2.
Tim. 2.19. Confidence is a great evidence of grace, but Love is a greater.

Let us employ spiritual joys when it pleases God to send them, to improve
love and gratefulness in us. Do we find ourselves destitute of those joys?
let us study to find out in our conciences the causes of that want, that we may
remove them; laboring to clarifye our souls of all mire of the earth, that
they may like pure Crystals receive the gracious and comfortable rays of the
Sun of righteousness. But as long as God gives us the grace to love him, and
cast ourselves upon him, Let his grace be sufficient unto us; for his strength
is made perfect in weakness. 2 Cor. 12.9. Joy and comfort cannot but follow
faith and love: Perhaps not very close, but fear not, they will and must needs
follow. Let us expect their coming in silence and hope, and take heed of
putting them back with curiosity and impatience.

CHAP. VI. Of the care of the Body, and other little Contentments of life.
SInce we seek the content of the mind, the body must not be forgotten; for as
long as they live personally united in this world they can hardly be content
the one without the other. That the body may do good service to the mind, the
mind must be a good Master to the body and maintain it with great care.

I say with great care, not with much tenderness: for we must use it to be
contented with little, and with things easy and ordinary, looking less for
pleasure then health, which yet is the way to get a lasting pleasure.

Of all earthly treasures health is the most precious. Without the health of
the body, the mind has much ado to maintain his liberty and stability. The
disorder of the humors of the body makes the mind turbulent and froward, and
sometimes reason is quite turned upside down by a corporal indisposition. It
is then the part of a wiseman to take a most special and exact care of his
health.

It is preserved by these three principal means, Serenity of mind, a sober
diet, and exercise.

Of these three antidotes against all diseases, the chief is, Serenity of
mind. This and the health of the body maintain one another. But the mind is a
more powerful agent upon the body then the body upon the mind. A meek and
cheerful spirit keeps his body healthful, whereas frequent excessive fits
of choler, and deep sadness, sour the whole mass of blood, and poison the
fountain of animal spirits. Whereby the body loses his lively color and his
good plight, and droops into a lingering consumption. Heaviness in the heart
of man makes it stoop. By sorrow of heart the spirit is broken. A merry heart
does good like a medicine, but a broken spirit dries the bones, says Solomon.
And to get that merry heart he enjoynes us to keep our mind in a mild temper.
Prove. 11.17. The merciful man does good to his own soul, but he that is
cruel troubles his own flesh.

The body thus preserved in health by the serenity of mind, pays him readily
for that good office; for the mind is kept tranquil and serene by the good
constitution of the body.

To preserve both, sobriety is necessary; there being nothing that wears the
body and sets the mind out of frame so much as intemperance does. Neither are
those that glut themselves with meat and drink the only that need to be
exhorted to learn sobriety. Many that go for sober, need that exhortation: For
generally all that live with some plenty eat and drink too much, and confound
in their stomach too many various ingredients; giving to nature more then it
needs, and more then it can dispense; Which superfluity, that especially of the
third concoction, turns into ill humors, whence variety of diseases is bred,
answerable to the variety of our dishes, as in the Commonwealth useless
persons, and such as have nothing to do, are they that stir seditions and
trouble the State.

Then natural heat which serves to the nutritive faculty wears away before
the time, when it is put to an overgreat labor; and the spirits serving to
make the pot boil below, leave the intellectual part ill served in the upper
room. That overplus of aliment growing to pride of blood, breeds no better
effect in the soul then to swell the appetite, and stir it to rebellion
against the reason. If we could bring ourselves to a more simple and less
abundant diet, both our bodies and minds would enjoy more health. The fewer
vapors the belly sends to the brains besides the necessary, the clearer is
the sky in that upper region. Therefore, to keep health and serenity, such as
have a daily plentiful fare, and fear that their stomach has more appetite
then strenght, shall do wisely to fast sometimes, to give it time to rest, and
recover strength. Most sicknesses in their beginnings may be healed by
abstinence.

On the other side they that use a more sparing diet should allow to themselves
some intervals of good cheer. It oppresses those whose ordinary meals are so
many feasts; but it renews the vigor of those that use it seldom. Wine is
especially given of God to make glad the heart of man. Psalm. 104.15 It is of
singular virtue to charm cares. Two draughts of it extraordinary when the
mind is vexed with crosses, will put upon a man's buzinesses a smoother and
calmer face.

The third preserver of health is Exercise, without which the body becomes an
unwieldy bag of corrupt humors. Great eaters need more exercise. But the
most sober need some. The naturallest and pleasantest is walking, to which they
that lead a sedentary life must allow some time. But to most men their
buzinesses give bodily exercise enough, many times too much, to the prejudice
of the mind, which thereby is neglected and made servant to the body. If one
be shut up, or has lost the use of his legs, he must invent some other way
instead of walking to exercise his body and prevent sickness; And if he cannot
put his body to any exercise, he must cate and drink the less.

It is a wise course to harden the bodies of children and young men, especially
against cold, the cause of most sicknesses in aged persons. But when one has
bin tenderly brought up, it is imprudence to go about to inure his body to
hardness in his declining age. The mind may be capable of that resolution, not
a tender body that needs careful tending.

These are the general precepts to preserv health. To mend it when it is
impaired, Physicians must be consulted, and remedies used: About which two
rules must be observed. Let it be betimes before sickness have taken root; Let
it be seldom, for too many remedies are worse then the disease. I presuppose
that Physique and Physicians shall be used as it is prescribed by the Son of
Sirac, Ecclus. 38.1. for necessity not for wantonness.

The chief use of that art is to prevent diseases. Every one ought to have
enough of it to know his own body, and keep off the indispositions to which
he feels himself obnoxious, not to wear out his body with drugs without
great necessity. But there are certain simple and eazy helps that prevent
great inconveniences when they are used betimes: And what wiseman would not
keep himself from grievous sicknesses, if the use of a little sauge or
juniper berries will do it?

What remedy soever be used for prevention of sicknesses, take it for certain
that they are better prevented by abstinence from unwholesome things then by
the use of wholesome.

Let the body be well clad, for commodity not show, neither curiously affecting
the mode, nor opposing it with a fantastical singularity. Let all that we wear
be comely and handsome, not to please other men's eyes but our own. He that is
slovenly in his attire thereby grows sad and dejected, ere he be aware: Why
should one make himself contemptible to the world and displeasing to himself
by a wilful lazy neglect of his person?

Let there be order and suitablenes in our stuff and furniture, though never
so coorse. Let not any thing want its proper place, though never so little.
Confusion is offensive to the mind but order gives a secret delight.

Let our dwelling be lightsome, if possible; in a free air, and near a
garden. Gardening is an innocent delight; it was the trade of man in the state
of Innocence.

With these if one may have a sufficient revenue an honest employment, little
buzines, sortable company, and especially the conversation of good books with
whom a man may converse as little and as much as he pleases, he needs little
more, as for the exterior, to enjoy all the content that this world can afford.

Of the pastimes of the Nobility and Gentry those should be preferred that
bring a public utility, as hunting the wild boar and the wolf, where the
country is annoyed with them, and in England the fox, and the badger. It is
double content to a generous and well given nature when he does good for his
pleasure. The military pastimes of young Gentlemen in France and Italy are
useful and pleasant; and by them they are fashioned, and fitted to serve their
country.

Games of hazard discompose the mind extraordinarily: They accustume it to be
hanging upon the future and depending on fortune, to which every wiseman will
give as little power over him as he can. They do also provoke passion; and
cause great agitations in the soul for things of nothing. All that, point
blank contrary to the work of piety and Philosophy.

Games that consist in dexterity of body or mind are preferable to those that
are committed to blind chance. Chesse will sharpen the wit but buzy it
overmuch, and toil the spirits instead of recreating them, which is the proper
use of play. Of all gaming, the less the better; And when it disordereth the
passion, the least is too much.

He that ventureth much money at play, ventureth not with it the tranquillity
of his mind a thousand times more precious, but makes a certain loss of it,
whatsoever become of the money. That bold venturing comes not out of contempt
of the goods of this world (as gamesters would have us to believe) but out of
an unsatiable greediness to gain much in short time. Wherefore to them that
have little money and to great lovers of it, great losses at play are very
smarting; and yet the gain is more hurtful then the loss: for it enflameth
covetousnes, and sets the heart upon a wicked labor to grow rich by the ruin
of others, which afterward is practiced in the more serious commerces of
Society. Thereby also the fountain of charity is drained, and so the streams
of charitable deeds. Bestowing money in play is not the way to make friends
with that unrighteous Mammon that receive a man into eternal habitations, but
enemies to turn him out of his temporal habitation. It is the way to lose both
earth and heaven.

When you have an undoubted right to a considerable sum of money, and the
present possession; what a mad part is it to call it in question whether it
must be yours or another, and decide the question with three dice? And what
ungratefulnes to the great giver of all goods gifts, to play those goods away
which are afforded to us by his liberality, and acquired for us by the sweat
and hard labor of many poor families? Though then the parties at play be
consenting to that strange way of acquisition, that consent does not make it
lawful; neither of them being the owner those goods which he calls his, but
the keeper and steward, who must give account of his stewardship to his Master.

Whether we win or lose considerable sums at play, we commit robbery; for
if we rob not our adversary, we rob our family, and ourselves, and God. Herein
worse then that ill Servant that hid his talent in the ground; for the gamester
if he be a loser has made away the talent entrusted unto him by God. And
though he be a gainer, yet he has made himself incapable to give a good
account of his talent to his Lord, since he has put it to an unrighteous bank.

Eloquence is a pleasant and profitable pastime, both to read and compose; For
while it delights the mind it does polish, sweeten, and heighten it. It is then
most delightful when it serves to cloth good matter, and when the chief
ornament is good sense. And it falls out happily that the eloquentest books of
antiquity are also the best, and they that have the wisest reason express it
with most elegancy. The same is true of the late Authors.

Poetry delights much, So one take little of it at once, for it is lushious
meat, too much of it brings weariness and loathing. It is more delightful to
read then to compose, herein like music which delights the hearers more then
the Musicians. As then it is better to hear a Set of violins then to make one
in it, it is better to hear Poets then to augment their number. I had rather
that others should make me sport, then I them.

I need not be curious in the search of the several devices of men to pass
their time; the task of the wise being not to seek them, but to use them well
when they meet in his way, and more yet to learn to live contented without
them. What we want of them must be supplied with serenity of mind, and an
easiness inventive to frame to ourselves divertisements, and make a pastime
even of our misfortune. If we may be merry it matters not upon what ground, so
it be not evil. A serene mind that trusts in God and does good needs not
look abroad for mirth: He fetches mirth out of his own stock.

To get the true taste of the outward contentments of life, we wust but taste
them, not stretch our stomach upon them; expecting our only true contentment
from God and within ourselves. We must make use of all things and stay upon God
alone. The sense of Gods love and our reciprocal love to him give to the soul
that only true content; but they take not from us the taste of the outward
lawful contentments of life. Rather they give us that taste: for to him that
loves God and rejoices in his love, all things look pleasantly. The certainty
of his principal good keeps him so cheerful, that he takes contentment in in
the smallest things; as he that has newly received tidings of great joy is
well pleased with a coorse entertainment, and delights even in those things
that displeased him before.

CHAP. VII. Conclusion. Return to the great principle of the Peace and
Contentment of Mind which is to stick to God.
FRom these small contentments let us remount to the great and principal, and
their stay. It consists in the peace of God and union with him by faith and
love. There we began, there we must end. We have considered the world
sufficiently, to conclude that it consists in three points, Vanity,
Wickedness, and Misery.

What is best in it is perishable. When we have it in our hands it slips
between our fingers, and when it stays with us yet it is none of ours, since
it is out of ourselves. Among all the objects of our senses, none is capable to
give us a perfect and durable content.

Being thus unsatisfyed of all things without us, if we enter within ourselves,
what satisfaction do we find in our nature? we find error in our opinions,
tumult in our passions, hardness or terror in our conscience, when God dwells
not in it by his grace.

Pagan Philosophers teach us indeed that within us or no where, comfort is to
be found. But alas! poor men, they sought nothing within themselves but
themselves. And what is more weak, more inconstant, and more calamitous then
man? Then, to this Philosophy one point is wanting, which is all; and that is,
to seek God within us, inviting him by humility and repentance to choose his
abode in our souls, and there entertaining him with love and faith. This is
the only safe harbor for peace and contentment of mind. Out of it, there is
nothing but storm. The best worldly state is vanity and perplexity. Of this
Solomon is an excellent witness who having seen all the evil, and tried all
the good of this world, pronounces this verdict. Eccles. 1.14. I have seen
all the works that are done under the Sun, and behold all is vanity and
vexation of spirit. That great King having long enjoyed an unparallelled
prosperity, says in the end that he hated life, and hated all his labor;
Eccles. 7.17, 18. although his labor was to content himself being exalted to
the highest Orb of power, overflowing with plenty, and swimming in delights.
What reason then have distressed men to hate their life and labor, when they
wear out their life in want, in lawsuites, in sickness, and receiving no
other salary of their virtue but envy and ungratefulness? Wherefore that wise
Prince having thoroughly considered all that is good and evil in this world and
this life, ends in this conclusion which he recommends to his Son. Eccles.
12.12. And further, by these, my Son, be admonished; Of making many books
there is no end, and much study is a weariness of the flesh. Let us hear the
conclusion of the whole matter. Fear God and keep his commandments, for this
is the whole duty of man. For God shall bring every work into judgment with
every secret thing, whether it be good or whether it be evil.

So does Solomon express that God is the center, both of our duty, and of our
rest and happiness; and that the only safety and solid content consists in
sticking fast to him. There we find refuge in our dangers, confidence in our
fears, comfort in our sorrows, counsel in our perplexities, light in
darkness, and life in death. There we learn to make the right use of
prosperity, enjoying the gifts of God with cherefulnesse and simplicity, not
vexing ourselves with cares to keep them, or with covetousness to increase
them. There we get a gracious illumination to our understanding, a rule to our
will, a bridle to our appetite, a sincere joy in our conscience.

How great, how unspeakable is that happiness, when our heart is turned into a
Sanctuary, where God himself is pleased to dwell and speak peace to our soul,
assuring us that he is reconciled toward us in his Beloved! There he leads us
into all truth, helps up our weakeness, instructs our ignorance, raises us up
when we fall, and sets us again in the right way when we are gone astray. We
are assaulted by many enemies, but they that are for us, are more then they
that are against us, since we have always the Lord at our right hand. We are
unwise, but we have free access to the Sovereign wisdom to consult it at all
times. And many times that high wisdom, preventing our consulting, mends what
we have marred by our folly.

Which present blessings are small being compared to our glorious hope. That
incomparable honor and, wealth to be received into all the rights of Gods
children, that incorruptible crown of life, that fullness of joy in the
enjoyment of Gods presence; they are depthes not to be fathomed with man's
thought. But whereas for material things the extent of our sight is long, the
reach of our arms but short. In things spiritual and eternal it is quite
otherwise with us; for the two arms of the soul, which are love and faith,
reach much higher then the eye sight of reason can penetrate: With these arms
the godly soul lays hold upon the celestial goods which she cannot see, and
with a lawful hastiness antedates in the present the possession of the glory
to come.

That expectation makes the Christian to digest any bitterness, and calmely
pass by all the incommodities of life. For he will say in his adversities,
This but a step of ill way to an eternal glory; All these evils have an end,
and then begins a felicity without end.

Without looking so far, the present sense of the love of God to us breeding
our reciprocal love to him; and that mutual embrace of God and the soul
living yet in the flesh, though as short of the perfect union with God as the
highest mountains come short of heaven, yet brings to the soul a dignity and
contentment beyond all expression. It is that peace of God which passes all
understanding and keeps our hearts and minds through Jesus Christ. It is a
transfiguration of the devout soul for an earnest of her glorification. It is
the betrothing of the Spouse with Christ, and the contract before the marriage.
After that, all the Empires of the world, all the treasures of Kings, and all
the delights of their Court deserve not to be looked on or to be named. If that
divine Embrace could continue, it would change a man into the image of God from
glory to glory, and he should be rapt up in a fiery charet like Eliah.

To enjoy that holy Embrace and make it continue as long as the soul in the
flesh is capable of it; We must use holy meditations, prayers, and good works.
These strengthen those two arms of the soul, faith and love, to embrace God,
and hold him fast; doing us that good office which Aaron and Hur did to Moses,
for they hold up the hands of the soul, and keep them elevated to heaven.

And seeing that God who dwells in the highest heavens dwells also in the
humblest souls, let us endeavor to put on the ornament of a meek and quiet
spirit, which in the sight of God is of great price. 1 Pet. 3.4. It is a great
encouragement to study tranquillity of mind that while we labor for our
chief utility, which is to have a meek and quiet spirit, we become of great
price before God; and therefore of great price to ourselves: How can it be
otherwise, since by that ornament of a meek and quiet spirit we put on the
nearest likeness of God of which the creature can be susceptible; For then the
God of peace abiding in us makes his clear image to shine in the smooth
mirrout of our tranquil soul, as the Suns face in a calm water.

Being thus blessed with the peace of God we shall also be strong with his power,
and among the storms and wrackes of this world we shall be as safe as the
Apostles in the tempest, having Christ with them in the ship. It is not
possible that we should perish as long as we have with us and within us, the
Savior of the world and the Prince of life.

The universal commotions and hideous destructions of our time prepare us to
the last and greatest of all, 2 Pet. 3.10. when the heavens shall pass away
with a great noise and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth
also and the works that are therein shall be burnt up. In that great fall of
the old building of Nature, the godly man shall stand safe, quiet, and upright,
among the ruins. All will quake, all will sink, but his unmoved heart, which
stands firm, trusting in the Lord. Psalm. 112.7. Mountains and rocks will be
thrown down in his sight, The foundations of the world will crack under him,
Heaven and Earth hasting to their dissolution will fall to pieces about his
ears; but the foundation of the faithful remains steadfast; He cannot be
shaken with the world, for he was not grounded upon it. He will say with David's
confidence, Psalm. 16.8. I have set the Lord always before me, because he is at
my right hand I shall not be moved. Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory
rejoiceth; my flesh also shall rest in hope. For thou will not leave my soul in
Hell, neither will thou suffer thy holy One to see corruption. Thou will show
me the path of life; in thy presence is fullness of joy, at thy right hand
there are pleasures for evermore.

A Table of the Books and Chapters of this Treatise.
THE FIRST BOOK. Of Peace with God.
Chap. 1. Of the Peace of the Soul page 1. Chap. 2. Of the Peace of Man with
God in his integrity, and of the loss of that peace by sin page 6. Chap. 3.
Of the Reconciliation of Man with God through Jesus Christ page 16. Chap. 4.
General means to preserve that peace with God, and first to serve God purely
and diligently page 25. Chap. 5. Of the love of God page 35. Chap. 6. Of Faith
page 45. Chap. 7. Of Hope page 49. Chap. 8. Of the duty of praising God page
53. Chap. 9. Of good Conscience page 59. Chap. 10. Of the exercise of good
works page 66. Chap. 11. Of redressing our selves often by repentance page 72.
SECOND BOOK. Of Man's peace with himself by rectifying his Opinions.
Chap. 1. Design of this Book and the next. page 77. Chap. 2. Of right
Opinion. page 80. Chap. 3. Of Riches page 87. Chap. 4. Honor, Nobility,
Greatness page 92. Chap. 5. Glory, Renown, Praise page 98. Chap. 6. Of the
goods of the Body, Beauty, Strength, Health page 104. Chap. 7. Of bodily
pleasure and ease page 110. Chap. 8. Of the evils opposite to the forenamed
goods. page 116. Chap. 9. Of Poverty page 121. Chap. 10. Of low condition page
130. Chap. 11. Of dishonor. page 134. Chap. 12. Of the evils of the body,
unhansomenesse, weakness, sickness, pain page 136. Chap. 13. Of Exile page
142. Chap. 14. Of Prison page 144. Chap. 15. Husband, Wife, Childen, Kindred,
Friends; Their price, their loss page 147. Chap. 16. Of Death page 155. Chap.
17. Of the Interiours of Man page 163. Chap. 18. Of the ornaments acquisite of
the understanding page 177. Chap. 19. Of the acquisite ornaments of the will
page 188. Chap. 20. Of the World and Life page 195.
THIRD BOOK. Of the Peace of Man with himself, by governing his Passions.
Chap. 1. That the right Government of Passions depends of right Opinion page
205. Chap. 2. Entry into the discourse of Passions. page 211 Chap. 3. Of Love
page 214. Chap. 4. Of Desire page 231. Chap. 5. Of desire of Wealth and Honor.
page 237. Chap. 6. Of desire of Pleasure page 243. Chap. 7. Of Sadness page
248. Chap. 8. Of Joy page 257. Chap. 9. Of Pride page 265. Chap. 10. Of
Obstinacy page 273. Chap. 11. Of Wrath page 278. Chap. 12. Of Aversion, Hatred,
and Revenge. p. 289 Chap. 13. Of Envy page 298. Chap. 14. Of Jealousy page
305. Chap. 15. Of Hope page 309. Chap. 16. Of Fear page 313. Chap. 17. Of
Confidence and Despair page 319. Chap. 18. Of Pity page 323. Chap. 19. Of
Shamefacednesse page 327.
FOURTH BOOK. Of Virtue and the exercise of in, Prosperity and Adversity.
Chap. 1. Of the Virtuous temper requisite for the peace and contentment of
mind page 331. Chap. 2. Of Virtue in Prosperity page 344. Chap. 3. Of Virtue in
Adversity page 357.
FIFTH BOOK. Of Peace in Society.
Chap. 1. Of Concord with all men, and of meekness. page 375. Chap. 2. Of
brotherly Charity, and of friendship. page 387. Chap. 3. Of Gratefulness page
395. Chap. 4. Of Satisfaction of Injuries page 399. Chap. 5. Of Simplicity and
Dexterity in Society. page 402. Chap. 6. To have little company and few
businesses. page 412. Chap. 7. Of moderation in conversation page 421.
SIXTH BOOK. Some singular Counsels for the Peace and contentment of mind.
Chap. 1. To content our selves with our condition. page 431. Chap. 2. Not to
depend of the Future page 436. Chap. 3. To retire within our self page 443.
Chap. 4. To avoid Idleness page 448. Chap. 5. To avoid curiosity in divine
matters. page 451. Chap. 6. Of the care of the body, and other little
contentment of life page 458. Chap. 7. Conclusion, Return to the great
principle of the peace and contentment of mind, which is to stick to God. page
468.
FINIS.

