An EXPLANATION OF THE ROMAN CATHOLICS BELIEF, Concerning Their Church,
Worship, Justification, and civil Government and their other Tenets: As it was
presented to some persons of Quality, for their particular satisfaction.

Anno Dom. 1656.

An Explanation of the Roman Catholics Belief, concerning Their Church,
Worship, Justification, civil Government, and their other Tenets: As it was
presented to some Persons of Quality, for their particular satisfaction.
Scriptures to be of Divine inspiration and infallible Authority; and
whatsoever is therein contained we firmly assent unto, as the Word of God, the
Author of all Truth.

But since in the holy Scriptures there are some things hard to be understood,
which the ignorant and unstable wrest to their own destruction; 2. Pet. 3.16.
we therefore profess (for the ending of controversies in our Religion, and
settling of peace in our Consciences) to submit our private judgments to the
Judgment of the Church, represented in a free General Council.

Blessed Trinity, one Eternal, Almighty, and incomprehensible God whom only
we adore and worship, as a lone having Sovereign Dominion over all things, to
whom only, we acknowledge as due from men and Angels, all glory, 1. Tim. 1.17.
service, and obedience (abhorring from our hearts, as a most detestable
Sacrilege, to give our Greatours honor to any Creature whatsoever.

And therefore we solemnly protest, that by the prayers we address to Angels
and Saints, we intend no other than humbly to solicit their assistance before
the Throne of God, as we desire the prayers of one another here upon earth, not
that we hope any thing from them, as original Authors thereof, but from God
the Fountain of all Goodness, through Jesus Christ, our only Mediator and
Redeemer.

Neither do we believe any divinity or virtue to be in Images, for which they
ought to be worshiped, as the Gentiles did their Idols, but we retain them with
due and decent respect in our Churches, as instruments, which we find by
experience, do often assist our memories, and excite our affections.

nature nor dignity of our best works can merit our Justification, but we are
justified freely by grace, Romans 3.14.
through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ.

And although we should by the grace of God persevere unto the end in a godly
life and holy obedience to the Commandments; yet are our hopes of eternal
glory still built upon the mercy of God, and the merits of Christ Jesus.

All other merits (according to our sense of that word) signify no more, than
Actions done by the assistance, of Gods grace, to which it has pleased his
goodness to promise a reward; a Doctrine so far from being unsuitable to the
sense of the holy Scriptures, that it is their principal) design to invite and
provoke us to a diligent observance of the Commandments, by promising heaven
as the reward of our obedience, 1 Timothy 4.8. Godliness is profitable to all
things, having the promise of this life, and of that which is to come, And Romans
2.6. God will render to every man according to his deeds, to them, who by
patient, confidence in well-doing, seek for glory, and honor, and immortality,
eternal life. And again, Romans 8.3. If you live after the flesh you shall die,
but is through the spirit you mortify the deeds of the body; you shall live,
And Heb. 6.10. God is not unjust to forget your work and labor of love, which
you have showed for his name, etc, Nothing being so frequently repeated in the
Word of God, as his gracious promises to recompense with everlasting glory the
faith and obedience of his servants; Luke 6.38.
Nor is the bounty of God barely according to our works, but high and
plentiful, even beyond our capacities, giving full measure, heaped up, pressed
down, and running over into the bosoms of all that love him.

Thus we believe the merit or rewardablenesse of holy living (both which
signify the same thing with us) arises not from the self-value even of our
best actions, as they are ours, but from the Grace and Bounty of God; Luke
17.10.
and for our selves, we sincerely profess, when we have done all those things,
which are commanded us, we are unprofitable servants, having done nothing but
that which was our duty, so that our boasting is not in our selves, but all our
glorying is in Christ.

are, as in all other Sacraments, two things. The visible sign, which is the
forms of bread and wine, to which noe Catholic may or does direct his worship.
There is also invisible Grace signified, the body of our blessed Lord, whom
being present we adore and worship with all possible reverence and thanksgiving
from our hearts for so great a blessing, warranted herein by our blessed Lord
himself in each of the Gospels.

frequently, in both, and sometimes in each kind, according to several
circumstances: and hence the holy Church following the piety of Christians, who
insensibly became accustomed to receive it almost universally in one kind,
upon great motives did afterward ordain to have it in one, as now it is
commonly administered, though the receiving of it so is not matter of faith.
Neither do we believe that religious and devout communicants, are hereby
bereaved of any benefit or comfort in obeying the Churches orders, since our
holy belief instructs us, Trid ses. 21. a n. 3
that our blessed Lord the fountain of all grace is as equally present in one
kind as in both.

Luke 21.9.
as being done in representation and commemoration of our Lords blessed passion
on the cross, wherein the body and blood were separated: Whatsoever therefore
propitiatory power our holy Religion attributes to this commemorative
Sacrifice, it is by virtue of the Sacrifice of the cross, as being by this
applied to us. This is the substance of our faith expressed in the Council of
Trent, Ses. 22. c. 1.
so that still we humbly acknowledge the ground of our salvatlon to be derived
from our Lords blessed and bitter passion.



As to the lyturgies they of the Church properly belong to Churchmen, and
therefore were anciently styled the Priests books, lest the people should not
receive full benefit by their public use, there is an express command of our
holy mother the Church in the Council of Trent, Ses. 5. c. 8.
that the Pastors and all who have charge of souls, in the very time of divine
service, should expound and make them plain to the peoples capacity, as in the
old times of the Church we find it was also ordained and practiced.

Augustine and the Council of Florence call them, In Enchyridie ad Laurentium
and De Civ. l. 21. c. 24.
who had not brought forth sufficient fruits of repentance, dying in communion
of the faithful; which indigent condition of theirs, relievable by the
Churches, or the prayers of the faithful surviving, speaks what the ancient
call Purgatory: warranted herein by the practice under the law recorded and
recommended in the Maccabees, which being in no ^ort reprehended by our Lord or
his Apostles amongst the rest of the Jews unlawful practices, was and is
justly presumed to have been allowed by him, as many of the Fathers understood
his sermon in the Mount, Mat. 5.29. 1 Cor. 15.29. 2 Cor. 3.
and by them, as is hinted by S. Paul: whereupon it has continued ever since
in general practice throughout all ages, as even gravestones and all other
Christian monuments do witness especially all ancient Lyturgies of the Saints,
and books of common prayers used in all Churches: neither can we decern how
possibly this may be conceived offensive to God, whose justice herein we hope
and do humbly endeavor to appease by our exercise of brotherly compassion.

Moral Law, Exodus 20. Mat. 19. Eccles. 12.13.
being so solemnly delivered to Moses upon the Mount, so expressly confirmed by
our Savior in the Gospel, and containing in it self so perfect an Abridgement
of our whole duty both to God and man.

Which Moral Law we believe obliges all men to proceed with faithfulness and
sincerity in their mutual contracts one toward another; and therefore our
constant Profession is, that we are most strictly and absolutely bound to the
exact and entire performance of our promises, made to any person of what
Religion soever; much more to the Magistrates and Civil Powers, under whose
protection we live, whom we are taught by the Word of God to obey, not only
for fear, but conscience sake; and to whom we will most faithfully observe our
promises of duty and obedience, notwithstanding any dispensation; absolution,
or other proceedings of any foreign Power or Authority whatsoever,

Wherefore we utterly deny and renounce that false and scandalous position,
that Faith is not to be kept with Heretics, as most uncharitably imputed to
our practices, and most unjustly pinned upon our Religion.

These we sincerely and solemnly profess, as in the sight of God, the searcher
of all hearts, taking the words plainly and simply, in their usual and
familiar sense, without any Equivocation or Mental Reservation whatsoever.


