ISREAL'S CALL TO MARCH OVT OF BABYLON UNTO JERUSALEM: OPENED IN A SERMON BEFORE
The Honorable House of Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT, November. 26. 1645.
being the day of Public Humiliation.

By John Durye, a Member of the Assembly of Divines.

Published by Order of the House of COMMONS.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Tho. Underhill, at the sign of the Bible in
Wood-street. 1646.

Die Mercurij 26o. November. 1645.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT, that Sir Gilbert Pickering,
and Sir John Clotworthy, do give thanks from this House to M. Durye, for the
great pains he took in the Sermon he preached this day, at the entreaty of this
House, at St. Margarets Westminster (it being the day of Public Humiliation)
and to desire him to Print his Sermon. And it is ordered that none shall print
this Sermon without being authorized under his handwriting.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I Appoint Thomas Underhill to print my Sermon.

John Durye.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE of Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT.
THe great work of Reformation which is put into your hand, has many and great
advantages: That it is undoubtedly a work which God alone can bring to pass:
That he will in his own time accomplish it: That it cannot be wrought any other
way, then by the advancement of the Gospel of Christ: That none can be
isntrumental in it, but such is are the trees of Isa 6^. 3. 4.
Righteousness, the planting of the Lord, by whom he may be glorified: That to
such the Lord has promised, that they shall build the old wastes, and raise up
the former desolations: That none can oppose the work, but such as hate to be
reformed, and know not the joyful sound of his truth: That all such as wait
for God in the way of his judgments, can be helpers in it: That the decree is
gone forth against Babylon, that she shall be laid waste: That these are
pronounced blessed, who shall take and dash her little ones against the stones;
and that you are so deeply engaged in this work, that you can have no temporal
safety nor subsistence, but so far as you proceed in it; so that now you must
either fall utterly, and draw with you into ruin the other reformed Churches;
or else secure them and your selves by the building up of Zion: all these are
exceeding great advantages, which I am persuaded, you do understand and can
truly value. Therefore when I spoke unto you, I found a freedom of spirit, in
love to the cause and to you, which opened my mouth, as without fear, so with
an assurance of acceptance: and although the shortness of the time would not
suffer me to proceed and come to a full application; yet I hope that if the
thing which has been delivered, which in obedience to your Honorable command
I have here published, (so near as I can remember, both in sense and words) be
laid to heart, and rightly apprehended, the main matter of my message will be
in due time effected by the grace of God in your spirits, which is, to know the
true relation wherein you stand toward the Church of God; what the mystery of
Babylon is; and what you ought to aim at in raising up the walls of Jerusalem
within your selves. If time would have given leave, I should have added
something concerning the extent of your building, that you must not make the
walls of your Jerusalem too narrow in compass, but be mindful that they
ought to receive all those that are going out of Babylon with you.

I mean, both your own and foreign Protestants, whose eyes are upon you, and
whose peace and safety is wrapped up in your prosperity: and how far soever you
shall think good in due time to look with an eye of brotherly correspondency
toward them: (whereof to put you in mind is a part of my duty, and therefore
I now desire to crave leave, that at a convenient season I may be permitted to
offer the means thereof unto you) yet in the mean time I may have confidence
and rejoice in this, that the engagement which God has put upon you by your
Covenant, is such, that you cannot possibly be reconciled unto Babylon, if you
be faithful to it. And in your faithful resolutions I dare promise unto my
self, that the Prophecy of Jeremy the Prophet shall be accomplished by your
proceedings, namely, that they shall Ier. 5. 26.
not take of Babylon any one stone for a corner, nor a stone for a foundation:
but that it shall be desolate for ever. If thus you are resolved to depart and
go out from her, and answer effectually the call which is given, to touch none
of her uncleannes; you may be sure that the work of the Lord and his good
pleasure, shall prosper in your hand. You shall be exalted in his truth, and
beautified with his holiness, when he fills Sion with judgment and
Righteousness. And you may make sure of the promise which follows the words of
my Text, that you shall not need to proceed in haste, nor go out by slight,
because the Lord will go before you, and the God of Israel will be your
rereward. And that this may be so, I shall never cease to make mention of you
before the Lord at the Throne of Grace, as it becomes

Your Honors Most humble and affectionate Servant in Christ, John Durye.

ISREAL'S CALL TO MARCH OVT OF BABYLON UNTO JERUSALEM.
ISAIAH 52. 11. Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch no unclean
thing, go ye out of the midst of her, be ye clean that bear the vessels of the
Lord.
THe Prophet Isaiah is truly called the Evangelicall Prophet: because his scope
is to show two things; First how the warfare of the The s^ope, sum and parts
of the Prophet Isaiah.
Church of God under the Law, should be accomplished. Secondly, what the
comforts are, which under the Gospel should be conferred upon her: and these
are the two parts of this Prophecy: the first concerning the warfare under the
Law; and the dispensation of several judgments depending thereon, is from
chap. 1. to 40. The second concerning the comforts of the Gospel, which at the
accomplishment of this warfare the Church was to receive, is from chap. 40. to
the end. His second part sub^ivided in to four promises. 1. Of deliverance
from Babylon. 2. Of the coming of Christ.


In this second part, four chief heads of comfort are promised unto the Church,
by the Prophet, of which;

The first is, That the Church should be delivered from the captivity of
Babylon, from chap. 40. to 53.

The second chief comfort is, That the Messiah should come, and by his
suffering, save his people, chap. 53. Erect a new Covenant with his Church
under the Gospel, chap. 54, 55. upon which, true felicity is effected to all
that keep it, chap. 56. and from which are rejected Idolaters, chap. 57.
Hypocrites, chap. 58. and obstinate Sinners, chap. 59.

The third chief comfort is, That the bounds of the 3. Of the calling of the
Gentiles.
Church should be enlarged unto the Gentiles, chap. 60. and the Gospel being
preached, chap. 61. Christ should be married unto them, chap. 62.

The fourth and last comfort is, That notwithstanding 4. Of the recalling of
the Jews.
the rejection of the Jews for their rebellion, and obstinate refusal of the
salvation purchased by Christ, and offered unto them, chap. 63, 64, 65, to 17.
yet that in end they should be renewed and recalled again, and glorify God
together with the Gentiles, from ver. 17. of chap. 65. to the end of the
Prophecy.

The Text which I have chosen at this time, for this day of our Humiliation;
does belong to the first head of these comforts, and is annexed thereunto, as a
duty to be performed, by those to whom the promise of comfort is given. And
seeing the end and purpose of our Solemn Humiliation is, to obtain this favor
of God; That our warfare wherein at the present wear, may come to a happy end;
and we may be delivered from the danger of Babylonian captivity; which cannot
be hoped for, except the condition whereupon it is promised be fulfilled:
Therefore it will not be out of season to put you in mind of this condition;
is the duty which is to be intended for the attainment of the comfort which we
desire.

But before I come to speak distinctly of the words of the Text; I will desire
you to observe two things, which Two things to be observed in the promise* of
deliverance from Babylon made by God.
the Spirit of God does much insist upon, in the proposal of this first
comfort, concerning the Churches deliverance out of Babylon. The one is, That
it was God, and God alone, that would be the Author of that deliverance. The
other is an argument to make this former truth evidently apparent unto all;
alleged thus, That because God alone had declared, and none but he could
declare the end of this great work from the beginning; That therefore he alone
was to be acknowledged the Author thereof. Both these truths are often
repeated, and much pressed upon us by the Prophet, to be taken notice of: and
almost in every chapter from the 40. to this 52. the first point is delivered;
the places are these, for the first, chap. 40. to 10, 11, 12, 13, 21. chap. 41.
ver. 4. 10, 20, 21, 22, 23. chap. 42. ver. 8, 9. and chap. 43. ver. 1, 2, 3, 7,
10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 18, 19, 25. and chap. 44. ver. 6, 7, 8, 24. and chap. 45.
ver. 5, 11, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23. and chap. 46. ver. 4, 5, 9, 10, 13. and chap.
47. 4. chap. 48. ver. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20. chap. 52. 6. and in
many of those chapters, the second also is insisted upon; the places are these
for the second, chap. 41. ver. 22, 23. and chap. 42. ver. 9. chap 43. ver. 12.
chap. 44. ver. 7, 8. chap. 45. ver 19, 21. chap. 46. ver. 10. chap. 48. ver. ^,
4, 5, 16. the particular places I will not now mention for brevities sake, only
I thought it fit to put you in mind of these two Doctrines, because the Spirit
of God does so much insist upon the truth of them in this matter; namely, that
he, even he, and none but he, should bring this deliverance to pass; and that
it should be known, that it was he, and none but he, by this, that he declared
from the beginning Isa. 42. 8, 9.
the end of his works: for herein God does difference himself from Idols and
Men; and in this deliverance Isa 41. 20, 21, 2^, 23, 24, 25, 26.
especially, does he challenge a peculiar emminency of glory; in the
manifestation of his power and wisdom, namely in this, that he does declare the
end from the beginning: which he has done ordinarily, both in the letter of
the Text in plain-words, and in the mystery of his working. He told Adam in
plain terms from the beginning, Genesis 3. 15.
the end of the whole work of our salvation, which is, that the seed of the
woman should tread down the head of the Serpent; he told Abraham, that in his
seed, all Genesis 12. 13.
the nations of the earth should be blessed; he told David, that upon his
Throne, his seed should sit for ever; and ordinarily Psalm, 89. 4, 29.
he has foretold unto his people, by his servants the Prophets, the particular
judgments which were to befall unto them with the issue thereof: as Amos
says, Surely the Lord God will do nothing: but he reveals his secret unto
his servants the Prophets, Amos 3. 7.

But this is not all, for God not only does declare the end from the beginning,
in the letter of the word; but also in the mystery of his work: For the
foregoing works of God, do represent and hold out, as it were in a picture,
the manner of his way, and the issue of the following works: So that the work
it self does speak in one period, that which is to fall out in another
analogically. And thus there is, besides the litterall, a spiritual Sodom and
Egypt in the Revelation of Jesus Christ discovered unto us, chap: 11. 8. Thus
also there is a spiritual Babylon, from which the Church under the Gospel, is
to receive a spiritual deliverance; which is not only foretold in plain terms,
but also represented and delineated unto us, in the temporal deliverance of
the people of God, from earthly Babylon; which is Typical unto the spiritual.

This I have been willing to observe, before I come unto my Text: because it
will have an influence upon the matter which is to be delivered; and clear that
unto your understanding, which otherwise might perhaps be doubtful, concerning
the mystical. Babylon: of which I have Reasons why this text was chosen.
chosen to speak at this time, for two great reasons. The first is the
importance of the work in it self, because the destruction of Babylon, and the
deliverance of the Church out of it, is the great work which God does intend to
accomplish, by the Gospel in these latter times. The second is the relation
wherein we do stand to it: for I conceive that God is not only working our
deliverance, to bring us out of Babylon at this time; but that his purpose is,
if we mar not our selves, to make us isntrumental toward others, to help to
free them from the bondage of it: and therefore it will concern us in a
special manner above others, to regard his work, and consider the operation of
his hands; That when you shall see, by the contemplation of this matter, that
this time of our Humiliation is an acceptable time, and a day of our Salvation;
you may with greater willingness and cheerfulnes of mind follow the call: by
which all the Israel of God is stirred up to march out of Babylon, to come to
their spiritual Jerusalem; according to the exhortation of my Text, Depart ye,
depart ye, go ye out from thence: touch no unclean thing, go ye out of the
midst of her, be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord.

These words and the following verse, conclude the whole prophecy of the
Churches deliverance, from her The coherence o^ the text to the rest of the
chapter.
Babylonian captivity; this two and fiftieth chapter is the close of the whole
matter insisted upon, from the beginning of the fourtieth; and these words are
the close of this Chapter. The foregoing part of the Chapter has three
promises of singular comfort, wherein summarily all the Promises made in the
former Chapters are in a manner contracted. The first is, that the Church
should be raised from her low and captivated condition to a state of freedom,
v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. The second is, that Messengers should be sent unto her,
who should publish the glad tidings of salvation; and manifest clearly eye to
eye, the way and counsel of God, v. 7, 8. The third is, that by this means
great matter of joy and gladness should be offered unto the Church, both of
Jews and Gentiles, ver. 9, 10.

Upon these promises the words of the Text are inferred, as a special use of
application, to exhort those to whom the Promises are made, to intend the
duties which would fit them to partake the effect thereof. Two things then are
offered unto our consideration in the words.

First, The persons are mentioned to whom the Exhortation The parts of the Text.
is directed, Ye that bear the vessels of the Lord.

Secondly, The duties recommended unto them are mentioned: which in the main
are two,

First, That they should rise up to march away from Babylon: in these words,
Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence; go ye out of the midst of her,
namely of Babylon.

Secondly, How they should march away, and behave themselves in departing, in
these words, Touch no unclean thing. Be ye clean. Where a twofold care is
recommended to them; the one, to avoid evil; the other, to do good. The evil
to be avoided, is the filthiness of Babylon, lest it cleave unto them, Touch
no unclean thing. The good to be intended, is to proceed in the way of
holiness, lest they come short of the grace of God offered unto them, Be ye
clean. Of these heads I purpose to speak, so far as time will permit, and as it
shall please the Lord to assist me with his grace for your edification.

First, of the persons.

The Prophet having declared what deliverance should be granted unto the
Church; by what means it should be wrought; and what the joyfulnesse of the
effects thereof should be, addresseth his speech by way of application to those
to whom this favor is intended, and he calls upon them by the name of the
office and charge which The persons described in the Text are Levites,
was committed unto them, Ye that bear the vessels of the Lord. This is the
description of a Levite; in whom two things are especially considerable which
serve to our purpose. The first is, the property of his office, as here it is
Who are considerable in their Office,
expressed. The second is, the property of his personal relation unto God. The
property of his office, was in a special manner to serve the Tabernacle, and
the Vessels thereof, as it is declared, Numb. 1. 50. in these words, Thou shall
appoint the Levites over the Tabernacle of testimony, and over all the vessels
thereof, and over all things that belong to it; they shall bear the Tabernacle,
and all the vessels thereof, and they shall minister unto it, and encamp round
about the Tabernacle.

The property of his personal relation unto God, did And in their
Primoge^^^ure.
stand in this, that he was appropriated peculiarly unto God in stead of all
the firstborn of Israel. This appears by Numb. 3. 12, 13. in these words,
And I (says God) behold, I have taken the Levites from among the children of
Israel, in stead of all the firstborn that opens the Matrice among the
children of Israel: therefore the Levites shall be mine, because all the
firstborn are mine, for on the day I smote all the firstborn in Egypt, I
hallowed to me all the firstborn in Israel.

Now a Levite in both these properties, as well in his In both which they se^
forth to us,
personal condition, as in his office of bearing the vessels of the Lord, does
either represent, or has some resemblance to three sorts of persons, namely,
to Christians, to Ministers, and to Magistrates.

The Levites represented Christians in two things chiefly,

1. First, That as they were set apart to God from amongst Christians in common.
all the children of Israel: So are Christians called and set apart unto God
from all the rest of the world, as you have it, 1 Pet. 2. 9. Ye are a chosen
generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar people.

2. Secondly, That as the Levites were the firstborn of the Israelites unto
God; so are true Christians the firstborn, whose names are written in Heaven,
Heb. 12. 23. and a kind of first fruits of his creatures, Jam, 1. 18.

They represented the Ministers of the Church, and these Ministers more
especially.
have a resemblance unto them in four things.

1. As it was the Levites charge, To teach Jacob Gods judgments, and Israel
his law, to put incense before him, and whole burnt-sacrifice upon his Altar,
Deuteronomy. 33. 10. So it is the office of the Ministers to labor in the Word, to
teach, rebuke and exhort; and to be instant in offering up prayers and
supplications for the flock. The Apostle Peter does comprehend his work under
these two heads, Act. 6. 4. To give himself continually unto prayer, and to the
Ministry of the Word.

2. As the Levites duty was to serve the Altar, and wait upon the holy things
of the Tabernacle and house of God: So the Ministers of the Gospel have an
Altar which they wait on, which is Jesus Christ, Heb. 13. 10. We have an Altar,
speaking of Christ, and a Tabernacle of God, and spiritual habitation, which
is his Church, Ephesians. 2. 22. You are builded for an habitation of God through
the Spirit. And upon the holy things of this house the Ministers must give
attendance. The Apostle tells Timothy, That he must know how to behave
himself in the house of God, which is his Church, 1 Timothy 3. 15.

3. As it was a peculiar part of their charge, To bear the Ark of the Covenant
of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 10. 8. So it is the chief duty of the Ministry of the
Gospel, To declare the testimony of God concerning the new Covenant in Jesus
Christ, and him crucified; which was all that the Apostle Paul did determine to
know amongst the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1. 1, 2.

4. As the Levites office was, when the Camp of Israel did march through the
wilderness, to bear the vessels of the Lords Tabernacle and service, as we
have heard already out of Numb. 1. 50. and Aaron was charged to bear the
children of Israel, and their judgment upon his shoulders and breast; as it
is, Exodus 28. 12. And thou shall put the two stones upon the shoulders of the
Ephod, for stones of memorial; and Aaron shall bear their names upon his
shoulders for a memorial. Item, verse. 29, 30. And Aaron shall bear the names of
the children of Israel in the breast plate of judgment upon his heart, etc.
And Aaron shall bear the judgment of the children of Israel upon his heart
before the Lord continually. So is it the office of faithful Ministers and
Shepherds in the Gospel, to bear the names of the sheep in their minds; as
Christ says, A good Shepherd calls his sheep by name, Joh. 10. 3. which
sheep are the vessels of Gods mercy, Romans 6. 23. And therefore the pastourall
charge does burden them with a care to bear them, as it were, upon their
shoulders, and in their heart: we have the example both of Christ, and of his
Apostle Paul for this; of Christ it is said, He shall feed his flock like a
shepherd, he shall gather his lambs in his arm, and carry them in his bosom,
Isa. 40. 11. And the Apostle does declare to the Corinthians, that he did carry
them in his heart: Ye are in our heart, known of all men, 2 Cor. 3. 2.

Lastly, Although the civil Magistrate is not properly Magistrates by a
resemblance.
represented, or typed out by the Tribe of Levi; yet herein is a similitude and
resemblance between the Levites and Magistrates.

1. That in the world the Magistrate has the privilege and right of the
firstborn, which was, and is, to In the primogeni^ure,
rule over his brethren. Isaac speaking to Jacob in the right of the
firstborn, does bid him, Be lord over his brethren; and does enjoin his
mothers sons to bow down unto him, Genesis 27. 29. Herein then the Magistrate is
the firstborn in the world, as Levi was in the Church; and so there is a
similitude of prerogative above others in both, yet according to different
respects.

2. The second resemblance is in the office; namely, in this, That the office
of the civil Magistrate, is also in In the office of bearing the vessels of the
Lord.
some sort appointed to bear the vessels of the Lord; I say, in the way of
support and civil countenance; for they are appointed by God to be nursing
Fathers of his Church, when they are called unto Christ, and bound to call him
their Lord. The civil Magistrate then has an outward care and inspection of
the Church committed to him; and in this respect he is also a vessel-bearer of
the Lord; as it is said of Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, that seeing he was to
be a Governor and a Father unto the inhabitants of Jerusalem; upon him should
be hung the glory of his Fathers house; And all the vessels, from the vessels
of cups to the vessels of flagons, Isa. 22. 24. He is compared there, ver. 23.
unto a nail fastened in a sure place, upon which vessels are hung, to be
preserved for use, lest they might lie upon the ground, and be trodden under
feet. So in this way the Magistrate is by power and authority fastened in the
wall of the State, to bear up all the offices, and the officebearers both of
Church and State, that they may not fall to the ground; and being trodden upon,
become useless and contemptible; but rather maintained in their true luster
and dignity, as vessels of honor.

Here then the manner of bearing in the one and the other Which is different
from the Leviticall bearing of the vessels in the manner thereof.
is different: Levi does bear them in his hands, to make use of them, and to
do God service with them in his house: but Eliakim does only support them by
his strength, that they may hang steadfast upon the wall; both have a care of
the same vessels of the Lord; both bear them, but each in his own way; in
respect of the effect of preservation, their cares are parallel; but in respect
of the manner of their bearing, their cares are different; the one is, inward;
the other is, outward to the Church. And although the relations are not the
same, yet both in the discharge of their duties are truly called
vessel-bearers of the Lord; because both are appointed by the Lord unto their
several charges, for the preservation of his vessels.

Where by the way let us make this general observation: Where it is observed,
that the vessels are to be esteemed above the vesselbearers.
That the vessels are not for the vessel bearers, but the vessel-bearers
appointed for the vessels. The vessels are not made to be hung upon the nail,
but for a better use, to contain some liquour, or other things useful for the
service of the Master of the house; but the nail is made and fastened in the
wall only, or chiefly for this use, that the vessels may be hung thereon. The
vessels are the glory Is^. 22 24.
of the nail; but the nail is no part of the vessels glory; only the use
thereof is to preserve the glory. So also it is in Levi: the tabernacle was not
made, nor the vessels thereof for Levi, but they were made for the Lord, and
the glory of his service; as for Levi, he was made and set apart for the
Tabernacle, and for the vessels thereof, to serve the same: The Church, as the
Tabernacle, is for God to dwell therein, by his ordinances among his people;
and the Ministers are Gods servants, and his peoples servants to this effect.

This then is to teach both Civil and Ecclesiastical office-bearers, whom God
has appointed either in and over his house, or about it, and his household
vessels, to think of themselves; that at the most they are but stewards in
their several charges; and that the vessels are not made for them, that they
should serve their own turns out of them, but that they are made for the
vessels; and that all their glory does stand in this, that each of them are in
their places servants to uphold the glory thereof; lest they be in the sight of
men as vessels of no pleasure: the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 4. 5. we preach our
selves, your servants for Jesus sake.

From the words thus opened, let us make some Doctrinall and Practical
Observations in brief.

The first Doctrine to be observed is, That God being a The first Doctr^^e is,
that God has vessels in his house.
great house keeper, has vessels belonging to him, which he has appointed for
the service of his house. You know what is meant by a vessel; namely, an
instrument fitted to contain something whereof a man does stand in need, and to
be made use of to that effect. Now the house of God is his Church, 1 Timothy 3.
15. and the faithful and elect are his vessels in this house. The proof of
this is to be taken from 2 Timothy 2. 20, 21. In a great house there are not only
vessels of Gold and Silver, but also of wood and earth, and some to honor, and
some to dishonor: if a man purge himself from these, (namely, wood and earth)
he shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified and meet for the masters use, and
prepared for every good work.

Here the Apostle makes the universal Church the great house; God in Christ,
the house keeper; men, the vessels, which are differenced by their substance
and uses: their substance of greater worth, is Gold and Silver; of Which are
different in matter and use.
lesser, is wood and earth. Their uses are, some to Honor, and some to
dishonor: that is, some less honorable: as one is to drink in, another is to
wash ones hands or feet in. So there be some men appointed by God to contain
precious liquor, and are of good and excellent metal; others to contain common
and ordinary liquor, such as is water; and these are commonly of an inferior
sort of matter. Some men are endued with special, some with common gifts and
graces; Some serve for spiritual, some for bodily employments in Gods house.

A second proof is from Romans 9. 23. where the Apostle speaking of the elect,
calls them vessels of Mercy; and says, that the end for which they were made
was, That God prepared them unto Glory; and the use and service which they were
to yield was, That they might make known the riches of Gods glory. Others are
mentioned, ver. 22. and called vessels of wrath, that is, receptacles of
wrath, fitted to make known Gods power, his long-suffering and his justice, in
the destruction of the wicked.

The third proof is from 2 Cor. 4. 8. where the Apostle says, that the
treasure of heavenly knowledge in the Gospel is kept in vessels of earth:
namely, in an earthly body; and the use of this earthly quality is, to show
that the excellency of the power of the word, is not of man, but of God.

The Reason of this is, that all creatures, as creatures, are but receptacles
of a superior, being to be serviceable thereby unto the creator, to show forth
his glory. Pre. 16. 14. The Lord has made all things for himself. And Isa. 43.
21. This people have I formed for my self, they shall show forth my praise.

Before I draw any use from this, I will proceed to another The second Doctrine
is, That God dothentrust some with his vessels.
Doctrine, which is this: That God has entrusted some with these his vessels,
and charged them with the care of them, to look to them, to bear them, and to
set them awork, for the end which he has appointed.

Vessels are for use; no vessels, as vessels, can make use of themselves;
therefore the use thereof must be committed unto some body, that the service of
the household* may not be neglected. And for proof of this, that God has
entrusted the care of his vessels to some that must be answerable to him for
the same, we must take notice that there is a threefold commission and charge
given of these vessels, to three several sorts of persons.

First, every man is entrusted with the care of his own Namely every one with
his own vessel in particular*
vessel. 1 These. 4. 4. Every one of you should know how to possess his
vessel in sanctification and honor. God does charge the conscience of every
one with the trust of his own soul and body, and of all the faculties and
members thereof, which are receptacles of grace and virtue, to be serviceable
unto others; for all the gifts are given to profit withal; and every one has
received his own gift, one after this way, and another after that, as the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 7. 7.

Secondly, every one is entrusted with the care of his ^ Every one with b. s
neighbors vessel in a private way.
neighbors vessel, as well as of his own. The commandment is, Phil. 2. 4.
Look not every man on his own things, but every man on the things of others;
the Apostle in that place does speak of the communion of Saints; and shows
that every one is obliged to his neighbor, as well as to himself, to have a
care of him for his good: as Christ cared not for himself alone, but for
others: so he would have the same mind in us, ver. 5. in like manner, Heb. 12.
15. The Apostle commands us to look diligently, lest any man fail of the grace
of God; lest any vessel, appointed for an honorable use, come to spill the
liquor of grace, whereof he is made a receptacle.

The reason of this is given by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. 24, 25. thus; God has
tempered the body together, that there should be no schism in the body: but
that the members should have the same care one of another. The relation wherein
Christians are set one toward another, is, that they are to be under one head
Christ, and in one body as members of each other. As then one member by the law
of nature is ordained to serve another, to care for it, to provide the good
thereof, and to preserve it from hurt: So are Christians appointed by God, in
respect of their union with Christ, and one with another, by his Spirit, which
is the same in all: to serve, care and provide for, and preserve each other. We
are all baptized (says the Apostle) by the same spirit into one body, 1 Cor.
12. 13. That is, we are all made to be one, as a man's body is but one; for
though it has many parts and members, yet all being quickened with one soul,
and by it united together in one man, are but one body: So is it with the whole
multitude of Christians; though they are many in particular, yet in their union
to Christ, and that life whereby they move in him, they are but one, and stand
in relation to each others, as members of the same body: and for this cause God
does charge them with the care of each other, and causes them for his service
to stand in need of each other, and so does oblige them to look to each other,
and to provoke each other to love, and to good works: Thus then the care of thy
Neighbors vessel is committed unto thee, that it miscarry not.

Thirdly, Although every one is bound to look to his 3. Some are entrusted with
the vessels in a general and public way,
own vessel, to bear it honorably through the world, and to his neighbors
vessel, as well as to his own: yet there is a more eminent and peculiar care
of bearing these vessels, committed unto the Ministers of the Word, one way;
and to the Magistrates, another way. The two first are private and particular:
the two last, public and general: the two first are enjoined by the interest
of love and common necessity; the two last are settled upon the interest of
order and office. The peculiar charge, and the These are Ministers.
service committed unto the Ministry, is set forth in the Tribe of Levi, and
in his separation from others unto God, whereof Moses in brief gives us this
information, Deuteronomy. 10. 8. The Lord separated the Tribe of Levi, to bear the Ark
of the Covenant of the Lord, to stand before him, to minister unto him, and to
bless in his name. And with this charge none other was to meddle but Levi
alone, as being set apart to that effect, and endued with a peculiar
maintenance for that service. With the same charge, and in the same kind, is
the Ministry of the Gospel now set apart by Christ; nor ought they to be
encumbred with any other cares, but such as are immediately subordinate Who
ought ^ot to meddle with worldly affairs,
unto the Gospel: this is the Apostles rule to Timothy, 2 Timothy 2. 4. No man
that warrethintangleth himself with the affairs of this life, that he may
please him who has chosen him to be a soldier. If then he does entangle
himself with other affairs and employments, then such as pertain unto the life
to come, he cannot please Christ: for when a Disciple offered himself to Christ
to attend his service, desiring only leave to go home first, and bid his
friends in the world farewell; he was told by Christ, that no man is fit for
the kingdom of God, who having put his hand to the plough of Gods service,
does look back to any thing else, Luke 9. 62.

And as they are thus to be set apart for the charge, and ought not to meddle
with any thing, but their own plough, and their own husbandry, which is the
tillage of men's souls toward God; so may no man take the charge committed unto
them upon himself, Except he be called thereunto, as Aaron was, Heb. 5. 4. And
the punishments of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, whereof the history is known,
Numb. 16. and of Vzziah the King, who presuming to take upon him the Priests
office, was stricken with leprosy, and separated from the administration of
the Kingdom, 2 Chronicles. 26. 16. are for a perpetual memorial, to show that
none may thrust himself upon this charge of the Ministry, but must be admitted
thereunto by an orderly calling.

To the Ministry therefore one way is the charge of And Magistrates whose
commission is different from that of the Ministers.
Gods vessels eminently committed, and to the Magistracy another way. The
Ministry is properly charged with a spiritual care of their souls, in things
pertaining to God, Heb. 5. 1. but the Magistracy is charged with a temporal
care of their outward and visible society, in things properly pertaining to
men, for the administration of justice and good order, and for the provision of
things necessary and comfortable for their life. In the one respect Aaron was
to bear the judgment of the children of Israel upon his heart before the Lord,
Exodus 28. 30. In the other, Moses, when the people was unruly and murmured for
meat, ^aith, that he was not able to bear them all alone, Numb. 11. 14. that
is, to care for all their matters, and to deal so with them, as to give them
contentment; for which cause seventy Elders are joined to him, to help him to
bear the burden of his charge, which was the outward regulating of their ways
in Justice and good order, according to Gods will. Thus then the manner of
bearing, and the charges are different, although they are about and over the
same vessels. The Minister bears them as they are within the house of God, and
as in that house he is a steward, and they of the household committed unto him,
that he should give them meat in due season. But the Magistrate Matthew. 24. 45.
does bear them as they are in the world; and so the Church it self, as it is a
visible society of men, wherein righteous and good order is to be observed, is
an object of that power and authority which God has entrusted him withal for
his glory.

So then every one does bear these vessels differently, in a manner suitable to
his calling.

The use of this Doctrine is twofold: The first for exhortation, The uses of
exhortation.
the second for instruction and warning.

The exhortation shall be in two words, to two things.

1. That every one should lay this to heart, and consider See what ves self
thou art, and what ^ust is given thee.
himself what sort of vessel he is, and what the trust is which is committed
to him, of himself, or of others. Thou may know what sort of vessel thou
art, by the qualifications bestowed upon thee, and place where thou art set,
whereby and wherein thou may become useful for the Kingdom of Christ, in
thy self and in thy neighbor. Let every one, says the Apostle, consider his
own work; that is, himself, in respect of the work entrusted to him, and then
he shall have rejoicing in himself alone, and Gal. 6. 4.
not in another: the custom and inclination of men is, to reflect upon
themselves, not in simplicity, but comparatively; not with a single eye unto
the rule, but with an indirect respect unto other men's ways, in comparison of
their own; Thus the Pharisee said, I am not like other men, Luk, 18. 11.
or like this Publican, etc. Such a consideration of our selves does give no
just matter of rejoicing: but the Apostles consideration of himself, is true
matter of joy; for our rejoicing is this, says he, The testimony of our
conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity; not with fleshly wisdom,
but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world, 2 Cor. 1.
12. if we look thus to our own consciences within our selves, to our talent
which we have received, and how we have bestowed it, that we may know how to be
accountable to God for it, then we shall have true matter of joy in our selves,
and not in another.

The second duty is consequent unto this; That every 2 Make t^y self a vessel
of honor.
one in the consideration of himself, should intend and endeavor to fit
himself unto God, as a vessel of honor. This is that which the Apostle does
infer, 2 Timothy 2. 21. upon this Doctrine, that God has many vessels in his
house: therefore, says he, if a man purge himself, he shall be a vessel unto
honor. He supposes that every one will aspire unto an honorable employment;
and that is the thing which I now stir you up unto, namely, that every one
should endeavor to fit himself for some honorable employment; the means is,
to purge your selves from earthly qualities: if a man does this, the Apostle
does promise him, that he shall be a vessel of honor; and if so, then as one
sanctified and set apart for the masters use, and prepared for every good work,
no doubt the Lord will not let him be without employment.

The use of Instruction and warning, is also twofold. The uses of instruction.


First, we should take notice, That every one of us is 1. Thou art thy brothers
keeper.
made his brothers keeper; and that God will call us to an account, not only
how we have looked unto our selves, but how we have looked unto our brethren. It
was Cains speech, when he had murdered his brother, and God calling him to an
account for it, he said, What, am I my brothers keeper? yea, thou art charged
with the care of preserving thy brother; and if thou do not in love to him
seek his good, thou do hate him in thy heart: and he that does hate his
brother is a murderer. Our duty 1 John 3. 15.
then is to remember the rule, bear ye one another burdens, and so fulfill the
law of Christ, Gal. 6. 2. Christ did bear all our burdens, therefore as he did
deal with us, we are bound to deal one with another, if we will be counted his
Disciples.

2. Secondly, we should take notice, that although all men, in one way or
other, are bound to bear the vessels of the Lord, and to put to their hands to
bear mutually their burdens, yet that no man may go beyond his line, 2. Yet
thou must not go beyond thy calling.
and thrust himself upon a charge which is not committed unto him; God has
distributed to every member of the body, his faculty, charge and place, as he
does think good; therefore no member can effect the ch^^ge and place of
another: the feet cannot effect the office of the hand, nor the hand of the
feet: the eye cannot take upon it to be the ear, nor the ear the eye: the
bowels cannot take the office of the arms, nor the arms of the bowels: So may
not the Ministry incroach upon the Magistracy; nor the Magistracy upon the
Ministry; nor may he who is called to bear the vessels only in a private way,
take upon him the charge of a public relation, belonging to the Magistracy or
Ministry. Every one of the sons of Levi had their distinct and peculiar
charge within themselves about the Tabernacle; nor was it lawful for any to
meddle with that which was not committed to him. Let every man abide in the
sphere and calling wherein God has set him.

The last observation which I will make upon this part The third Doctrine is,
That God does respect his vessel. bearers.
of the Text, which concerns the persons, is this, That God has a peculiar
respect to those that are entrusted with the charge of bearing his vessels.

We see that the coherence of the text with the former matter, does clearly
speak this; for the joyful promises of deliverance and salvation are no sooner
offered to the people of God in general, but the particular application is
immediately made to those, by name, who bear the vessels of the Lord, as to
such who are epecially in Gods eye; in whom he is concerned, that their
behavior may be answerable to the effect of his intentions.

Now that God does respect in a special manner those, to whom he does commit a
special trust, is clear from the law of justice and prudency, settled in the
heart of all wisemen, who give a trust unto others. The Law is this, to whom
much is given, of him shall be much required, Luke 12. 48. consequently, to
whomsoever a peculiar charge of great concernment is committed; upon him a
peculiar eye will be cast, and from him a special account will be expected of
his faithful performance of the work. You only, says God by the Prophet Amos
to the children of Israel, have I known of all the families of the earth:
therefore will I punish you for all your iniquities, Amos 3. 2. as if he had
said, I have in a special manner taken notice of you, to make my self known to
you, by the ordinances wherewith I have entrusted you to make my name known;
therefore I have also looked more narrowly to your ways then to others, and
will not suffer your iniquities to pass without a punishment; because you are
above all others accountable unto me of your ways.

The ground of this, is that which Moses does tell Aaron, upon the punishment
of Nadab and A^ih^, Levit. 10. 3. for these two sons of Aaron, presuming to
offer incense unto God, with strange fire which he had not commanded them, were
devoured with fire from the Lord, for an exemplary punishment of will worship,
and of false zeal in Gods service; Hereupon Moses does tell Aaron the cause of
this punishment, saying, This is that which the Lord said; I will be sanctified
in them that come nigh me, and before all the people will I be glorified. God
is jealous of his own glory; therefore those that come nigh him, must be holy
as he is holy: the nearer we are to him, if we answer not the beauty of his
holiness to show it forth, we dishonor him the more; therefore to vindicate and
uphold his own honor, he did before all the people glorify himself upon Nadab
and Abihu; lest their presumption being unpunished, others might be encouraged
to the like excess.

God is interessed in those that are nearest to him: in such as are strangers
and aliens from the common wealth of Israel, God is not much concerned, and he
does suffer them to walk in their ways; and does wink at the times of their
ignorance: but when he does send them the knowledge of the Gospel, and offers
unto them thereby the privilege of being his people by Repentance and Faith,
he tells them, that they must be accountable unto him of their actions, in
the day appointed wherein he will judge the world in righteousness, Act. 17. 30.
31. The Gentiles that are not called by Gods name, bring no dishonor directly
unto it, but it is for Isreal's sake, that Gods name is blasphemed among the
Gentiles? through you, meaning the Jews, says the Apostle, is the name of God
blasphemed, Romans 2. ^4. ^^erefore he is careful even of servants professing
the Gospel, (though otherwise mean and contemptible in the world) that their
ways should be answerable to their profession, lest the Gospel might be evil
spoken of for their sakes, 1 Timothy 6. 1. the misdemeanour of any of ones
household does reflect upon the Master of the family; and this is Gods meaning
toward the children of Israel, Levit. 20. 7, 8. when he faith, sanctify your
selves, and be ye holy, for I am the Lord your God: and keep my statutes and
do them, for I am the God that sanctify you; because I have set you apart for
my self, and I have given you my statutes, which are the way of holiness;
therefore set you your selves apart for me, and keep my statutes: for I am the
Lord your God; if you do otherwise, I will not own you as mine. Can two walk
together, says God by the Prophet, Amos 3. 3. except they be agreed? that is,
can God walk with a people, and accept them for his own, and employ them in his
service, to bear his vessels of honor; and not have an eye unto them, to see
that they walk worthy and agreeable to the place wherein he puts them? no, by
no means: his honor is too much engaged in them not to regard them and look
after them.

This then being a clear and undeniable truth, That God has a special eye to
those that are honored to be nearest unto him: Let me offer a word of
application unto The Application of the point.
you, concerning your present condition.

Consider, I pray you, in what case you stand toward God, with this whole
nation whereof you are a body representative.

Consider, I say, what our relations and engagements First to the whole nations
of great Britain.
are. We are all entrusted to bear the vessels of the Lord in our distinct
charges and places, in a more eminent way, then any other people of the world;
for the Nations of great Britain have made a new thing in the world; a thing
which has not been done by any Nation in the world, since the preaching of the
Gospel in it, a thing which since the Jewish Nation, in the days of Nehemiah,
was never heard of in any Nation, that not only the Rulers, but the whole
multitude of the people should enter into a Covenant with their God, and one
with another; and that two Nations should be leagued with an Oath together man
by man, to walk in the ways of his Word, to maintain the Cause of Religion,
and to reform themselves according to his will. This is a new thing in the
Christian Church, therefore there is a special engagement lying upon us all
more then upon other men, to bear every one our own vessels, to bear the
vessels of each other, and to bear jointly the Church and Cause of God in our
hearts, hands and shoulders. In all the world there is not a Magistracy so
eminently entrusted with such a charge, over a people so nearly united unto God
as you and the Parliament Then to the leaders thereof in the cause of
Reformation.
of Scotland are: Your charge is not only the outward safety of three
Kingdoms, to settle them in such a way as you have covenanted: but the care of
the Protestant Religion, and Cause (wherein the vessels of the Lord, which are
in foreign parts are concluded) is committed unto you, that you, together with
them, may be brought out of Babylon. I beseech you mark this our engagement
unto God, and let us lay it to heart. Mark Gods intention, and our obligation
to fulfill it. God has since the beginning of the Reformation of his Church
from Popery and Antichristian superstition intended to bring his vessels out of
Babylon unto Sion; the way has been opened by the preaching of the Gospel a
long while ago; the Nations of Europe, some more, some less, frequently have
begun their marches in several troops, and the spirits of many Magistrates,,
and of many Ministers have been stirred up, and called upon to bear the vessels
of the Lord, and by their care, power, authority, assistance and vigilance, to
bring them to Sion, there to be fully settled in the right use of the Ordinances
of God. But none of all the Magistrates or Ministers of other Nations have ever
given such an answer to this call, as you and we of the Ministry, and this
people has done; for we all have undertaken the cause in the full extent
thereof: therefore we are in this employment, nearer unto God then any others;
and he is more interessed in you, and in Scotland, then in any Nation
whatsoever. And if this be so: do not you think that God will have a nearer
respect unto you, then unto others? and that he does expect a more exact
performance of this charge from you, then from others. You and we all have
fastened the cause we have in hand upon him; and for this cause we have no
foundation to build on, but upon him: and he has none other employment for us,
but that we all should carry his vessels carefully out of Babylon; if you do
this faithfully according to your promise; and make it your aim to fulfill your
Covenant to this effect with him; you may be sure that he will bear you up, and
bear you out in all your difficulties; but if you have any other aim, and do
not make this your glory, that the vessels of the Lord are committed to your
trust; if you cast them off in your heart, and think them a wearisom burden,
and heavy to be borne; If, I say, any does but in his heart quit the charge
committed unto him, will not God require it at his hand? does not he try the
secrets of all hearts? and although man may cast dishonor and contempt upon
his vessels of honor, and neglect them in his thought, yet he will not
utterly forsake them, but will be found faithful unto them, although all men
should prove liars. Take heed therefore every one to his spirit, that ye deal
not falsely with your God in this great employment: you may be sure that he
will not suffer himself, by the contempt of his vessels, to be reproached and
vilified: he has borne even from the days of old his own, from the belly,
from the womb he has carried them as a nursing father, and he does promise to
be the same unto them, even Isa. 46 3, 4.
unto their old age, and even unto hoar hairs to carry them. The only way then
for you to be supported by him, is this, that you be sure to support with all
your heart and might his vessels; for you must know, that it is only for their
sake, that you are, and shall be a sure nail fastened in the wall of this
Kingdom; only I say for this end, that the vessels of your Lords house, and
the glory thereof may be hung upon you: but if you cannot be made use of by him
to this effect, though the nail be never so strong, and fastened in a place
never so sure, it shall be broken and pulled down, for the Lord has spoken it.

Let us then all fear lest we come short of our duty, in the charge committed
unto us in our several places; Let us look to one another, and exhort one
another daily, lest our hearts be hardened, through the deceitfulnes of sinful
and humane counsels; and lest the eagernes of pursuing these, cause us forget
the main thing committed unto us, which is, to behave our selves as servants
only, and as such servants who bear the vessels of the Lord: and upon whom the
eyes of the Lord are continually open.

And as this on the one hand is an object of exceeding great fear, to make us
careful that we may not be found faulty in so great a trust: so on the other
hand, it is an unspeakable matter of joy, comfort and encouragement to those
who have their consciences clear in this matter; telling them, that they aim at
nothing else but at the dutiful performance of this very thing; namely, that
the vessels of the Lord entrusted unto them, may be borne and brought out of
Babylon safely to Jerusalem, and there become serviceable unto God, in his holy
habitation. Happy is the man whose heart is perfect toward God in this thing:
This man may be sure that in the midst of trouble he shall find deliverance,
and in the saddest times he shall be comforted and supported: for as his heart
is engaged to rely upon God in his service: so he has a rich and a sure
promise to trust unto, that Gods Providence will be engaged for him. The
promise is, 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. The eyes of the Lord run to and fro through the
whole earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of those, whose heart is
perfect toward him; his eyes will spy thee out wheresoever thou art; and his
hand will be ready pressed to do thee service for thy deliverance: even as thou
with a perfect heart art ready to serve him in the bearing of his vessels; but
if thy heart be imperfect and unsound in this matter, whatsoever thy condition
may now be, and how prosperous soever; the judgments are not yet at an end,
before all be done, thou shall be ranked with the Hypocrites in Sion, who are
forced to cry out, even then when Sion is filled with judgment and
righteousness, with Isa. 33. 10.
wisdom and knowledge, and the fear of the Lord; then shall such Hypocrites all
of them be forced to lament and cry; who of us shall dwell with the devouring
fire? who of us shall dwell with the everlasting burnings?

This use and application of the Doctrine does respect us all indifferently, in
that relation wherein we stand, under the Oath and Covenant of our God; this is
a matter both of fear and of comfort, as we find our hearts affected
therewith; that we may all learn and be mindful both high and low, both
Civil and Ecclesiastical in our several places, to serve the Lord in the
preservation of his vessels with fear; and to rejoice in the performance of our
duty with trembling. Now before I leave the point, seeing you have put me in
this place, to be your remembrancer in the name of the Lord; give me leave to
Lastly to those that are in civil employme^^,
discharge this special trust, by speaking a word of special application more
distinctly unto those that are in places of civil employment, or that affect
and seek after the same.

To those let me say this; That they ought carefully to bear in mind the
name, which here the Prophet does give them: he does call them vessel-bearers
of the Lord. By this demonstration they are taught not only what their charge
is, but under whom, and in whose name they are to administer the same; namely,
under God, and in the name of the Lord. Therefore the weighty admonition which
Jehoshaphat gave unto the judges of Israel, whom he appointed in all the Cities
of Judah; is now to be given unto you: he says unto the Judges, 2 Chronicles. 19.
6, 7. Take heed what ye do; ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is
with you in the judgment; let then the fear of the Lord be upon you. Remember
this when you are in Parliament, or in Committees appointed by it; remember
that ye judge not for man, but for the Lord. Call to mind that it is he who
has called you to the place; that in his presence, who does see all your
intentions, it is not safe to judge for favor, or to have designs for, or
against this or that party, or person, for this or that particular interest.
Remember, says Jehosaphat, that the Lord is with you in the judgment: that it
is not in your own name, and for your own ends that you are there, but in his
stead; therefore let the fear of the Lord be upon you. And this is the warning
which belongs unto you, who are already in places. Others there be, who seek
to come And to those that seek after e^ployment.
to places; because these are times of action and employment; and men that are
zealous in a good cause, may offer themselves to a call which is lawful: let
me speak a word unto such also. I will not narrowly examine by what means men
seek to come to places; but supposing it to be in a lawful and approved way, I
would heartily advise them, if they will have any comfort in their places, to
look to their own hearts, to set them aright toward the end, for which their
places are ordained by God: and to consider the intention of him alone, by
whose favor they can be maintained, and become useful to the public, and to
themselves in their places. This then they must know, that God has ordained
all such places, not for a private use, that a man should get into it to sit
safe, and warm, and high, to be respected more then his neigbour; to get power
and be able to sway a party, or to cross this or that supposed design of
another party; this God does not in an ordinary way call any man unto:
therefore look to it you that come to ordinary places, look to your own aim,
which you can know best: if you think to receive your call with a blessing from
God, hoping to be maintained by him in your places; you must be sure that your
purpose is answerable unto his: he calls you to have a hand in the
administration of his affairs, that is, to help in the work of his mercy and
justice, to bear up mercifully and kindly his vessels of honor, and destroy,
in the way of judgment, the vessels of his wrath: he calls you to march with
the vessels of his mercy out of Babylon: and he calls you to come with them to
his Jerusalem: if then you apply not your mind to know who are his vessels;
how you should bear them: whence you should depart, and whither you should go
with them; truly you will have little or no comfort in your places in the end.

Let me propose unto you, for your admonition, the example of Shebna, of whom
we read in Isa. 22. 15, 16, etc. he was over the house, and treasurer of the
King of Juda: and we find by the circumstances of things mentioned in that
chapter, that it was a time of trouble, and danger of war, in which times men
that are in high places, can make use of them to their greatest advantage, if
they be wise statesmen; and so did Shebna, he did uphold his state, he
provided for himself, as one that graveth an habitation for himself in a rock;
he had the charets of his glory to attend upon him, and so served himself of
his place: but what does God say to all this? he sends the Prophet unto him,
to tell him, that he had made his reckoning without his host, that he made
acacount to settle himself on high, but that God would turn him down low, and
out of his place, and toss him up and down like a ball in a large country;
and that the charets of his glory should become the shame of his Lords house:
and why should all this befall unto him? it may be gathered from the place,
that it was, because he was not faithful to the charge which God had committed
to him, and that he did not look so much to the vessels of the Lord, as to
himself. In a word, he was a statesman, that looked to his own ends in a
public place: therefore God appointed Eliakim to be put in his place; who
should have a care of the vessels, from the least to the greatest: who should
support the glory thereof, and in this employment, be fastened as a nail in a
sure place. I need not to insist further upon the application of this example,
only look to it, that there be no Shebna found amongst you; but that every one
set his heart in uprightnes to his duty, as Eliakim did.

And this much for the first part of the Text, concerning the persons to whom
the promise of deliverance out of Babylon is made; now follow the duties which
God requires of them by virtue of a call.

Of the duties.
These duties we have said in the beginning, are chiefly two. The first is,
that they should resolve upon a march from Babylon. The second is, that in
their march they should be careful to preserve themselves from uncleannes, and
perfect holiness.

The call to march from Babylon is in these words, Depart In the call to march
out of Babylon is observed, 1. The earnestnes thereof.
ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, go ye out of the midst of her, namely,
out of Babylon.

First, observe here how earnest the Spirit of God is to give this call; this
is apparent in the frequent repetition of the same thing, to show the
importance of the duty, and the necessity of doing it without delay; for when
God says, Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out, go ye out: is not this as much as
if he had said, make no delay, tarry not, march away with all speed? the reason
of this earnestnes to press us to all diligence in this departure is twofold.
The first is, the danger wherein we may be, if we stay long By reason of the
danger of staying.
in Babylon: this is declared more expressly in the Revelation, chap. 14 ver.
4. Come ye out of her, (namely, Babylon) my people; that ye be not partaker of
her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues; the danger is, that if we
make any stay in Babylon, we may be infected with her sins, and be involved in
her plagues; being called away, if we obey not, we can promise to our selves no
protection, either from sin, or from the punishment thereof; and the danger
of being overtaken with the punishment is great, because it is said that it
shall be very sudden, when she shall think her self most secure, and safe,
then in a moment, in one dry her plagues shall come, even in their perfection,
Isa. 47, 8, 9. therefore it is very dangerous to make any delays.

Besides the danger of the event of a slow departure; there is another cause
why the call is so earnest; namely, the dulnes of our inclination to; and the
aversenes of our And by reason of our inclination to stay.
mind from the resolution of this march and removal: We cannot naturally
apprehend the danger wherein we are within Babylon: and not being sensible
thereof, we find no cause of fear; and so cannot resolve to flee; nay, we love
to stay there where we are accustomed. You may see a clear example of this in
Lot; He was a godly man; he was told by the Angels, that Sodom should be
destroyed; he did believe the warning; and in his former conversation 2 Pet. 2.
8.
amongst the Sodomites, he found no delight, but grief of soul: Yet for all
this, when it came to a sudden removal, he could not get his matters
dispatched, nor come to his march from thence, till the Angels forced him in a
manner away; for the Text says, they took him by the hand, and set him without
the City, Genesis 19. 16. and then when he was gone, his wife having received a
command not to look back, could not refrain to express her inclination toward
Sodom; although she could not be ignorant of the prohibition. This then does
manifest the strong bent of our desires to remain in Babylon; which by this
earnest call the Spirit does endeavor to overcome in us; even as Christ also
does upon the like occasion in few words warn us, Luke 17. 32. saying,
Remember Lots wife; to show that in us there is a disposition to remain in
Sodom, although we be strongly called out of it.

The words of the exhortation are clear, and need no explication; The Doctrine
to be gathered from them is this.

That the great and main work of a Christian in this life 1. The duty delivered
in a Doctri^e,
is, to march away, and make a safe retreat from Babylon, to come to Jerusalem.

To make good this truth, and to open the whole matter, And opened in three
^ead^.
I must here show three things.

1. What the mystery of Babylon is, in opposition to Jerusalem.

2. How all Christians are in a Babylonian captivity, whiles they are in this
present world.

3. How, notwithstanding this captivity, they may be marching away, and ever
advancing toward Jerusalem.

Concerning Babylon to lay open the mystery thereof, 1. In the mystery of
Babylon^
in opposition to Jerusalem; we must first observe the literal truth of both
these Cities; and then take up from thence that wherein the mystery does stand.

The first original of the City and Tower of Babylon, Grounded upon the
History.
is reported in the eleventh Chapter of Genesis; the substance of the story is
this. That mankind after the flood being of one language, did design to build
a tower, whose top should reach unto Heaven, and a city by it, to get
themselves a name, lest they should be scattered abroad upon the face of the
whole Earth. This purpose did miscarry by a judgment of God upon the builders,
whose language God did confound, and so scattered them abroad over the Earth,
whence the place did get the name Babel or Babylon, which signifies,
confusion: after this scattering of the first builders of Babel, the
foundations of the City being only laid; in process of time it was built by
Nimrod, who in it began the first Monarchy Gen 10. 8, 9, 10. Dan. 2. 37, 38.
of the world; which continued there, till it came to its highest perfection in
the days of Nebuchadnezzar. This Nebuchadnezzar was the man that took
Jerusalem by force, burnt it with fire, and transported the people thereof into
Babylon, and the vessels of the Lords house, into 2 Chronicles. 36.
the house of his gods. Now Jerusalem, which he did conquerand subdue, was the
Mother-City of the Jewish Nation, the place where God had put his name amongst
his people; there was his Temple where his public* worship was observed; and
as long as the Nation did keep the ordinances and the laws of their God, they
were in safety under Gods protection: but when they fell away from him, he gave
them up unto the hands of their enemies, to be afflicted by them: and amongst
others, the King of Babylon was the heaviest enemy that ever they had; nor was
the City of Jerusalem ever taken from them by any, before Nebuchadnezzar.

The mystery which is to be discovered in the opposition To be gathered from
the universal property of the state, in opposition to Jerusalem.
of these two Cities and states, must be observed from that wherein the
property of their different constitutions does stand, as it is universal to
all of the same kind: as then by the City of Jerusalem the frame and nature of
the Church of God is set forth; so by Babylon is set forth the frame and nature
of humane worldly societies. In the state and condition of Jerusalem we find
all the properties of the true Church of God: and in the state and condition of
Babylon, we find all the properties of the Kingdoms of this world.

Jerusalem, (this name) does signify the vision of peace, Their opposite ^. mes.
to show, that no where but in the Church and people of God the way to true
peace can be known or followed, and that none but such as enjoy the true
ordinances of God, and keep his Covenant and statutes, can hope for peace,
either in this world, or in that which is to come. And the name Babylon, does
signify confusion and disorder, to show, that all the ways of men wherein
they respect not God, but follow their own designs, come to confusion and
disorder. For the mystery of Babylon is Their opposite counsels and endeavors.
to be seen in the counsels and endeavors of the first builders of the Tower
and City after the flood; they took counsel among themselves, without any
respect unto God; they resolved upon a course to preserve and secure
themselves, and did endeavor in a rational way, by their own industry to
bring it to pass. This is the way of all natural men in all their
undertakings, they never look to God in their purposes, they mind only
themselves, and trust to nothing but to their own strength and abilities, and
to those contrivances which, according to their policy, they have laid down to
be followed.

But the mystery of Godliness is to be seen in the counsels and endeavors of
the true Citizens of Jerusalem; whose whole life was to be a perpetual
dependence upon God, in obeying his will: all their counsel was to be taken
from the oracle which he had set amongst them; and all their endeavors were to
be undertaken in his, and not in their own strength.

The mystery then of Babylon does consist chiefly in Their opposite ways of
government.
this; That it is the method or way of Government which natural reason does
suggest unto worldly men, to secure themselves from danger, to get themselves a
name upon Earth, and to subdue others unto their power, after their own will.

But the mystery of Jerusalem is the way of government which the Word of God
does prescribe unto spiritual men, to assure them of Gods favor, to get their
names written in Heaven, to show themselves servants unto all men through love,
not intending to bring any under their power, but all to the obedience of the
will of God in Christ.

To open the whole mystery more fully, we must understand that it lies between
the two ways of government; which are to be compared in four things; in
Discovered in four things.
their Principles; in their ends; in their means to attain those ends; and in
their manner of dealing with their subjects in the use of those means.

The principle of the Babylonian government, is that 1 In their opposite
principles.
Idol which Politicians call the Reason of state, or the Interest of state,
upon which, as upon an Axel-tree, all the wheels of government run in the
minds of statesmen. This is that secret which in the breast of the governors
of this world does rule their counsels; and at the best it is nothing else,
but some maxim or conclusion of government, which a natural worldly wise man,
upon the rational consideration of all outward circumstances of affairs, is
able to find out for his own advantage.

But the principle of the government of the City of God, is nothing else but
the will of God; and the great maxim of state, whereupon all the government is
grounded, is nothing else but this, That the Tenor of the Covenant between God
and us in Christ may be fulfilled.

The end of the Babylonian government, that is, the 2. In their opposite ends.
aim which wordlings have in the governing of states, is threefold. First,
they aim at a being, which is a condition of safety, plenty and ease for
themselves and their subjects. Secondly, they aim at a well-being, which is a
condition of credit, splendor and renown, not to be thought less then any of
their neighbors. Thirdly, they aim at an absolute being, which is a condition
of power, and command at will; to have all things without control in
subjection to themselves: for naturally all government does tend to an
absolutenes of superiority, and cannot rest till it arrive to it. But the end
of the government of the City of God is this; to bring the Saints to have
communion with God. The Apostle John does tell us his end wherefore he did
administer the Apostolical charge; namely, that we should have fellowship with
them that were Apostles, and truly (says he) our fellowship is with the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 1. 3. Paul's end and aim was to
present every man perfect in Christ Jesus, Col. 1. 28. and when the true
Jerusalem shall be established, this end shall be attained; for it shall be the
Tabernacle of God with men, who will dwell with them, and they shall be his
people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God, Revel. 21. 3.
which is the only true happiness of the soul; for in Gods presence is fulness of
joy: and at his right hand are pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16. 11.

Thus then the Babylonian state does aim at a temporal happiness, such as men
use to imagine unto themselves in this world, for their contentation (which yet
is never attained) But all the contentation of the children of God is obtained
in having communion with him, and seeing him, Psalm. 4. 6. The worldling says,
who will show us any good? But the child of God does answer, Lord, lift thou
up the light of thy countenance upon us, for thou will make me more glad
thereby, then when their corn and wine increases.

The means by which the state of Babylon does compass 3. In their opposite
m^^^s.
the ends which it proposes unto it self, are chiefly two: Policy, and Power.
The greatness of this world does walk upon these two legs. Rabsakeh does
acknowledge that counsel and strength are for war: and all the states of
Isa. 36. 5.
this world are states of war; for there is no peace to the wicked, says the
Lord, Isa. 48. 22.

By policy, we understand all the contrivances of humane wit and reason to
compass self ends: and whether the contrivance be fair or foul; if it but
reach the end, it will serve the turn of a natural statesman. Babylon does
boast of her wisdom, Isa. 47. 10, 12, 13. Thy wisdom and thy knowledge has
perverted thee, says the Prophet: and immediately before, Thou have trusted in
thy wickedness: thou have said, None sees me. The men of this world lay their
plots deep: they seek deep to hide their counsel from the Lord, their works
are in the dark, and they say, Who sees us? who knows us? Isa. 29. 15. But
the children of light delight to walk in the light, and in the presence of
their God, to do all things openly, because they know that nothing is hid but
it shall be revealed. The counsels of Babylon are not only such as proceed
from the principles of natural truth, honest, and justice, whereunto all
pretend for their own ends; but such as admit of all craft, subtilty and
deceit, nay of witchcraft, sorceries and enchantments, Stand now with thine
enchantments, and the multitude of thy sorceries, wherein thou have labored
from thy youth, says the Prophet. And this is the final result of all humane
deceits and policies which tend to wickedness, Satan becomes their oracle.

The power of Babylon is all the riches, the strength, and the authority which
it can purchase to make it self considerable; whereby it does exalt it self in
comparison of others, and what with allurements on the one side, and with
terrors on the other, or with actual violence it labors to bring all into
subjection to it self.

But the means by which the City of God does compass the end of her
government, are also two, namely, the word and the spirit: This is my Covenant
with them, says the Lord, my Spirit which is upon thee, and my words which I
have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth
of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed. The Covenant on Gods part
is to furnish his Church with the Word and Spirit; these are the two guides of
truth, to lead all that come to God in all his truth by these two; namely,
through the spirit according to the word: the Church is settled in a way of
government under Christ, with diversities of offices, and differences of gifts,
of administrations, and of operations answerable thereunto; the office of
ministering the Word 1 Cor. 1^.
and Sacraments; the office of ruling and overseeing the flock, the office of
distributing unto the necessities of the Saints, are the principal and
ordinary means of bringing the Citizens of Jerusalem to have communion with
God. The administration of Instruction, of Exhortation, of Comfort, of Reproof,
and of Correction in the way of government, judgment and discipline, by the
use of the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, to shut it upon the refractory, and
to open it unto the penitent sinners, are the duties of those to whom the
offices are committed; all which they must do, not in a Lordly way, but
according to the rule, as stewards of the mysteries and manifold gifts and
graces of God, ordained for the edification of the Children of God in the
household of Faith.

The manner of dealing which Babylon uses toward 4. In their opposite manner
of dealing. Revel. 17. 3.
her subjects, is that which men use toward beasts: she rides upon the beast,
I understand this of the beastly part of humane nature, (for the corruption of
our nature in that which is sensual and carnal does put us in the case and
condition of beasts to be ruled and governed as they are) this way of ruling
men as beasts, is practiced, when with absolute power she does bring her
subjects unto absolute obedience; when they are bound to do all by an
implicit faith ignorantly, only because she does command it to be done; even
as a horse turns this or that way, only because he that rides on him does
draw the bridle to the right or left hand. When they are led by baits and
sensual allurements of pleasure, or profit, or imaginary greatness; and when
they are overawed with the whip and the spur, and driven to do whatsoever
she does please, without any respect to reason or conscience for their own
good, but only to exalt her greatness in this world. And this is the way of all
humane government, which is merely natural; nay, the use of natural reason,
as it reflecteth upon outward things without respect unto God, does teach the
great ones of this world none other way to deal with their subjects: and herein
the great Romish whore of Babylon, the Mother of Fornication, has outstript
all the rest of the Earth in policy, and showed to all the Kings of the earth,
the depth of the mystery of iniquity in this government, so that they have
drunk out of the cup of her fornications, and their statesmen have committed
adultery with her.

But the manner of dealing which is used in the City of God toward the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, is not at all Arbitrary, it is altogether Legal;
there is but one Lawgiver, Jesus Christ; and under him the government is to be
administered, even as he himself when he was in the flesh, did behave himself in
the administration thereof toward his subjects. He was not as a Lord over
them; but as their servant in love, to admit of them, and to receive them to
the glory of God. His way of dealing was to inlighten their understandings, to
exhort them, and to lead them forth in the way wherein they were to walk, and
to go before them. By this rule all the officers of his Kingdom are to walk
toward his servants: all his true servants are his members; and these have as
great a right in him, as those whom he has made rulers over them; in him they
are all but fellow servants and Brethren; and the meanest of them, in case of
any offense, may call the greatest, nay though he were an Apostle, (yea, and
the chiefest of the Apostles, as we see it fell out in Acts chap. 11.) to an
account; to show the grounds and reason of his proceeding in any matter: and to
this effect Thrones of judgment are set, even Thrones of the house of D^vid
within Jerusalem* By the means of these thrones all the liberties and
privileges of the Children of God are preserved; and none (for all are alike
accountable to them) is suffered to live and do what he pleases in an
Arbitrary way, whether he be high or low, to the throne of Christ he must
stoop, or be broken to pieces with a rod of Iron, Psalm. 2. 7, 8, 9.

Thus you see the difference, and the opposition of the two mysteries, of the
spiritual, and of the wordly government; the one reflecting immediately upon
the souls of men; the other upon their bodies and bodily state; and reaching no
further in the utmost extent thereof.

I have done with the first point. The second thing which I am to make
apparent, for the proof of the principal Doctrine, is this; That all
Christians whiles they 2. In our captivity in Babylon.
are in this world, are under this Babylonian captivity in some sort.

To make this good, the foundation of the mystery of Babylon, which is
universal, is to be discovered; and this is nothing else, but the universal
corruption of the soul of man in his conscience, will, reason, and all the
inferi^^ faculties thereof; and the want of power in the superior faculties,
to rule and subject the imaginations and affections unto the will of God. This
corruption was brought in by Adams fall into our nature; he affected an
Independent power from God to be his equal; and suffering his lusts to break
forth against the will of God, he brought himself and all mankind of his
posterity, into disorder and confusion; for as he did at first, so all men do
still, and in every thing they affect to be absolute within themselves, and
over others to have power to rule: The spirit Iom. 4. 5.
which is in us, says the Apostle, does cover to ^nvy: and from this spirit of
envy does proceed all our Babyl^^i^^ disorder and confusion, all our ambition;
lust and strife ^ll Christ then have ^ully destroyed the works of the Devil in
our nature, and conversation one toward another, no man shall be freed from
some part of the bondage of this Babylonian captivity: because as it is rooted
in the natural faculties of every man's soul, so of necessity it must break
forth and fructify, in all the states and employments of every man's life.
Except then a man can live in the flesh without all relations unto other men:
that is to say,

First, without being under a Magistrate that in civil matters shall rule his
subjects by the principles, for the ends, by the means, and in the ways of
worldly government.

Secondly, without being under a Ministry, where men are in gifts, graces,
offices, and administrations, less able then Christ and his Apostles in the
ways of spiritual government.

Thirdly, without being under some dependences of these two, such as are in the
common wealth, the Courts of Justice, the governments of places in time of
peace and war, the ordinances of trades and merchandises by Sea and Land,
which are brought to any humane* rules. And in the Church the dependences are:
the constitution of Families; the education of Children in Schools, and the
trades of all manner of learning and sciences, (which I call trades, because
amongst men sciences are used as trades and monopolies in all the parts
thereof.)

Except, I say, a man can live in the flesh without some relation, or
subordination unto any of these; it is unpossible for him, to be free from this
Babylonian captivity.

One proof may suffic^ for all; and that is the whole book of Ecclesiast^^,
where the preacher Solomon having tried all things in this world, to see what
he could find in them; does tell us, that he found nothing else, but vanity of
vanities, and an endless vexation of spirit.

And the Apostle speaking of the whole creation, tells us in like manner, that
it does groan and travel in pai^, Romans 8. 20, 21, 22.
till it be delivered from the bondage of corruption, and the subjection unto
vanity wherein it is. Nor does he except the Saints from the same condition;
for they also groan within ver. 23.
themselves, waiting for the redemption of their bodies, from this Babylon
wherein we live, till they come to the enjoyment of the glorious liberty of the
Sons of God.

And this may suffice for the second point; the third thing which was to be
made good, is this; That although 3. In the possibility of our deliverance from
it.
we are thus involved and entangled under the power of this Babylonian
captivity, that nevertheless the way is open for us to march away from thence,
and come to the sp^rituall Jerusalem, which is the Mother of all Saints.

To make this good, I need no other proof then the words of my Text; which
holding forth so earnest an exhortation, show that it is Gods intention the
thing should be done: and if it should be done by Gods intention, then it may
be done; nor is it a legal commandment, which is of things impossible for us
to do of our selves; but it is an evangelicall commandment, to which a
promise of grace made unto believers is always adjoined, which does make the
work possible.

The commandment is, besides that of the Revelation, chap. 18. 4. Come out of
her my people, etc. very much pressed upon us in two places.

The first is, Romans 12. 1, 2, I beseech you, brethren, (says the Apostle) by
the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy,
acceptable unto God; which is your reasonable service; and be ye not conformed
to this world, but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind. Now that
this is not impossible unto the believer, is apparent; because God has
promised, Ezekiel. 11. 19. I will put a new spirit within you; therefore seeing
God does undertake the work, it is not impossible.

The second place is parallel unto my Text, and a commentary thereon to explain
it; it is in 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16, 17. where the Apostle does set forth this
duty, as the main tenor o^ Gods Covenant with us. He brings in God speaking
to us, and offering himself, that he will receive us, and dwell with us, and be
to us as a Father, and make us his Children; upon this condition, that we shall
but separate our selves from the darkness, the unrighteousnes, the uncleannes,
and the Belial of this world, to come to the light, to the righteousness, and to
the holiness of Christ; whereupon in the beginning of the seventh Chapter he
infers this exhortation; Therefore let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

From all which, the Doctrine which I did offer unto you from the Text, is to
be concluded thus; that it is evident that the main and great work of a
Christian in this life, is, to march away and make a safe retreat from Babylon,
to come to Jerusalem. The Apostle Act. 2. 40. as soon as the first converts had
given their names up unto Christ, does press this duty upon them; Save your
selves from this untoward generation, as being the main thing by them to be
intended.

The reason why this is to be counted the great and main work, is this; because
herein is the fulfilling of the intent of all the promises of the Gospel. For
the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1. 4. does tell us, that all the precious promises are
given to us to this end, that by them we should escape the corruption which is
in the world through lust, and become partaker of the divine nature; which in
effect is nothing else but to march away from Babylon, and come to the
spiritual Jerusalem.

The use and application is, for exhortation and earnest The application of the
du^y.
entreaty; That the resolution here recommended to the vessel-bearers of the
Lord, may be seriously laid to heart, and carefully minded by every one of you
that are here.

If you think that the matter does any way concern To all in general.
you; then you ought not to slight the admonition; and if you think it any
honor to be a vessel-bearer of the Lord; and if you conceive that God does
look after those whom he does employ in honorable charges; then conceive also
that it will be very necessary to settle your resolutions in a way answerable
unto his call. If you can apprehend it any way dangerous to be in Babylon, then
linger not to make an escape. And if the state of Jerusalem be the way to
happiness, then make haste to live in it; lift up the hands that hang down, and
the feeble knees, make straight paths unto your feet, and depart, O depart ye,
go ye out of the midst of her, that bear the vessels of the Lord.

This every one is bound to do for himself; but such as are leaders of the
flocks must intend to march before others, To the leaders of the people in
particular.
and direct them in the way. The Prophet Jeremy in his fifth Chapter from ver.
4. to 9. does represent unto us our condition, and the duty of our rulers. Our
condition is like to that of the Children of Israel and Judah, who are said to
be going, and weeping, and seeking the Lord their God. This wear now doing in
these days of our Humiliation chiefly, if there be at all any sincerity in us.
It is said of them, that they should ask the way to Zion with their faces
thitherward; This I hope we are now doing. It is said, that they shall exhort
one another, saying, come, let us join our selves unto the Lord, in a
perpetual Covenant that shall not be forgotten; This I hope we have done
already. Then the distracted condition of the sheep being represented; that
their own shepherds had caused them to go astray, and turned them away on the
mountains, and that they had gone from mountain to mountain, and had forgotten
their resting place: which was in former time, and is still in some sort our
condition. All this being thus premised, the exhortation follows, which I
desire to make my words unto you at this time, Remove out of the midst of
Babylon; go forth out of the midst of the Chaldeans; and be as the he-Goats
before the flocks: to you that are in place this is spoken, be ye as the
he-goats; the flocks are marching, go then before them.

And if you are fully minded to discharge this duty, even as it is by God
himself recommended unto you; Let me again be your remembrancer on his behalf,
and mention some public cares which ought to be laid to heart.

First, look to the house of God to settle it in good order; and then look to
the further settlement of the civil state. Some men when they are put in mind
of this, use to say, We must have a being, before we can intend a well-being:
they mean by a well being, the settlement of Religion; and by a being, such a
frame of the common wealth as they propose unto themselves: but I say, that
this is a false and preposterous method of proceeding; for it supposes that
there is no being in God, but that all our being is in this world; it makes
Religion the accessory, and this present world the principal; but Christ's
Doctrine and exhortation is quite contrary, Mat. 6. 33. Seek ye first the
Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, and all other things shall be
added unto you; but if you seek Gods Kingdom in the second place, you have no
assurance that you shall get it, nay, I will assure you that you shall lose it;
and with it all your other purchases. The Prophet Haggai, after the captivity
of Babylon had to do with Hag. 1. 2.
men that spoke thus; The time that the Lords house should be built, is not yet
come: But what does God answer them; is it time, says he, for you to dwell in
your houses, and to provide for your selves, and is it not time to provide for
my house? O let us not have cause to say so unto you, that God who does so
miraculously provide for you, should be so ill requi^ed by you.

Let me then speak freely concerning the settling of the house of God amongst
you, if you will have God to dwell in it, give him the privilege which every
one of you does challenge in his own house, namely, to be master in it; and to
order it as you think good. Let me entreat that he may have this right in his
house; and you may be sure that all will be well. Holiness becomes the house
of the Lord; and without holiness no man shall see his face. Here I have just
cause to praise the Lord for your last vote and resolution, whereby this point
of holiness is much advanced, by the decree of removing all scandalous persons
from the Communion of Saints: settle but the judicatories of particular
Congregations, and let all the thrones of the whole house of David be erected;
and you shall find that the fruit of righteousness will be peace, and the work
thereof, quietness and assurance for ever; Isa. 32. 17. But where there is no
restraint of scandalls and offenses, as hitherto there has been none, there a
woe must follow, woe unto the world because of offenses. With the settlement
Matthew. 18. 7.
of the Church, as a body compact together (for so Jerusalem is to be built,
Psalm. 122. 3.) The Schools of the Prophets, the Universities must be settled,
purged and reformed with wholesome constitutions, for the education of the sons
of the Prophets, and the government of their lives: and with the soundnes and
purity of spiritual learning, that they may speak the true language of Canaan;
and that the gibberidge of Scholastical Divinity, (which is nothing else but
the language of corrupt humane reason, and Philosophy, concerning spiritual
objects, without respect to the Word of God) I say that the gibberidge of that
(falsely so called) Divinity may be banished out of their society.

Next unto the Schools of the Prophets (whereof besides the Universities, it
were to be wished that some lesser ones might be settled in every Province) Next,
I say, unto these, all the inferior common Schools of all sorts of children
and youths, should be taken into serious consideration, and men of parts
encouraged to have the inspection and oversight of them. The corruption of all
states and qualities of people does arise from the neglect of these Schools,
wherein no seeds of virtue or grace, but rather all habits of dissolutenes are
begotten in the souls of children; which makes them useles, if not hurtful to
the commonwealth, by the matters of knowledge which are taught them.

This building up of the spiritual Jerusalem in the souls of all men, both
young and old, will overthrow the foundations of Babel, by Gods blessing, in
the very corruption of our nature: For except you dig deep to lay the
foundations of Zion one way, and to root up the foundations of Babel another
way; your building will be to little purpose.

These thoughts and resolutions will naturally lead you to the counsels of
peace; and in those counsels, the settlement of all the Courts of Justice
thorowout the Land will be necessary; that this unnatural war being at an
end, whereby the state of Babylon is powerfully maintained amongst us; we may
have our hearts enlarged, and our mouths opened to sound forth the praises of
our God, who passes by the sins of the remnant of his people, and does not
keep his wrath for ever: and who for his own Name sake, that it may not be
profaned among the Heathen, does work deliverances in Jacob. To him be glory,
honor and praise for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 33. marg. for grounded upon the History, read grounded upon the letter of
the History. p. 46 l. 9 for fifth, read filtieth.


