The Plain Way OF PEACE and UNITY IN Matters of Religion.

Showed By some Maxims supposed to be undeniable, which John Durie has made
use of in Negotiating with all the Churches.

AND By some Expedients supposed to be effectual, which he has endeavored to
make practicable among the Churches, for the preserving and promoting of the
Protestant Religion abroad.

And now are offered For the preventing of further Breaches, and the Settlement
of Unity amongst our selves at home.

Romans 12. 18. If it be possible, as much as lies in you live peaceably with
all men.

Phil. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4. If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of
love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies; fulfill ye my
joy, That ye be like-minded, having the same love; being of one accord, of one
mind.

Let nothing be done through strife or vain glory, but in lowliness of mind,
let each esteen other better than themselves.

Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of
others, etc.

Ephesians. 4. 1, 2, 3. I beseech you that you walk worthy of the vacation where with
ye are called.

With all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one another
in love.

Endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, etc.

LONDON, Printed for Fr. Tyton at the three Daggers in Fleetstreet, 1660:

The Plain Way of Peace and Unity IN Matters of Religion, Showed By undeniable
Maxims, and by effectual Expedients, to perserve and promote The Protestant
Religion, By preventing further Breaches, and advancing a Settlement amongst
our selves at home.
1. THe Protestant Religion can neither be propagated abroad; nor maintained at
home; except the Principles upon which it is grounded be upheld publicly, and
the practice made conformable thereunto.

2. The fundamental Principles which distinguish the Protestant Religion from
Popery, are chiefly these:

1. That the word of God in the Scriptures is the only Rule of Faith and
Obedience. 2. That this Word is infallible and clear in all things necessary
for salvation. 3. That this Word is perfectly sufficient to make a man wise
unto salvation, and thoroughly furnished unto all good works.
3. The Practice of the Protestant Profession cannot be made conformable unto
these Principles, except two things be observed:

1. That all things to be taught and to be done by and in this profession have
a warrant from the word of God. 2. That they who teach and do these things do
the same knowingly and in Faith, and not because it is a custom long ago
received and enjoined by humane Authority. For Christ says, Matthew. 15. 9. In
vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the commandments of men.
4. If these Principles, and this Practice be upheld in a Gospel-way; that is,
if they be made evident to the conscience of upright minded men by a
Demonstration of Truth, and not imposed upon all men, because some in power
will have it so, then the Protestant Religion will be propagated without the
mixture of Popery, but not otherwise.

5. And if it should be effectually propagated it must be upheld not only to
be free from Popery, which is a dependence upon the Pope as infallible, and
superstitiousness imposed by Power: but also as opposite to profaneness which
leads to Atheism, and to Disorderliness, which leads back either to
Profaneness, or to Popery; or begers Enthusiastical Fancies, and therewith
endless Divisions.

6. The expedient to avoid Profaneness is to educate Youths carefully in the
Principles of Christianity, and of sound Learning; and by civil Laws to repress
the Intemperancies and Excesses of Riot and Wantonness, in those that are of
Age, that being kept sober and rational, their conscience may have its proper
work in them.

7. The expedient to avoid Disorderliness in the profession of Religion, is to
unite the Professors together so far as they have attained, and to keep them
from biting and devouring one another, for that whereunto they have not
attained.

8. They cannot be united in that whereunto they have attained, except they
know one another seize; and own each other so far as they are come.

9. The seize of all may be known by their public or private
Confessions, and their owning of each other therein, will be discerned by the
Harmony thereof in matters of Faith, and in the Rules of Obedience to God and
men.

10. They cannot be kept from biting and devouring one another about the things
wherein they differ; except the occasions of offenses which they give to each
other, be first removed and afterward prevented.

11. The occasions of offenses cannot be removed, except the parties offended
on each side, be willing to meet and agree upon the way of removing the same
according to the Rules of the Gospel.

12. Nor can the occasions of offenses be prevented, so long as Christians are
not taught by their Leaders, and pressed in Conscience to walk by the same Rule
of Charity, to bear one with another, and to forbear disputing with, and
murmuring at one another.

13. To oblige them in conscience to walk by this Rule, the expedient is to let
them all equally enjoy a Regulated Liberty, so as they may not fear to be
imposed upon by power, nor hindered by tumults in their way, nor undermined by
Policy in their Constitution.

14. This liberty may be Regulated, if each party can be obliged to declare
that which they would have others do, or not do toward themselves, for their
edification; and then if they be obliged to do, and not to do the same toward
others also for their edification reciprocally.

15. The expedient to oblige them to forbear disputing one with another about
their particular differences, is to divert their thoughts and put them upon
public tasks, wherein they shall have no cause to dispute with any for a
victory, but only to show their abilities for the service and good of all.

These tasks may be many, but at present three seem most useful to be set upon.

1. What the things are wherein all Protestants agree in Doctrine, Worship and
Discipline. 2. How they who differ not in Fundamentals, may notwithstanding
lesser differences, edify one another according to the Rules of Christian
Moderation. 3. What Truths Protestants should unaninimously hold forth to Jews,
Turks and Heathens, for their conversion to Christianity.
16. The expedients which will oblige them to forbear murmuring one at another,
are:

1. To abolish the names of parties, as Presbyterial, Prelatical,
Congregational, etc. and to be called Reformed Christians of England, Scotland,
France, Germany, etc. 2. To discountenance controversal writing by private
persons, and to oblige every party to suppress it within themselves, by
requiring their members to observe that whereunto the Cardinal Richelieu brought
the French Protestants, namely, That all things which should be published for
the defense of a party should be reviewed and owned by the leaders of that
party. 3. To bring Refutatory scribbling out of use, (except it be in matters of
Fact, where witnesses may be had to disprove untruths) and to oblige men to
declare their own sense of truths affirmatively and negatively, without
insulting over others for their supposed errors. 4. To set some Peacemakers a
work, to deal with the leading fierce men of both sides, to take off the edge
of their jealousies and passions against one another, and if there could be a
Council or Committee of such Peacemakers formed, it would do the work.
17. If the Disputings and murmurings which by reason of jealousies begin
already to work, be not speedily prevented, a relapse may make our breaches
worse and incurable,

Principiis obsta sero Medicina paratur
Cum mala per longas invaluere moras.
18. To make these expedients effectual and practicable amongst our selves for
Unity at this time; it is humbly conceived, that neither a Conference, such as
was at Hampton Court; nor a Synod, such as was at Dort, or at Westminster; will
heal our breaches, but rather multiply or confirm the same: except the way and
manner of their conferring, or of their meeting in a Synod be so ordered, that
they never shall come to dispute and argue one with another about their
Principles, or the matters wherein they differ; for I know not any Conference
or Synod wherein different parties met to dispute, which ever brought them to
an agreement. True it is, that parties at conferences have some times driven
one another to absurdities, and in Synods, according to the power which called
them, have over-voted one another; but never have any acknowledged publicly a
conviction by a Conference, nor yielded to the determination of the Synod. The
Council of Trent has made the Rent between Protestants and Papists
irreconcilable. The Synod at Dort did not reclaim the Remonstrants from their
way; not the Assembly at Westminster the Independents or dissenting brethren,
as they were then termed, notwithstanding the several attempts of an
accommodation; only because the manner of proceeding did rather tend to argue
and debate, then to prevent and heal prejud ces.

19. Now to prevent Disputes, and thereby prejudices both at a Synodical
meeting, or at a Conference, the expedients will be, to predetermine the aim
thereof, and the subject matter which should be only concerning matters of
agreement to settle them;) and to limitate the manner of the Treaty, which
should be only Declarative and Deliberative, and not Argumentative and
contradictory.

20. And to make such a Treaty succesfull; two things must be avoided, which
have made commonly all meetings almost and conferences about matters of
Religion without effect. The first is, the jealousies which they who come to
meet, have commonly one of another. The second is, the inconsiderateness and
heats which fall out in verbal conferences; besides mistakes and other
inconveniences.

21. Now to avoid and prevent both these; the expedients will be,

1. That each party, which should treat, be authorized to meet by it self; and
choose such as they will Depute to attend a meeting in their name, with others
from whom they differ. 2. That these Deputies of the parties, be appointed to
meet severally each by themselves in distinct places, giving liberty to all of
their own way, to bring in to them their thoughts concerning the things which
are to be in agitation; by which means each party will be free within it self,
and be able to know fully the sense of all that go along with them; when the
Brethren as well as the leaders shall have access unto the Deliberations. 3.
That the proposal of matters to be agitated, shall not be left to either of the
parties to be contrived, or offered to each other; but shall be prescribed by
form of Question, by his Majesty, to be resolved from the word of God by each
party. 4. That the Answer of each party shall be given up in writing to his
Majesty, and shall have these properties observed. 1. That it shall contain
both the Thesis and the Antithesis of the matters in question, with the reasons
thereof. 2. That it shall deliver nothing as the opinion of other men to refute
it, but only the sense of the party it self, which does offer the answer. 3.
That it shall be put in Aphorisms, and not in a large Discourse. 4. That it
shall be given to his Majesty, and not communicated to any before he receive it.

22. Perhaps it will be objected, that this is a longsome and tedious way.

I answer; That in this case the farthest way about is the nearest way home.
For that which does prevent all inconveniences, which make all shorter ways
ineffectual ought not to be counted long or tedious; and that which infallibly
will make Peace, is the only short and delightful way of proceeding. Moreover
because the expedients here mentioned are obvious to every man's capacity, and
commonly known by all; therefore the way is more easy and without
contradiction, and most suitable to the Principles of Gospel-simplicity and
Christian-liberty; whereof the former being despised or neglected; and the
latter incroached upon or abused, are the causes of all our divisions and
distractions, or the chief ingredients which make these causes most powerful
in their operation. The plainest way of dealing, if it has an orderly tendency
to the right end is least followed, for none can follow it, but he who without
all selfseeking design or interest, has learned to deny himself: and whosoever
in seeking Peace does not study through self-denial to serve others in love;
will make to himself crooked paths, and he that goes therein shall not know
peace, Isa. 59. 8.

23. In all these forementioned expedients, it is presupposed that each party
is fully agreed within it self, concerning the matter which it does declare to
be the common sense of all that belong unto it; but in case it fall out, that
the members of each party do not agree fully amongst themselves, either in
their Tenets or in their way of acting (which I have seldom seen fall out
otherwise.) The question then will be, What expedient is to be used to prevent
a new fraction of a party within it self, when it is about to treat of an union
with others:

The expedient may be this.

1. Supposing there are three or four sub-distinctions of professors in a
party, which for the main tenet do agree, and so are under one denomination;
let each sub-distinction name a deputy or two for it self, to whom it will
entrust its concernments.

2. Let these Deputies agree upon a Directory how to order their proceedings
within themselves for the credit and interest of their party, that all that can
be done by common consent may be done, notwithstanding some particular
distinction of ways or difference of opinions, which may be emergent amongst
them; and let this Directory be proposed to the leaders of the Congregations
for their advice and approbation, and it may contain proposals to this effect.

1. That nothing shall be reputed an Act of a party, but that which all the
Leaders of the Congregations shall be made acquainted with and consent unto, or
at least not dissent from. 2. That to form an Act so to be reputed, the matter
whereof it is to be formed, shall be notified to all the leaders of each
sub-distinction, to desire them to bring in their suggegestions in writing to
him who is their deputy within a time limited. 3. That each Deputy having
summed up the agreements of his own sub-distinction, shall meet with the rest
to confer notes, and gather out of all the suggestions a general agreement.
4. This general agreement being drawn up shall at a general meeting be
proposed to get a general assent, that none may seem to be imposed upon in a
matter of conscience. 5. That there shall be no perpetual Chairman but the
Deputies shall preside by turns for the ordering of matters within themselves
relating to the party. 6. That the common scribe of the party shall keep all
the writings which shall be given in upon all matters of deliberation; and that
a double of the agreement of each sub-distinction within it self, shall be kept
for such of the Leaders of the Congregations as shall desire to see it, or to
take a Copy of it. 7. That the meetings of the Deputies with the leaders of the
Congregations, shall begin and end with prayers, etc.
24. If by these expedients every party can prevent further inconveniences
within it self, and preserve the union whereunto it is come; and if that degree
of Union wherein it stands with other parties in the grounds and duties of
Christianity, may be held forth and discovered, there is a possibility of
healing the breaches, which hitherto have distracted us, and made us a prey
unto all the enemies of the Truth; who cunningly have insinuated, and will
insinuate themselves more and more amongst us, to foment our divisions and our
distempers, if we resolve not to own one another in that whereunto we have
attained, and to walk by one Rule of charity and mutual forbearance in that
whereunto we are not yet come, which is the counsel of the Apostle Paul, Phil.
3. 15, 16. in a case of greater difference between the Jewish and Gentile
Professors of Christianity, than any is between Protestants either abroad or at
home. And to bring this Rule of the Apostle into practice amongst Protestants,
a Negotiation has been entertained for many years with all the Churches and
Universities abroad, under the countenance and authority of the Supreme
Magistrate of every place: that the breaches between the Churches being
repaired upon Gospel-grounds, and the offenses removed by the concurrence of
Authority, the Communion of Saints might be upheld, and the truth of the
Gospel-profession might be maintained against the common Adversaries thereof,
and unanimously propagated to Jews, Turks and Heathens, for the enlargement of
the kingdom of Jesus Christ unto the ends of the earth.

And although the effect of this negotiation has not hitherto been so visible
as has been wished and prayed for, by reason of the civil distractions
wherewith God has punished all the Nations of Europe, putting a cup of fury
and trembling into their hand, to make them rather waste and destroy one
another, than mind the ways of Christian peace and unity: yet if now the Lord
will be appeased toward his people, and break the shield, the hurtful sword
and the battle; we may hope that the thoughts of reconciling Religious
differences, upon the grounds of these maxims and expedients, will become
seasonable; for seeing they are matters neither of abstruse contemplation, but
plain truths, nor of deep contrivance, but of common apprehension, yet being so
fundamentally necessary for a Gospel-Reformation, that no true peace, nor
religious unity can be had or continued, without the constant use of them;
Therefore they are now extant for a Testimony of the guilt more or less of all
patties, who knowing these maxims and principles, and not being unacquainied
with these expedients and rules of walking toward a settlement, yet, have not
been inclined by their own ingenuity, nor induced by the persuasion and earnest
solicitation of others to put the same in practice, and thereby to become
subservient to the kingdom of Jesus Christ in their generation, which fault
will never rise up in judgment against him; who hereby bearing witness to
these truths, does endeavor to awaken all unto their duty, as it becomes him
who has made himself for these 30 years past, a constant sollicitour of the
means of Truth and Peace, amongst the Protestant Churches, whereof they are all
Witnesses, for

The unworthy Servant of Christ in the Gospel of Peace. JOHN DVRIE.


