THE WITCHES OF HVNTINGDON, Their Examinations and Confessions; exactly taken
by his Majesty's Justices of Peace for that County. Whereby will appear how
craftily and dangerously the Devil tempts and seizes on poor souls.

The Reader may make use hereof against Hypocrisy, anger, malice, swearing,
Idolatry, Lust, Covetousness, and other grievous sins, which occasioned this
their downfall.

Profecto res stulta est nequitiae modus. Seneca. LONDON, Printed by W. WILSON,
for RICHARD CLUTTERBUCK. 1646.

TO The Right Worshipful the Justices of the Peace for the County of
HVNTINGTON.
Gentlemen,
IT has been a common fault of late, to commend things to the Press taken up
by hearesay and report, which frequently prove untrue. This common course makes
many trueths doubted, specially in difficult discoveries. That this ensuing
discourse is true, I need no other witnesses then your selves: your pains was
used in the diligent Examination of the Offenders, and the witnesses against
them. You were present, and Judges at the Trial and Conviction of them, more
full and clear confessions, more satisfactory Evidence, and a clearer
Conviction, could not be in a case of this nature. By particular service, I was
attendant in most of the Examinations: and waiting on you all at the Trial,
know what I assert to be true, and dare presume to make you Patrons hereof.
Knowing your integrities most ready to attest truth, and to maintain and
countenance herein

Your Honourer and humble Servant, JOHN DAVENPORT.

THE WITCHES OF HVNTINGDON, Their Examinations and Confessions exactly taken,
etc.
The Examination of Elizabeth Weed of great Catworth in the County of
Huntingdon, Widow, taken upon the last day of March, 1646. before Robert
Bernard, and Nicholas Pedley, Esquire; two of his Majesty's Justices of the peace
for this County.
SHe says, that about one and twenty years since she being saying her Prayers
in the evening about bedtime, there did appear unto her three Spirits, one in
the likeness of a young man or boy, and ^^e other two of two Puppies, the one
white and the other black: and that which was in the shape of a young man did
speak unto her, asking her, if she would renounce God and Christ; she
answered, she would. And the Devil then offered her, that he would do what
mischief she should require him; and said she must covenant with him that he
must have her soul at the end of one and twenty years, which she granted. And
says, that he came to her about a week after, about ten of the clock in the
night, with a Paper, and asked her whether she were willing to seal the
Covenant, she said she was, then he told her it must be done with her blood,
and so pricked her under her left arm, and made her bleed in the place: a
great lump of flesh did rise, and has increased ever since, and he scribled
therewith. And being demanded what light was there, she answered, none but the
light of the Spirit, and presently he came to bed to her, and had the carnal
knowledge of her, and so did diverse times after, and says, the other two
Spirits did then, and at other times come into her bed also, and sucked upon
other parts of her body where she had Teats. Being demanded the name of the
lesser Spirits, she says the name of the white one was Lilly, and the black
one Priscill; and that the office of Lilly was to hurt man, woman, or coilde;
and the office of Priscill was to hurt Cattle when she desired. And the office
of the man-like Spirit was to lie with her carnally, when and as often as she
desired, and that he did lie with her in that manner very often; and that the
Spirit Lilly, acchrding to the Covenant, did kill the child of Mr. Henry
Bedells of Catworth aforesaid, as she this Examinate desired him to do; and
that she wished him to do the same when she was angry; but does not well
remember for what: and says, that about two or three days before that, she
sent the same Lilly to the said Henry Bedells commanding him to kill him, who
returned and said he had no power: and confesses she sent her said Spirit
another time to do some hurt to Edward Musgrave of Catworth, aforesaid, who
likewise returned answer, he had no power: And that she sent her Spirit
Priscill to kill two horses of the said Edward Musgraves, and one of John
Musgraves, and to kill one Co^ of William Musgraves, and one Cow of Thomas
Th^rps of the same Town, which was done accordingly. And being demanded when
the one and twenty years would be out, she answered about Low-Sunday next, to
the best of her remembrance, and being further demanded what was the reason,
she did duly resort to Church to Sermons, and also to the Ministers house to
repetition, which Mr. Poole the Minister being present did affirm; she says,
she was well pleased with his preaching, and had a desire to be rid of that
unhappy burden which was upon her. And further she says not.

Signum Elizabeth Weed. ROB. BERNARD.


The Examination of John Winnick of Molseworth in the said County, Labourer,
taken upon the 11. day of April, 1646. before Robert Bernard Esquire, one of
His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for this County.
He says, that about 29. years since, the 29th year ending about Midsommer
last past, he being a Batchellour, lived at Thropston with one Bu^eman, who
then kept the Inn at the George, and withal kept Husbandry: this Examinate
being a servant to him in his husbandry, did then loose a p^^^e with 7 s. in
it, for which he suspected one in the Family. He says that on a Friday being
in the barn, making hay-bottles for his horses about noon, swearing, cursing,
raging, and wishing to himself that some wise body (or Wizzard) would help
him to his purse and money again: there appeare^ unto him a Spirit, black and
shaggy, and having paws like a Bear, but in bulk not fully so big as a Coney.
The Spirit asked him what he ailed to be so sorrowful, this Examinate answered
that he had lost a purse and money, and knew not how to come by it again. The
Spirit replied, if you will forsake God and Christ, and fall down and worship
me for your God, I will help you to your purse and money again: This Examinate
said he would, and thereupon fell down upon his knees and held up his hands.
Then the Spirit said, to morrow about this time of the day, you shall find your
purse upon the floor where you are now making bottles, I will send it to you,
and will also come my self. Whereupon this Examinate told the Spirit he would
meet him there, and receive it, and worship him. Whereupon at the time
prefixed, this Examinate went unto the place, and found his purse upon the
floor and took it up, and looking afterward into it, he found there all the
money that was formerly lost: but before he had looked into it, the same Spirit
appears unto him and said, there is your purse and your money in it: and t^en
this Examinate fell down upon his knees and said, my Lord and God I thank
you. The said Spirit at that time brought with him two other Spirits, for
shape, bigness, and color, the one like a white Cat, the other like a gray
Coney: and while this Examinate was upon his knees, the Bear Spirit spoke to
him, saying, you must worship these two Spirits as you worship me, and take
them for your Gods also: then this Examinate directed his body toward them,
and called them his Lords and Gods. Then the Bear Spirit told him that when he
dyed he must have his soul, whereunto this Examinate yielded. He told him
then also that they must suck of his body, to which this Examinate also
yielded, but they did not suck at that time. The Bear Spirit promised him
that he should never want victuals. The Cat Spirit that it would hurt cattle
when he would desire it. And the Coney-like Spirit that it would hurt men when
he desired. The bear spirit told him that it must have some of his blood
wherewith to seal the Covenant, whereunto this Examinate yielded, and then the
bear Spirit leapt upon his shoulder, and pricked him on the head, and (...)
thence took blood: and after thus doing, the said three spirits vanished away.
The next day about noone, the said Spirits came to him while he was in the
field, and told him they were come to suck of his body, to which he yielded,
and they sucked his body at the places where the marks are found, and from that
time to this, they have come constantly to him once every 24. hours, sometimes
by day, and most commonly by night. And being demanded what mischief he caused
any of the said Spirits to do, he answered never any, only he sent his bear
Spirit to provoke the Maidservant of Mr. Say of Molmesworth to steal
victuals for him out of her Masters house, which she did, and this Examinate
received the same.

The mark of John Winnicke. ROE. BERNARD.


The examination of Francis Moore, taken before Nicholas Pedley Esquire; one of his
Majesty's Justices of Peace for this County, the ninth day of April. 1646.
THis Examinate says, that about eight years since she received a little
black puppy from one Margaret Simson of great Catworth, which dog the said
Margaret had in her bed with her, and took it thence when she gave it to the
Examinate: The Examinate further says, that the said Margaret told her, that
she must keep that dog all her life time; and if she cursed any Cattle, and
set the same dog upon them, they should presently dye, and the said Margaret
told her that she had named it already, his name was Pretty.

And the said Examinate further says, that about the same time one goodwife
Weed gave her a white Cat, telling her, that if she would deny God, and affirm
the same by her blood, then whomsoever she cursed and sent that Cat unto, they
should dye shortly after. Whereupon this said Examinate says that she did
deny God, and in affirmation thereof she pricked her finger with a thorn,
whence issued blood, which the Cat presently licked; and the said goood-wife
Weed named the Cat Tissy. And the said Examinate further says, that one
William Foster, about sixteen years since, would have hanged two of her
children for offering to take a piece of bread; and for that cause about six
years since she cursed the said William Foster; whereupon the white Cat went
to him, and he immediately fell sick, and lying in great pain for the space of
seven or eight days, and then dyed: but being demanded what the Cat did to
him, or what she bid it do, she says she remembers not. And she further
says, that about five years since, she keeping Cowes in the field, a Cow of
Edward Hulls went into the grain, she cursed her, and set Pretty on her, and
she swelled and dyed shortly after; and after that a Cow of one Peter Brownes
went into the Corn, and she likewise cursed her, and set Pretty on her, and
she dyed within two or three days after: and she further says, that she
killed the said Dog and Cat about a year since; and yet after that the like
Dog and Cat haunted her familiarly: and when she was apprehended, they crept
under her clothes, and tortured her so that she could not speak, to confess
freely, and more she says not.

The Mark of Frances Moore. Ni. Pedley.


The Information of Peter Slater of Little Catworth in the said County,
Shepherd, taken upon oath, before Robert Bernard Esquire; one of his Majesty's
Justices of Peace for this County, upon the 7th day of April. 1646.
THis Informant says, That his wife dying about one and twenty years since in
Childbed, and one Frances Moore being suspected for a Witch, and in custody:
He went to her upon Friday last, and asked her, if she did his wife any harm?
she answered she did, by cursing her. And he says, his wife did of a sudden
change and dye, after she had lain in a week; and that a little before this
Informants wife was brought to bed, the said Frances Moore falling out with
her, said, she hoped she should never be untwin'd, as this Informant has
since called to mind.

Signum Peter Slater. ROB. BERNARD.


The Information of William Searle of little Catworth, Ye^man taken upon oath
the said day and year.
THis Informant says, he was present when Frances Moore did confess her self
to be a Witch, and that she had done much harm; and amongst other things,
that she sent her Spirit Pretty to this Informants Capons, who did kill them:
and he says, that she coming to bake a loaf at his house about three or
four years since, being denied, the Capons did fall a fluttering, and would
never eat after. Also says, that about the said time, she having a Hog in
his yard, some of his servants set a Dog on the same; for which she said she
would be revenged; and the next day one of his Hogs dyed.

Signum, William Searle. ROB. BERNARD.


The Examination of Elizabeth Chandler of Keiston, Widow, taken the seventh day
of April, 1646. before Robert Bernard and Nicholas Pedley Esquires, two of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace for this County.
She says that something has come to her five times within this little
space, and that there was about a weeks space between their coming to her,
and that the last time was upon Satterday seven-night last in a puffing and
roaring manner. And she says that she found her body sore about the bottom of
her belly after he was gone from her. She says she did never willingly invoke
or employ the same, but has prayed to God to deliver her therfrom. Being
demanded whether she did heretofore strike a child of Goodwife Darnells of
Keiston, named Katherine, or send any Spirit to harm it, she denies the same:
being asked whether she did heretofore use any means to spoil the Furmity of
the said Goodwife Darnell or any other, she answered no; she confesses that
about two years since, having received some hard usage from the said Goodwife
Darnell, by causing her to be duckt, she did heartily desire to be revenged of
her. And about half a year after, and ever since, she has been troubled with
the said roaring things. Being damanded whether she had not two Imps resorted
to her, and that she named the same, calling the one Beelzebub, and the other
Trullibub: She denies the same, only says she did call a logg of wood
Beelzebub, and a stick Trullibub.

Signum, Elizabeth Chandler. OB. BERNARD.


The Information of Mary Darnell the Wife of William Darnell of Keiston,
Blacke-smith; taken upon oath the said seventh day of April, fore the said
Justices.
SHe says that about a year since, she had a daughter named Katherine, which
was then about the age of nine years, which ^hilde was eating Furmity with
another child brought up by Elizabeth Chandler at the house of one William
Browning in Keiston aforesaid: at which time the said two children fell out as
she ^eard. And this Infor^ants child did expres when she came home that
Goodwise Chandler had given it a box of the Ear, and complained of that ^^^e
so long as it lived, which was until that day 3 weeks: and during the time
that it did lie ill, it did squeal and shreek out very often, that Goodwife
Chandler did come to her and would kill her. And she says, that about a year
since she made some Furmity, and bid some Neighbors to the house: but when the
same was taking up, it did continue boiling for an hour after it was taken
from the fire, and she could not keep it from running over, although she put
it into great bowls, tubs, and other large vessels. And she has heard Lewis
Carmell say that she confessed she did cause it to be spoiled by Beelzebub,
because she was not bid to it, nor had any part thereof.

Signum, Mary Darnell. ROB. BERNARD.


The examination of Ell^n the Wife of William Shepherd of Molesworth in the
said County, Labourer, taken the 8th day of April, 1646. before Robert Bernard
and Nicholas Pedley, Esquires, two of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for
the said County.
She says, that about five years since, when she was in her homsted at
Molesworth, swearing and cursing about the discords of her children, there
appeared unto her a Spirit, somewhat like a Rat, but not fully so big, of an
iron-grey color, and said you must go with me, and she said, I will not,
avoid Satan, and thereupon he went away. She says, that within a short time
after, going into the field, cursing, and fretting, and blaspheming, there
appeared three Spirits more with the former in the fashion of Rats, of an
iron-grey, and said, you must forsake God and Christ, and go with me, and take
those spirits for your Gods, and you shall have all happiness, whereunto she
consented: And moreover they said unto her, that when she dyed, they must have
her body and soul, and said, they must have blood from her, which she granted,
and thereupon they sucked her upon and about her hippes, and they have used
very often to come to her since. Being demanded whether ever she employed them
to hurt any reasonable creature or beast, she says she did not: And she says
that some of them did torment her this afternoon, since she was brought to
Huntington to be examined. Being demanded whether she enjoyed any happiness
(as they promised) since they frequented her, she says she did not, but does
intend to leave her former course of cursing and swearing.

Signum, Ellen Shepherd. ROB. BERNARD, NIC. PEDLY.


The information of Thomas Beck of Bythorn in Com. Hunt. Yeoman, against Anne
Desborough, taken upon oath before Nicholas Pedley Esquire, one of his
Majesty's Justices of Peace for the said County, the 9th day of April, 1646.
THis Informant says, that Anne Desborough Widow of Bythorn aforesaid, being
apprehended upon suspicion of being a witch, on the 8th day of this present
April, he in the presence of Master Coysh and others, heard the said Anne
Desborough (in answer to questions asked her) freely confess, that about 30.
years since, there appeared unto her a thing somewhat bigger then a mouse, of
a brown color, when she lived at Titsmarsh in the County of Northampton, she
being in bed and asleep, which nipped her on the breast and awakened her, then
it told her that it must have part of her soul: she prayed thsn to God, and it
left her at that time, and the said Informant heard the said Anne further say,
that about five or six days after, the same mouse appeared again to her with
another much like the former, it being a little less then the former, and had
a white belly: then the mouse that came first said, we must abide with you,
and suck your blood, she said that they should. About three days after both
the mice came to her again, and told her that she must forsake God and Christ:
and when she dyed, they must have her soul, to all which she yielded: this
Informant says further, that he heard the said Anne confess that she named
one of the mice Tib, which promised her to hurt men, and she named the other
Jone, which promised her to hurt Cattle when she wished it: and after the
third time they kept not away from her above 24. hours together, but did
frequent her, and familiarly suck ^n her body, until she was apprehended.

Thomas Beck. NIC: PEDLEY.


April the 8. day, Anno 1646.
ANne Desborough of Bythorn in the County of Huntington, confesses, that about
30. years since, the first week of Clean Lent, there appeared unto her a
thing somewhat bigger then a Mouse, of a brown color, and of the likeness of
a mouse. This was while she lived at Tichmarsh in the County of Northampton:
she being there in bed, and in a dream, the said likeness then gave her a
nip, and thereby awakened her out of her dream, and then told her (when she
was awakened) that it must have part of her soul; whereupon she was in a great
fear, and gave him no answer, but prayed to God, and thereupon it vanished
away from her. About five days after, the same Mouse appeared to her again,
bringing with it another Mouse, about the bigness of an ordinary Mouse, or
very little bigger, brown like the former, save only that this latter had some
white about the belly, whereas the former was all brown. Then the Mouse that
first appeared, said, we must suck of your body. She yielded to them, and
said, they should: upon her yie^ding they went to her, and sucked of her body,
where the marks are found. The bigger mouse she called Tib, and the lesser
Jone. Tib told her that she must forsake God and Christ, and take them for her
Gods: telling her that when she dyed, they must have her soul, to all which
she yielded. Tib promised her to hurt men if she should desire. Jone promised
her to hurt Cattle if she should desire. Within two days after they appeared
again: and ever after till she was discovered, they appeared once every 24.
hours.

This the said Desbourough confessed on the first said day in the presence of me

Joseph Coysh Minister of the Word.

The Examination of Jane Wallis of Keiston in the County of Huntington Spinster
taken the 16th day of April, 1646. before Sir Robert Osborn Knight, one of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of Huntington.
THis Examinate says, as she was making of her bed in her Chamber, there
appeared in the shape of a man in black clothes and blackish clothes about
six weeks past, and bid her good morrow, and she asked what his name was, and
he said his name was Blackeman, and asked her if she were poor, and she said
I; then he told her he would send one Grissell and Greedigut to her, that shall
do any thing for her: She looking upon him, saw he had ugly feet, and then
she was very fearful of him for that he would seem sometimes to be tall, and
sometimes less, and suddenly vanished away.

And being demanded whether he lay with her, she said he would have lain with
her, but she would not suffer him: and after Blackeman was departed from her,
within three or 4. days, Grissell and Greedigut came to her, in the shapes of
dogs with great brisles of hogs hair upon their backs, and said to her
they were come from Blackeman to do what she would command them, and did ask
her if she did want any thing, and they would fetch her any thing: and she
said she lacked nothing: then they prayed her to give them some victuals, and
she said she wa^ poor and had none to give them, and so they departed: Yet the
confessed that Blackman, Grissell, and Greedigut diverse times cames to her
afterward, and brought her two or three shillings at a time, and more says
not.

Signum Jane Willis.

April 14. 1646.
IOANE WALLIS confessed to me, and John Guylet that she had ^^ree Spirits, she
called them Black-man, Grissel, and Gredigul, and that Blackman gave her the
other two, and told her they should do any thing for her that she should
desire: she said Blackman came first to her, about a twelve-moneth since, like
a man something ancient, in blackish clothes, out he had ugly feet uncovered.
Sometimes she said it was longer since he first came to her, and ever since he
appeared in the like shape, but Grissell, and Greedigut did come in several
shapes, yet most commonly like hounds with Brissells on their backs. I asked
her what use she put them to, and if any of them had the use of her body
besides sucking; she said he would have had once, but she denied him: then
presently of her self she said, if I would not tell, she would confess, but
she hoped I would love her never the worse, and then she said that Blackman
had the use of her body once, twice, and sometimes thrice in a week, but the
other two only sucked her where her marks are found; she said Blackman never
sucked her; she would not confess that she ever sent them to do any harm,
but said the filthy rough Blackman would send them; but what hurt they did she
confessed not to us. I asked her to what purpose she set Gris. and Greed. suck
her if she made no use of them? she said, they would sometimes bring her money,
two or three shillings at a time, and that was all they did for her; and once
they told her they robbed a man, and pulled him from his horse, and brought her
some money.

All this she confessed to me before Dinner, and after Dinner she affirmed it
all to be truth, but in the repeating she would seem to forget Gris. and Greed.
names, but always affirmed the same of Blackman; She said, she first would
have had them sucked her breasts, but they would not, and chose the place
themselves.

Edw. Ma. Wingfeild. John Guylatte.


The Examination of John Clarke Junior, of Keiston, in the County of Hunt.
Labourer, taken before me John-Castell, Esquire, one of his Majesty's Justices
of the Peace for the said County, the 2d. day of May. 1646.
WHo says, That true it is that he did overtake one man and three women upon
the Sabbath day last was seven-night, between Stanwick and Raunce, being about
three miles from Keistone, whither this Examinate was going. But this Examinate
denies that he ever told or said that he had any marks cut off, or that he had
any place of meeting with any Witches, or that he had any consultation, or made
any Compact with the Devil, or ever knew what belonged to any such matter. And
further says not.

JOHN CASTLE.

The Information of John Brown of Raunce in the County of Northampton, Tailor,
taken upon oath the second day of May, 1646. before me John Castle, Esquire; one
of his Majesty's Justices the Peace for the County of Hunt.
WHo says, That upon the Sabbath day last was seven-night, he (this Informant)
coming from Higham-Fer^is to Raunce in the County of Northampton aforesaid,
where he quartereth, and sitting down by Stanwick Towns end, saw one coming
from Artlebroward; who when he came near to this Informant, this Informant
said, I have staid for you a long time; but he answered, I saw you not all the
way I came. Then this Informant said to him, from whence came you? who
answered, that he came from his Uncles at Artlebrow: Then this Informant asked
him who was his Uncle? and he said one Clarke: this Informant asked him, if
he were not Clarks son of Keiston, he answered, he was: And then this
Informant asked him, What haste he was in? who said he was in haste; for his
Father and Mother were accused for Witches, and that he himself had been
searched; and this Informant answered, and so have I. Then Clarke asked this
Informant, whether any thing were found about him, or not? he (this Informant)
answered that they said there were marks: Clarke said again, had you no more
wit but to have your marks found? I cut off mine three days before I was
searched. And then after some further communication past concerning who
searched them, Clark said to this Informant, I do not believe you are a Witch,
for I never saw you at our meetings: who answered, that perhaps their meetings
were at several places, and so fell out and parted.

JOHN CASTLE.

Who desires to be resolved in cases of ^onscience touching Witches and
Witch-crafts, let them read that learned discourse of Mr. JOHN GAULS, lately
set forth, and Printed for Richard Clutterbuck STATIONER.

FINIS.

