A SUMMARY DISCOURSE concerning the work of PEACE ECCLESIASTICAL, How it may
concur with the aim of a civil confederation amongst PROTESTANTS: Presented
to the consideration of my Lord Ambassador Sr. THOMAS ROW, etc. at HAMBVRG,
in the year M DC XXXIX. By Mr. JOHN DURY, A faithful and indefatigable
Solicitour of the Gospel of Peace amongst Protestants: Now put to the Press
for the information of such as are able to countenance, and willing to help
forward the Negotiation to some issue.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by Roger Daniel, Printer to the Universitie, Ann. Dom. 1641.

JOHN 3. 20, 21. Every one that does evil hates the light, neither comes to
the light, lest his deeds should be reproved.

But he that does truth comes to the light, that his deeds may be made
manifest that they are wrought in God.

To the Right Honorable Sr. THOMAS ROW, Knight, Chancellor of the most
Honorable Order of the Garter, and Ambassador extraordinary for his Majesty,
unto the King of Denmark, and Princes of Germany, etc.
Right Honorable;
IT is easy to discourse of a good business, but betwixt doing and saying
there is a great deal of difference. And although I labor to be rather
effectual then talkative, nevertheless sometimes discourses are requisite to
satisfy such as must hear and judge of the work. What satisfaction this may
give, I know not; but I can conjecture that few will be pleased with it, except
those which really love the work for it self. And although I did not intend to
be half so large when I first set pen to paper, as now I find my self to have
been, yet I am not satisfied in mine own work, because I see that whiles I
study to avoid prolixity I do not descend unto such particulars as Judicious
Statesmen will perhaps look after in these endeavors concerning the outward
ways of proceeding, and as learned Divines will reflect upon concerning the
inward manner of reconciling men's judgments, and working peaceable
dispositions upon their affections. But my Apology is, that particulars depend
upon circumstances, and that the variety of circumstances is almost infinite:
Therefore not so much to be discoursed of, as to be observed in the action, and
made use of toward the effect. Neither is it fit to lay open in a discourse
communicable to every one the particularities which pertain to the undertaking,
and must go along with the execution. It sufficieth in this case to make the
necessity and possibility of things intended to appear, which I hope is done,
if not so fully as could have been, yet in some satisfactory measure toward
such as can conceive and make use of general rules applyable to cases, which
every one acquainted with the nature of public affairs easily can imagine and
represent unto himself. Now the chief end for which I have put my self upon
this discourse is, that I should at this occasion sum up mine own thoughts to
discover the same unto your Lordship, and to let others see my way, who perhaps
will concur to further it in time and place convenient. For seeing the work
is in it self most necessary, and for the Protestant cause most profitable, and
neither impossible nor so difficult as most men that have not tried the ford,
as I have done, imagine it to be; therefore I would not have any to despair of
it, nor give me occasion to complain of this age, that after so many years
unblamable solicitation, I have found small reality of assistance in a public
work of so great necessity. The jealousies and fears of the times, I know,
occasionate this: But as for me, I have once for all by oath unto Almighty God
renounced all by-respects in this business; and no man shall ever be so
jealous over me for outward circumstances, as I shall be inwardly over my self,
lest the simplicity of my mind in these purposes be tainted with worldly hopes
or fears; against which as the traitors of good counsel, I have guarded my
spirit in working it into a temper, wherein I may seriously take pleasure with
the Apostle in all adversities, and rejoice in crosses and in 2. Cor. 12. 10.
straights, that when I shall be (as I foresee I may be) deserted, neglected,
despised and laughed at, for embracing (as it were alone) so vast a business,
I may then endure it patiently, and without murmuring at my ease rely upon Gods
providence in it, in respect I know that he is able to show his strength in my
weakness. And if he will not comfort me with the wished for success, yet I
shall not faint in well-doing, because these general grounds and rules to walk
by are able to support me (if my heart be upright to the work) in all
difficulties. Neither is it requisite for me to set forth and commend this
matter, nor will I use persuasive arguments to induce men to give assistance in
it: for I desire the help of none, but of such as love the work for it self,
and who are able either of themselves, or at least from these general
discoveries, to satisfy their thoughts in the possibility of more particular
undertakings. Few men are so judicious to consider the consequence, and so
cordial to assist the prosecuting of these endeavors, as your Lordship has
always been. I speak this in true simplicity of heart, as knowing, from the
real testimonies of your Patronage unto the work, the thing which I say.
Therefore as your Honor was the first encourager and supporter of me at the
beginning of this Negotiation in Prussia, so now at this almost full period
thereof, after this trial of my constancy, sincerity, and unblamablenesse
therein, I am persuaded your favors will not be failing before it appear what
preparatives may be wrought further in these Quarters, and in the Church of
Denmark, where hitherto nothing has been attempted. Who knows what
opportunities time will produce hereafter? Periander, one of the renowned seven
Sages of Greece, bids us, Expect the occasion: and the (...). Libr. 43.
reason of this precept may be taken from Dion, who says, Quod plura negotia
opportunitate occasionum quam viribus recte sunt confecta. Thus then if I may
but go on without noise in mine own private slow pace, I shall rest contented:
for I know that this seed must not only be sown in the hearts of men at its
own times, but also lie there a season and rot before it will spring up and
fructify. The Prophet Isaiah in a case of this nature says, He that believes
Esaias. 28. 16.
shall not make haste: Now I do believe; therefore I am resolved not to make
haste. Only two things I could wish for; First, that all outward helps be not
withdrawn from my subsistence; Secondly, that the favorable access which I
have had unto some eminent Divines of Great Britain, which are not unwilling
to take some spiritual tasks in hand concerning this subject may be still
confirmed. If these wishes cannot be obtained, I confess the case will be so
much the more difficult, but yet no worse then either is preconceived or has
been experimented. For in both these I have been at as low an ebb when I first
did begin this Negotiation as I am likely ever to be. And now seeing I have
served out my apprenticeship, I hope I shall not prove less industrious and
happy at the latter end in continuing my trade, then at first I was in learning
how to begin the same. It is some advantage in framing a resolution to have
experience of extremities wherein Gods providence has been seen. I can desire
no more to be at rest in respect of future contingents, and in respect of
present matters, I thank God for contentedness. I will make no further
preliminary discourses; for I fear me these have been too long. Therefore I
intend now to come to my proper subject, which at this time is,

A general Discourse touching a concurrence of the work of Peace
Ecclesiastical with the aim of a civil Confederation amongst Protestants.
IN this matter two things are to be considered: First, What the concurrence
The heads of this deliberation
of endeavors toward the work of Ecclesiastical reconcilement may contribute
unto the aim of a civil Confederation. Secondly, How this concurrence may be
set a work most effectually and profitably toward the scope which ought to be
intended in such a negotiation.

Concerning the first.
THe spiritual work of Ecclesiastical reconciliation Are described,
is a negotiation whereby the spirits of spiritual persons are wrought upon by
spiritual means, tending to induce them to peaceable dispositions toward those
with whom they are at variance for matters of Religion.

The aim of a civil Confederation, I suppose to be a purpose of joining the
Protestant States together in counsels and actions of peace and war, tending to
their mutual preservation. That these two And their concurrence supposed.
businesses may concur as well as Religion and civil prudence are able to
stand together, is out of all doubt: but what the first may contribute unto the
last, and how the concurrence must be framed, are two things which are now to
be thought upon. And to this it is needless to reckon up all the benefits
which spiritual concord brings unto the Church of God, and all that
happiness which redoundeth from the blessed and peaceable estate of the Church
to the Commonwealth, of which a volume might be written: But it will suffice
at this time to intimate, that whatsoever the soul of a man is able to
contribute unto his body, the same in a proportionable way may be contributed
by the work of spiritual reconciliation of souls unto the civil Confederation
of the bodies of Protestant States. And to show this briefly, we will make the
comparison only in two things, which all Naturalists confess to be effects of
the souls of men toward their bodies. Namely, First, that the soul frames the
body and makes it up for it self, so that it receives no true natural life
and being without the soul. Secondly, That when the body is framed, then the
same soul still supporteth the being thereof, so that without the continuance
of the soul therewith it is neither permanent in life nor in substance. Both
these effects must flow from the souls of Clergy men, by the work of
spiritual reconcilement unto the aim of a civil confederation, as really and
truly in the body of the Protestant State, as they do in this outward world
from living souls unto their natural bodies. For neither can a civil
confederation be truly framed amongst Protestants, nor when it is framed can it
be faithfully maintained, except the foundation thereof be laid in the minds of
the Clergy. The Which is proved
ground of this position is clear from reason backed with experience, which
has taught us for the space of these hundred years bypast, that except the
schism Ecclesiastical and causes thereof be taken out of the way, it will not
be possible either to make a true and constant league, or to confirm it when it
is made. For it is evident that the leagues of Protestants, By Experience,
which by reason of necessity and imminent dangers were hitherto made up, have
been continually broken to pieces by reason of their differences in Religion,
which bred jealousies, from whence their counsels were distracted, and their
spirits alienated one from another. The causes of these jealousies And by
Reason.
come partly from the very nature and property of all rents and controversies
about spiritual matters, which command so powerfully over the soul, that all
other affections must stoop thereunto; partly from the hot and unreasonable
disposition of most Lutheran Divines, who by clamours and partial practices
cease not either to prevent all manner of conjunction, in maintaining that it
is not lawful to confederate with Heretics, or else to break it off, and
weaken the effect of it when it is brought to pass, by reason of the same
position. For this position stiffly maintained makes the breach to become a
matter of conscience: For when the one side (as the Lutherans do) cease not
to charge the other with the crime of heresy, and the other side (as the
Reformed do) uses no sufficient means to take away this imputation, it must
needs follow that such Rulers of State as give credit to their Clergy, and are
religiously set, must be possessed with an averseness from those whom they
imagine to be guilty of so great a crime. From hence then it is manifest how
necessary this work of spiritual reconciliation is unto the Protestant cause:
For if the preservation both of Church and State ought to be a matter of
necessity, and if this preservation cannot be hoped for without a civil
league, or a civil league either well framed and faithfully kept afoot except
such imputations as these be taken out of the way, it follows that the one
can have no being without the other. Neither can indeed a blessing from heaven
be expected upon the civil league without the other reconcilement: because it
is just before God to divide the hearts and counsels of those which are not
confederates together in him by his truth, chiefly then, when for his truths
sake they are set upon, and know themselves bound in conscience to prefer the
care of Religion to all other intentions. From whence we see that the benefit
which may redound from the bond of Ecclesiastical peace toward the civil
league is the greatest that can be thought on to conserve State and Religion:
So that to aim at a temporal league without the spiritual reconcilement of
affections in a religious way, is to undertake a work which God will never
bless, and which will betray the cause for which it is undertaken. Thus then I
conclude, That it will be a matter of absolute necessity to make these
endeavors to concur together.

Concerning the second.
BUt how must this concurrence be framed? what Points to be considered in the
second Head.
is to be observed in the conjunction of these two endeavors, that the end
thereof may be obtained? I suppose this question will be answered if these
things were opened: First, What each of these works is, being considered in it
self: Secondly, What relation each work has to the other: Thirdly, What
considerable circumstances are to be taken notice of, to discern what may
chiefly be done in the spiritual part of the work at this time: And lastly,
What particular endeavors may further the joint effect thereof in this
negotiation.

1. Of the properties of each work by it self.
THe properties chiefly observable in the work of Ecclesiastical reconciliatio^
are these, That it must be wrought by spiritual men, by spiritual means, in
such a manner as may neither scandalize the weak, nor give advantage to the
captious, and toward such a scope as may be free from the imputation of all
manner of partiality, and answerable to the edification of all men that make
profession of Christianity. This scope of the work being well conceived will
determine all the rest of the properties thereof, because they are and must be
subordinate unto it: Therefore we must begin with it. And to do so, what if we
should say thus, That the scope of Ecclesiastical What the scope of
Ecclesiastical reconcilement is,
reconcilement, sought for amongst Protestants, ought to be the establishment
and increase of godly and brotherly love, between themselves and all other men,
through the common and public acknowledgement, profession and practice of that
truth and those duties which are necessary and sufficient for all souls to
attain thereby unto salvation. From And to whom it may reach,
this scope none are expressly to be excluded of whom there is any hope: For
although in the work wherein Protestants seek to be at peace amongst
themselves, their immediate aim is their mutual edification, lest continuing
to bite and devour one another they should be in the end consumed one of
another, yet their chief and last intention ought not to rest in their own
particular benefit, but should be raised to an universal good and upright
meaning toward all men that can possibly receive it, or may become willing to
partake thereof. Thus then, the passionate affection of some which are chiefly
set upon the work rather for a private advantage, and to exclude their
professed adversaries from all means of Christian unity and peace, then to win
and save all, is not to be allowed of; because in true Christianity there is
no partiality, but the good, which we for our own selves seek in Christ Jesus,
ought to be made, so far as in us lies, common to all men, and we in seeking
it ought not to intend our selves only, but should crave it of God and apply
it also unto others. For this was the mind of Christ in procuring all his
Fathers benefits unto us, as the Apostle shows, Romans 15. v. 1, to 8. and
Phil. 2. v. 1, to 9. When this scope is really intended and well scanned, it
will discover And what men and means must be used to attain unto it,
what kind of spiritual men ought to go about it, and chiefly to be dealt
withal in it; what kind of dispositions and learning they ought to have; what
kind of means must be made use of, as well in dealing with men that are averse
from peace, as also in rectifying the effect thereof with such as are
peaceable; and lastly, what cautions ought to be observed in the manner of
proceeding, to make use of these means, and to ratify that effect, that the
inconveniences of two extremes may be avoided; namely of the weak Christians on
all sides, lest they stumble and be offended at these proceedings; and of the
malignant adversaries, lest they take occasion to disgrace the work, and speak
evil of the truth of godliness and of all Religion. Of all these properties
belonging to this work and arising from the main scope thereof, much may be
said, and must be thought on hereafter, when it shall be seasonable to speak of
particulars. Therefore at this present we will not go further in this subject,
then to take notice, That such men are only fit to be set upon this work which
have universal thoughts, and are not wedded to any singular course of this
age; That such means must be applied to the work which in theorie and practice
are undoubted fundamentals of salvation, and clearly known in the consciences
of all honest men to be matters without all controversy; And that the manner
of applying these means to the work to ratify the effect thereof, must be
fitted, First, toward the And how they must be applied in the work.
weaker sort of Christians, with such a stooping unto them in true
carfulness, lovingnesse, and lowliness of spirit, and with such an
accommodation of all matters unto their capacity by the clear insinuations and
fit gradations of proposals, that they may rest satisfied and no ways troubled
in conscience at doubts which will be incident; Then in the second place, That
toward the captious evil-willers of the work, the manner of proceeding must be
with such evidence and demonstration of truths proposed, and without all
offensivenesse in proposing the same unto them, that if it be possible they
also may either be gained, or else made ashamed of their malitiousnesse, when
they shall not be able to find any advantage against the proceedings. These are
summarily the properties and conditions requisite to attain the effect of
Ecclesiastical reconciliation, if it be considered by it self.

The properties of the other work, being also looked upon in it self, seem
chiefly to be these: That, it The properties of the civil consideration,
being once undertaken by faithful and worthy Statesmen by means of supreme
authority, it must be brought to pass and confirmed in such a manner as may
neither prejudge the fundamental reasons of any particular State, nor give any
advantage to the common enemies to discover and cross the counsels thereof;
and for such an end as is justifiable before all men, in the way of conscience,
of reason, and of natural defense. Which being done, a course also must be
taken by good correspondencie to maintain the league once confirmed. Now from
this end of the league, all the properties requisite in the Authors, Means,
and Manner of proceeding can be gathered, because the properties of every thing
intended define the middle causes fit to purchase the same. If then the end of
this negotiation must be to And the scope thereof.
stir up a necessary mutual care, and to establish a conjunction of
endeavors amongst all Protestants for the preservation of the liberties and
rites civil, religious and Ecclesiastical, of Protestants in Germany, lest
the house of Austria lay for it self a foundation of an universal Monarchy in
their ruins; then it may be conceived by what persons and means the
confederation may be sought for, how it should be brought to pass, and what
will be requisite to confirm it amongst those that have interest in the cause;
which are all such to whom the house of Austria is or will be either
intolerable or dreadful in these present conquests. Concerning which things it
is out of mine element to speak at large: And therefore I will rest in these
generalities, which I mention only to intimate that it is not only possible
to frame and confirm such a league amongst Protestants, if they be not
altogether insensible of their own dangers, but also feasible enough and not
very difficult, if the true relation which the one work must have to the other
in their necessary concurrence be rightly observed, and instruments employed
about the same.

11. Of the relation which the one work has to the other.
IN the beginning was showed that the civil league depends upon the work of
Ecclesiastical reconcilement, as the body does upon the soul: Now we may say
on the other side again, That the Ecclesiastical work depends upon the
civil confederation, as the soul upon the body. For indeed betwixt soul and
body there is a mutual dependence; so that the one is not so apparently
subsisting without the other: Therefore it may be concluded, That except the
body of a civil confederation be intended and sought for, the work of
Ecclesiastical reconcilement will never come to a public and visible estate
of ratification, no more then our souls are to be seen without their natural
bodies; yet because the souls of men have by themselves also a being and
subsistence without their bodies, it is manifest that spiritual things which
have a relation unto men's souls ought not to be suspended from their bodyly
conditions, but may and should be sought for by themselves. From whence it
follows that the work of spiritual reconcilement should be agitated,
although the other be not intended; that yet this must not be made an appendix
thereof, but taken up for it self, as a business standing upon its own
principles, tending to its own end (which is the advancement of Gods kingdom)
and which may run along in its own channels together with the other work, even
as the arteries, which are conduits of the vital spirits, concur together in
one body with the veins thereof, which contain the mass of blood. I suppose
then that the Authors of both works, their endeavors, means and manner of
proceedings, ought to be not only conjoint, but also in some cases dependant
each upon other; yet so, that there be no confusion and commixture of the chief
aims, of the principles of the fundamental proceedings, by which each work is
to be perfected. For each work having its own aim, its own principles and ways
distinctly to be used, in and for its self, must needs have also its own
Authors and Actours distinguished, which nevertheless must not only
correspond together and do things with mutual knowledge, but also assist and
help one another with advice and address in matters of moment, that when
either hopes and likelihoods appear both may know each others advantages; or
when difficulties either way are incident, preventions may be both ways used,
lest from the circumstances of the one some inconveniences might reflect upon
the other. Therefore the undertakers of both works, before they enter in
agitation, ought to preconceive their plots, and make an agreement together
concerning the manner of their relative proceedings, chiefly in those cases
wherein it may be conjectured that jealousies, taken up by others from matters
which happily will fall out on either side, may cause a difficulty in both
works. For if either the instrument of a civil league should agitate too much
with Divines (or with Statesmen) the work of Ecclesiastical reconcilement, or
the undertaker of the spiritual work should show himself too forward in
matters of State, both might incur the suspicion of not dealing sincerely;
because the Clergy might be jealous that something might be intended to their
prejudice, if matters of Religion should be too far meddled into by
Statesmen; and the Statesmen might suspect the spiritual Agent, that his
chief and real aim was not a true composition of differences in Religion, but
rather some pretext subtly made use of to cover some other worldly intention,
which would mar all, and make both them and their Divines shie and fearful
to meddle in the one or in the other business. Now to avoid this and many
other inconveniences which might be reckoned up, each must agitate his own
work, and yet not without the foreknowledge and preconsultation with the
other; which suffices to frame a fit concurrence at incident occasions of
special moment, which being openly countenanced by authority will make a deep
impression upon men's affections. And to this effect also the most observable
circumstances of times, places, and persons must be preconceived, and a course
laid how to make use of the same as well jointly as severally.

III. Of the considerable circumstances of the spiritual work, to discern what
may be done in it at this time.
THe possibility of all effects arises from the fitness of means to be used
toward the same: The fitness of means consists in the properties of
circumstances wherewith they are clothed. These circumstances are chiefly time,
place, and persons: Therefore to see the possibility of this spiritual work,
these circumstances are to be considered. The seasonablenesse of this time to
agitate in these matters arises two ways; partly from the extreme dangers and
distractions of the Churches and of the minds of men, partly from the
preparations made already toward the accomplishment of the work in the spirits
of those that can best help to bring it to pass. The first circumstance of
this time makes this business to be a matter of absolute necessity; the
second shows the possibility thereof. The distractions and dangers of
Protestants are almost infinite, they cannot be reckoned up: for what Church is
it that is not divided from its neighbor and subdivided in it self? where is
true brotherly love without respect of persons and partiality? where is a true
care for godliness and religiousnesse considered in it self, without siding to
this or that faction? what is become of the Communion of Saints tending to
uphold the duties of charity and mutual edification? Is not all this gone and
lost? and is not all manner of bitterness in disputes, raylings, and
reproaches, and all kind of disorder, indiffidences, factions and plots
undertaken one against another come in stead thereof? Hence it is that the
peace of the Churches being disturbed with violent affections and uncharitable
practices, there is not only amongst Divines a breach in communion about
spiritual matters, but also that mutual amity and fidelity which is requisite
in Statesmen, for the concourse of Councels in common affairs of a public
nature, is decayed and broken all to pieces. Thus they are become a prey unto
their adversaries. And although they can perceive that their strength is almost
broken, yet they cannot join in counsel for their mutual preservation, but
whilst the Austrians are before, which devour Protestants with open mouth, and
false brethren behind, which undermine their counsels, their heads are brought
very low, their state is overthrown, their Church is darkened, their land is
burnt up, and the people thereof is as the fuel to the fire; yet for all that,
scarce any Protestant Divine or Statesman spares his brother, but he
snatcheth on the right hand and is still hungry, and eats on the left hand
and is not yet satisfied: every man eats the flesh of his own arm, or
strengthens his adversaries with the overthrow of his brethren; Manasseh is
against Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasseh, and they both are against Judah,
and what the end of this will be God alone does know. Neither is there any that
seems hitherto to have taken this matter so seriously to heart as the
importance thereof does require: for although these thoughts of Reconcilement
are now become of absolute necessity, yet many do not apprehend them to be of
such a nature. Nevertheless to me sure it is, that if the desire to preserve
both Church and State be at this time necessary to a conscionable and honest
mind, and if this desire cannot be attained without a confederation and
conjunction of divided spirits, nor this conjunction either be procured or
faithfully maintained except the ground thereof be laid in the hearts of
Clergymen; then it follows, that both to facilitate and to confirm the
civil confederation, this work of Ecclesiastical Reconcilement is not only
seasonable, but of absolute necessity to be undertaken; and although there were
none other circumstance but this to move an honest heart to think upon this
matter, this alone ought to suffice. But besides this there is another
circumstance of seasonablenesse arising from the preparatives made already in
the minds of men toward the effect of reconciliation; for it is most true,
that all men's thoughts in all Churches and States are already stirred up and
wrought upon in some measure to this effect, insomuch that there is scarce any
but he has some impression concerning the effect of this Negotiation. True it
is that some fear it, some hope for it, some doubt what to think of it, and
some laugh at it; all these howsoever well or ill affected, are already
prepared in some sort unto the further agitation of the business, for
whatsoever the disposition of their mind be, it is no great matter for this
time present, because it suffices to make the work seasonable, that there be
some kind of real impressions and thoughts reflecting upon it. If their
impressions and thoughts be good, it is so much the better; if they be
indifferent, yet because they are thoughts of such a work, the mind is disposed
toward the effect thereof, which will not be found unseasonable unto them; if
they be rather evil then good, that is, if they either despise it as a matter
too meanly undertaken by one of no appearance, or despair of it as a matter of
too great difficulty, yet it is not unseasonable to deal with them in it,
although it were for none other cause then to rectify their judgments in
these conceptions, which concern both the manner of proceeding, which is
thought to be disproportionate unto such an end, and the matter which is
thought to be of so great weight that it cannot be heaved; if at last they be
wholly evil, that is, if they fear either the effect of peace it self, or my
person and negotiation in it, then it is most of all not seasonable only, but
even necessary also to deal with them, that their needless fears may be
corrected and better impressions wrought upon them, lest they be moved through
jealousies for sinister and private ends to hinder these proceedings, either by
neglect of duties requisite, or by cross courses secretly or openly taken in
hand. Thus seeing men's spirits are wakened up, and a real expectation is
raised in their minds of some thing which may be done in this work, it is
seasonable to entertain the same by such a continuance of agitation in this
matter which may rectify the evil, prevent the worst, and strengthen the good
affections. And thus much of the seasonablenesse of the time. The consideration
of the place is of no small moment in the production of all things, because it
is a matrix wherein the seed of every thing is conceived, which most commonly
according to its fit or unfit disposition either marreth or makes the shape of
that which is brought forth. Therefore if this place, I mean Hamburgh and
Lubeck, be rightly considered, it will be found in two respects most fit for
the agitation of this work: First, in respect of the situation, that these
cities are in the midst of all Protestant States, and most convenient to
entertain correspondence with all others of both sides, not only because they
are as a center amongst the rest, but chiefly because they have perpetual
occasions of conveyance to all quarters, so that at one time information may be
given to all parties of every occurrence that may fall out. Secondly, in
respect that these are free cities, not only free for all persons to resort
unto safely from all quarters, without all jealousies and outward respects
prejudicial unto the work, but also fitted with certain Divines of special
use, by whose means (if they be once gained to the cause) all the rest of
Germany may without all difficulty be wrought upon. Lastly, the persons
considerable and fit to be made use of both here and elsewhere, are all such
Divines as follow one John Arnd, formerly general Superintendent at Luneburgh,
who has labored with good effect to draw the minds of Lutheran Divines from
disputes, unto the thoughts of a godly life. These men are all zealous for
peace, and spare not to bear witness against the unconscionable and partial
dealings of many of their own Clergy. And besides these, other known prudent
and moderate men who are in eminent places of authority can be made use of,
amongst which the Lord Chancellor of Denmark Frise, and the Lord Chancellor
of Holstein Ravenelow, and my Lord Rosencrants, and others as well here in
Hamburg and Lubeck and elsewhere, can be set a work toward their own Clergy
to take off the edge of their spirits in many things; with most of whom
acquaintance is either made already, or may be made by fit address hereafter.

IV. Of the particular intentions and endeavors which I ought to undertake to
advance the effect of these Negotiations.
When I begin to think of my self, and of the endeavors which I have already
undertaken, and which I ought and may further undertake, two things represent
themselves unto me: First, what the inward purposes and resolutions of my mind
ought to be toward the work. Secondly, what outward undertakings must follow
thereupon to gain the effect intended. As concerning the resolutions and
purposes of my mind, they were settled before I came out of Sweden in these
particulars: First, that I should never leave the thoughts of this work so long
as I live. Secondly, that I should intend it for it self, and keep it free from
being subordinate to particular politic ends. Thirdly, that I should follow
none other ways in prosecuting of it, then such as are most answerable to the
Gospel of Christ, and may be made use of without all occasion of dispute,
strife and scandal. To these and to some other resolutions subordinate to
these, I am bound by a solemn vow, which vow cannot be retracted nor altered.
Therefore if I purpose to keep my promise conscionably, I am bound to dedicate
my self wholly unto the effect of the work, with a purpose not only to
entertain my self speculatively with this object of meditation, but rather to
endeavor effectually the work it self, at least so long as I can by any
lawful means possibly subsist to proceed in it. I suppose then I have here a
task for my whole life, and therefore will make no haste to rid my self of it,
nor ever think of being weary, or of taking any other thing in hand, which is
not either collaterally helpful or subordinate unto it. For when I enter
seriously within my self to consider what course of life I must from henceforth
follow, that I may be able to perform the vows and promises which I have made
unto Almighty God, I find that I must resolve before all things to be no more
mine own man in any thing, but a servant to the work and to such as will help
to further it; whereupon this consequence follows, that as I must resign and
give up my self unto the work, so I must resolve to be at full liberty and
free from all other occasions, obligations and relations which may divide and
distract my thoughts from it.

Having thus settled the main business which does concern my conscience, when
I reflect afterward upon particulars, I find, that to concur effectually with
the work of a civil Confederation, I must propose unto my self this distinct
scope, namely, to labor to dispose the spirits of the Clergy of both sides,
but chiefly of the Lutherans, to have good and moderate thoughts of their
neighbors and friends the Reformed Churches. For indeed, though both sides be
in some things faulty, yet the chief fault lies in the spirits of some
Lutheran Divines, who either through ignorant zeal or forwardly ends disturb
the peace of Protestants. And the way which they take to do it is none other
but a pretext of maintaining truth against Calvinists (under which name all
Reformed Churches are meant) who are said to be guilty of most damnable
heresies. Therefore to moderate this untoward affection this pretext must needs
be taken away: And to do it, the chief Lutheran Divines must be made really
sensible that the Reformed Churches are not guilty of heresy, but are in very
deed true Evangelicall Christians and sound Professors of the Gospel; which
thing although it be no difficult matter in it self to be made good, yet it
will prove a task of no easy performance to make Lutherans so far obliged to
take notice of this truth, that they shall not be able any more to decline the
acknowledgement thereof. Now to gain this purpose, some treaty must needs be
intended with the Lutheran Clergy, and it must be a peaceable treaty void of
all occasion of jealousy and offense; but how this treaty may be drawn on, by
what means and manner of proceedings it must be prosecuted, How the
preparations thereof may be negotiated, How the difficulties which are or will
be incident to these proceedings may be overcome, are things now to be thought
upon, before the work it self be further undertaken.

Concerning the way how to draw on insensibly these treaties.
I Have hitherto professed my self like a public Solicitor of peaceable
counsels betwixt both parties, to see what good inclinations either were or
might be wrought upon the spirits of Clergy men in this age, toward their
mutual edification in duties belonging to the Communion of Saints. How much my
solicitation has stirred them up to these thoughts, and how far they are
prepared to admit or not to admit of peaceable propositions, it is not fit for
me to declare; I hope hereafter the effect it self shall speak. But seeing I am
resolved still to continue and to proceed to win by little and little and draw
on the Lutheran Clergy toward friendly and peaceable affections, I conceive
that it cannot be otherwise brought to pass then by such proceedings as
hitherto I have used. Whereof the first step has been always, a free,
unpartiall, and unblameable conversation with the chief Divines to make
acquaintance with them. When acquaintance is made, the next step is, to come by
degrees insensibly to insinuate matters of mutual edification, in making them
sensible of such duties of Christianity which are most necessary at this time
to be set upon by men of conscience and charity: By this means the
inclinations and dispositions of their minds will either, if they be good,
break forth and discover themselves, or if they be raw and untoward, will be in
some part prepared toward further thoughts of this nature. This being done, a
man may draw somewhat near the subject of peace and mutual reconcilement, in
making them think of the great inconveniences of schisms and divisions amongst
Protestants, and of the great good which might redound to all Christians, if
the true causes and original motives of such differences might really be taken
out of the way, as well by settling men's judgments in the truth of Christian
Religion which are wholly undoubted, as by bringing their will to affect the
main duties, wherein the public and Ecclesiastical profession thereof
consists: Of which duties the first ground does seem to be this, That all
men, and chiefly Divines, are bound in conscience to intend truly and profess
openly a desire and willingness to be at peace with peaceable neighbors; and,
That they ought to account peaceable neighbors such men as not only study to
be void of offense toward others, but also desire to entertain love and
friendship with them. These principles being proposed and wrought upon the
minds of some of their Leaders, it might be tried whether or no they could be
brought to declare and promise that they will concur in thoughts and
treaties, by which the grounds of former, and the cases of future scandals and
contentions might be taken away from amongst Protestants. If then they should
not be averse from such a motion, they might be brought by degrees forward;
First, To entertain private thoughts by themselves concerning the possibility
of advancing such treaties: Secondly, To communicate such thoughts to others,
which shall be found desirous to confer without prejudice about this matter
with them: Thirdly, To hear the proposals of others, and declare how far
they agree or disagree with the same, that means may be thought upon, by which
difficulties and incident causes of disagreement at the treaty may either be
prevented or taken out of the way. If any three or four leading-men of the
Lutheran side can be brought thus far, (whereunto it is likely that all
reasonable and conscionable Divines will easily be brought) there is much won
in the cause. For the schism is upheld by none but by a few, who indeed
decline all occasions of orderly treaties, but yet dare not openly profess any
unwillingnesse toward the same. When therefore a willingness is thus stirred
up in some, and the averseness of others is prevented so that it cannot openly
break forth, if then it be found expedient to prosecute the work in a more
public way, the consent of Princes will be requisite, to have a preparatory
meeting in some place, only of some chief and well disposed persons on both
sides; wherein the general grounds of an agreement might be laid, and a
resolution taken how to proceed by degrees afterward to a more full
conclusion, and how to ratify the agreement in all particulars of moment, with
consent and counsel of such as may pretend some interest in the business. But
because we are not yet come so far as to draw the chief Divines of these
quarters to affect a treaty, and to consent to a meeting of this nature,
therefore it is now to no purpose to speak of that which might be done at it,
but I will come to mine own private task, to show by what means other
preparatives of such a treaty may be negotiated openly and more irresistibly,
and how the pretext by which Lutheran Divines use to keep up strife and
alienate the affections of men, otherwise harmless and simple, might be taken
out of our way.

Concerning the more effectual means and manner of proceedings toward the
preparatives of a more public treaty.
I Will suppose here either that the foresaid insensible way of working upon
the Lutheran spirits will take none effect at all, except it be immediately
backed with chief authority, or else although it may take some effect, yet that
it is not a sufficient preparation for this present exigencie of affairs,
because it is too slow, longsome, and imperceptible: Therefore the question may
be thus made, What? cannot the work be prosecuted otherwise? Cannot a friendly
treaty be drawn on without all these preparatives? Is it not possible that
either the differences may be fully composed, or else that unreasonable pretext
of strife, whereby the Lutherans accuse the reformed Churches of heresy, be
fully taken away? To answer this question, I say Yea: The work can be more
effectually prosecuted both ways, that is to say, that not only the
preparatives of a friendly treaty to compose the differences with more
effectual endeavors then these are can be brought to pass; but also that the
railing accusation and stumbling block of heresy, imputed unto the Reformed
Churches, may invincibly be taken out of the way. And to make both these
assertions to appear, I will briefly lay down the ways whereby they may be
brought to pass.

Concerning the more effectual preparatives of a peaceable treaty, the way to
bring the same irresistibly to pass, must needs have two degrees, whereof the
first must be grounded upon some former treaties in Germany and Sweden. And the
second may come from a new rise, which now may be taken from the circumstances
of this season. The proceedings which are to be grounded upon former
negotiations, do presuppose and prerequire some small acquaintance with some of
the chief Lutheran Divines: because the first ground and rise of all
Theological and spiritual proceedings which will be effectual must be love,
because nothing but charity does edify. And to beget love, there must be an
impartial and familiar way of conversation undertaken to gain private
acquaintance, by which the occasion of humane jealousies may be prevented,
which are incident amongst all men that without former acquaintance treat of
important affairs one with another. Let us then suppose that this acquaintance
is made, and such a familiarity begotten as is requisite to make a beginning of
the work which I should go about. Here then the proceeding to bring on the
treaty must be thus, First, a draught of my scope must be imparted to him with
whom I am to deal, to desire him to think upon it, and let me know his opinion
concerning it, whether or no there be any thing amiss in it, and if it may
fitly be imparted to others that are capable of such thoughts. This being done,
if the scope be not disallowed, it must also be imparted unto some of the
Magistrates of the place, that Statesmen also may be made acquainted with it;
and if circumstances require (either to further mainly the business, or to
prevent incident lets) a petition unto the Council of State may go along with
it, or soon after follow it, requiring two things: First, That the
consideration thereof in general terms may be recommended unto the Clergy:
Secondly, That one or two may be nominated to whom the particular agitation of
the business may be referred. When such a Reference is made, then the private
treaties are begun, which must be prosecuted in writing by degrees and slowly;
and that for many reasons, amongst which I will only name two: First, That
time may be gained to work good impressions in the hearts of honest men that
have been misinformed against us: Secondly, That address may be made at all
occasions toward one or two of the chief Senators, to give them notice of all
the passages of the treaty, and know some part of their mind concerning it. If
then this treaty with one or two Divines comes to such ripeness, that they
will desire to acquaint their colleagues in a collegiall way, either to gain
their public consent, or to shift handsomely the consequence of the business
from themselves to the multitude, then the rest of the Clergy must be informed
of the true circumstances of all matters, either severally every one in
particular, or else collegially at their meetings. To which effect some
particular writings (whereof the copies must always be given to some of the
Senators) must be ordained. Now the matters whereof a treaty in this kind is
to be prosecuted must be such which are already consented unto, and advised
upon by others, whereof authentical documents must be produced: and the end
for which these matters are to be treated upon must be none other then to gain
their assent and further advice thereunto. If then no resolution fall at the
collegiall meeting, but occasion is taken to delay and shift off the business
for some pretense or other, they must not be urged with importunity, but left
unto their own leisure. And in the mean time, either a course may be taken to
deal afresh in the same way with others, or else if none be more to be dealt
withal, then the Acts may be communicated unto every one that is desirous to
see the same; and chiefly insinuated to men of note, as well such as are
zealots for the Lutheran cause, as to such as are conscionably and honestly
affected toward peace and unity: and toward these some further means either
in private or in public may be used, that they may give occasion unto their
Clergy to break off silence, and declare their resolutions toward peaceable
endeavors. And if either of these means take or take not, at last the Acts may
be sent to some chief Universities of both sides, and submitted unto their
judgments. After all which, both the Acts and the judgments thereof may be
published in print, with a Preface to remonstrate unto the rulers of Christian
States, what the true causes and remedies of schisms are, and how by amiable
and conscionable treaties amongst sober and godly Divines all inconvenients of
strifes and endless disputes might be taken out of the way, with an
exhortation and entreaty toward them, to choose out and authorize fit men to
go with consent and liking of their brethren about such a work, for the
general good of Christendom and particular of Protestant Churches. If then
any Prince or State be stirred up to take this resolution, and will give
occasion to others to enter with some of his Clergy upon these thoughts, the
matter may be further prepared by certain degrees of public meetings whereof
it is not yet time to speak. And this is the first way taken from the ground of
former treaties.

The second way of proceeding in this business may take the rise from the
circumstances of this present time, and then it will have a relation unto the
public dangers of Protestant Churches and States, and to the necessity of a
brotherly league and confederation betwixt the same against their common
enemies. Here then, all such as have real intention to frame such a League to
support the Protestant cause, and to restore the house Palatine in Germany, I
suppose will easily be persuaded to further the spiritual part of this League,
that is to say, to care for the soul of their conjunction as well as for the
bodily part thereof. Here then there should be a purpose of negotiating for a
league with the German Princes and Lutheran States, and the Ambassador that is
to labor in it should have one with him authorized and instructed by eminent
authority to treat with the Lutheran Clergy about the work of Ecclesiastical
Reconcilement, who might have some instructions to some such effects as these
may be; First, to do nothing without foreknowledge and express consent of the
Ambassador sent to make the league: Secondly, to treat with none obligatorily,
but with such Divines as shall expressly be named to that effect by that
Prince or State with whom the Ambassador should be in treaty for the other
conjunction: Thirdly, to treat of matters only preparatorily by way of
consultation, with a reference to some other future treaties which in due time
might be taken in hand: Fourthly, to treat only of means and ways belonging
to the scope of religious agreement in matters of difference, which have bred
disputes and public scandalls; to which effect he should be authorized to
testify a willingness in the Church from whence he comes, to advance unity
amongst all Christians, and chiefly to try by what means in due time a more
strict and near Ecclesiastical agreement might be brought to pass amongst
Protestants: Fifthly, to avoid and decline all particular occasions of dispute
and debatement about matters controversall: Sixthly, to make such proposal of
particular means and ways of agreement as will be then found expedient to be
mentioned by those from whom he comes, and will probably be entertained by
those to whom he is sent. Such like instructions being given to one that is
acquainted with the persons, humors, and controversies of Lutheran Divines,
and by some experience can foresee, prevent, and answer their scruples,
jealousies, doubts, shifts, and difficulties, no doubt a public treaty might
very easily be brought to pass to great good purpose about the work of
Reconciliation. For if the minds of one or two Divines about every Prince
should in this manner be drawn and prepared really to affect, or at least not
to disaffect, the purpose of a further treaty at some friendly meeting, the way
of coming together might without great difficulty be so contrived that by
little and little all matters might be composed and settled in unity without
all occasion of strife and dispute. And the chief motive why a Theological
treaty in this kind ought to be intended and urged as a thing most necessary
amongst Protestants, may be alleged by the Ambassador of the Civil League to
be this, That seeing in a faithful confederation and brotherly league for
mutual defense betwixt two parties for each others lives, liberties, and
rights, there ought not to be any known cause of doubt concerning the
sincerity of mutual love and upright intentions betwixt the confederates left
untaken away, lest the real effect thereof be disappointed: and seeing it is
notoriously known that one of the greatest causes by which mutual love and
sincere intentions can be broken off, has been existent and is not yet truly
taken away from the spirits of Lutheran Divines, who have esteemed hitherto all
Reformed Protestants no better then damnable heretics, therefore to take away
this cause of disjunction and of breach in true love, it will be necessary to
permit chief Divines of both sides to treat in a friendly manner, that they may
receive satisfaction one from another in matters of doubt, and that they may
take away the causes of mistakes and future breaches, and confirm their love
one toward another. And to this effect it might also be intimated, that,
whiles such intentions of brotherly reconcilement are in agitation, it would be
fit a course should be taken to forbid railing accusations and odious
imputations from the pulpit on both sides, in hope that the grounds thereof
will shortly be taken away to the full content of every one.

Hitherto the preparatives of a public treaty have been spoken of, but in case
no such amiable treaties can be produced, then remains the last attempt which
may be intended, that the pretext of schism whereby many many damnable errors
are laid to the charge of the Reformed Churches can be taken away, and the
Lutheran Divines made to take notice that all Reformed Protestants are wronged
by such imputations. To do this, as formerly, so now acquaintance must be made
with the ringleaders of that side, which chiefly uphold the division; and when
the matters of duty belonging to mutual edification are without prejudice
proposed, a question must be made concerning the causes which hinder the work
of Reconcilement, to know in particular what they are, what may be thought a
sufficient and requisite means to take the^ out of the way. To which question a
short and friendly answer from him with whom the treaty is begun must be
procured in writing, wherein as well the Catalogue of those things which are
laid to the charge of the Reformed Churches, as also the description of that
which ought to be done to cause these imputations cease, should be set down.
This answer may be procured either immediately by him that prosecuteth the work
of Ecclesiastical Reconcilement, or else by the mediation or intervention of
others who will be able and willing to procure it. For it may be gotten either
in a public or in a private way, as well by some Lutheran as Reformed men of
note; and perhaps it will not be amiss that the Ambassador for the League
should move the Princes, who may be brought into the Confederation, to command
their Divines to set down in short terms without all partiality and railing
affection the true exceptions which they make against the public Confession of
the Reformed Churches, that a course might be thought upon how to give them
satisfaction in all matters that are colourably proposed to maintain their
division. Now when these exceptions are specified by three or four of the
chief Leaders of that party, the whole Theological difficulty of the business
will appear; which being reduced to a few heads, a full resolution thereof
might authentically be produced from all quarters where the Reformed Religion
has a form and being in the State, that all doubts from whence the imputations
of grievous errors do arise may be satisfactorily cleared. And in the mean
time while this is a doing, the Lutheran Divines might be put to a peculiar
task; namely, to resolve certain Cases of Conscience, which may direct their
thoughts toward better subjects then hitherto many of them have been used to
think upon. By which means their understandings will happily get occasion to
cool their spirits, somewhat too hot about needless disputes, when they shall
be led fairly without prejudice to the consideration of some few infallible
principles, from which the determination of truths fundamental, and matters
necessary to be known and practiced unto salvation, may be deducted without
great difficulty, and consequently all schismatic differences composed.
Then afterward, when the declarations of the Reformed Churches tending to clear
themselves from damnable errors and heresy are brought unto perfection, they
must be offered unto the same Lutheran Divines that did give up their
exceptions against the said Churches, with a demand that if any thing necessary
for salvation be yet doubtful, or not sufficiently explained in these
declarations, that they would be pleased to make it known, that a further
exposition of their mind may be procured in things still doubtful. If then any
further doubts be alleged, and new exceptions made against any positions
contained in the foresaid declarations, two things may be done; First, the
positions may be further explained to give them satisfaction unto rational
doubts for clearing of the truth: Secondly, the matter it self whereof the
doubt is made may be confidered, whether or no it be of that importance that
men must needs agree about it; and in case they cannot agree, whether or no
they ought for such a difference of opinion to break off all respect of
Christian communion and brotherly affections one toward another. Here then the
business of fundamental and not fundamental truths will come in agitation,
which will be the only means to resolve finally all matters of strife. And
therefore whiles some are a work to clear the Reformed Churches from such
imputation whereof they are injuriously charged, some others must take the task
of thinking upon truths and duties which are unto salvation fundamental or not
fundamental. And thus the Lutheran pretext of schism, whereby damnable
heresy is laid to the charge of Reformed Protestants, may be fully and
invincibly taken out of the way, if means be not wanting to uphold an Agent to
stir in these matters, and if no other difficulties seeming to be insuperable
be left in the way, of which now we are to speak in the last place of all.

Concerning the difficulties incident unto this work, how they may be overcome.
THe difficulties which may befall to these proceedings are so many, and
sometimes so great, that it is neither well possible to relate them all in
particular, nor good wisdom to set them forth in all their worst
circumstances: Therefore I will contract them to a few heads, and show the
fundamental ways by which they may be overcome. The heads of all difficulties
may be reduced to three kinds: for some have relation to the person that is to
go about the work, some relate those with whom he is to deal, and some regard
the matter and manner of the work it self which is to be prosecuted. The
difficulties which fall out in regard of him that is to go about the work are
these, First, seeing the work seems to be a new business as taken in hand by
a way not formerly traced; therefore he that undertaketh it must expect to be
differently spoken and thought of amongst men: Then also seeing the work in it
self is both exceeding great and difficult, it follows, that if a man
purposed to do good in it, he must needs dedicate himself wholly to it, and
leave the care of all other things for it, which is no small task: Thirdly, he
ought to see a possibility of the effect, or else he must despair and never
undertake it. Now to see a possibility of this effect, he must have a sight of
some sufficiency of means to reach it: and that sufficiency must either be in
himself or in others. Now what if he dare not find in himself any such
sufficiency? for who is so presumptuous as to say more then the Apostle durst
of himself, And who is sufficient for these things? But if no man dare think of
himself that he is sufficiently fitted to go about a work of so great
consequence, what willingness can he have to undertake it? If no willingness
to undertake it, what inward calling can he have to go about it? If no calling
to go about it, how is it warrantable for him to follow it, and to leave all
other callings for it? This I confess is a hard knot, but yet it is made much
harder when other circumstances come to it, as thus, What if he find as little
sufficiency in others toward this effect as in himself? what if he find least
willingness in most of them? Nay, what if he find in those that are esteemed
most sufficient very little apparent and flow concurrence to help in it? This
is yet harder, but if above all this according to all humane appearance he
cannot but rationally conjecture that he must lose his labor and be esteemed a
fool for his pains; what if he finds after some trial of the work when he
profits little, that he is like to be deserted of such as were ready formerly
to help him? what if he must needs (as being indifferent and free from siding
with any party) make himself to all parties an object of their jealousies, and
of strange surmises to most men, and consequently become liable to obloquies,
censures, injuries, hatred, and malice, etc. without having any friend to stand
up for him? and above all this, what if he is like to have no outward means to
subsist by any more or favorable Patrones to bear him out in his innocent and
harmless endeavors? what, I say, if all these things should concur
together, as now in this case they seem in some sort to grow unto this height,
and in all humane appearance will fall hereafter more heavily upon these
proceedings? Chiefly, if the Agent thereof continues thus to walk as it were
in a cloud, and to follow his own indifferent and undependent ways, to
prosecure these intentions further to a full period; I say again, what if all
these difficulties come at once upon him, what must he do? should he not give
over? what warrant has he to proceed or hope to conquer these difficulties?
Here I confess that when I confider my present estate, I have scarce nothing
to support my spirit but a clear testimony of my conscience, which bears
witness unto me that I am come to this work neither through presumption of any
sufficiency in my self, as if I could effect such a work, nor for any
singularity and newfangled fancies, nor for any worldly ends, private respects
or hopes toward men, but merely by a simple honest meaning to make once a
trial what good might be done by this way of unpartiall solicitation for
councels of Peace, in this business which is every way so lawful in it self,
so laudable before God, and so requisite in these times for the advancement of
the Gospel. Neither did I want a sufficient, express, lawful and particular
calling to undertake that which at first I did undertake; neither do I yet want
a calling and warrant to go about that which now I aim at, but I find rather
that my calling, being at first lawful, has since continually increased upon
me till now it is come to this height, that although I find my self environed
with many straits, and by reason of the generality of my way like to be
deserted of every body, yet I cannot possibly without wounding extremely my
conscience, in breaking a most solemn vow made with due preparation religiously
unto Almighty God, go back from this intention. Thus then it is with me, I am
inwardly without fear, and though outwardly I see no help nor likelihood of
great assistance from men, but rather on all sides difficulties and want of all
comfort, yet I cannot be without hope of a good issue, so that I may really say
in this case (without comparison nevertheless to him that said it once before
me) O Lord, thou have deceived me, and I am deceived: Jerem. 20. 7, 8, 9.
thou art stronger then I, and thou have prevailed: I am in derision daily,
every one mocketh me. For since I spoke, I cried out of wrong, and proclaimed
desolation. Therefore the word of the Lord was made a reproach unto me, and I am
in derision daily. Then I said, I will not make mention of him, nor speak any
more in his name. But his word was in mine heart as a burning fire shut up in
my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and I could not stay. For I heard
the railing of many, and fear on every side. For thus indeed it is with me; I
can perceive nothing in the spirits of most men, but railings, discontents,
clamours and fears. To remedy these evils in a spiritual way within the
compass of mine own calling amongst Ecclesiastical persons, I am insensibly
drawn on so far, and so deeply engaged in this work, that I cannot now go
backward any more. But whatsoever may become of me or befall unto me, I am once
for all resolved to undergo it. Therefore I find an easy remedy to all these
difficulties, which is this, That seeing I am called lawfully to this
negotiation, and that I trust not to my self, but unto God who is able to do
with me above all that I can think or hope; therefore I am resolved to live no
more in this work unto my self, but unto him that has set me upon it, and whom
I only respect in it. And if I can but keep and follow this resolution, I know
that for trusting to him and laboring to do good to all, as yet never man was,
so I shall never be ashamed. The difficulties incident in regard of those with
whom the work must be prosecuted arise from their multitude, and from their
different and strange dispositions: First then, it is a difficult thing to deal
both with Churches and Statesmen in one and the same work, and yet more
difficult to deal with many of both sorts in so many Churches and States as
this business may concern. I answer, True, it is difficult to do this, yet not
impossible; for by diligence, by constancy, by good address and unpartiall
dealing with choice and leading men of every sort and in every Church, this
difficulty may be overcome: For it is not convenient that all should be
promiscuously dealt withal and in particular, but two or three in every Church
being picked out will be sufficient at first, till matters grow ripe, and then
to compendiate the work, occasions of public meetings may be taken hold of, to
acquaint the multitude with generalities fit for their knowledge; from which
afterward references must be obtained to some few again, that in weighty
matters necessary particulars may be distinctly scanned, which in a great
multitude cannot be done at all, or not without great confusion. The second
difficulty is, That many men will have many minds, many particular opinions
many different aims and prejudices, so that it will hardly be possible to fit
any one course or purpose, any one counsel that will please them all; and
therefore it will be either labor lost, or else an occasion of more strife and
division, to put them all upon one subject of meditation. To this I answer,
That it is true; if they should all at once be put upon the business without
due preparation, these effects would needs follow, but now they are dealt
withal severally and in some good order. Also fit preparations are to be used
toward every one, for if nothing be offensively objected, indiscreetly
prescribed and urged upon any of them, but only occasion given to every one by
way of fit insinuations of undeniable principles to do his duty, and in
discharging his conscience to give some good counsel toward the scope of peace
answerably and proportionally unto the foreconceived principles, then there can
no such inconvenience arise; but rather from many different opinions, when all
are tending to one scope, and rising from the same general grounds, the common
course unto which all do agree, or the safest way which will displease none may
be gathered and afterward proposed to be ratified by common consent. The third
difficulty is, that seeing not only the Lutheran and Reformed Churches differ
one from another, but also in each of those again are found many subdivisions
and factions, which are almost at as great ods one with another about their
private differences as all of them are about the general matters, it is a
great doubt if it be possible either to bring men that cannot agree amongst
themselves to agree with others, or to bring them before they are agreed
amongst themselves to resolve upon a common course to deal with others for any
agreement. For this difficulty there is no other remedy but that every side
must be dealt withal apart and without partiality, and such propositions must
be made, which retrench no further upon their private debates, then to
insinuate and to involve some infallible grounds, whereby the true causes as
well of those particular differences as of all other controversies may be taken
out of the way. For the same property and nature of strife being in the
particular which is in the general division of men's minds, it is manifest that
whatsoever is fit to remedy the one, will do good also unto the other. The
fourth objection is, But still every party will look to his own private
interest and sWay all advises to his own ends, for every one will be loath to
lose any grounds by these treaties: from whence it will come to pass that
while the treaty stands in generalities, all will be liable to jealousies,
diffidencies and suspicions; and when particulars come to be scanned, the
controversies will be renewed as hot as ever, and more inconvenients arise
perhaps then before. To remedy this evil a positive way of proceeding, (that
is, such a way by which every one shall declare positively his own meaning and
not meddle with the meanings of others) must be agreed upon and so fitted to
the work, that by it the negotiatours may be able to prevent all particular
disputes, and clear intricate and doubtful matters, by the means of general
and undoubted axioms of truth, which may be laid and admitted before ever the
several treaties come to be scanned. Then also a particular rule and
limitation of the treaty, as well in respect of the extent thereof, as in
respect of the outward manner of going about it, could be set down, so that
none should be able to except against it. By which means the causes of
jealousies in the general, and the danger of hot strife in the particular
treaties might be taken out of the way. Lastly, if all parties be brought to
think upon fundamental truths and duties, that is to say, to show not so much
what is in this or that point truth and error, as to show from the general
undoubted ground what is a truth necessary to be known by every body unto
salvation, and what is a damnable error, then there will be none occasion
either of jealousies in the general treaties, or of strife in the particular
positions, because it will be granted beforehand that no truth or error
should give occasion of division and earnestness in debate, but such as are
within the compass of matters necessary to be known unto salvation.

Other difficulties might be alleged in this kind, but it is not expedient to
insist too much upon such matters: therefore I will come to the last sort of
lets which do arise from the work it self in respect of the matter and manner
of proceeding in it. If we look unto the matter it is very weighty and of
mavelous great consequence, for it does concern the estate of religion, the
truth of God, and the souls of men, for the directions of their understandings
and settling of their wills in matters of conscience, whereof every man is
bound to have a special care: therefore it is natural to all men not to
endure any sudden reformation or change therein, because tacitly he is thereby
reproved and convicted as if hitherto he had not been in the right way of
salvation, which is a great trouble unto the spirits of men that are zealous
for means of eternal life, and a matter that cannot be digested by any but
such as have no true sense of religion. From hence then it follows, that it
will be a matter of extreme difficulty to meddle in this business, because it
touches the very apple of a man's spiritual eye, wherein the least disturbance
of the world is not only perceptible but also intolerable; because it does
endanger him to lose his whole sight, that is to say, to lose all sense and
certainty of religion, and all care of conscience if he be once unsettled and
troubled in the profession of that which he has hitherto maintained. To remedy
this inconvenience and all the dangerous consequences following thereupon,
prevention must be used toward the understandings and wills of men that are
weak, and make them sensible of the true scope which is intended, and of the
means to be used in this work. The scope then to be really intended and whereof
others are to be made sensible must not be to condemn, to stagger, or to
overthrow any; but rather directly to strengthen, to confirm, and to build up
all the truths known and once received, that by the increase of light in
theoreticall and practical truths which are of chief moment the false zeal and
giddiness of men's minds about private opinions about doubtful and disputable
matters (which commonly are of no great consequence unto salvation, but rather
proceed from curiosity and self-conceited imaginations) may fall of themselves
unto the ground; which will fall out when once invincibly truths will sway the
consciences and wills of men to look more after matters of present edification
in the knowledge and duties of godliness and mutual love, then after high and
sublime mysteries, whereby men are not only involved into a labyrinth of
doubts and scruples which breed improfitable Questions, but also withdrawn in
their understandings from the only true, comfortable, and laudable object of
meditation.

Thus then if the real purpose of the work be to lead the minds of men unto
such objects of knowledge, whereby infallibly comforts may arise unto their
souls, and if means fit to effect this be made use of, it is evident that all
the difficulties and fears of other things will be swallowed up and drowned in
the life of godly affections, which will enlighten and settle the soul in the
way of peace and righteousness toward God and man. By which means without all
occasions of dispute, without all danger of apparent change, and without all
occasions of outward condemnations and fear of inward troubles perplexities to
the conscience, men will be enabled and addicted to judge themselves, and so by
little and little to rectify their own ways from all circumstances of
scandal, and from evil inclinations, which through disorderly affections and
untoward actions have bred all these divisions. Now the means by which this
purpose may be brought to pass, as well toward the understandings as toward
the wills of conscionable men, whether they be learned or unlearned Statesmen
or Divines of this or that side, are no ways difficult, but easy to be set a
work, if the matter it self, and the spiritual way of proceeding therein,
necessary to work upon the spirits of men, be not either stopped for want of
correspondencie and a few constant Agents, or outwardly discountenanced by
Authority in respect of worldly jealousies, or deserted for want of necessary
support and maintenance toward the work, and toward an Agent or two to
subsist in going about it. For it can easily be demonstrated how all manner of
difficulties arising from the matter and subject of the work, whether they
concern the understanding or the wills and affections of men, may be either
prevented or taken away in due time by spiritual means and proceedings
answerable to the main grounds of Christianity and conscience, of which now we
cannot speak at large. The last and greatest difficulty will be found in the
manner of treating and ratifying that which may be concluded and agreed upon.
Here then two things are wholly necessary: First, The way of giving
satisfaction to men's consciences must be found out and made use of: Secondly,
The respect which is due unto public authority must not be neglected. These
things are wholly necessary, but how to apply them fitly to the circumstances
of the work, is a matter of no small difficulty; because in the first, the
method of School Divinity on the one side, and the spirit of private
interpretation on the other side, has spoiled the ways of true knowledge. And
in the second, public authority may be in certain matters and cases regarded
otherwise then it ought to be, so that the work every way will be marred if the
true midst of all these extremes be not observed. For both high and low,
learned and unlearned may be all at once offended, if the demonstrative rules
both of truth and righteousness be not so exactly applied unto the proceedings
of the work, that every one may find therein his own due, and receive
satisfaction. Now to do this, before ever the treaty be set upon, the spirits
of men must be tried afar off and discovered in these things: First, What
principles and ways of knowledge they have taken up: Secondly, How far they
are prepossessed, settled and exercised therein: Thirdly, How flexible their
nature and large their capacity is to apprehend things more universal:
Fourthly, How far they regard or regard not the authority of Superiors in
matters of Religion. When these things are discovered, the manner of dealing
with them according to their own principles, the measure of their capacity,
and the respect which they carry unto public authority must be thought upon
and made use of, to fit their minds and affections unto the scope of these
treaties, that first their minds by insensible degrees of unfallible truths, no
ways repugnant to their received principles (though somewhat perhaps different
from the same) may be perfected, and advanced to a way of knowledge more
universal and consequently more peaceable then that is wherein they have been
formerly excercised, and secondly, that their affections from the grounds of
necessary respects due to such as are in place of lawful authority may
conscionably be raised up to yield willingly obedience unto such constitutions
as may fall out to be requisite about the work. When these preparatives are
wrought upon their understandings and wills, it will easily appear what manner
of treaties must be undertaken to satisfy the minds of men in respect of
doubts concerning faith, and how for matters of practice the respect of public
authority, and in what things it may easily be made use of toward them. For
it is manifest by the experience of all ages, that many things (though never so
lawful and rational) cannot be carried by mere authority, chiefly among men
that think themselves not unable to judge, and obliged to know the grounds of
such things as do retrench upon Religion, and seem to bind their conscience.
Therefore a great deal of circumspection and tenderness must be used both
ways, I mean as well to prevent the troubling of men's consciences that are
conscionable, as to expose authority to be censured in men's secret thoughts.
For if either the consciences of men be troubled, for want of sufficient light,
in that which they are bound by reason of authority to give way unto; or else
if the respect which is due unto authority, in such things which it ought to
advance and prosecute, decay in the hearts of men; because weak consciences
receive no satisfaction in matters whereat they stagger as proceeding from mere
authority, then the foundation both of State and Religion are shaken. For the
foundation of Religion in the souls of men is nothing else but the respect
which men have unto their consciences under Christ's ordinances: and the
foundation of State in the hearts of men is nothing else but the respect which
inferiors bear unto their superiors unto a lawful government. And to avoid
the shaking of either of these respects, in managing of weighty businesses all
diligence and prudence must be used in every particular degree and action of
their proceedings, that every one may have sufficient light and satisfaction
concerning the nature and properties of the same. So then, to proceed in
matters of truth to reconcile the understandings of men, it is apparent that
neither School Divinity nor the private spirit of any particular man will
satisfy all men, and give sufficient light to know the way of truth, because
as scholasticall methods are only fit for scholars of that kind, and not for
men of other reading and capacity, so also the spirit of one interpreter of
Scriptures can be no rule to another, who has as much right to rely upon his
own conception as the former does upon his: therefore a more universal way
then either of these to declare truths and clear doubts must be made use of,
against which no man shall be able to make any exception. And to this effect,
(I mean lest any exception be made against it) before the way be made use of
and applied unto the work, it must be proposed, examined, allowed, and received
by all those that are to treat or to be treated withal in this subject, that
no body may have occasion, for want of light fitted to his capacity, to stagger
at the proceedings, or fear and doubt at the truth of such determinations as
may be settled to reconcile men's judgments in points of religion. Now of this
way whereby intellectual doubts may be cleared I am not at this time to speak
at large, because my purpose is only now to intimate in general terms that no
difficulties can be incident unto the work, which may not be overcome by a
convenient remedy, if it please God to suffer us to proceed. Seeing then a
complete way of advancing spiritual knowledge can be intended without danger
arising from School Divinity, and private spiritual interpretations, care must
also be taken on the other side not to neglect the respect which is due unto
authority in all these proceedings, and yet not to make any such use of it as
may endanger it to be censured by any. It is not my purpose to speak of the
power of superiors in this work, and of the things belonging unto their
charge; I will not presume to meddle with such high matters, but I mind only
those respects which ought to be carried to all Superiors wheresoever this work
may be agitated, and which must be conserved in the minds of all them with whom
it is to be agitated, to the end that public authority, which is the chief
instrument of all universal affairs, and the image of Gods power eminently
apparent in this world, may not be without use in such things for which it has
been communicated unto mankind. I conceive then that all authority and
superiority is appointed by God, and that by it all affairs should be directed
unto the public good of a Communaltie: Superiors then are directours of all
affairs that concern a society or a public State: They are like eyes which
address not only the whole body of a man unto the way wherein he does walk,
but also his members every one each to his several object for the well-being
of the whole: from hence then it must be inferred, that as the eye ought to see
all things and discern the same, so nothing may be concealed from the knowledge
of Superiors in this business, that when they are informed thereof, either
permission or commission may be had from them to proceed in it as occasion
shall require. Now as a man has two eyes in his outward body, a right one and
a left one; so he has two directing faculties in his soul, to rule his life
outwardly toward men, and inwardly toward God, which are Reason and
Conscience: Conscience is the right eye of a man's soul, and Reason is the left.
To these two are answerable two sorts of directours in public affairs which
concern the society of men: For seeing men are joined both by spiritual and
worldly bonds of society for the well-being both of their souls and bodies, God
has appointed eyes and directours over them in both these Commonwealths to
serve the public good thereof: The civil Magistrate does serve the
Commonwealth by the eye of Reason, and the directours of Ecclesiastical
affairs by the eye of Conscience. Therefore in all outward, public and visible
circumstances of this work, the same respect must be had and deferred by those
that agitate in it unto the Rulers of the civil State, which wise men in their
outward bodily actions use to yield unto their own natural senses and reason:
And in like manner as a religious man does reflect upon his conscience in all
the circumstances of his spiritual performances, even so in this business the
Leaders of Ecclesiastical affairs must be regarded in all spiritual means
whereby it is to be advanced. These then are Rules by which the respects due
unto Superiors in this work may be observed; each Superior must have his due
in a joint and several respect. For as reason and conscience, as the right and
left eye of a man, concur together in the apprehension and consideration of
matters, because all that which is reasonable is answerable to conscience, and
again all that which is conscionable cannot be but reasonable; even so the
civil and Ecclesiastical Directours must both at once concur and be
regarded in the work, yet every one must be taken notice of according to his
own sphere, in his own way, according to his own principles, objects and ends
for which this matter should be intended. Thus then this difficulty also may be
overcome, and by it also the impediments of the work: for if the Directours of
the business be once truly gained, it is likely that their wisdom and
authority will carry all clear before them. And the means to gain them is
chiefly a care to bear them all due respect: For it is hopefully to be supposed
that God will move them to take so laudable a work to heart, if things be duly
prepared to their hands, and none of them that is able to give assistance in it
be neglected.

FINIS.

