THE PROFESSION OF THE FAITH OF THAT REVEREND and worthy Divine Mr. J. D.
sometimes Preacher of Stevens Coleman-street. LONDON. Made publicly before
the Congregation at his Admission into one of the Churches of GOD in
NEW ENGLAND. Containing twenty several heads as it was drawn from his own
Copy. viz. 1. Concerning the Scriptures. 2. Concerning the Godhead in the unity
of essence, and Trinity of persons. 3. Concerning the Decrees of God. 4.
Concerning the Creation, and Providence. 5. Concerning the fall of man and
original sin. 6. Concerning man's Restitution. 7. Concerning the Person and
natures in Christ. 8. Concerning the offices of Christ. 9. Concerning Christ's
prophetical office. 10. Concerning the Priesthood of Christ. 11. Concerning
Christ's kingly office. 1. in general. 12. Concerning his Kingdom. 2. In
special. 13. Concerning the Application of Redemption. 14. Concerning a
particular instituted Church, and the Privileges thereof. 15. Concerning the
manner of gathering a Church. 16. Concerning the Sacraments. 17. Concerning the
power of every Church. 18. Concerning the communion of Churches. 19. Concerning
Church Officers. 20. Concerning giving every man his due.


LONDON: Printed for John Handcock at the Bible in Burchin-Lane. 1642.

I believe with all my heart, and confess with my mouth.
1* Concerning the Scriptures.
THat all Scripture is by divine inspiration, or inbreathing of God (by
Scripture I mean the books of the old Testament as Moses and the Prophets, and
of the new Testament) and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. 1 Timothy 3.16, 17. and that in
all things which concern faith, and obedience, whether in Gods worship, or in
the whole conversation of men, it holds forth a most perfect rule, whereunto
nothing may be added, not from it may ought be diminished. Deuteronomy. 4.2. Revel.
22.18, 19. Which also is so clear in all truths necessary to salvation, that
the entrance into it gives light, yea, understanding to the simple. Psalm. 19 7.

2. Concerning the Godhead in the Unity of Essence, and Trinity of Persons.

That God is a Spirit most holy, immutable, eternal, every way infinite, in
greatness, goodness, power, wisdom, justice, truth, and in all divine
perfections, 1 Timothy 6.15, 16. Joh. 4.24. Isa. 6.6. Exodus 34.6, 7. And that in
this Godhead are three distinct Persons, coeternall, coequall, and
coessentiall, being every one of them one and the same God, not three Gods, and
therefore not divided in essence, nature, or being, Deuteronomy. 4.3. but
distinguished one from another by their several, and peculiar relative
property, the Father is of none but of himself, the Son is begotten of the
Father before all worlds; the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the
Son* from all eternity, and together are to be worshipped and glorified.

3. Concerning the Decrees of God.
That God has unchangeably decreed in himself from everlasting, touching all
things, great and small, necessary, contingent, and voluntary, with all the
circumstances of them, to work, and dispose them according to the counsel of
his own will (yet without being Author of, or having fellowship with the sins
of any) to the praise and glory of his great Name. And touching the eternal
estate of men that God has according to his most wise, free, and unchangeable
purpose in himself, before the foundation of the world chosen some in Jesus
Christ to eternal life, to the praise and glory of his grace, and rejected or
reprobated others to the praise of his justice.

4. Concerning Creation, and Providence.
That in the beginning God made by his Word all things of nothing very good,
and made man male and female after his own Image righteous; and as a faithful
Creator does still uphold, dispose, and govern all things to the ends for which
they were created, having care especially for man, and amongst men chiefly for
the righteous and believers; so that neither good nor evil befalls any man
without Gods providence.

5. Concerning the fall of man and original sin.
That inasmuch as Adam was the root of all mankind, the law and covenant of
works was given to him, as to a public person, and to an head from whence all
good or evil was to be derived to his posterity: seeing therefore that by the
subtilty of the Serpent, which Satan used as his instrument, first Eve, then
Adam being seduced, did wittingly and willingly fall into the disobedience of
the Commandment of God; Death came upon all justly, and reigned over all, yea,
over Infants also which have not sinned after the like manner of the
transgression of Adam: hence also it is, that all since the fall of Adam are
begotten in his own likeness, after his Image, being conceived and born in
iniquity, and so by nature children of wrath, dead in trespasses and sins,
altogether filthy and polluted throughout in soul and body; utterly averse
from any spiritual good, strongly bent to all evil, and subject to all
calamities due to sin in this world, and forever.

6. Concerning man's Restitution.
That all Mankind being thus fallen, yet the elect, and only they, are
redeemed, reconciled to God, and saved not of themselves, neither by their own
works, but only by the mighty power of God, of his unsearchable, rich, free
grace and mercy through faith, in Jesus Christ, who of God is made unto us
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption; in the relation both
of a surety to satisfy Gods justice for us, and of an head to restore the
Image of God that was lost, and repair the nature that was corrupted in us.

7. Concerning the Person and natures in Christ.
That the Lord Jesus of whom Moses and the Prophets wrote, and whom the
Apostles preached, is, as touching his Person, the everlasting Son of God the
Father by eternal generation, coessentiall, coequall, and coeternall, God with
him, and with the holy Ghost: by whom he made the world, and by whom he
upholdeth and governs all the works he has made: who also when the fullness of
time was come, was made of a woman, of the Tribe of Judah, of the seed of David
and Abraham, viz. of Mary that blessed Virgin, by the holy Ghost coming upon
her, and the power of the most high over-shadowing her; and was in all things
like unto us, sin only excepted: so that in the person of Christ the two
natures, the divine, and humane, are truly, perfectly, indivisibly, and
distinctly united.

8. Concerning the Offices of Christ.
That Jesus Christ is the only Mediator of the new Testament, even of the
Covenant of grace between God and man; the Prophet, Priest, and King of the
Church of God for evermore; and this office is so proper to Christ, as, neither
in the whole, not any part thereof, it can be transferred from him to any
other. And to this office he was from everlasting, and in respect of his
Manhood, from the womb, called, separated, and anointed most fully with all
necessary gifts, as it is written, God has not measured out of the Spirit unto
him.

9. Concerning Christ's prophetical Office.
That Christ has perfectly revealed the whole will of God, so far as it is
needful for his people either jointly, or severally to know, believe, or obey,
and that he has spoken, and does speak to his Church, in his own ordinances by
those instruments whom he sends, and by his Spirit.

10. Concerning the Priesthood of Christ.
That Christ being consecrated has appeared once to put away sin* by the
offering and sacrificing of himself, and has fully performed and suffered all
those things, by which, God through the blood of his cross, in a sacrifice of
a sweet smelling savor, might be reconciled to his elect; and having broken
down the partition wall, and finished and removed those ceremonial rites, and
shadows, is now entered into the most holy place, (not made with hands) to the
very heavens and presence of God, where he for ever lives, and sits at the
right hand of Majesty, to make intercession for such as come unto the throne
of grace by that new and living way: and he makes his people a spiritual
house, and an holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to
God through him.

11. Concerning Christ's Kingly Office. 1. In general.
That Christ being risen from the dead ascended up to heaven, set at the right
hand of God the Father, has all power in heaven and earth given to him, and
does exercise his power in his government of this world over all Angels and
men, good, and bad, to the preservation and salvation of his elect, and to the
ruling and destruction of the reprobate: communicating and applying to his
elect, the benefits, virtue, and fruit of his prophecy, and priesthood to
their regeneration, justification, sanctification, preservation, and
strengthening in all their spiritual conflicts against Satan, the world, and
the flesh, continually dwelling in them by his holy Spirit, begetting and
nourishing in them faith, hope, love, repentance, obedience, with peace and joy
unto immortality: but on the contrary, limiting, using, restraining the
reprobates his enemies by his mighty power, as seems good in his divine
wisdom and justice, to their seduction, hardening, and condemnation, till his
appearing in glory with his mighty Angels to judge both quick and dead; where
he will be and separate all his elect from them for ever, punishing the wicked
with everlasting perdition from his presence; and joining together the godly
with himself in endless glory.

12. Concerning his Kingdom. 2. In special.
That in the mean time besides his absolute rule in the world, Christ has here
on earth a spiritual Kingdom in his Church, which he has purchased and
redeemed to himself as a peculiar inheritance; into the body whereof he does by
the power of his Word and Spirit, gather his people, talling them through the
ministry of the Gospel out of the world, and from idolatry, superstition, and
from all works of darkness to fellowship with Jesus Christ, and by him with
the Father, and the holy Ghost, and with his people, making them a royal
Priesthood, an holy nation, a people set at liberty to show forth the virtues
of him that has called them out of darkness into his mavelous light, and
uniteth them together as members of one body in his faith, love, and holy order
unto all general and mutual duties: and instructs and governs them by those
instruments and ordinances which he himself has prescribed in his Word for the
edification of his body the Church.

13. Concerning the Application of Redemption.
That the holy Ghost is sent by the Father and the Son to make application of
Redemption only to those whom the Father has by his eternal Decree given to
Christ, and for whom Christ makes intercession to his Father, and whom the
Father accepts in Christ unto fellowship of the everlasting covenant of his
free grace, having called them out of the world to fellowship with Jesus Christ
by the Gospel made effectual to that end, by the mighty power and operation
of the holy Ghost. Which grace of effectual calling is thus dispensed to a
poor lost sinner awakened and humbled by the Law through the effectual
working of the spirit of bondage, judging himself worthy to be destroyed for
his sins, and seeing himself utterly destitute of all help or hope of himself;
The Lord in the preaching of the Gospel by the powerful work of the holy
Ghost, reveals the fullness and all-sufficiencie of that grace, and salvation
which is laid up in Jesus Christ, as the only suitable good to him, that he
also enableth him spiritually and savingly to apprehend Jesus Christ as given
him of the Father. And the same Spirit having thus enlightened him, does leav a
supernatural virtue, and impression of Gods love upon the some, whereby the
soul is drawn to close with Christ, and with that grace of God in him, so
entirely that there is now nothing between Christ and the soul but it willingly
parts with all things that hinder his enjoying of Christ; and by this
effectual calling all that are brought to Christ, are, 1. justified, that is
absolved from sin and death, and accounted righteous unto life, for, and
through Christ apprehended, received, and relied upon by faith. 2. They are
adopted, that is, accepted for Christ's sake to the dignity of Gods children;
they are also, 3. sanctified, that is, really changed by degrees from the
impurity of sin, to the purity of Gods Image; and lastly, they are glorified,
that is, changed from the misery or punishment of sin, unto everlasting
happiness, which begins in the inward sense of Gods love to them in Christ,
whence they have hope of glory, boldness in access to God certainty of
salvation, peace, joy unspeakable; and it ends in their full perfection in
soul and body.

14. Concerning a particular instituted Church, and the Privileges thereof.
That it is a company of faithful and holy people, or persons, called out of
the world to fellowship with Jesus Christ, and united in one congregation to
him as members to their head, and one with another, by a holy covenant for
mutual fellowship in all such ways of holy worship of God, and of edification
one toward another, as God himself has required in his Word of every Church
of Christ, and the members thereof.

15. Concerning the manner of gathering a Church.
That it is the duty of all Christians, having renounced all false ways of
idolatrous, Antichristian, and superstitious worship, and of sin, and the world
(as to instruct and govern their own families according to God, so) to join
willingly together in Christian communion and orderly covenant, and by free
confession of the faith, and profession of their subjection to the Gospel of
Christ, to unite themselves unto peculiar and visible Congregations, wherein as
members of one body, whereof Christ is the head, they are to worship God
according to his Word: To this Church he has given royal privileges, as the
holy Oracles, the Promises, the seals of the Covenant, his presence, love,
protection, and blessing in a special manner, here all that acknowledge him to
be their Prophet, Priest, and King, are to be enrolled amongst his household
servants and to present their bodies, and souls, and gifts, and solemn
services for a spiritual sacrifice acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. Being
thus united, they to whom God has given gifts to interpret the Scriptures,
being approved by the Church, and appointed thereunto, may, and ought to teach
publicly the Word of God, by prophesying according to the proportion of faith
for edification, exhortation, and comfort of the Church, till such time as men
may be had fit to such office or offices as Christ has appointed to the
public Ministry of his Church; and then they are upon due trial to proceed
to the choice, and ordination of those officers according to God: and then the
officers are to dispense the seals of the covenant, viz. Baptism to the seed
of the faithful in their infancy, and to others not yet baptized, when by
profession of their faith they are added to the Church: And all of the Church
that are of years, and are able to examine themselves, must communicate also in
the Lords Supper in both kinds, viz. bread and wine.

16. Concerning the Sacraments.
That they are in the ordinance of God signs and seals of Gods everlasting
covenant with us, representing and offering to all receivers, but exhibiting
only to true believers the Lord Jesus Christ and all his benefits unto
righteousness, sanctification, and eternal life, through faith in his name to
the glory and praise of God.

17. Concerning the power of every Church.
That Christ has given the power of choosing Officers, and of receiving in, or
calling of any member, to the whole body together of every Church, and not to
any one member apart, or to more members sequestered from the whole, or to any
other Congregation to do it for them: yet so as every Church ought to use the
best help they can hereunto, and the most meet member they have to pronounce
the same in their public Assembly, if they want Officers. And to this censure
and judgment of Christ, duly and orderly dispensed, every member of the
Congregation, yea, and officer also how excellent or learned soever he be, is
subject. Yet ought not the Church without great care and advice to proceed
against such public persons.

18. Concerning the Communion of Churches.
That although particular Churches be distinct and several independent bodies,
every one as a city compact within its self, without subordination under or
dependence upon any other but Jesus Christ, yet are all Churches to walk by one
and the same rule, and by all means convenient to have the counsel and help
one of another when need requires, as members of one body in the common faith
under Christ their only head.

19. Concerning Church Officers.
That Christ when he ascended up on high gave gifts unto men, and disposed of
them in several functions, and for public ordinary ministry, he gave
Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Deacons, helpers, for the instruction, government,
and service of his Church to the worlds end; and that none may usurp or
execute a Ministry in the Church, but such as are rightly called by the
Church, whereof they stand Ministers, and being so called they ought to give all
diligence to fulfill their ministry, and to be found faithful, and
unblameable in all things: And that this ministry is alike given to every
Church of Christ, with like and equal power, and commission to have and enjoy
the same as God offers fit men, and means, and the same rules are given to
all for the election and execution thereof in all places: which rules and laws
it is not lawful for those Ministers, or for the Church, wittingly to neglect,
or transgress in any part. And those Ministers thus chosen, and executing
their office faithfully; every Church is bound to have them in singular love
for their works sake, to reverence them according to the dignity of their
office which they execute, and to provide for them that they be not entangled
with the cares of this life, according to the law of Christ: And this to do not
as in way of courtesy or mercy, but out of duty to them in the Lord; and
having hope in God that the resurrection shall be of the just and of the
unjust; of the just, to the resurrection of life, and of the unjust to the
resurrection of condemnation.

20. Concerning giving every man his due.
That unto all men is to be given whatsoever is due to them, in regard of their
office, place, gifts, wages, estate, and condition; endeavoring our selves to
have always a conscience void offense toward God, and toward men.

FINIS.

