CONSCIENCE EASED: OR, The main Scruple which has hitherto stuck most with
conscionable Men, against the taking of the Engagement removed.

Where amongst other things is showed,

First, How far the Oath of Allegiance, and the National League and Covenant
are Obligatins; either in their legal inte^ts unalterable or at this time no
more binding and alterable.

Secondly How far in a free People the Subordinate Officers of the State,
have a right to judge of the Proceedings of a King in that State.

Thirdly, How Zedekia'es case in breaking his Oath to the King of Babylon, and
our case in making use of our freedom from the Oath of Allegiance, and
Supremacy to the King of England do differ.

The Author, John Dury.

LONDON, Printed for T. H. in Russell-street, near the Piazza of the
Covent Garden, 1651.

The Errata.
In page 1. line 10. for out soon after, read but soon after. p. 2. l. 22. for
ease, r. case. p. 3. l. 1. for cause, r. clause in the note for summoned, r.
summed. p. 5. l. 1. for must, r. most. l. 8 for many intentions, r. main
intention is. p. 6. line 22. for cease, r. cross, in l. 27 for oppress, r.
oppose. p. 7. l. 6. for of, r. to. line 9. for that, r. what. P. 10. l. 21. for
out your self, r. not your self. p. 11. l. 4. for laws r. lawless. p. 12. l.
24. for Salvus, r. Salus p. 14. l. 14. for show, r. Sphere. p. 16. l. 21. r. in
our places. p. 17. l. 16. for revealed, r. resolved. p. 20. l. 22. for have,
read make. line the last, for Representations, r. Representatives. p. 25 l. 16.
for accepted, r. I excepted. l. 23. r. they are not set. p. 28 l. 26. r. from
under them. p. 33. l. 2. for instructed, r. entrusted. p. 36. l. 14. for him,
r. us in the same line, for toward the K. of Babylon, r. toward our K with
Zedekiahs condition, and his Oath binding him thereunto toward the K. of
Babylon, line 16. for master, r. matter. l. 17. for master r. matter. l. 35.
for imposed, r. employed. p. 4. l. 19. for oblige, r. alleged.

CONSCIENCE EASED; OR, The main Scruple which has hitherto stuck most with
conscionable Men, against the taking of the Engagement, removed.
Loving Friend, and Brother in Christ,
I Had occasion a few days ago, to be with your Son in Law, which put me in
mind of the discourses, which you had with me when we met last at his house:
whereat I found my self under a guilt of some neglect of duty toward you,
which now I am willing to confess, to deprecate and amend. All that I have to
say for my self is, that soon after you were gone from hence; I did indeed, as
I promised, put my thoughts concerning your Scruple to Paper; out soon after I
went out of Town, and all this last Summer, having bin variously distracted, and
several times in the country, I could not atrend the ripening and transcribing
them to be imparted unto you: once I did set upon it to do it, but was by a
very pressing occasion taken off The occasion of this discourse.
again, and some time since I have thought upon my promise, but I know not how
I was willing to believe that happily you were satisfied, and should not now
need any suggestions which I could offer; and thus I have protracted the
discharge of this Duty, till the other day I was struck with some remorse, and
found cause to be ashamed of my self, that all this while I had not made good
my promise, made to you so long ago; nor done that which was befitting my love
and friendship to you in Christ; when as I did not certainly know how far
your spirit was now quieted, which happily might lie as much under a doubt as
ever: but that which does now more effectually waken me to this performance, is
that among all the objections against the Engagement; which I have bin obliged
to reflect upon since I saw you; I do not remember that the matter of your
scruple, has bin so deeply pressed by any as by your self, and two or three
days ago, by a very honest and Godly Gentleman, who is pinched just as and
the scope there of which is to rrsolve the chief Scruple about the Engagement.
you were, and brought your ease fully again to my mind; which I find when I
lay it seriously to heart, the deepest, most inward, and weightiest Scruple of
any that does belong unto this business: Therefore I shall now ar last (rather
thus late, then never) acquaint you with what I have to say unto it to clear
it.

I find by your Paper which I have, that your Scruple which does rise from two
causes, viz. 1. from the mis-interpretation of the Engagement.
does rise from two things. First, from your interpretatiou of the words of the
Engagement, when you put the whole Emphasis in the latter clause thereof, viz.
As it is now established, without a King, und House of Lords: which you
conceive is the cause intended to be more directly obligatory then the
foregoing; viz. To be true and faithful to the Commonwealth of England.
Secondly, because you conceive that the sense of the 2. From the contradiction
between it, and the Oath of Allegiance.
Engagement, as you understand it, does contain a direct contradiction to the
true meaning of the Oath of Allegiance, and of the National Covenant; for your
difficulty lies in this, how to bring the intentions which you had in the
former Engagements, to a Righteous Consistencie, with the intention which you
conceive you ought to have in this Engagement; all which difficulty you reduce
to this practical Syllogism, under which your conscience is concluded at
present.

He that is under a lawful Oath and Covenant of both are summoned up in one
practical Sylogisme.
the Lord, may not lawfully do any such thing as tends directly to take him
off from acting in righteous ways, according to his Oath and Covenant: But I
am (say you under a lawful Oath and Covenant of the Lord, to assist the
jurisdictions annexed unto the Imperial Crown of this Realm, in the
preservation of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdom; and to
endeavor to preserve the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, as they were at
the taking of the Covenant, and the entering into the present Engagement (as the
proper sense thereof is obvious to me) tends directly to take me off for ever
from acting even in righteous ways according to this Oath and Covenant:
therefore I cannot lawfully enter thereinto, Prove. 4. 27.

To enlarge your spirit from this straight, I conceive there is none other way
but to clear your apprehension from the mistakes wherein you are concerning
The way to resolve the Scruple.
the intent of the National Covenant, and of the Oath of Allegiance, compared
with the true intent of the present Engagement: for if it shall appear that you
run upon a clear mistake, concerning the true and righteous intents of any of
these, then your Scruple will be found groundless, because the opposition
which you imagine to be between them (under which imagination your Conscience
is straightened,) will be removed.

To this effect then let me recommend unto your serious perusal, that which I
have said to the Cheshire and Lancashire Ministers plea for non-subscribers;
where I show their mistake about the maine object of truth and faithfulness
required in the Engagement:; for although their mistak does rise from the
misconstruction of the word Commonwealth, whereat you seem not to be
staggered, so as they are, yet the grounds which are there obliged to clear
the sense of the Engagement, may be of use to let you see that the Emphasis The
resolution of the first part thereof.
cannot be there where you place it; but that the chief Emphasis must be placed
there, where the proper disposition of the words, the nature of the matters
expressed therein, and the public Declarations given out to that very purpose,
place it; for if their public Declarations tend mainly to this, that to show
themselves true and faithful to the good of the Nation, they have constituted it
to be a free State, or Commonwealth, by the removal of the King, and House of
Lords, who did usurp upon the Liberties of the Nation, and if the disposition
of the words and matters of the Engagement, in their Grammatical and Rational
Construction, are must consonant to this pla^ne intent of their Declatations;
then we ought to place the Emphasis of the words, not in the latter but in the
former clause of the Engagement, because the end wherefore the establishment
has bin made without a King, and House of Lords is, to make England a Common
wealth, or free State; and therefore their many intentions to oblige every one,
who shall live in it and enjoy the Liberties thereof, to be true and faithful
thereunto; and I am sure you understand by Truth and Faithfulness, not a mere
negative, but a positive durifulnesse: now to make the privative part of the
establishment to be the proper and principal object of such a dutifulness,
when the positive establishment is directly and immediately both in the
position of the words, and in the property of the things set before it, seems
to me to proceed rather from a spirit of Jealousy against their persons, then
from reason and ingenuity, in considering the meaning of their words.

If then nothing but an injurious Jealousy does put the Emphasis where you
place it, you may free your self from that ground of your Scruple, if you will
be but so equitable, as to take the words of the Engagement, in a sense
containing a just Duty which it clearly bears; and if you can do this, which
I hope you will not find a Scruple to do; then in the next place I shall
entreat you to weigh these following Propositions in Thesi without prejudice
whether yea or no they are not sound and without al exception; which if you
do, I hope they will conduce somewhat to the clearing of the rest of your
Scruple.

1. That no humane Engagements, are, or ought to Grounds to clear the second
part of the Scruple, showing,
be binding to the conscience of those that take them; further, then the
meaning of those that give them is declared and assented unto by the taker.

2. That no Engagements, whereof the meaning is 1. How far humane Engagement
are binding.
declared, ought to be further binding to the conscience, then the intent
declared is lawful and allowable in the presence of God.

3. That the intents of no Engagements amongst men can be further lawful and
allowable in the presence of God, then as they are subordinate unto the main
rules of our Christian Profession, and to the principles of natural equity in
humane societies, whence this Corallary will follow.

That if upon unfore-seen accidents and emergences 2. What may alter them.
(which alter the nature of all humane affairs) one and the same intent and
design, may be at one time agreeable to these Rules and Principles, and at
another time become disagreable thereunto: then that intent and design, not
only may, but must be laid down; for it is wholly unlawful to maintain any
purposes which cease the practice or the profession of duties flowing from
these Rules and Principles.

4. That the intents and designs of the Oath of Allegiance, 3. What the intents
of the Oath of Allegiance, and National Covenant are.
and of the National Covenant, were never made by the Parliaments, which framed
them to contradict one another; or in their proper times to oppress the rules
of our Christian profession, or the principles of natural equity by which our
society is upheld: although in respect of certain expressions, which relate to
the circumstances of several times, wherein they were framed, they are
clearly different one from another.

Whence this again will follow.

That to be obliged to different intentions (though contrary) upon several
occasion (if both agree in their proper times to the forenamed Rules and
Principles) this can be no breach of Duty, or prejudice of Conscience.

5. That it does belong only to the Superior 4. To whom it does belong to
Judge of public intentions and designs and forms of Government.
powers of Humane societies to judge and determine at all times that the
public Engagements and Designs ought to be, and what the form of Government
is, which is most proper for the times, and agreeable to Natural Equity to be
yielded unto by all for common preservation in Humane societies.

6. That the Supreme Powers cannot be bound 5. What power the supreme
governors have in altering government.
up unalterably to any particular design or Humane Engagement; so as not to be
free upon Emergencies to entertain other designs and Engagements; when they
shall think it most expedient for Common safety, and agreeable to Christianity,
nay, they are not only free to do this, but they are bound to it: else they
are not faithful to the Charge which God has committed to them.

7. That Subjects (that is, particular men in private 6. By what rule private
men should order their thoughts about the intents of public engagements to
Judge thereof.
stations) ought not to make themselves interpreters of the intents of public
Engagements, otherwise then as they are agreeable to the Rules of Christianity,
and the Principles of Natural equity; and so far as they bear a sense
agreeable unto these; so far they are bound in conscience professedly to own
them, but if a sense be imposed upon them contrary to any of these, then they
are not obliged to own that sense.

From whence I suppose this will follow.

That whatsoever any man's private intention or 7. By what rule humane intents
about public engagements are altergble.
sense of any public Engagement may be, when he takes it: if afterward he
finds clearly and convincingly that either his intention was not subordinate
unto the public at all, but only to some private aim; or though it was
truly in his thought subordinate thereunto, but not agreeable to the Rules and
Principles of Christianity and equity; (I say) if he finds himself mistaken
either way; he is bound to rectify his mistake, and bring his sense in
observing the same unto the proportion of the forenamed Rules and Principles of
Christianity and natural equity.

If these Propositions are to you, as to me they are, The application of these
grounds to the scruple in hand, showing generally that to come out of it we
must consider
sound and without exception, I suppose they may show you a way to come out of
the strait whereinto your conscience is concluded: for if you apply them to the
case in hand; concerning this present engagement, with respect to former
engagements; and do make all their intents, according to the circumstances
wherein they were begotten commensurable one to another, by the rules and
principles of Christianity and natural equity; you will find either no cause
at all to take up in your mind such contradictory intentions, as you have
imagined to be therein: or if the circumstances of affairs shall be found
such, as will enforce by these rules and principles to allow of a change of
intentions in the latter which was not in the fo^mer engagements; then your
spirit will be set at liberty, from the strait wherein it is; which proceeds
only from the want of this due consideration, as I conceive; for when I put my
self in your case (which to give you an unpartiall advice, I must do) I find
but two ways to be ridd of the scruple 1. That the same main intent is to be
in all public engagements.
wherein you are ensnared; the one is by looking upon the main intent and
fundamental duty which is the life and soul of all these engagements. a thing
unalterably one and the same in them all, viz: common safety and welfare: to
the prosecution of which (by the law of God in right reason) all public
engagements are at all times subordinate; though the means and ways diversely
mentioned therein do vary.

The other is by looking upon the evedent emergencies 2. That the means are to
be alterable by emergencies and the rules and principles of proceedings still
the same.
which bring a change upon the means and ways of prosecuting that intent, for
it is undeniable that as the Circumstances of Humane affairs alter, so the
Engagements to prosecute Common safety and welfare therein are alterable. If
then I can see that notwithstanding the changeableness of Emergencies, and the
variety of means resulting from thence, the same end is prosecuted by the
same Rules and Principles, I am still where I was; and no more out of my way,
then if in a Voyage at Sea, whiles I am steering the same course; I have
sometimes fair, and sometimes foul weather; or a wind sometimes on this,
sometimes on that side of the Ship; which does oblige the Mariners to nothing
else but to trim the Sails somewhat in another way, and stand more or less
carefully to their tackling.

Now to make some application of this to our Particularly that we should
consider.
case, I conceive whiles the King and Parliament did agree, and the trust of
Common safety was reposed in him by his observance of the Laws; The Oath of
Allegiance like a fair gale in fair weather, did carry us on peaceably
toward the Haven of common safety: but when he was judged to manage his Trust
unfaithfully, as intending not to steare his course by Law, but by will: the
Covenant first like a side-wind on the one hand came in with foul weather, and
then the Engagement came in after it, as a change of wind on the other side of
the Ship; both winds (as it is natural to all side-windes) may serve to carry
the Ship safely to her harbor, if the Mariners trim the Sails well, and the
Passengers do not disturb them in their functions: for if the same aim of
common welfare is really intended by all three Engagements, though they put it
under different expressions; then you are not out of your way by taking any of
them, if contrary to the rules of Christianity, you must put out your self out
of it; For that which in the Oath of Allegiance is required to be performed
toward the jurisdictions annexed 1. That wherein all former engagements have
one aim.
unto the Imperial Crown of this Realm, is termed in the National Covenant,
the defense of the Kings Person and just Authority in the preservation of the
true Religion and liberties of the Kingdoms; all which in this present
Engagement is summed up and expressed by truth and faithfulness to the
Commonwealth of England. The King, whiles he was in place of Trust, was looked
upon as the Center of all common interests, and the Guardian of public
safety; next unto the Laws and Legislative power, (for indeed he is no King,
de jure, further then he agrees with these, and is a living Law in all his
deportments) but when he made himself Laws, and would by power have set
himself up instead of the 2. What the emergencie was which did alter our
relation to the King.
Law, the Trustees of the Nation, to whom the Legislative and the Executive
power does primarily belong; thought it necessary to express the forenamed
Interests instrusted to his management, (and therefore by the Oath of
Allegiance fixed upon his name) more directly, properly, and immediately, by
the name of a Commonwealth, the safety of which was mainly intended by the
Oath of Allegiance, although the words thereof mention our relation only to
the King. If then when you took the Oath of Allegiance, your intention was not
so much to oblige your self to the welfare of the Nation, in that way of
settlement, Or to that way of settlement in order to Common welfare; as to the
maintaining of a mere Royal greatness for it self, or to the maintaining of
the Kings person in his Royal 3. What the mistake was might be at first in
taking the oath of allegiance which now is to be rectified.
greatness without respect to Common welfare; you did wholly mistake the true
and Legal intent of your Oath; and because that such an imagination had crept
insensibly upon the spirits of many, by whom the King thought he could have
exalted himself to be absolute above the Nations liberties; therefore the
Parliaments of both Nations finding that the name of a King was made an Idol
to the prejudice of that for which it was entertained, joined in the Covenant,
to rectify that mistake, by determining that the true notion of Common welfare
and safety, did mainly and more nearly stand in the maietenance of Religion
and Liberty, with the Rights and privileges of Parliament, then in the having
of a King; And since the Covenant has been made void, as to the Nations, by
reason of the hostility which has been used between them; the Supreme power
of this Nation, has for it self (as distinct from Scotland) determined in
reference to the emergencies sprung up since the making of the Covenant, that
the true notion of Common welfare and safety, as to us, does now stand in the
maintaining of the Commonwealth by it self, immediately, without a King and
House of Lords; For the having of a King and House of Lords, were never by the
rules of Christianity and natural equity, understood otherwise to be useful,
but in order to the Commonwealth: If therefore at any time, they wereby any
taken up for themselves, without a due subordination to the Commonwealth: It
is a clear mistake of the true meaning of their constitution; and by the
principles of Natural equity, it is in the power of the Trustees for the
Commonwealth to rectify it, not is there any rule in Christianity which is not
consonant unto this, that Salvus populi is Suprema Lex, therefore they who are
entrusted with Authority and power to see this Law kept: it according to the
best of their understandings upon different emergencies they alter the means
of procuring it, and determine the way of prosecuting it; I cannot see what
should move the consciences of particular men to be offended at 4. And what
obligation lies
them for so doing; or what warrant they can have in Christianity or natural
equity to cross them in upon private men to follow their rulers in the way of
rectifying this mistake.
their proceedings; If they prescribe nothing to those that are in subjection,
which is in it self impious or unlawful; for if they do prescribe any such
thing, the Law of God is clear; but if nothing of this kind be enjoined, but
only that which is in its own nature alterable, according to circumstances,
(of which circumstances they by their places are made Judges (and not I) then I
suppose it is undeniably clear, that my conscience ought not to be bound up so
to any one particular circumstance of proceeding toward the public safety,
as that I may not have the liberty, upon the change of circumstances, to follow
them whom in alterable matters God has made my Leaders for the public good.
For if it belongs to their proper charge to judge when, and where, and what
change is to be made in the State; and how the public good by Public
Resolutions is to be advanced therein: and if I am bound to trust them with
this, and am not permitted by the law of God in Christianity or common equity
to take upon me to be their judge, or to rule them, or to overrule the
judgments of other men under them, against their sense therein; then my
conscience is at liberty and under no guilt; Although I follow their dictates
in affairs which are changeable: I must only look to this, that in my private
station, my course upon all emergencies whatsoever be made answerable to the
rules of Christianity and equity, in the circumstances of mine own way whereof
I am to be a judge for my self: and if in these circumstances I subordinate by
these rules my proceedings to common safety, I discharge the duty of a true
and faithful Subject; and need not to trouble my spirit further with higher
matters: for if I do trouble my self with them, I bring my self into a snare;
because I observe not the bounds wherein I am at liberty. but go beyond them.

If these grounds cannot be contradicted Rationally; then I suppose you will
see thereby, that you The conclusion of the maine scruple
need not to be concluded so as you think you are obliged to be unalterably
under the precise terms of the former Engagements, in opposition to this;
because the true and Legal intent thereof is fully made out, so far as
concerns the show of your judicature in this last Engagement.

Therefore when you say in your discourse to me, that the Oath of Allegiance
and the National Covenant are such Sacred and everlasting Obligements The
consequence inferred upon the maine scruple is proposed.
upon the consciences of these that are under them, that they can never
lawfully by enterring into any after-Ingagements bind up themselves from acting
in good and lawful ways (if the Lord be pleased to open any such in after
times) for the assisting of the jurisdictions formerly annexed to the Imperial
Crown of this Realm; and for the preserving of the Rights of Parliament then
acknowledged, when the Covenant was taken, as far forth as the Imperial
jurisdictions and And then opened and resolved to show.
Parliamentary Rights are Consistent with the true Religion and liberties of
the Kingdom.

I say, when you assert this, you mean either to make every particular man a
Judge of the restrictive clause how far the Imperial Jurisdictions and
Parliamentary Rights, are consistent with the true Religion and Liberties of
the Kingdom, or not; If you will make every particular man a competent judge
of Imperial jurisdictions, of Parliamentary Rights, and of the consistency
thereof in reference to all public emergencies, with the true Religion and
the Liberties of the Kingdom, you will be obliged to show me some grounds for
this your opinion; and to make it appear that I have erred in my fifth
proposition, which I suppose is not to be contradicted.

But if you will not make every private or particular man a public Judge of
those things; and yet will allow them to be determined upon all emerge^t
public occasions by some body in a public way; then it will I suppose fall
to the share of the Supreme powers for the time being to make this
determination: and if it be their right upon all emergencies to Judge what
consistencie there is between the true Religion and the liberties of the
Kingdom) which to me are essential requisities of the common welfare and
safety of a christian common wealth with the imperial Jurisdictions and the
Parliamentary Rights, then I suppose inferiors ought either to be concluded by
their determination, or not. If not, how can it be supposed to be their right?
what ground is there left upon such occasions, to avoid confusion and to keep
a settlement of order and governments? But if they ought to be concluded by
their superiors in these things; and if their superiors Judge it fit or
necessary for common safety, to alter the terms of these former public
engagements; how can their obligements as to these things be called
everlasting and never alterable? for if these that have a right to alter the
same, find cause so That all humane Constitutions being alterable no
everlasting and unalterable obligement can be brought upon men's consciences
thereby
to do: and do as they find cause; and if none are to be Judges of the causes
of that alteration but they themselves; and if the rest are to be concluded by
them, how can the obligement of the conscience be made everlasting to a matter
in it is own nature alterable? I conceive then that no everlasting obligement
can be brought upon the conscience of any man but by God himself in things by
his authority made unalterable in their nature: and except that you can show me
that the Imperial jurisdictions mentioned in the oath of Allegiance, and the
Parliamentary privileges and rights which then were, are made by his authority
of a nature unalterable, I cannot allow you that by any engageme^t (though
never so strong) whereby we are bound unto them, an everlasting and
unalterable obligement can be brought upon any man's conscience: Our oaths never
to alter; or to maintain a form of government in places and callings
faithfully and truly, does not make the form neither in it is own nature, nor
as to us and to the public unalterable by superior powers upon emergencies:
they only bind us, nor to be accessory as private men, that is, by private
practices unto the alteration thereof, so long as they are consistent with
common safety, which is only determinable by the supreme power of a nation: for
I suppose you never meant that those obligements should hold, although all
public welfare and common safety should go to wrack for their sakes. If then
they were at the very time of their making to be understood, as subordinate
unto this condition; that is, to be alterable if upon emergencies they should
be found contrary to common safety; how can they be counted an evelasting
obligement as you would make them to be? can your particular oath predetermine
you in humane affairs not to be obliged to yield to divine Providence therein?
or not to follow what is determined by the rules of Christianity and equity?

You see then upon what grounds to my understanding the present engagement and
former oaths either agree; or are lawfully alterable without any just scruple
of conscience to be made by me, in my place at the public alteration thereof.

This is your main doubt; and thus to me it is revealed.

The other doubts which (you say your self) lie not near the heart of the
business; I need not meddle withal: for if these principles which I have
laid; and the application thereof which I have made, be without exception,
then other by-matters cannot reach to the conscience in this business: yet
Concerning some secondary doubts.
ex abundanti; that I may pay you some interest for the long delay of
discharging this debt: and that nothing may be wanting which may tend to clear
your thoughts in this disquirie; I shall take the other doubts of your
discourse as you have offered them into consideration, First you say that my
assertion concerning the power of Subordinate officers is, Questionable. My
assertion was; that Subordinate officers belonging to a State are bound to
Judge of the rights of these that are over them; both by which 1. Concerning
the right which subordinate officers have to Judge of the actings of superiors.
they stand in their places of supremary; and by which they proceed in their
actings toward Subjects, lest they be made the instruments of arbitrary power
and Tyranny. This assertion you say is Questionable. But to clear the doubt
which you may have of it, take notice, that I speak of officers belonging to a
State, as immediately subordinate thereunto, and not depending upon a King,
though the Supreme Officer therein: I suppose then that they are appointed by
the Authority of the State it self, and placed in their Offices thereby, and
not by the authority of the K. This being presupposed, that these officers are
thus created and stand in their places, I conceive that which I have said of
them to be a truth very matteriall to be cleared, to show not only how a
people may lawfully (I mean by the law of Nature) free themselves from the
danger of Tyranny; but how private men who are in no public place of Trust;
may be induced to discern what is most conducible for public Safety by the
Authority of their Leaders. To have then this matter determined; we may reflect
upon two things: First, what To determine that which is doubtful concerning
this matter is considered.
Constitutions and Customs the Nations pretending to Freedom have made, or
keep up, concerning the subordination of Officers, under their highest Powers,
Secondly, what the Ground and main Principle of subordination of Officers is in
Nature, and what the end of their employment under Supreme Powers is. What
sorts of officers are in use among free nations


We find by the Constitutions or Customs of free Nations, three sorts of
subordinate Officers in their States; Some are placed by the Representatives of
a Nation in their Offices; Some by him that is in the place of Supremacy over
it: some by both jointly.

The first, although in respect of Power they are less, and in Order they are
after him who is Supreme (because his place is first, and his Power is of a
larger extent then theirs) yet because they receive not their places from him,
but from the same 1. Such as are set up by the State it self.
Authority whence he has his; Therefore they are not accountable to him of
their proceedings, but unto those only who gave them their authority.

Thus in Poland, Sweden, and Denmark, by the ancient constitution of those
States, there are several offices of state, as chancellors and chief Justices,
and Admirals who are appointed by Parliament; and so hold their places from it,
and not from their Kings. Thus you had in England a Constable of the Kingdom,
whom the Parliament did appoint. But King James never rested till he was
removed. Thus in the Empire the electors are under the Emperor; not as his
officers, but as Officers of the Empire it self; they are instrusted to be
Judges of the right and title of him who is to be Supreme; and they have a
power in their college to control him in his proceedings if he become
exorbitant; for they may say to him, what do thou? this then is an allay of
his imperial power; and so are all officers of this nature any where else; an
allay to the absoluteness of the Royal power.

The second sort of subordinate officers, are such as depend merely upon him
that is supreme in a Nation: for he has power in the charge wherewith he 2.
Such as are set up by the Supreme Officer of State.
is entrusted to make and unmake his own instruments; so that they are to be
counted properly his officers subordinate to the charge, whereof he is the
chief administrator: these are therefore responsable unto him first, and then
also to the State, even as he himself is by whom they are employed. These
officers although they have no paaticular trust reposedin the^ by the nation;
yet because they are made isntrumental in the administration of a trust which
the nation has reposed in him, who does create them and set them at work,
therefore they are responsable for the effects of their administration, to
those from whom the first trust does proceed; and to whose advantage or
disadvantage the way of their administration does finally redound: whence it
follows that these officers are bound both for their own safety, and for the
obligation which lies upon them toward the state, to judge both of the power
which their superior takes upon himself to exercise, and whereof he pretends
to have a right to have them his instruments, and also of the manner and
property of the work which they are employed in, lest they should under him at
his will, being led blindfold to obey, become instruments of Tyranny and
injustice, Thus the servants of Saul (though soldiers who are otherwise bound
to a most strict obedience justly refused to be the executioners, of his
cruelty in killing the priests of the Lord. 1. Sam. 22. 17.

The third sort of subordinate officers, are such as are constituted by the
joint consent and concurrence of both; as when the Representations of a free
State; viz: the supreme council thereof, agree with a governor whom they call
and choose; that he shall place none in special offices under him; The third by
such as are set up by both Jointly.
for the administration of their public concerments but such as shall be
taken out of a certain number whom they shall present unto him: so that the
Election of two or three Persons, indefinitely, as capable of the place, is in
the power of the Senate; but the distinct appointment and nomination of one who
is to have the place, is left to the Supreme Governor. Thus in the Low
Countries Burgemasters of Towns and Sheriffs of the Territories were
constituted by the Prince who was their Governor; and in several Provnces,
there and elsewhere, other Officers of State, are constituted by such a
concurrence of Election on the one, and Nomination on the other side, that the
power of conferring authority is divided; and the subordinate officers receive
in their places a trust from both, and become accountable unto both in several
respects.

These are the Customs and Constitutions of 2. Concerning the principle and
ground of subordination.
free Nations, to prevent the abuse of Power in their Officers.

As for the Principle whence naturally Subordination does proceed; I conceive
it to be the necessity of Unity and Order in a society, for the manageme^t of
public affairs, wherein all are concerned, for to avoid the dissolving of
Societies, joint Relations and Duties belonging thereunto, must be settled as a
common interest, and to avoid the confusion which would follow upon the
manageme^t of that interest, if it were left to every one to do in it, what he
should think good; the Trust thereof must needs lie in some hands; and the
nature of that Trust must be determined by a law, which should be the effect of
the free consent of those that are interested in the Public to provide the
welfare thereof, and because no single hand can be every where by it self; at
the same time; to discharge a large Trust which has many parts; whereof the
one is to be made helpful to the other: therefore many are employed in order
to one another, and all to the original of power by whom they are set aworke.

And concerning the direct and Immediate end of subordination, 3. Concerning
the end of subordination.
it is to bring all transactions to one issue; namely to the safety and welfare
of the Communalitie, by the a dministration of duties according to laws,
whereby every one is to have his due from another; which is called Justice. And
the Indirect and Accidental end of Subordination and coordination of Officers
under a Supreme, is to prevent by the bounds of offices, and the distribution
of Power belonging thereunto; the Tyrannical incroachment of Power into one
single hand; lest an absolute Arbitrary dominion be taken up over those, who by
the law of Nature and of Christianity being free, put themselves voluntarily in
an orderly Subjection to a Superior power. For in my apprehension all humane
actions, whether natural or spiritual depend upon power: (I mean by power a
might and strength to produce an effect) and wheresoever God or men have
disposed of power, and placed strength to act for a public interest; there
What is properly meant by authority.
is also a right to administer that power to that effect; that is to put it
forth toward others to that end: This right I do call Authority; because it
intitles a man unblameablely to become the Author of the undertakings, for
which he has received power; and to be a leader of others who should concur
therein with him: this right or authority is not unlimited or commensurable
only to the utmost extent of what power is able to do; so that he who has
power may do with it what ever he will and can; but it is bounded in nature by
the end for which it is given; and in societies of reasonable men by a law to
become serviceable to a common good: and if upon emergencies no positive law
be extant to determine the Circumstantiall way of using power and authority;
then the general law of Nature and of Christianity is to take place, which is
the law of liberty, by which all cases may be determined so far as to make
our actions at least without offense, if not also acceptable to those to whom
they are done. This law is, give no occasion to the flesh, but by love serve
one another; and the rule of this service is; what ever you would have others
Gal. 5. 13. Luke 6. 31.
do to you; do ye to them likewise. To be in authority is to have a right to
act in a place for the public good, so as to be an author of some
undertaking; and to be obliged to lead others therein: which obligation does
naturally arise from the trust of power put in the hands of him that has
received it, to act toward those and for those that give it; to the end for
which it is bestowed: whereof there is a clear example in the power given to
the constable of every parish; who is obliged to be the author of public
undertakings in the sphere of the Trust reposed in him, though otherwise he is
a man of no respect.

Upon these grounds the subordinate Offices of a State, may judge and act in
their places for the public good, to prevent Tyranny, and the incroachment of
absolute power in him who is entrusted with the highest power: and if these
grounds be sound (as I suppose they are) they will clear the justice and
equity of the Parliament proceedings in their late Transactions with the King;
whereupon a change of Government is fallen out in this State; which being
brought about by the Supremacy of power in the Representatives of the people,
and by a right to act for the public good in the subordinate Officers of the
State; private Persons are bound to acquiesce thereat, and to regulate their
intentions according to the Rules and Principles of Natural equity and
Christianity in their several places, as Emergencies do require.

This matter which you did call Questionable, but would not debate, I have thus
endeavored to open somewhat largely, because it is of use to undeceive us from
the false Notion of Royal power, which does insensibly breed many scruples;
when it is taken up unawares, without a due examination of the right which it
has to Supremacy, in a Nation which is to be governed by Laws, and not by
will of a Monarch But you have other matters in your discourse, which you
thought more worthy of a debate; and you take them chiefly from three Passages
of my considerations; to show that they are not satisfactory to resolve your
present Scruple; to these I shall also impart unto you my present thoughts.

In Page 6. I say, that private men cannot be counted 2. Concerning the guilt
of breach of covenant in private persons.
guilty of a breach of Covenant, because there was a change of Government
brought upon the State by others in a way to them unresistable in their places.

To this you answer: As I was not guilty (say you) of what others did (whether
well or ill, I leave it freely to the judgment of the Lord and their own
conscience) in a way unresistable as to me in my place; so I cannot lawfully
bind up my self from acting in my place in lawful ways for the accomplishment
of my Oath and Covenant, without guilt of sin, and despising the Oath of the
Lord.

To this I answer: That the present Engagement, if you look upon it as
containing a perpetual Duty to be true and faithful to the Commonwealth; is
That the engagement brings no such guilt upon any
so far from binding you up from acting that which in your place, is fitting
for you to do, toward the accomplishment of your Oath and Covenant (so far
as they are binding) that it rather does oblige you to act in your present
place, that which is the ground, by which your Oath and Covenant did Legally
bind you to a Duty; and without which they could not at all be binding, which
in the beginning of this Discourse and elsewhere also I have showed.

As for me, I do not think it lawful to suffer my self to be bound up, by
any Emergencies whatsoever, or any Resolutions of mine own, from the Intentions
of performing known Duties; Nor do I think it lawful for any Christian to
think himself tied by any Oaths or Covenants whatsoever, so, as at any time he
should be thereby bound up from the performance of any clear and undeniable
Duty toward God and Men in his place; therefore I plainly assert that the
Allegation of Oaths and Covenan^s, which does tend to take me off from an
undoubted Duty, is undoubredly undutifull: for which cause, when the Engagement
was offered unto me, I did set my self to look upon it, not as you do, to see
what sense it might bear contrary to any former Duty; but to see what the Duty
was which it did directly require, and which I was bound at this time, Rebus
sic Stantibus, or at all times to intend: and having made a Declaration of my
Sense in taking the Engagement to this effect; and my Sense being accepted, or
not accepted against by those that were imposers thereof; I thought it my Duty
to rest there, and not to trouble my self any further; either with the
Conjectures of future Contingencies, as some do: or as others But that the
prejudices which some entertain against the Authors of our change lays the
imputation of that guilt.
do, with jealousies over the intentions of my Rulers; or with the Censures of
miscarriages, which others imagine to be in those over whom they are set to be
Judges; for although you leave it (as you say) freely to God to judge, whether
the present Change be well or ill brought about; yet give me leave to tell you,
that I cannot perceive that your Spirit is free without prejudice against them
in reference to the change: for if you had no prejudicate thoughts that way;
you could not make such a construction of the engagement as you do, relating to
the change as it is opposite to a duty which you think lies upon you by the tie
of an Oath and Covenant. Therefore if there be a clear and perpetual duty
both in the former and latter Engagements in something wherein their senses
agree, and yet if you will not own that, but take up that rather wherein their
senses may seem to disagree; I may conclude that you either mistake the true
meaning of the oath and Covenant; or that you understand not your tie at this
time, in observing the same, how far it is to be extended: for if it cannot
be extended, to oblige you to neglect any present and seasonable Duty; then
you misapply your sense thereof, to the present occasions, so, as to make it a
snare unto your conscience; which for your own Peace sake you should endeavor
to avoid.

But to that which I say in page 8. concerning 3. Concerning the tie of former
engagememts that it is extinct.
the tie of the former Oaths that is extinct so far as the things promised
therein are become either impossible in themselves; or in reference to our
calling unlawful to be prosecuted: you answer, that you cannot apprehend your
obligation to be extinct toward the matter of the oath of Allegiance and
covenant, whiles you may possibly in lawful ways consistent with the public
welfare and liberties of the Common Wealth and agreeable to your calling (viz.
by Petitioning, humble Remonstrance to the Parliament, or the like Peaceable
course) have an opportunity offered you to endeavor the restitution and
preservation of the ancient rights and Privilegdes of Parliament and the Kings
Authority, in the preservation of the true Religion and Liberties of the
Kingdom.

And then to that which I say page 9. that it is not lawful for any in a
private calling to attend the restoring of that which by public Authority
has been abolished; you add further by the way of answer that is true in a
way of force and fraud; but that it holds not as to ways humble, peaceable,
and consistent with public welfare; to which the Oath and Covenant,
immediately and undispensably extend.

To all which I shall answer: that humane laws Because humane laws relare
only to outward actions, and not to secret ententions.
such as the Engagement is, respect only men's outward actions, and oblige us to
be true and faithful therein to what we declare, but the inward purposes of
the mind which occasionally may be framed, no laws of man can regulate: these
are subject only to the general rules of equity which Gods law does
prescribe; therefore if emergencies be so circumstantiated as you suppose they
may be, to incline your thoughts to such a purpose as you speak of, the rules
of natural equity and Christianity must direct you then as then, in
declaring your desires how to make them harmless and consistent with the
public welfare: and what need you fear that any will harm you if you follow
that 1 Pet. 3. 13.
which is good? but that you should imagine still that your obligation to
maintain Royalty, is not extinct, is somewhat a wonder unto me: for if the
matter of the Oath of Allegiance and Covenant had any legal being, you might
and ought to intend the preserva^ion thereof in your place and calling; but
since that does clearly cease to have a being, it is not imaginable to me that
any private man in his Sphere should be bound to in end or endeavor the
restitution thereof. For that the form of a Because the matter of the Oath of
Allegiance does clearly cease.
Royal government has no real being amongst us to oblige us to maintain it;
is so clear that none can make any doubt of it; and that the l^te Kings
progeny (though they have a being innature, yet) have no legal being in place
of trust or government as to us; is no less evident; therefore what should be
the ground to make you believe; that your former obligement to Royalty, or to
the late Kings heirs (who did forfeit his place of Trust, as for himself so
for his posterity) should still be binding, is a kind of riddle unto me, upon
what account you take up that obligation to continue: for if the Allegiance
which you promised to the King, to his heirs and successors could oblige you,
no more but to be a good Subject in your place, and to maintain him and them
in their Legal standing over you, by your legal submission unto him and them;
then it follows, that in case either they should have no such standing over
you, or you should remove under them; that your obligation comes to an end: for
either way the relation ceasing the obligation is made void. Nor is there any
clause to oblige you to restore them to such a state, in case they should come
to fail of it; nor could any such clause be obligatorie although you you had
promised it, because no man can lawfully be obliged to that which is not in
his power. to effect.

Therefore I say, that by virtue of these former Because former Engagements
bind not to a restitution of Royalty if abolished by public Authority.
Engagements, it can be no part of your Duty to intend the restitution of those
things, which are now by public Authority abolished; For if this should be an
absolute Duty, then also it must be a Duty to prosecute the same absolutely;
and if I am bound absolutely, (that is without any condition) to prosecute the
restitution of a Royal Power over me; Then I cannot with a good Conscience
acquiesce at the abolition thereof upon any terms whatsoever: nay, although
the abolition be never so well and lawfully brought about: which to assert is a
great Paradox, and yet except all this be granted, your position cannot stand.
Therefore I am clearly convinced, not only by the Law of God commanding me to
be subject to the Powers that are over me; but by the true and Legal intent of
the former Engagements, that it is my Duty at this time to acquiesce at the
abolition of things publicly removed: and if so, then it cannot be my Duty to
prosecute the Restitution thereof; and if it is not my Duty now to prosecute
their Restitution, then also it is not lawful for me to intend such a thing:
for if I intend it, I am resolved in my heart to attempt that which is no part
of my present Duty, and to work a change upon the present settlement, which
the Word of God forbids me to meddle withal, Prove. 24. 21. For as formerly I
might not in my Sphere intend to bring a change upon the State from the
settlement that then was; so now the same Rule holds, I may not intend to bring
a change upon the State from the settlement that now is. And although I take
this to be a Rule for me in my private place to order my purposes by; yet I do
not think this Rule binds the Supreme Power of a Nation; the Representatives
thereof, when they are in a body acting their public Trust; as if then it
were not lawful for them Because the representatives of a nation may be
obliged upon Emergencies to alter the form of Royal government.
according to Emergencies to be obliged to alter the forms of Government in
the Nation: for although every one of them in their private station and at
their admission to their Trust, may have taken the Oath and promised to
maintain the Government in that form wherein they found it when they took
their oath, yet when they are upon the deliberation of the public; wherein
Salus Populi is to be their Suprema Lex. No humane constitution or particular
obligation, can bind them in a body from what they shall find most expedient in
that case to be done. And if the emergencies may be such, as to oblige them in
the discharge of their trust to alter the government for public safeties,
notwithstanding their oath of Allegiance to maintain it: far more when the
alteration is wrought publicly, may private men (who have no power to judge of
such concerments; nor to act therein without their leader be dispensed
withal, from being obliged to intend the restoration of that which by
public authority has been abolished, notwithstanding their Oath, binding
them to maintain it whiles it was in being.

Now because yougive me cause here to reflect upon that which was formerly
alleged in your words, concerning the Oath of Allegiance and National
Covenant, that you count them such sacred and everlasting obligements that
nothing can absolve Because the property of an everlasting obligement cannot
be fixed upon mere humane engagements.
men from acting toward the accomplishment thereof: therefore I think it
expedient to suggest something further unto your consideration, for which I
think those Oaths not to be such everlasting obligements as you apprehend them
to be; which is this. That nothing can be an everlasting obligement upon the
conscience to bind it unto a perpetual purpose of prosecuting the same, but
that which is in it is own nature a perpetual Duty, and that only is to me a
perpetual duty, whereof the rule and the direct object is to men unalterable.

But to assert the Jurisdictions formerly annexed to the Imperial Crown of
this Realm, etc. is not in its own nature a perpetual Duty, in respect the
object of that Action is not as to men unal^erable: therefore it cannot be an
everlasting Obligement upon the Consciences, to bind them unto a perpetual
purpose of prosecuting the same. Now that to support Monarchy, or to endeavor
any other Earthly thing, relating to State affairs, is not in it is own nature
a perpetual Duty; I suppose is to your self so clear, that I shall not need
to prove it; for no man can be ignorant that all Earthly matters and Relations
are wholly alterable according to the Emergencies and circumstances: whence
follows immediately that the Conscience cannot be everlastingly bound to
intend the prosecution thereof; but only conditionally, according to the main
end for which such Obligements are allowed to be taken, and according to the
Rule by which they are to be prosecuted, which in private men is not without
the conduct of their Leaders, who are instructed with the Supreme management of
public affairs; if then the Leaders, as heretofore they saw cause to abolish
Monarchy, should see cause hereafter to set it up again, and thereupon should
intend a new change in the State; I think it would in this Case be lawful for
you to concur with them therein: whence we must conclude, that as the Rulers
of this State by taking the Engagement, cannot intend to oblige themselves,
never to intend upon what Emergencies soever to alter the present
Establishment; so the Subjects thereof by taking the same Engagement, cannot be
supposed to bind up themselves from following their Leaders in the resolutions
which in that kind they may take; for if upon new Emergencies the Supreme
Powers should lead the people to intend a new Change with them; without all
doubt they may lawfully do it; but except you suppose the conduct and guiding
of these; I see not how it can be lawful in the aim of any private man to
precure it by any means whatsoever: because by so doing private men without
their Leaders go beyond their Line. Therefore still I conclude that private men
may not attempt the restoring of that which by public Authority has been
abolished, otherwise then under the conduct of their Superior Powers.

The third and last thing which you question, is that which I say page 9. That
if in order to the public good, I were bound by Oath to prosecute a
business, and should find that by my prosecution of it, the public would
rather be hindered then advanced; that in such a case my Oath would oblige me
rather to desist from prosecuting 4. Concerning releasement from oaths upon a
con^ition.
the business, then to proceed therein.

To which you say thus; That this being Dogmatically delivered, does seem
altogether unsound; which you endeavor to show by the Example of Zedekiah, who
is condemned for breaking his Oath upon such a pretense to the King of Babylon;
for you say; No question Zedekiah became subject, and And Zedekiah his Case and
plea for the breaking of his Oath.
was bound by Oath to the King of Babylon in Order to the common good of his
Kingdom, and afterward apprehending (as we may be confident) that it would be
more useful for the public good of the Commonwealth, to stand free from the
Babylonian Yoke; by the assistance of the King of Egypt, he attempted the
procurement of that freedom, contrary to his Oath; and became guilty of Oath
and Covenant breaking before God; for which he is deeply charged and threa^^^^
by the Lord, Ezech. 17. So then your Argument from hence is this; If Zedekiah
did behave himself in breaking his Oath according to the Rule which you lay
down; and yet was condemned by the Lord for so doing; Then the Rule which you
own is not sound: But Zedekiah did so, Ergo,

To answer this doubt; I shall confess, that if Zedekiah his Case was the same
with that which I suppose; and if he followed the Rule which I give The
argument raised upon Zedekiahs case.
in that Case; and yet is condemned by the Lord for following that Rule, then
my Rule is not sound; but I conceive you will find (if you look somewhat nearer
to the business) that his Case is not the same with that which I suppose; nor
that he followed the rule which I gave in this Case, nor that he is condemned
by the Lord for following that Rule.

The case which I suppose is concerning a particular By showing the difference
of the case in hand with that of Zedekiah.
business which I am bound by Oath to prosecute as a private man in order to
the public good: whereof I am supposed to be a competent Judge so far as
relates to that particular business: I say, if my Oath binds me to prosecute
it in order to the public good; and I upon circumstances can judge that the
prosecution will not advance but oppose the public good, then my Oath binds
me not to proceed, but to desist; because the express condition of the Oath
which is only binding to the prosecution, is desect^ve. But in Zedekiah l. is
case this cannot be supposed: For first, his Oath was not concerning my
particular business, but a general submission to be a faithful Subject to
the King of Babylon: nor was he a private man managing his own business, but
he was the Substitute or Vicegerent of the King of Babylon, over the public
State of the Kingdom of Judah: nor was it left to him to be the sole competent
Judge of the matter, whether his submission to the Crown of Babylon should tend
to the public goodyea or no; for that was already absolutely determined; and
he was sworn to be subject without any other condition; but that he should be
King to that effect. The case then as it is by me proposed, is not applyable to
Zedekiah: Therefore it comes not to be considered by my Rule, nor had he the
liberty left him to make use of my Rule, for my rule speaks of a conditional
Oath; and no such thing can be supposed in this case. My rule supposes me to be
free to prosecute or leave my business according to mine own judgment, as I
shall see it subordinate to a publipue good; but the business to which he was
sworn, was not left to him to judge otherwise of, then was already determined
by his superiou^ Lord the King of Babylon, viz. that his subjection to him
should be the safety of the Nation; his Rebellion from him, should be his and
their destruction: nor was the case when Zedekiah rebelled, altered from what
it was at first when he swore subjection; which I suppose in my rule must fall
out seeing therefore Zedekiah could not make use of my rule in his case; I
conclude that he could not be condemned for making use of it.

But because this matter is worth a further disquirie; and And how our
obligation to be subject to the King by the Oath of Allegiance and the
Covenant, differ from Zedekiahs oath to the King of Babylon.
I see that the case which I have proposed undefinitely, may be applied to the
oath of Allegiance under which we stood for the public good; and to the
National covenant; concerning which you may say perhaps of us as I have said
of Zedekiah, that they bind us absolutely to be subjects to the King, and
leave it not to us to judge whether our subjection to him should tend to the
public good yea or no: therefore to resolve this doubt also, I shall compare
our condition of subjection, and our Oath binding him thereunto toward the
King of Babylon, and then if the case be found alike; I shall confess that we
are now, as much bound, to the master of our Oath as he then was bound to the
master of his: but if his relation to the King of Babylon was wholly different
from ours to our King; if his Oath of submission to that King was of another
kind then ours was to our King, and if his way of freeing himself from his
relation and from the bond of his Oath toward the King of Babylon was quite
another thing then what has been intended by us; then I hope you will not make
our case parallel to his; but in all these matters a vast difference, will be
found between him and us, ergoe his guilt cannot be made ours.

First his Relation to the King of Babylon, was to be the vassal In respect of
the relation wherein he stood to Nebuchadnezer and we to the King of England.
of a Conqueror for the K. of B. having ruined the state of Judah and subdued
the Nation, made Zedekiah his vassal to rule it in his name, who bound
himself by Oath so to do: but we stood not under our K. as a Conquered nation
by him, but as free borne subjects under a King bound to rule by law.

Secondly, the Oath by which Zedekiah did submit himself to the K. of Babylon,
was prescribed according to Nebuchadnezzars will, and no doubt it was
absolutely to keep the Nation in his subjection In respect of the oath which he
took, and we took.
without any condition of Laws, of Privileges, of Liberties, or of any such
thing supposed or imposed on Nebuchadnezzars part; but the Oath by which the
people of this Nation were bound to be subjects to their K. was by those that
framed and imposed it, made to be taken and kept under certain conditions: viz.
that we should be Subjects by Law and not otherwise; and that our subjection to
him should be consistent with the privileges of Par. and the native liberties
of the nation, and no otherwise: and to make this Oath binding, those who
imposed it upon the people, had power to impose another Oath which was
reciprocal thereunto upon the King, that he might be bound to them to rule by
law, as well as they to him to be obedient according to law: by which means
the tie of the Oath was several ways limited, and the K. himself as well
bound up in his commands, as they in their obedience by a Law: but no such
thing can be imagined between Zedekiah and Nebuchadnezzar.

Thirdly, his way of freeing himself from his relation and oath, was In respect
of his way of breaking of his oath and of our way of being freed from it.
by a direct rebellion contrary to the intent of his Oath and Covenant; but our
way of freeing ourselves has been Legal, agreeable to the Tenor of the Law
and to the sense of the Authority by which the Oath was given and made Legal:
for the Oath in the sense of the Legislative power was never absolute, but
conditional; it did not bind us to the Kings personal and arbitrary will and
command, but to his government and authority as he had a leg^ll standing: and
the sense of the Parl. touching the Oath of Allegiance, how far we are
thereby intended to be made subordinate to the K. is expressed in the National
Covenant which makes it clearly conditional: and the Parl. it self has freed
us long ago from the obligation of that condition, by declaring that he had
forfeited his right to govern any longer. So that the difference between
Zedekiah and us, is so vast in this point of being free from the Oath, that I
can find no resemblance at all in the one to the other: for as in our case if
the K. kept not his Oath to his Subjects, they were absolved De lure from their
Oath to him, in Zedekiah his Case there was no such contract between the K. of
Babylon and him, but the will of the Conqueror was his law; in our case there
was a Law to Regulate both the K. and us in keeping of our Oaths; and Trustees
in Parl. to see that law kept; who herein were above the King, and in cases of
aberration empowered, to see faults amended, both in King and Subjects; but in
the case of Zedekiah there is no such thing; the Authority of Nebuchadnezzar
was above all Humane positive Laws, and Zedekiah was sworn to be absolutely
his Subject in such things, and to keep his people in subjection thereunto; In
our Case, the King to whom we were sworn, deserted his Station of Government,
and left his trust by leaving his Parliament, and levying war against it; but
in Zedekiah his Case, no such thing is imaginable; In our case the Parliament
having the Supreme Authority of the Nation, and having conquered the King, does
oblige us to be true and faithful to the free States without him; but in
Zedekiah his Case no such thing is conceiveable: and many other things of a
different nature might be insisted upon in our Case, which cannot be brought
home to Zedekiah his Case, to free him from his Oath, as we are freed from
ours: for his whole action was directly opposite to the clear intent of his
Oath; and to all the circumstances of the public good of the Nation often he
Jews, as the Lord himself does intimate in Ezech. Chapter 17. and 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
but our actions in following the Parliament, have been all along consonant to
the Legal intentof our Oath, by which we are absolved from our relation to the
King, as also by all the circumstances of his miscarriages, of his illegal
proceedings, and of his breach of trust toward the public: by all the
circumstances of the public good to be procured without him; not according to
the judgment of particular men (for in this Case my Rule, is not to make every
private man a Judge of the public good) but of the Supreme Authority of the
Nation: and by all the circumstances of his removal from the Throne, and of
our present standing under the Supreme power of the Nation which now is over
us. So that to Oblige the conscience of private men to intend the restoration
of a royal government upon the account of such an Oath, from which we are made
so many ways Legally free; is to me a great mistake of Duty, and a dangerous
snare to entangle weak spirits into the occasions of public disturbances;
whereunto I know you are not inclined to give any the least Overtures: but the
danger is that other men who are of a turbulent disposition, and by such a
mistake of their dissol^ed relation, and seeming Obligation to that which is
contrary to their present Duty, being otherwise personally discontented, may
st^enthen and heighten their distempers to a full resolution of public
disturbance, and endeavors of distructive unsettlements; from which I am sure
your genius and pious thoughts do abhor.

Thus you have that which I can at present suggest, which I beseech the Lord so
to address, as it may tend most to your comfort, if you be still unsatisfied;
and if you be already satisfied, that it may be a means to confirm you in
that which is agreeable to his holy Will, and profitable to the good of the
Commonwealth of Israel, in the love of which, I subscribe my self

West minster this 8. December. 1650. Your faithful and affectionate Servant, I.
D.


