A MODEL OF Church Government: OR, The GROUNDS of the Spiritual Frame and
Government of the House of GOD.

Showing, What the holy Scriptures have therein delivered; What the best
Reformed Churches do practice; What the Tender Consciences may rest in.

For the better Satisfaction of such as scruple at the Work of REFORMATION,
declared and appointed by several Ordinances of PARLIAMENT.

BY JOHN DURY, one of the Assembly of Divines; Who has traveled heretofore in
the work of Peace among the CHURCHES.

PSALM. 2. 6. I have set my King upon my holy hill of Zion. ISA. 9. 6, 7. The
government shall be upon his shoulder, etc. LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M.
for John Bellamy, and are to be sold at his shop at the three golden Lions near
the Royal Exchange. 1647.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sr. John Gayer, Knight. Lord Major of the City of London.
And to the Right Worshipful, The ALDERMEN and SHERIFFS his Brethren.
Right Honorable:
These Scriptural Assertions, at their first conception, were not designed for
the Public; they were only put to Paper at the desire of those, who in this
City gave me a call to the Cure of their souls, and were willing to reform
their ways according to the will of God. And because they did confess their
ignorance of the whole Frame and Government of the House of GOD; my aim was to
let them see it, as briefly as I could, in a Model taken from the pattern which
I have seen in the Mount, which the Scriptures have revealed.

I would not be large, of purpose, to the end that I might stir them up the
more to Meditation, to the searching of the Scriptures, from which I have
endeavored to gather all; and to conference with my self, when they should be
at a stand. I intended nothing, but according to their desire to give them
private satisfaction; yet they would not rest there, but insisted to engage me
to publish these Heads of thoughts (for in effect they are no more:) Nor was it
enough to make them public, but they would have me to own them, and to
present you also with them. To all which you may perceive that I have
condescended, although I confess with much reluctancie.

Not that I am ashamed to own any thing that is mine, though so imperfect as
this is, and in a matter of so great consequence, (for I am very well conscious
to mine own weakness, and not unwilling that others should perceive it, (if it
may be for their edification) or that I was doubtful of any Truth here
delivered, (for I conceive that all may be made out to the full, if God should
give time, and a call to do it) but that I was loath to offer unto all whom I
could not know, that which I had designed only for a few, whom in cases of
mistake I would be able to rectify. I was unwilling to seem to intermeddle to
so little purpose, as these Tracts are like to be, in matters of so high
concernment, in a season so full of distraction, and in an Age so willing to
censure, so apt to mistake, and so ready to misconstrue on all hands every
thing that has no character of partiality upon it, though done never so
harmlesly: And then also I was afraid to be thought to stretch my self beyond
my line, in making this address unto You. But I hope that your favorable
acceptance, and the Relation which I have to a particular Congregation in the
City, will free me from this last apprehension; and from the former I have been
taken off, partly by the consideration of greater inconveniences which might
follow upon the not yielding, then upon the yielding unto a publication; partly
by the importunity of the Call which I received to do what here is done. So
that I hope none other construction will be made of the publication of these
Notions than ought in charity to be made; which is to believe, That I being
earnestly desired to declare my knowledge of the truth of these matters,
thought my self bound to bear witness thereunto, and to suffer my testimony to
come to the light, that it might appear that these works are done in God, that
they are free from humane respects; and that my aim in putting them forth, is
to give occasion to men conscionably peaceable, to consider whether yea or no,
an agreement in these Truths ought not to oblige Brethren to a nearer
conjunction of spirits, and profession of unity, then we as yet are come unto?
and whether yea or no, the things wherein there is a difference of opinion,
deserve so much distance in affections, as many are fallen into, or ought to be
debated in such a way of heat as most men follow, whereby they rather disturb
then edify one another. It is a sad thing to see men that are called
Christians and Brethren, exercising their wits to the disparagement of one
another in Religious matters; and to deal with things concerning Conscience,
lightly, passionately, and without all serious and conscionable gravity. These
things are to be deplored, but cannot be redressed, without the acknowledgement
of the Truth; nor can the Truth be received without the spirit of Love and
Peace, which the Word of the Gospel does administer only.

The Lord of truth and peace reveal the same unto us all more and more; and
direct You in your station to walk therein as patterns of Righteousness before
all others. Which, with the wishes of prosperity unto the settlement of this
whole State; shall be toward the LORD who alone is able to save, the constant
Prayer of

Your HONORS most humble and affectionate servant in Christ, JOHN DURY.

A PREFACE To the Christian and unpartiall Reader.
Christian Reader,
SEeing I am put upon the publishing of these brief Tracts, I will endeavor by
this Preface unto thee to make the best use thereof that I can, both for mine
own comfort, and for the building up of others. As for my self; I shall be
comforted in this, (whatsoever others may judge of the matter) that I see
clearly a Providence in this publication, without any purpose of mine: And that
I can conceive of the things which I judge therein to be imperfections, that
they may prove advantages unto Gods main work in his way of using them; For the
brevity of each Part may, to an intelligent Reader, make the whole so much the
more commendable; and to one that is of no quick understanding, although it
will be more obscure, yet it will also be less tedious; and may give to him
that is ingenious, occasion to make some further inquiry after the Truth, that
his rational Doubts may be satisfied; which, as God shall enable me with
grace, I shall be willing to intend.

As concerning others; seeing the spirits of most men are very sharp, and full
of jealousies, I shall therefore offer my self unto them with the greater
simplicity; for being in my self without prejudice, I hope to be found toward
all without occasion of offense; and as I shall be void of partiality, so I
shall make use of that liberty which in a business of this nature does beseem
my profession in the Gospel; which is, to look upon all alike, to be free in
the matter, and plain in speeches, to utter the Truth as it is in my heart.

First then, I think my self bound to declare this; That I am under a Vow to
prosecute upon all occasions, as long as I live, the ways of Evangelical
reconciliation amongst PROTESTANTS; that is to say, Professedly to seek, and
upon all occasions offered to advance, amongst those that have received the
Holy Scriptures for their Rule, and keep to the Fundamentals of Faith and
Practice, the means of spiritual unity, of peace and of love, by the
manifestation of the truth, and in the duties of holy Communion. Having
therefore this opportunity fairly offered; I am obliged, in minding my Vow, to
discharge a good Conscience; and for the love which I owe unto the Gospel of
Peace, to the whole Church of God, and to the prosperity and flourishing
condition thereof in this Nation, to make some Overtures, which I hope shall
give no matter of grievance unto any, but will prove edifying unto all; at
least my aim shall be none other, The scope of the Preface.
but to stir up thy pure mind (Christian Reader) to the thoughts of Brotherly
kindness, of meekness, and of peace; to the end that some ways may be taken
up, which will help to reconcile the Affections of many divided about
Circumstantials; to preserve and keep entire the Unity which remains about
Fundamentals; and to prevent or cure the manifold Misprisions, which increase
our confusions, and obstruct the Remedies of our diseases.

Now to offer at this, I shall not cry out against particular faults; not
because I think them not very hurtful to the ways of Reformation, or that I
think it unlawful in due time and place, or altogether unusefull to warn all
of public dangers, when none other Remedies are left: But I shall not do it,
because it is more suitable to my spirit to seek to gain all to the sense of
necessary Duties, than to reprove some for the neglect thereof; because my
resolution is to follow (if it be possible) the rule of Charity; first to
admonish a Brother in private, before his faults be charged upon him in
public; and because I find it the Theme of many, on all sides, that do almost
nothing else: And yet this course does prove no lenitive, but rather an
incentive to our distempers. My way then shall be, 1. To represent as The parts
of it.
briefly as I can, the general danger which hangs over all our heads by
reason of our common faults. 2. To discover the causes whence our danger does
originally proceed. And 3. to offer at some counsel, which may point at a way
to prevent the lamentable consequence which is like to ensue, if no course be
found and followed for healing of our breaches.

First concerning the danger wherein we are, thus in brief:

That we amongst our selves, almost in respect of every thing, are all broken
to pieces in our affections, is very evident.

That in this rupture of affections there is not only a distance of parties,
but much heat of opposition, no man can deny.

That by this heat, the alienations and thoughts of heart grow daily greater
and greater, every one can perceive.

That few set themselves in the gap, and labor to make up breaches, all must
confess.

And by reason of all this, (if the cause of our unsettlement continue long)
that we shall be habituated unto Breaches, even till we be consumed, none can
justly doubt, but every one should sadly apprehend: because the saying of our
Lord and Savior is undeniably true, That every Kingdom divided against it self
is brought to desolation; and every City and House divided against it self,
shall not stand, Mat. 12. 23. If then I may parallel the universal state of
Protestancie, as it is opposite to Popery, unto a Kingdom; and the National
Churches thereof, unto so many Cities; and the several Congregations of each
city, unto so many Houses; and in all these, if I reflect upon the Breaches
which are apparent unto all; First between the Lutherans and the Reformed
Churches, which have brought them both from a flourishing, to a desolate
condition, in Germany: Secondly between each of these within themselves, by
their Sub-divisions and cross Parties, which have weakened all their strength,
and multiplied scandals amongst them: I must needs confess, that Christ's
sentence is verified upon them; and that the judgment which of old was
denounced and executed against Israel, is now come to pass in part upon the
Protestant Churches, and may be accomplished over them all, if the Causes
thereof be not taken away by true repentance. Let us briefly consider what the
Prophet Amos, in his sixth chapter, says unto Israel, that we may apprehend
therein our own danger. First he denounces a heavy woe unto those that were at
their ease in Zion, and were not grieved at the affliction of Joseph; namely,
That they should be led away captive with the first that go captive. v. 1. till
7. Captivity then is threatened unto all, but chiefly unto these. Then he
shows the certainty of this judgment, with the means by which, and the chief
causes for which it should be brought to pass. The certainty of the Judgment
is declared, v. 8, 9, 10. namely, that God had sworn by himself, that he did
abhor their excellency and hate their palaces, that he would deliver up the
City and all that was in it to the enemies thereof, and that he would kill with
death such as remain after the captivity in the city, although there should be
but ten men remaining in one house.

The means by which, and the causes for which this heavy Judgment should be
thus executed, are set forth in verse. 11, 12, 13, 14. The means are two: He
would divide them within themselves, v. 11. and he would bring a foreign
Nation against them to afflict them, v. 14. The causes are chiefly two; their
incorrigiblenesse in unrighteousness, v. 12. and their pride in their own
strength, v. 13. All these things are considerable in our present case: For
this is evident; although the Church of God is heavily afflicted every where,
and the Saints throughout the world have great cause to mourn, yet that most of
us take our ease, and rest contented in the enjoyment of our Victories, and
that we grieve for nothing in effect but because we have not all our will
accomplished against the adverse party with whom we are in contest about
particular concernments; and as for other things besides, we are secure and
careless, we take our pleasures to the full without restraint, and we grieve
not at the affliction of Joseph, but in effect we do even as Joseph's brethren
did, they sat down to eat bread when they had cast their Brother into a pit,
Genesis 37. 24, 25. So we who heretofore have helped to bring our Brethren of the
Palatinate and of France, into the Pit wherein at this day they sit; now being
at our ease, we mind not at all their interests. If then our sin is the same
with that of Israel, to seek our pleasure and ease, and to enjoy it to the full
so far as we have gotten it; certainly our punishment will be the same with
theirs also: for God has as just cause to swear that he does abhor our
excellency and hate our palaces, as he did theirs; and he has no less power
now to punish this Nation with captivity and mortality, then he had heretofore
to punish that: And to me it is apparent, that he has set the same Means
awork, and for the same Causes, against us now, which then were threatened
against them. Against them the Prophet threatened, saying, Behold the Lord
commands; and he will smite the great house with v. 11.
breaches, and the little house with clefts: that is, he will divide you, and
break your strength to pieces; for, says he, Shall horses run upon the rock?
will one plow there with oxen? for ye have turned judgment into gall, and the
fruit of righteousness into hemlock. That is, You must be broken to pieces,
because v. 12.
you cannot otherwise be made subject and useful unto Gods fervice; for you
are hardened in your sins like a rock, upon which the spirit of God cannot run
and have a free passage: Nor can By horses, Gods spirit is typified, Zach. 1.
8, 9, 10. compared with c. 6. v. 2, 3, 4, etc. By oxen, the Ministers of the
Word are typified, 1 Cor. 9. 9, 10, 11. v. 13.
you be manured as a profitable husbandry unto him, by his ordinary Ministry,
which is appointed to plow up your fallow-ground, because you are not capable
of being plowed by reason of your stony heart, which is so hardened in the ways
of iniquity, that you have turned Judgment into gall, and the fruit of
Righteousness into hemlock. Moreover, you rejoice in a thing of naught, and
you boast your selves of your strength, saying, that you have taken horns
(power to defend and assault) by your own strength: therefore, behold says the
Lord God of hosts, I will raise up against you, O house of Israel, a Nation,
and they shall afflict you, from the entering in of Hamath, unto the river of
the wilderness. This is that which was denounced and executed against Israel;
this we see has been the case of the Protestant Churches in Germany; and may
we not now say unto England, or to Great Britain in like manner, to this same
effect --

Behold the Lord has commanded in the way of his Justice, an evil spirit of
Division to appear amongst you; for he has smitten your great houses with
breaches, and your little houses with clefts; there are divisions and
subdivisions amongst you at home, by which he does fit you for the ruin which
is determined against you from abroad, and all by reason of your other sins
wherein you are hardened; for you pervert Justice, and cannot be reformed:
because you trust to the power and strength which you have gotten to your
selves, therefore God will bring from abroad enemies against you, who shall
afflict you, as heretofore has been done to others; Except you fear the Lord,
and his goodness by which he does yet spare you, and be so wise as to prevent
this Judgment with speedy Repentance.

In respect of God, this is the danger under which we lie. In respect of Men,
all the foundations of the earth, all grounds of settlement, all Rules of
government, are shaken and out of frame. For if we look upon our selves in
respect of that which is within: How little care and compassion there is of the
Poor, of the oppressed and afflicted; how impossible it is to expedite the
ways of relief for them; how near they are to break forth into tumults and
discontents: How little faithfulness and trust there is to be found amongst
men that are called Brethren; how some we are of the event of our Divisions;
how eagerly most men are carried to prosecute the designs of a Party, without
regard to the Public; how many cross Interests are prosecuted by opposite
Parties in the State, which obstruct all proceedings: How the Church is broken
to pieces within it self, and in the very Principles of a true settlement; how
that which is called the present Church, is clogged and obstructed in the way
of Reformation, and in the aim and means to compass it, is distant from the
authority by which it is to be supported; dnd how that which seems to be
established, is set upon a sandy foundation. If (I say) we look upon these
things within, and then in respect of that which is without, we take notice of
the distance at which we stand from the rest of the best Reformed Churches, and
of the Judgment which they make of our proceedings. (I say) if all this be
laid together, as to Man; every one that has eyes, must needs foresee our
inevitable ruin, if we continue thus; and that it is impossible for us to
subsist long in this condition.

Clear it is, That if every one be left in his outward and public ways to the
liberty of his own will, to cross and oppose his neighbor, and affront him as
he pleases; that we shall need none other enemy to destroy us besides our
selves.

But if now in the midst of our unsettlements, many enemies take their
advantage to watch over us to cause us halt; if they blow dililigently the
coals of our divisions, supporting themselves only with this hope, that the
flame which is kindled amongst us, will at last burn us up to ashes, and that
they may yet triumph over us therein; And if few do either observe their ways
to discover them, or endeavor by faithful counsel to shut the door upon them;
then we may infallibly conclude, that our desolation will not only be
certainly, but speedily accomplished. And this is the danger wherein I conceive
we all are at this time.

Now before we can speak of the Remedies, we must look a little into the
Causes, whence these symptoms of our ruinous estate proceed.

I shall not rake into all the particulars that might be observed, Of the
causes of our public evils.
nor lay all the guilt upon any one: It is an easy matter to accuse
Adversaries; and a very natural course, to make such as we do not love, odious
unto others. But this is a way wherein narrow spirits walk; and men, as men,
seek rather to justify themselves before the world, then to reclaim with
meekness others from the error of their ways before God. But I shall look to
this last duty in the first place; and then let the other come as it may, if
need be, that is, in case I find my self suspected or accused wrongfully. Nor
shall I meddle with matters of State, to impute the causes of our misery to the
miscarriages of Public designs, or to the perverseness of the counsels, or the
wickedness of the Instruments thereof. It is no part of my calling, to trace
Politicians in the crooked and serpentine ways wherein they walk. The Interest
of States is a troubled Sea full of hideous Monsters, and hidden Rocks,
whereupon the men of this world make shipwreck; and therein all the Nations and
great Families of the earth are tossed up and down according to the fancies of
the Rulers, whose aim (though under other pretenses) is nothing else but
greatness and command, to be supported by riches and power: My soul enter
thou not into their counsel, for there is no truth in their ways, there is no
faithfulness in their mouth, their inward part is very wickedness: And that
our distractions proceed from this generation of men, and from the Counsel,
which are taken up upon their Principles, there is no question to be made. But
I shall leave them unto God, to be judged in his own time; And walking in mine
own sphere, shall speak unto thee that art a Christian indeed, of things
belonging to our Religious profession; to discover at the root the causes of
our disease, which I conceive is nothing else but the corrupt Profession of the
true Religion, whereof we must all confess our selves guilty, every one of us,
more or less: which how to Reform, first in our selves, and then in others,
will be a profitable enquiry.

If the Truth had not been manifested unto us, we should have no sin; but now
since we have known it, and held the profession of it in unrighteousness, we
have no cloak for our sin: we ought then to confess and deplore that our
profession is corrupted, two ways. First, that most of us, although we are not
ignorant of the Truth; yet we cannot deny but that we have lost the true aim
of the holy profession thereof. Secondly, that although some aims be rightly
set, and the profession of many commendable; yet for the most part, the means
and ways of prosecuting the same, are either not answerable unto the Rules of
Christianity, or else directly destructive thereunto.

The true aim of the Holy profession is, to show forth unto What the aim of
our profession is, and how we fail of it.
this evil world, the life and virtues of him who has called us unto his
Kingdom and glory. The Truth which we know, and which by the Gospel is
revealed unto us, is the testimony of Jesus; that in him alone there is
Redemption from all sins; that by him alone there is all sufficiency of
Grace to be received through Faith; that for his sake alone we have free
access by the Spirit unto the Father; that the titles and names of King,
Captain, and Forerunner, of Apostle, Prophet and High Priest, of Author and
Finisher of our salvation, do belong to him alone: and that he being alone the
Way, the Truth and the Life, no man can come to the Father but by him; this we
do know and acknowledge; this we do maintain and profess as the Truth: but
who can say that the true aim of this profession, is taken up and followed as
it ought to be? this aim is to follow him as dear children, expressing him in
his life, that is, in his lowly, just, holy, and unblameable conversation
amongst men; and in his death; that is, in his mortified, his self-denying, his
afflicted, his meek and humble condition in this world. I say, this aim is
not taken up and maintained in this profession of the Truth; yet we know that
this should be our whole aim; and because we know it, and do it not,
therefore our sin is heavy upon us; therefore these judgments do overtake
us, and God does revenge the quarrel of his Covenant against us; The Covenant
is, that we being in Christ Matthew. 16. 24. Romans 8. 17. 2 Cor. 6, 17.
shall bear his Cross, and follow him; that we shall suffer together, and be
separate from the world with him; and if we touch not the unclean things
thereof, we have a promise that the Father will receive us. But who is it that
does truly aim at a full separation from the world, and does not intend to
uphold the high things and full enjoyments thereof together with the profession
of the Truth? are we not content, and have we not a desire to enjoy the fashion
of things present, although we know that we are called to seek and apprehend
only the things to come? we are called to be conformable unto the image of
the Son of God; that is, to be no ways conformable unto this world: but if
we mind no such thing, how can we be said to maintain the true aim of our
holy profession? The Socinians who have cast off the Truth which is in Christ
Jesus concerning our Justification before God, and have made the
acknowledgement of his Person in the Truth, void, by their Heresies; these
uphold still the aim of the profession, namely, that we must follow his
footsteps: but we who are convicted of the truth which they have denied,
seem to deny (at least in our practice) that which they uphold; and
consequently make the truth it self which we acknowledge, ineffectuall, by our
profession thereof; because our aim is not in simplicity answerable, but
rather cross in all appearance unto the tenor of the new Covenant, and the
end of our heavenly calling. Now if the maine and principal aim be lost in
our walking with God; how can he be at peace with us, or we with him? can two
walk together except they be agreed? and are those agreed whose aims are
different? does not he know the secrets of all hearts, that he may reward
every one according to his works? what then can we expect from him other, then
to reap the fruit of the seed which we sow? for we sow to the flesh worldly
aims in the field of a religious profession; and can we expect any other
harvest frrom thence but trouble and confusion? This then is the first and
maine cause of all our distractions, that the true aim of our Profession is for
the most part lost amongst us.

The second cause of our public distraction is this; that although for the
maine, a work of Reformation is truly aimed at by some; and many particular
matters tending thereunto, are rightly designed by many, for the advancement of
Religion: yet the means to bring this aim and these designs to pass, are
not at all proportionate to the effect intended thereby. The work of
Reformation (no doubt heartily aimed at by some) is a real and thorough
purging of the Church and State from the corruptions which have overgrowne the
one and the other, and a settlement of both in a way of Righteousness: I say
that What the Reformation aimed at is, and why we come short of it.
some aim heartily at this; and I truly do believe it; but how many there
are, God alone does know. Sure I am we cannot discern very many, that have
nothing else in their aim; but that most men, are very fierce in their
private, and very cold in the public occasions, we can easily discern; and
yet their Covenant both with God and man does otherwise oblige them. And would
to God there were not some that did make the aim of a Religious Reformation, a
mere pretense to compass their own worldly ends: and a snare to entrap
others into difficulties. I shall not meddle with the State, the Church is my
task at this time; but I find, that to advance this Reformation in both, the
means used are very disproportionate to the effect, not only in respect of the
way, wherein many of the Reformers walk in their own thoughts, but also in
respect of their manner of concurrence every one with another.

The way wherein most men walk in their thoughts to Reform the State, has no
relation unto Christianity, but only to the wisdom of the world; and the way
by which they seek to reform the Church, has as little relation unto
Charity, but is either carried in the way of Liberty, or of Authority; for men
walk by one Rule of Prudencie in State matters, and by another in Church
affairs: as if a Christion in his civil employments might act without a
Relation unto the will of Christ; or in Church Matters, might either please
himself alone, without a relation to his Brethren, or might use all the power
whereunto he can pretend, without a compliance and condescension to the weak.
These false Principles of Reformation, make men inconsistent with themselves
both in Church and State: here they act one way by this Rule, and there another
way by that Rule, and sometimes they jumble both ways together, and look at
once with two faces in the same business different ways. The simplicity and
truth of Christianity is by this means lost in the Aim, and with it all true
Prudencie in the Deliberation; and these two being gone, men are left unto the
counsel of their own hearts, and betake themselves in the execution of their
designs, as well in the one as the other sphere, to the tricks and
contrivements of Policy, or to main power and strength. And thus it falls out,
that even the best and most hearty Reformers, walking as Men, in spiritual
undertakings, fall into different ways, take up different Maxims and Rules;
and acting according to the same, (because they respect not the Maxims and
Rules of holy Communion in Christianity) they make use of all their strength
and wit to oppose one another by different contrivements about the same work:
And whiles they are wholly bent and possessed (as men naturally are) with the
thoughts and affections of their own way and designment; they look upon others,
no more as upon Christians, but as upon a Party: Because the simplicity of the
Holy Profession being lost in the Aim, and the Rules of Holy Prudencie for the
Communion of Saints, being laid aside in the work; and men having forgotten
that they are called to be Brethren, and members of one another, in their
relation to Christ; they act no more in this, (though otherwise godly men, and
hearty toward a Reformation) as men of godliness, and truly reformed from the
world, but as men interessed in a Party of the world; for such or such a
Design; to gain, or to oppose this or that Purpose. And because this frame of
spirit even in the best of us all (if we look not carefully to our spirits) may
be found more or less; therefore the Means of our Reformation are
disproportionate unto the End for which they are undertaken; and this, because
they are not put forth by us in Gods way, which alone can edify his Church,
and without which no design therein can prosper.

Now when the Authors of our Reformation act thus, and are acted by a
Principle of Division within themselves; how can they be brought to a hearty
concurrence one with another, except a way can be found to rectify this
Fundamental error in every one of them? And if the Instruments who are to put
life in the Means of the Reformation, either cannot at all join, or if without
their conjunction nothing at all can be effected to any purpose for a
settlement; how shall the work be carried on? If Christ would not have his own
Nation to come to perfection without us; sure he will not have any one of us
come to perfection without another. If then the Agents who are to work out the
Perfection whereat we aim, are so far from joining in it, as that they prove by
their conjunction rather destructive to one another, then furtherers of Gods
work; what hope is there of any success? Christian Reader, give me leave
without offense to speak plainly what is observed in the Actors of a
Reformation at this time, I mean such who have the means thereof in their
hand, or at least a hand in the means: These we may find to be of three
sorts. Some mind the work sincerely for it self, although they now and then
mistake the Rules by which they should walk; Some mind the work, only to gain
some temporal advantages by it; And some mind it only to spy the faults, and
stop the proceedings of the Actors. Now if our constitution be such, that
nothing can be done effectually in the Public, without some of each sort of
these Agents, whenever they list to have a hand in the business: it is
apparent that no means can be employed succesfully toward the thorough
Reformation of any thing. For the Upright man failing (as we all do) to walk by
his Rule (which is his strength) he easily is drawn by the Worldling into a
Plot, to do things for some End which is not answerable to the simplicity of
the Gospel; and as soon as any such thing is in agitation, the third Agent, who
is also interessed in Statecontrivements, steps in to observe and obstruct or
overthrow their proceedings: And hence it is that the means of an intended
Reformation, well meant by many, and set afoot by some, are unsuccesfull in the
event, because in the proceedings and use of Means there is no sutablenesse,
but rather a destructive quality unto the advancement of Religion. For in every
thing that is proposed or taken in hand, the jealousy of a Party does come in,
which overruling the Affections by worldly considerations, raises an endless
contest about every thing concerning every part and circumstance of the work;
by which means the design, though never so just and harmless in it self, is
either stified in the conception, or else becomes abortive before the time of
strength; or a birth of so loug continuance, that in end there is no strength
left to bring it forth. And this is briefly my thought of the Causes why the
main work of our Reformation is so much perplexed as we find it. As for more
particular matters honestly designed for the advancement of Religion, by many,
in their several places and callings; As they can have but little influence
upon the main, because the great corner stones of the Reformation, are not as
yet publicly professed and laid, upon which every one should make an orderly
superstructure of gold and silver and precious stones, in the unity of the
spirit toward his Brethren: So, the more such Designs are stood upon and
advanced in a private course, they accidentally become the greater hindrances
to the general work; whiles men that are thereby stinted within themselves,
rest satisfied in their own private ways; and by leaving the thoughts of a
public Communion, they prove opposites thereunto; when they admit of nothing
that is not every way agreeable unto their particular Contrivements.

I am persuaded that many able men throughout the Kingdom have many excellent
things in readiness, which might be usefully applied to the edification of the
Churches, both for the advancement of Knowledge and of Godliness, if the ways
of our Settlement were cleared. But now as matters stand, I cannot look
otherwise upon their excellencies, but as upon the scattered stones of a
building not yet framed, and as upon the furniture of a house whose model is
neither apparent, nor yet well understood by any. Therefore although there be
many men in these Churches of eminent abilities, and Vessels of great honor,
fit for very good uses in the building of this Tabernacle: yet because the Rule
and way of their Brotherly communion and correspondencie is not determined as
it ought to be, they stand (though in their private sphere profitable as to
God, yet) as to the Church useless in the Communion of Saints. For the Parts
of the building not being set together, their serviceable gifs are not employed
as Joints should be in the Body to make up and compact the whole: And for want
of this aim and endeavor, by all that they do, they bring nothing forth unto
perfection.

I have briefly pointed at the Causes of our Disease; that thou may consider
thy self (Christian Reader) as in the presence of God, how thou art led, by
what spirit thou art guided, and how thou should free thy self from the
guilt of contributing further any cause or matter of continuance to our
Distempers. Now the Lord grant us all grace, to do all things without
murmurings and disputings, to his glory, unblameably in Love. Amen.

I am in the last place to speak of the Remedies of this corrupt Profession of
the true Religion: And if I should enter at large upon this task, I should be
obliged to write a Volume: but my purpose is only to name the Heads of things
necessary to be intended and set awork, to advance our Reformation, and
redress the Evils which threaten our final ruin; That if thou (Christian
Reader) art convicted of the usefulness thereof, thou may contribute in thy
way what thou can thereunto.

The remedies then of our distracted condition I conceive will be found in a
discovery of two things, first of that which will help to rectify the disease
at the root, by taking away the cause which does origionally beget it; Secondly
of that which will help to prevent Of the remedies of our public distractions.
the effects thereof; which become causes of increasing the distempers, to
propagate and continue the disease.

I have showed my opinion that the causes which beget our distempers, are the
want of the true aim in the holy profession, and the disproportionatnes of the
means used to prosecute the true and lawful aims of the Reformation which
we seek to rectify the inward Hypocrisy of the heart is only Gods work;
but to discover it and convict men's consciences of it, may be the work of his
servants by the right interpretation and The Remedy of the first cause of our
disease.
application of the word, as the Apostle testifies, 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25. Yet the
bare discovery of vice or error and the conviction of a natural man that he
is guilty of it, is not enough to remedy the evil disposition of his spirit
or to beget a true aim in him to answer the heavenly call; nothing can do
this but God by the discovery of the truth in the loveliness thereof; When he
gives faith to the elect by the engrafted word, wherein they receive the love
of the truth, which purifieth their souls, and makes them obedient thereunto
through the spirit: unto this work of God the faithful Ministers of the Word
are subservient, when they hold forth the Truth in sincerity and manifest the
knowledge of the glory and life of God in the face of Jesus Christ.

The first remedy then, will be to stir up Ministers, who understand this
Mystery of Godliness ordinarily to press and preach the maine things which
discover the life and spiritual estate of Christ as the Truth is in him, that
their hearers may know, first, positively what that life is whereunto they are
called; and then negatively, what that life and state is wherein men are by
nature from which they are called: and this should be done not so much by an
enlargement of themselves upon many particular branches and twigges of duties
as upon the manifestation of the Principles and essential properties of the
spiritual and carnal man, from whence the knowledge of duties will of it
self flow: I do not mean that the preaching of particular duties is
unprofitable or ought to be omitted; but I conceive that the fundamentals
which discover the hidden man of the heart both in respect of the
Righteousness of the spiritual and of the unrighteousness of the fleshly
nature should be mainly and ordinarily so proposed, as from the discovery of
that which is conformable or inconformable unto the image of Gods life in
Christ, all particular duties should be derived and pressed upon the
conscience; and I believe that because godly and zealous men commonly spend
more of their strength in matters of particular concernment then in such a
fundamental course; that two evils arise from thence unto the hearers, and one
in the Ministers themselves. First, that the natural corruptions of the hearts
of all men, remain in some altogether, in others in a great measure
undiscovered at the root; by which means they still conceiving well of
themselves, or better than they ought, are not truly humbled before God, and
mortified unto the world, but live still as men in the world, and take up the
profession of Religion in the performance of certain duties, rather than in the
pursuit of a heavenly call to come unto Christ Jesus. Secondly, that such as
are ingenuous and have tasted the Kingdom of God, and thereupon are gotten
into a hatred of the world, being fervent in spirit to serve the Lord, are
driven, by the much pressing of particular duties, to an over acting zeal;
either against or for some persons or actions, which zeal having no
temperament of love, meekness, and lenity, to heal and bear with the
infirmities of the weak, or to bring their own proceeding with them home to
the true aim of the holy profession which is to discover Christ unto those
that go astary from him, they are so far from edifying the Church of God by
their forwardness, that they rather disturb and destroy every thing they
meddle withal; but if they were instructed by their teachers to understand the
way wherein Christ did Mat. 12. 19, 20.
walk to show judgment unto the Gentiles; namely, that he did not strive, nor
cry, nor cause any man hear his voice in the streets: that he did not break
the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax till he send forth judgment
unto victory. If I say they were taught to know him in this, as in all other
things, and were obliged to judge themselves in all their aims, to do nothing
out of the way of conformity unto him, in his walking in the flesh, they would
easily refrain from the intemperancy of their passionate zeal, for or against
particular matters which reach not unto the heart of the profession.

The evil which in this course of preaching does befall unto the Ministers
themselves, who otherwise are Godly and holy men, is this; that they easily
overshoot themselves, either by pressing a particular duty too much and
indiscreetly laying too great weight upon it toward all without distinction of
cases, whereby the weaker consciences are straightened and ensnared; or by
applying a duty unto matters of state and public relations to the prejudice of
one party for the advantage of another upon reports or mistakes and
misconstructions of matters, from whence often times great scandals and
discontents arise, and are fomented to the widening of breaches without all
hope of reconcilement: If the Ministers press not the fundamental aim of the
profession; but rest in the delivery of theoreticall truths, and the
application thereof unto particular duties, It is no great wonder that their
hearers remain ignorant of it, and walk not up to it; and it must naturally
follow, that all the care whereunto their conscience will draw them in their
profession, will be nothing else, but a professsion of some particular tenets
and practices for which they will strive as for life and death: not that I
think that any truth or righteous practice is rightly to be esteemed or
neglected; but that all the Theorie of the world, and all the performances that
can be wrought in particular duties may be a matter of mere Hypocrisy in the
professor; and nothing else but an occasion of strife and disturbance toward
those to whom our profession is addressed, if the true aim of the holy
profession be not minded: the teaching then of the aim of our profession (by
Gods blessing upon the word of his servants) may rectify the purpose of the
hearers in their profession, and cure the first and fundamental cause of all
our distempers; and if once this radical cause be taken away, the secundary
which is but a stream flowing from that fountain, will soon be dried up, by
the heat of true love and sincerity which will take possession of the
affections of those that in the Spirit follow Jesus Christ.

For as the second Cause of our Distempers, viz. the want of The Remedy of the
second Cause of our Disease.
Proportion in the Means used toward a through Reformation, to produce the
Effect intended thereby, is an effect of the first: So the second Remedy of
that evil, will be a consequence of the first, namely the way of doing all
things in love. For he that aims at nothing in the way of his Profession, but
to follow Jesus Christ, will find that he in his way of walking did
proportionate all his undertakings to the end for which he did them, by the
manifestation of Gods love to those toward whom he did make his application.
And because there is little or no sincerity of Brotherly love apparent in the
use of the Means which are set a foot for the advancement of a Religious
Reformation amongst us; therefore every thing which is done by many of us, is
altogether unsuitable to the end for which it is performed: for although the
thing which is done, be in it self never so good and just; yet if the spirit of
Divine love do not go along with the performance of the work there will be no
proportion found therein to reach the end for which it is to be undertaken;
because there is nothing but love that can fit every thing to the good of those
to whom it is done. The Apostle says, that there is neither circumcision
available in Christ Jesus, nor uncircumcision, but Gal. 5. 6.
Faith which works by Love: The object of Faith is Christ, when we take him
in the Covenant as our aim to be found in him: and if this Faith has any life
in us, and is not a mere verbal profession, it will be operative in that Love
wherein He did all his works amongst men, and toward his Father. The Apostle
speaking of the Rule by which we should walk as children of God, gives us this
charge, Ephesians. 5. 2. Walk (says he) in love, as Christ also has loved us and
has given himself for us. If then our aim is Christ, it will appear that the
chief thing wherein our conformity with Christ must stand, will be the exercise
of love toward the Brethren for Gods sake, and of Holiness to be separate
from the world; and when we shall reflect upon the use of the Means which are
set afoot and put in the hands of most men for the advancement of our
Reformation, we shall find that nothing is so much wanting both in the framing
of the counsels, and in the execution of the works, as the spirit of Brotherly
love, and of Holiness: and where these two are deficient in those who act a
Reformation, what can the event be other then disorder and confusion?

Some Act altogether by the way and in the means of Christian liberty, some by
the way and in the means of Christian Authority; but because neither of these
for the most part are acted by the spirit of love to one another, or by the
spirit of Holiness to be separate from the world, and from their own
interests in what they do; therefore they act nothing for, but against one
another, as if Christian Liberty and Christian Authority were things altogether
inconsistent; and so the means which should advance both the one and the other
part of our spiritual constitution, are not only ineffectuall, but offensive
and destructive to each other, because neither the desire of liberty, nor the
pretense of Authority are put forth in the spirit of love, to serve others
thereby in true Holiness, but a certain interest of state is rather looked
upon both ways, which makes both the path of Liberty and of Authority to
become unchristian to those that walk therein with partiality and worldly
aims, and this is the only cause why all our works and proceedings of this
nature do miscarry; because many of those that are the Actors thereof in
making use of the means do not, for the most part mind the golden Rules of
spiritual proportion and prudency for edification, which are the laws of Love
and Holiness; but in stead of these are carried sometimes, even in their best
actions, by a Rule of humane Jealousy, which begets nothing but Passion and
Policy: And this once being discovered, does wholly blast their proceeding,
and makes all the means, though otherwise in themselves never so powerful,
wholly disproportionate unto the effect.

The second Remedy then is this: That godly Ministers, whom I look upon as the
chief Actors of our Reformation, and such as must put life into the Means
thereof, must first set their own hearts aright in this frame of Love and
Holiness, and then stir up one another to the Counsels and Deliberations
which these Principles, according to the Word of GOD, will suggest. And because
in the framing of Designs which tend unto a public good, it is apparent that
on all sides a Concurrence is sought for by those that act in the affairs of
State, with those that are set in the Church to act for Christ's kingdom: and
that as Moses could not be without Aaron at first, when he came to the people;
So Aaron could not be without Moses at last when the people was to march
through the Wilderness; and that neither the one nor the other durst go a step
forward without a direction from God in their ways; therefore in the
concurrence of Statesmen and Ministers toward a Reformation by the use of the
means; both Moses and Aaron must walk by one Rule of Christianity, whereof
the end is brotherly love and holiness, and not by two different rules, as the
custom of most men is, and if the Ministers suffer themselves to be taken off
from this aim by any pretense whatsoever, or do not labor to sway the
Resolutions of the Master Builders in the common wealth, according to these
Rules, that all public constitutions and the ways of acting them upon the
spirits of men may savor of nothing but of love, of holiness, and of
meekness in Authority by the directions of the word and the way of Christ's
walking; (I say) if Ministers do not exactly keep themselves to this Rule and
draw others to walk thereby, they will be by their own weakness and the craft
of others drawn over to serve state ends, and be made use of to divide others,
and to be divided from others and from one another amongst themselves, according
to the wicked maxim of Machiavilian Government Divide and Impera, and who does
not see that the enemies of our Reformation, leave nothing unattempted to put
this maxim in execution, and that they find opportunity enough and more then
enough, so to do in every thing which is attempted in public by reason of the
unchristian frame of our Spirit and our walking by a twofold Rule or without
the Rules of charity and holiness? For Satan which works in them, and is the
Prince of this world, finding us who pretend to be Ministers of Christ out of
the Sphere of Christ's walking, and in the Sphere of his own Kingdom, meddling
with worldly interests which concern us not, has power over us, to make us
that are called Ministers more then all other men in the world to serve his
ends, of disturbing the Peace of mankind, and tearing the Church of God in
Pieces, and only because we are not in the way wherein God has set us: but if
on the otherside we stand in the simplicity of our Christian way and walking
to deliberate and do all things both in private and public by love, and for
holiness according to Christ's example, then we are in our full strength,
armed with light, and Satan in the power of darkness cannot come near us or
comprehend us. And if it is not possible through our own default to put this
Counsel in practice amongst us, who are convicted of the truth thereof,
whether we are Independents or Presbyterians, we are all alike guilty before
God of our own ruin, and of the general disturbance of this Church and State.

I have spoken as briefly as I could contract my thoughts concerning The Remedy
of the evil effects of our disease.
the Remedies which will work a cure upon the Causes of our disease; now I
must speak also a word of that which I conceive will be of use to prevent the
dangerous effects thereof, whereby our distempers are daily increased. The
disease, in my conception, is a distractednesse of spirit in a divided mind,
which has wrought a dis-joynting of our affections; so that we stand as a tall
man distracted in his thoughts, and divided in all his resolutions, who has no
command or little use of any of his members; because they are all out of joint,
and hang as it were loose one from another. Thus this Church the tallest of any
Reformed in Europe, and fit to be a leader of the rest in the spiritual
Conquest of Canaan, does stand within it self and to others useless.

The effects of this our distraction and division which increase our disease
and make it grow upon us, are chiefly three. Frst jealousies, fears and evil
surmises of every thing that is designed by any party which is not our own.
Secondly, censures, reproaches disputes, accusations and revilings against the
persons and the actions of a different party. Thirdly, oppositions and cross
proceedings in counsels and attempts, against all that are not exactly in the
way wherein that party does walk of which we are. These three effects beget
each other reciprocally not only in every man within himself, and in every
party within it self; but in every man and party in relation to another, as
he stands at a distance from the same; and all of these make our distempers
almost past remedy, nor can the one well be cured without the other; and
therefore the Remedies must needs be such, as can have an influence upon all
at once, to stop the current thereof, upon our own and other men's spirits, if
they should prove succesfull toward a cure.

The field of this discourse is so large, that I shall at this time but name
only the heads of things, which must become the ingredients of this Physic;
leaving the particular composition and application thereof unto some other
time, wherein God perhaps may give a call and grace to elaborate the same; and
this I shall do to give unto thee Christian Reader, an object of prayer and
meditation; that thou may be moved to go to God, and to stir up thy self
and others daily, till these Remedies be applied unto our diseases as they
ought to be.

If then the forenamed effects of our diseased Church should be cured by this
work of Reformation; we must consider not only what is requisite to allay our
present fits of distemper; but also that which both in our age and in time to
come will build us up unto a habitation of God through the spirit, and
propagate the blessings of the Gospel unto Posterity.

To cure then our present distempers, it is evident that an unlimited liberty
to every one to vent and practice whatsoever he shall think good without
control, will not do it; because this very Liberty has begotten our
distempers, and no doubt will increase them, if no course be found to regulate
men's proceedings concerning their public Profession, so as they shall have no
just cause to complain that they are persecuted for Conscience sake. But how to
determine the way of Regulating men's proceedings, so as none shall have any
just cause of complaint, herein lies the difficulty: Yet I conceive it may thus
be taken away: Let all Parties who take the Holy Scriptures for the Rule of
Faith and Practice, set down positively and declare plainly, either that which
they judge to be fundamental in matter of Doctrine and Practice, or clearly
commanded and useful for Edification; or that wherein they profess a full
agreement with their Brethren. If they do either of the two last, as (I think)
all may easily be engaged to do, either by the demand of any one Party, that
seeks to advance Peace; or by the command of the Civil Magistrate, who ought to
restrain Quarrels, and take away the causes thereof so far as he can in
public: If (I say) either of these positive Declarations, or both, be
delivered by each Party to another, then the Apostles counsel is to be put in
execution, which is Phil. 3. 16, Whereunto we have already attained, let us
walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing. Which counsel, to me, does
furnish this matter of advise, in reference to our present constitution.

First, let the Parties by some of their selected men (who shall do all things
with their full consent and knowledge) make a draught of the full Agreement of
those former Declarations; and that being imparted unto all, let an
Acknowledgement be made concerning it, that it is that whereunto All have
attained, and wherein they will mind the same thing to edify one another in
the Truth whereunto they are come.

Secondly, Let the same Parties declare negatively the things wherein they
conceive they disagree from each other: And when these Declarations are drawn
up, let those that have penned them add their advice concerning the ways of
reconciling the differences, whether in Judgment or in Practice; and then let
some selected men, the most moderate of each Party, be called together to set
down the joint agreement of their Advices concerning the way of reconciling
Differences; and according to that Agreement, let them make a trial of
reconciling the Differences, and offer it to all, only as an Essay without
prejudice to any, to be considered.

Thirdly, Let the same Parties declare, both Positively and Negatively, the
Rules by which they are willing to walk inoffensively toward those with whom
they do not agree; and in case any offenses be given or taken about those
things, How the same ought to be taken away by mutual consent. Here then the
same selected men, or others, may be set a work to peruse such Declarations,
and gather into one Body the Rules whereunto all sides will agree to walk by,
to avoid offenses; and let every one who will pretend to any freedom of
Profession in public, be obliged toward those that have inspection over the
public, to walk by those Rules of inoffensivenesse, notwithstanding any
difference that is, or may arise in aftertimes amongst themselves or others.

These things I conceive may be done without great difficulty, and will be done
by all those that love peace; And that they may be done, I could wish that the
Supreme Authority of the Kingdom would appear in it to procure it; that when
the Public Confession of Faith, and Catechism, shall be put forth, all such
as shall desire the protection of the Supreme Power, and shall be willing to
live in peace with those that allow of the Government established by Law, may
be enjoined thus to proceed toward the settlement of an union between them and
their Brethren, in the Profession of the Gospel: and in the mean while, till
this can be done, if all sides would agree voluntarily upon a cessation from
all bitterness and railing accusations against each other, or if it should by
those that are in place of Authority be enjoined as a Preparatory for so good a
work, it would be very consonant to the abatement of our distractions, and
commendable in those that should do it willingly. But if no such way of
transacting differences can be brought to pass answerable to the counsel of
the Apostle, truly then I must confess that I can see no way to prevent the
growing effects of our fatal distempers, except God so bless the Government
by law established, with that spirit of Discretion, of Moderation, of Equity,
and of Lowliness in all things which it does act, that none shall be able to
find any just grievance at it. And to this effect, the less the Classical
Presbyteries shall resemble the Civil Courts of Judicature, or the Bishops
Courts in former time, the more they will be suitable to the end for which they
are instituted, which is, to entertain Brotherly conferences and consultations
about spiritual matters for mutual assistance and support in the ways of
God; and not at all to intermeddle with the Congregations in any of their
particular affairs, which are not voluntarily brought unto them as a Case
wherein their Judgment is sought unto; for no particular Church, by its
subordination to a Classis, is to be deprived of any right which it has within
it self, but is rather thereby to be maintained therein.

The Maxims then of spiritual Communion to be observed in the Classical
Presbyteries, that all misconstructions of their ways which occasion
jealousies and clamours, may be prevented, ought to be published, to wipe away
the fears which ensuare us into distractions against the duties of Love. And it
will be necessary not only to publish those Maxims for this end; but three
other things more must be satisfactorily, and from the grounds of Scripture
cleared, if ever the Government shall prosper, to settle us in Peace.

1. It must be made out, that the Ministers of particular Congregations, and
their Elderships, are bound in conscience in the things belonging to their
charge, to maintain a Brotherly communion and correspondencie with each other,
and consequently to enter into such combinations as to that effect they can
conveniently cast themselves into.

2. That to such Combinations of Elderships, Appeals may and ought to be made,
has sufficiently been cleared by many, and especially by Mr. Paget of
Amsterdam, in a Treaty which has not been answered by any that I know. But the
second thing requisite to clear men's scrupulous apprehensions about the
proceedings of such combined Elderships, is not so much their Right to receive
Appeals and judge Authoritatively thereof; as to make the ways of their
handling matters in judging thereof, as a Senate of spiritual men, evident;
that is, To show forth their way of handling things amongst themselves, by what
Rules and Grounds it does stand, in the Communion of Saints; to prejudge no
man's just and conscionable Liberty, and yet to act Regularly, and with all
competent Authority.

3. What the way should be, by which the Combination of Elderships ought to
deal with such as are without, who disturb and trouble the peace of their
Congregations. Here, the manner of conferring with those that are not
coordinate with them in the Profession, is to be opened, to show that it does
tend only to the conviction and reformation of men's spirits, and not to the
blasting of men's names, or any other outward inconveniencie to be brought upon
them by reason of their disagreement from them in opinion and practice.

If these declarations concerning the Classical Presbyteries were published, as
I conceive they may be drawn up, from the grounds of Scripture, and undeniable
Principles of Holy communion, and right reason; and backed with the practice of
all the best Reformed Churches; they might be a fit plaster for the sores
which are in men's minds against the government.

These are in brief the heads of my thoughts concerning the cure of our
present fits of distemper, as it may by Gods blessing be wrought out in a
spiritual way; what the Civil Magistrate in his Prudence and according to his
place, may and ought to do outwardly to regulate the outward behaviors of
men, so as to make them without offense, I shall not now speak of; but leave it
to the wisdom of the State; praying, that God would direct them to do all
things by their own light and for their true end of government; and not by the
instigation and prompting of others who may have by-ends to sway them.

As for the Reformation in times to come (because we should endeavor not only
to build up the wast places, but also to lay the foundations of many
generations) thoughts should be had of these things following; without the
accomplishment of which in some competent measure, we shall transmit little or
no comfort unto posterity in the fruit of our undertakings. Thoughts then I say
should be had,

First, of the ways of constituting Schools for the education of youth
throughout the Kingdom in reference to four sorts of people. viz. 1. to the
Mechanics. 2. To the Gentry and Nobles. 3. To those that are to be trained up
to teach others in humane Sciences. 4. To the sons of the Prophets.

Secondly, of the ways of purging the Universities from the froth of ambitious
and contentious Learning, and Debates of Sciences falsely so called; To bring
Scholars to a Demonstrative way of attaining profitable Knowledge, and by the
exercise and employment of their Talents for the benefit of each other without
envy, to increase in infinitum beyond the present bounds thereof.

Thirdly, of enlarging unto all sorts of people Scripturall knowledge; not only
by Catecheticall exercises, more exactly to be intended for the manner thereof,
by Pastors, Parents, Schoolmasters, and Masters of families, then hitherto
has been minded; but by regular and well ordered Conferences, either in
private or in public, as well to resolve doubts from the Text, as to enlarge
the discovery of Truths and Mysteries therein.

Fourthly and lastly, of the ways and Rules of Spiritual and Rational
Meditation, in Divine and Humane things; to rectify the Principles of men's
thoughts in the search of Knowledge; whether from the Scripture, by the grounds
of demonstrating the true sense thereof, in the Literal, Material, and Mystical
analysis of the Text; or from other Objects wherein the Mind of man may be more
freely employed, either for Theoretical or Practical aims.

Of all which it is not now seasonable to speak any more, but this; That I
shall entreat thee (good Reader) not to despise the days of small things, nor
to mistrust Gods power and goodness concerning that which he does intend to do
in the last days; but to lift up thy prayer with me, that we may be all fitted
to receive, and to make right use of the Grace, which in the midst of many
trials is offered unto us in Christ Jesus. To him be glory for ever. Amen.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. 1. Page 1. COncerning a Church as it is the house of God. Chap. 2. p. 2.
Of the Members of Christ's body, and their Conjunction. Chap. 3. p. 4. Of the
Ordinances of Worship and Government. Chap. 4. p. 7. Concerning the office and
employment of the Pastor and Teacher. Chap. 5. p. 19. Concerning the office and
employment of Ruling Elders. Chap. 6. p. 23. Some Rules taken from the Word of
God, to show how the Elderships of a particular Church ought to settle the
spiritual Government of the Flock committed to them. Chap. 7. p. 25.
Concerning the office and employment of Deacons. Chap. 8. p. 28. Concerning the
duty of Christians, as they are to be in a particular Church, and under the
government of Rulers set over them in the Lord. Chap. 9. p. 36. Certain Rules
concerning the Administration of the Lords Supper, for the decent ordering of
the action, offered to the consideration of those that scruple at the gesture
of Sitting. Chap. 10. p. 55. The practice of the best Reformed Churches, in the
Administration of the Lords supper.
THE GROUNDS OF THE SPIRITUAL FRAME OF THE HOUSE of GOD.
CHAP. I. Concerning a CHURCH as it is the House of God.
1. A Congregationall Church is a ( a) dwelling place of Mount Zion, (a) Isa.
4, 5. The Lord will create a cloud upon every dweling place of Mount Zion, and
upon her Assemblies. Ergo, there are many dwelling places, and many Assemblies
of Mount Zion: and each of them has a promise of the Lords presence with
them.] And one of her Assemblies, that is to say, a ( b) House of God. ( b) 1 Timothy 3. 15. The House of God, which is the Church of the living God.

2. This house is built upon the foundation (c) of the Apostles and Prophets;
Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone.

( c) Ephesians. 2. 20. and ye (viz. Ephesians) are built upon the foundation of
the Apostles and Prophets; Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone,
as the Ephesians were, so all true Churches are built upon Christ alone.

3. The end and use of this building, is to be an ( d) habitation of God
through the Spirit. ( d) Ephesians. 2. 22. in whom you (viz. Ephesians) also are
builded together, for an habitation of God through the Spirit.

4. God then through ( e) Christ dwells therein; ( e) Joh. 17. 23. I in them,
and thou in me; that they may be made perfect in one. Ergo, if they be united
by any other tie to one another, then by their relation to Christ, they are
neither perfect as one; nor a true habitation of God by the Spirit.

And that two ways:

First in the lively members of Christ's body fitly joined together.

Secondly in the spiritual ordinances of his worship and government rightly
observed.

CHAP. II. Of the Members of Christ's body and their conjunction.
THe members of Christ's body are all the lively ( f) stones of the house of
God, ( f) 1 Pet. 2. 4, 5. To whom coming as unto a living stone, etc. ye also
as lively stones are built up a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood, to offer
up spiritual sacrifice acceptable to God, by Jesus Christ] built upon ( g)
Christ; and set in their proper places, to offer up spiritual sacrifice unto
him. ( g) 1 Cor. 3. 9. Ye are Gods building; and Ephesians. 2. 21. In whom (viz. in
Christ) all the building is fitly framed together.

2. The stones of this building are either the Foundations, of the Corners, or
the Walls.

3. The chief and only foundation, which is the head of the corner, is Christ
Jesus. 1 Cor. 3. 11. Other foundation can no man lay, then that is laid, which
is Christ Jesus. and 1 Pet. 2. 7. Unto you he is precious (viz. Christ) but
unto the disobedient, the stone which the builders disallowed, the same is made
the head of the corner. Compared with Psalm. 118. 22. and Isa. 28. 16. Thus
says the Lord, behold I lay in Sion for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, a
precious cornerstone, a sure foundation.

4. The secondary foundations ( i) next unto Christ, are the Apostles and
Prophets, ( i) Ephesians. 2. 20. Built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief cornerstone. and Revel. 21. 14.
And the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and in them the names of the
twelve Apostles of the Lamb.

5. The walls are the Body of common members, which is the Congregation of
believers, joined ( k) together in one. ( k) Cant. 8. 8, 9. We have a little
sister, etc. What shall we do for our sister? etc. If she be a wall, we shall
build upon her a palace of silver.

6. The corner-stones which join the walls together, are Officers ( l) in the
house, ( l) Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. Pastors and teachers, for the perfecting of the
Saints, and ((...), for the making up) And as ( m) joints in the members of the
Body. ( m) Ibid. verse. 16. From whom the whole body fitly joined together, and
compacted by that which every joint supplieth. Ergo, the joining and compacting
of the Body together, is by the office of the joints.

7. These officers are differenced ( n) according to the grace and gifts given
to them for the edification of the Body, ( n) Romans 12. 6. Having then gifts
differing, according to the grace that is given us. and Ephesians. 4. 16. That
which every joint supplieth -- makes increase of the Body unto the edifying of
it self in love.] in their proper ( o) offices. ( o) Romans 12. 4. All members
have not the same office.

8. These offices are either for speaking, ( p) or for the doing of some
service. ( p) 1 Pet. 4. 11. If any man speak -- if any man minister, ((...))
that is, does service.

The office of him that speaks, is either to teach, ( q) or to exhort. ( q)
Romans 12. 7, 8. He that teaches, on teaching; he that exhorts, on exhortation.

The office of him that is employed about some service, is either to rule, (r)
or to impart and show mercy. (r) Romans 12. 8. He that rules -- he that shows
mercy.

9. By these offices, all things necessary and comfortable to the household of
Faith, in respect of the inward and outward man, may be supplied.

In respect of the inward man, it is necessary that the understanding of the
household be supplied with knowledge, and the will with sincerity of zeal to
obedience. The first belongs to the Teacher, the second to the Exhorter.

In respect of the outward man, it is necessary that the life and conversation
of the household be rightly ordered, that is, sutably (s) to the holy
profession. (s) Ephesians. 4. 1. Walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are
called] And that their bodily necessities be supplied in case of want, by the
charity of their fellow members. The first belongs unto the Ruler; the second
unto the Deacon.

10. More then this nothing is requisite in ordinary, to build up the Body in
(t) love within it self. (t) Ephesians. 4. 16. The effectual working in the
measure of every part, makes increase of the Body unto the edifying of it self
in love.

And therefore, in ordinary, none other offices are either useful, or
mentioned in the Scriptures, as appointed by Christ for the constitution of his
Church.

The life (u) and action of these members, is to observe all Gods ordinances.
(u) 1 Cor. 11. 2. I praise you brethren -- that you keep the ordinances as I
delivered them to you. and Luke 1. 6. They were Righteous before God, walking
in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless.

CHAP. III. Of the Ordinances of Worship and Government.
1. THe ordinances of Gods worship are duties prescribed in the (x) Word, (x)
Isa. 8. 20. To the law and to the testimony. and chap. 66. 1, 2. The heaven is
my throne -- but to this man will I look, who trembles at my word.] According
to which God is to be served in spirit (y) and truth, by every one. (y) Joh. 4.
24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and
in truth.

And the ordinances of Government are duties prescribed for ever unto the (z)
Rulers, (z) 1 Timothy 3. 15. That thou may know how thou ought to behave thy
self in the house of God. and chap. 5. 21. I charge thee before God, and the
Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels, that thou observe these things,
without preferring one before another, doing nothing by partiality. and chap.
6. 13, 14. I give thee charge in the sight of God, etc. that thou keep this
commandment without spot unrebukeable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus
Christ.] According to which the affairs of the household are to be (a) ordered,
(a) Tit. 1. 5. I left thee in Crete, that thou should set, in order the
things that are wanting -- as I had appointed thee. and 1 Cor. 14. 40. Let all
things be done decently and in order. and Coloss. 2. 5. I am with you in the
spirit, joying and beholding your order.] both for the increase (b) of Grace,
(b) Ephesians. 4. 13. Until we all come unto a perfect man. And v. 16. makes
increase.] and the taking away of (c) Scandals, (c) 1 Cor. 5. 7. Purge out the
old leaven. and v. 12. Do not ye judge them that are within? and v. 13.
Therefore put away from among you that wicked person.

2. The use of these Ordinances; is, to betroth (d) the consciences of men, and
bind them over unto God in the covenant of grace; and to keep them faithful to
him, (d) Ezech. 16. v. 8. till 15. and 2 Cor. 11. 2. I have espoused you to one
husband, that I may present you as a chaste Virgin to Christ.] or to reclaim
them (e) when they are faulty therein. (e) 1 Cor. 4. 21. Shall I come unto you
with a rod, etc.

3. All the Ordinances then are Means which God does use, either to bring (f)
men to his Covenant, (f) Exodus 19. 5. If ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep
my covenant, then ye shall be peculiar treasure unto me.] or to confirm (g) and
keep them in it, (g) Isa. 8. 16. Bind up the Testimony, seal the Law among my
disciples. and Ezekiel. 20. 19, 20. I am the Lord your God; walk in my statutes,
and keep my judgments and do them; and hallow my Sabbaths; and they shall be a
sign between me and you, that ye may know that I am the Lord your God.

4. The means which does bring men to the Covenant, is that which begets
Faith; the means which does confirm and keep men in the Covenant, is that
which increases and strengthens Faith; and the means which does reclaim men
from the breach of the Covenant, is that which does chastise unbelief and
disobedience.

5. To beget Faith, the ordinance of Preaching (h) is appointed; (h) Romans 10.
14. How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall
they hear without a Preacher? and v. 17. So then faith comes by hearing, and
hearing by the word of God.] To confirm it, (i) the same ordinance is to be
used, (i) 1 Pet. 2. 2. Desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow
thereby.] together with the ordinance of (k) Prayer, (k) Act. 6. 4. But we will
give our selves continually unto Prayer and to the ministry of the Word. and
the right use of (l) Baptism; (l) Mat. 28. 19. Baptizing them in the name of
the Father, etc. and Act. 2. 40. Then they that gladly received the word, were
baptized.] and the (m) Lords supper; (m) Act. 2. 41. And they continued
steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship and breaking of bread, and
in prayer.] and the fellowship of the Saints by their (n) assemblies; (n) Heb.
10. 25. Not forsaking the Assembling of our selves together, etc.] and by the
supporting of one another in their (o) burdens; (o) Gal. 6. 2. Bear ye one
another burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.] And to reclaim the
disobedient from the breach of the Covenant, the rod (p) of Discipline, (p) 1
Cor. 4. 21. Shall I come with a Rod, etc. and weapons of (q) Revenge are
appointed, (q) 2 Cor. 10. 6. Having in a readiness to Revenge all disobedience.

6. These ordinances are not to be concealed, but by the public profession (r)
of the Gospel, administered in the Church. (r) Mat. 5. 14. Ye are the light of
the world; a city that is set on a hill cannot be hid. and v. 15. Neither do
men light a candle and put it under a bushel -- v. 16. Let your light shine so
before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which
is in heaven.

7. The ordinances of Government are to be administered by those, who are
entrusted with the (s) Keys of the kingdom of heaven, whose authority is to
bind or loose, and to remit or retain sins, according to the revealed will
of God, ministerially, (s) Mat. 16. 19. And I will give thee the Keys of the
kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth shall be bound in
heaven; whatsoever thou shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. and
Joh. 20. 23. Whosoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and
whosoever sins ye retain, they are retained.

The key of Knowledge must always make way for the key of Discipline; because
the weapons of Righteousness must first lead the minds of men captive, and
convict their consciences (t) before they be made use of to revenge
disobedience. (t) 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. The weapons of our warfare are mighty
through God to the pulling down of strong holds; casting down imaginations, and
every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God; and
bringing into captivity every thought unto the obedience of Christ; and having
in a readiness to revenge all disobedience, when your obedience is fulfilled,
and Luke 11. 52. Ye have taken away the key of knowledge, etc.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the office and employment of the Pastor and Teacher.
1. THat Christ Jesus has appointed Pastors and Teachers to be officers in his
Church, is evident from Joh. 10. 1, 2. the Sheepfold -- the Shepherd of the
sheep. Ephesians. 4. 11. He gave -- some Pastors and Teachers.

2. That to these officers, the whole work and effect of the ordinary
Administration is committed, is also evident from Ephesians. 4, 11, till 17. where
next unto the extraordinary officers of the church, who are Apostles, Prophets
and Evangelists; the ordinary, who are Pastors and Teachers, are ranked: unto
whom, together with the others, all is ascribed, that is to be done concerning
the Church. Therefore the extraordinary officers ceasing, all is committed unto
the ordinary administration, which rests upon these, 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Feed the flock, ((...)) shepherdize the flock.

3. That these officers are distinct from Ruling Elders; and that Ruling Elders
are subordinate unto their employment, is clear from 1 Timothy 5. 17. The Elders
that Rule well -- especially they that labor in the word and doctrine. That
they are also distinct from Deacons, and that these are subordinate unto them
in like manner, is clear from Act. 6. 2, 3, 4. It is not reason we should leave
the Word, and serve tables -- Look out men -- whom we may appoint over this
business; but we will give our selves to Prayer and to the ministry of the Word.

4. That in the work of the Ministry, the duties of the Pastor and Teacher are
to be jointly performed, does appear by this; that the Pastors according to
Gods heart, do feed the people with knowledge and understanding, Jer. 3. 15.
Then also reproofs, rebukes, and exhortations, which are the proper work of the
Pastor, must be performed; with all long suffering and doctrine: which is the
proper work of the Teacher, 2 Timothy 4. 2.

5. That the special gifts and proper works of both these, are nevertheless
distinct; is also apparent from Romans 12. 6, 7, 8. Having gifts differing -- He
that teaches, on teaching; He that exhorts, on exhortation. And 1 Cor. 12.
8. To one is given -- the word of wisdom, which is the Pastoral; to another
the word of knowledge, which is the Doctoral gift.

6. So then the Pastoral office does eminently contain the use of all other
offices: for all that is to be done by the Teacher, or by the Ruling Elder, or
the Deacon, is to be subservient unto this care; and in case these officers be
wanting, the Pastor is to do all by himself, even as the Apostles did the work
of the Deacons before those officers were chosen, Act. 4. 34, 35. They laid
down the prices at the Apostles feet, and distribution was made. And when all
these do their duties, he ought carefully to concur with them therein, Romans
12. 5. We being many are one body; and every one members one of another. 1 Cor.
12. 20. They are many members, yet but one body. verse. 25. The members should
have the same care one of another.

7. The end and use of the Pastoral office, is the same with the end and use of
the Apostolical, Prophetical, and Evangelical office. Which is, to perfect the
Saints; to do the work of the ministry; and to build up the body of Christ,
Ephesians. 4. 12.

8. The effect of this office, when it is rightly performed, will be,

1. The unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the son of God, unto a
perfect man, Ephesians. 4. 13.

2. Preservation from ( a) seducers. ( a) Ephesians. 4. 14. That we henceforth be
no more children, tossed to and fro and carried about with every wind of
doctrine, by the slight of men and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait
to deceive.

3. The growth ( b) of the Body in all things in Christ. ( b) Ephesians. 4. 15. But
speaking the truth in love, in all things, may grow up unto him which is the
head, even Christ.

4. The jointing ( c) and compacting of the Body together under Christ; that
the Members may act within themselves for the building up of each other in
love. ( c) Ephesians. 4. 16. The whole Body fitly joined together and compacted by
that which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the
measure of every part, makes increase of the Body to the edifying of it self
in love.

9. To gain these ends and effects, three things are requisite in the Pastor.

First, that his entry upon the office be lawful.

Secondly, that the duties proper to it be discharged.

Thirdly, that the spiritual manner of performing those duties be observed.

1. Of the Entry upon the office.
10. The lawful entry upon the Pastoral charge, is only to come in by the
door; and he that does enter into the sheepfold any other way, is a thief and a
robber, Joh. 10. 1, 2.

11. The door by which the shepherd must come, is Christ, Joh. 10. 9. I am the
door; by me if any man enter, he shall be saved.

12. Now Christ by the anointing of the Spirit does dwell in the ( d) hearts
of the faithful, ( d) 2 Cor. 1. 21, 22. Now he which stablisheth us with you
in Christ, and has anointed us is God; who has also sealed us, and given the
earnest of his spirit in our hearts. and 2 Cor. 3. 17. Now the Lord is the
Spirit. and Ephesians. 3. 16, 17. Grant you -- to be strengthened with might by his
Spirit in the inner man; that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith.] If
then a Minister does offer himself by the Spirit with that Pastoral affection
which proceeds from Christ unto the flock; He who is both the ( e) Door, and
the ( f) Porter, does open himself in the heart of the Flock to receive him,
and he enters in lawfully. ( e) Joh. 10. 9. I am the door, etc. compared with
verse 3. To him (viz. that enters by the door) the Porter opens. And with
Revel. 3. 7. He that has the key of David, that opens and no man shuts,
and shuts and no man opens.

13. If any man has not this Pastoral affection and spirit which Christ had
toward the flock; but comes in some other way, that is, by some humane
practices and contrivances of his own; Christ does call him a thief and a
robber, Joh. 10. 1. and says, that he does come to steal, to kill, and to
destroy, ibid. v. 10. The heart then of the Flock must be opened to him that
comes unto them, else he cannot pretend to be the Pastor of their souls.

14. This door of the heart being first opened by the inward working of Christ's
spirit; the outward call also must follow upon, by a free choice, and orderly
reception of him that is chosen, in a public way, in the face of the
Congregation, with the countenance of Authority; as Aaron was called and
received, Hebr. 5. 4. No man takes this honor to himself, but he that is
called of God as Aaron was.

II. Of the Duties belonging to the office.
15. The duties belonging to the Pastoral charge contain all the cares and
endeavors, whereby the Flock is to be fed, conducted, preserved and defended.

16. The cares belonging to the feeding of the flock, are these --

First, to seek and find out pasture for them, Joh. 10. 9. By me if any man
enter in, he shall -- find pasture. Which is done, by giving attendance to
reading, 1 Timothy 4. 13. by meditating and applying himself to profit in
knowledge, 1 Timothy 4. 15. Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to
them, that thy profiting may appear to all. And to this effect he must keep
the form of Doctrine received from the Apostles, and the Truth of grace
received from the Holy Ghost, both which are recommended to Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.
13, 14. Hold fast the form of sonnd words which thou have heard of me, in
faith and love, which is in Christ Jesus. Keep by the Holy Ghost which dwells
in us, that good thing which was committed unto thee.

Secondly, to give to the Flock that pasture which he finds to be their
proper portion. Luke 12. 42. Give them their portion of meat; which is done by
dividing the Word to them, 2 Timothy 2. 15. Study to show thy self approved unto
God, a workman that needs not be ashamed; rightly dividing the word of truth.

Thirdly, to give this portion in due season. Luke 12. 42. Give them in due
season their portion of meat.

Fourthly, to give it according to every man's capacity. Mark 4 33. He spoke
the word unto them as they were able to hear it. Then he must give to babes,
milk; 1 Cor. 3. 2. and to those that are of full age, strong meat, Heb. 5. 12,
13, 14. He must feed all with judgment, Ezech. 34. 16. He must not feed the
weak with doubtful disputations, Romans 14. 1. Nor entertain with any, profane
and vain bablings, and oppositions of a Science falsely so called, 1 Timothy 6. 20.
and 2 Timothy 2. 16. Or questions and strife of words, 1 Timothy 6. 4. and
contentions of Genealogies, Tit. 3. 9.

17. The food to be given to the flock, is the word of God, Mat. 4. 4. Man
lives not by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth
of God. This word of God, is none other but the faithful word which the
Apostles taught, Tit. 1. 9. Holding fast the faithful word as he has been
taught. And all the word is taught, to the end that it may beget Charity out of
a pure heart, and of a good Conscience, and of Faith unfeigned. 1 Timothy 1. 5.

18. The cares belonging to the conduct of the Flock, are these --

First, the good Shepherd ought to call his sheep by name, Joh. 10, 3.

Secondly, he ought to lead them out and in, Joh. 10. 3, 9.

Thirdly, to go before them, Joh. 10. 4. to be an example of the believers, in
word, in conversation, in charity, etc. 1 Timothy 4. 12.

Fourthly, To visit the flock, and seek out the young ones, Zach. 1. 16. and
judge between cattle and cattle, Ezekiel. 34. 17.

19. The cares belonging to the preservation and defense of the Flock, are
these --

First, to pray constantly for the flock, as the Apostle does, Romans 1. 9. and
1. Cor. 1. 4. Ephesians. 1. 16. Phil. 1. 3, 4. Col. 1. 3, 4, 9. and 1 Thessalonians. 1. 2,
3.

Secondly, to warn them of dangers, as the Apostle did the Ephesians, Act. 20.
31. and God does charge watchmen to do, Ezekiel. 3, 17. and 33, 3.

Thirdly, to be helpful to them in all their infirmities, that is, to bear
the sheep that stands still, Zach. 11. 16. to heal and strengthen the sick
and bind up the broken, Ezekiel. 34. 4. to comfort the feeble and support the
weak, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14. to restore those that are taken in a fault, Gal. 6. 1.

4. To bring back that which is driven away, and seek out that which is lost,
Ezekiel. 34. 4.

Fifthly, to resist the ravenous wolves, and men speaking perverse things, Act.
20. 29, 30. to convince gainsayers, and stop the mouths of unruly and vain
talkers, Tit. 1. 9, 10, 11. To reject heretics, Tit. 2. 10.

Sixthly, to lay down his life for the sheep, to defend them, and not as a
hireling to run away from them, Joh. 10. 10, 1^.

And thus much of the Duties: now follows to consider of

III. The spiritual way, how these Duties should be performed.
20. The manner and way of performing these Duties, is not arbitrary, depending
upon the wit, or will and contrivance of man's wisdom; but spiritually to be
regulated either by the Word which is expressed, or by the undoubted Principles
of Edification. 1 Cor. 2. 1. I came not with excellency of speech or of
wisdom. and v. 4. My speech was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but
in demonstration of the Spirit, and of power. and 2 Cor. 1. 12. Not with
worldly wisdom, but by the grace of God we have had our conversation in the
world, and more abundantly to youwards. and chap. 4. 12. Not walking in
craftiness, or handling the word of God deceitfully.

21. The way then to regulate and order these Duties, has three Spiritual
paths:

The first is, that which sets the Pastors spirit upon his proper employment.

The second, that whereby his endeavors are fitted toward the Flock, and the
Flock fitted to receive them at his hand.

The third is, that wherein his employment is made edifying and useful toward
all. In the first path, he will be accepted of God; in the second and third,
approved of men.

Of the first Path.
22. The Pastors spirit will be directed toward the work of his employment, if
he bear in mind,

What his relation is to God, in his office.

What the end and use of his work is.

And what the frame of his Affections, and Rules of performance should be, to
make his way answerable unto these.

23. His relation unto God, is, that God does entrust him with his Mysteries,
and with the souls of his children: As a steward to dispense the mysteries
unto Gods children; to have inspection over them, and to keep the Keys of the
House of GOD.

24. As a steward thus entrusted: the frame of his Affection must be
Faithfulness (a) toward his Master; and the rule of his Performance must be,
to study to approve his conscience to God, not regarding the judgment of men,
but that of God alone. ( a) 1 Cor. 4. 1. Let a man so account of us as of the
Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the mysteries of God. and v. 2. It is
required in stewards, that a man be found Faithful. and v. 3. With mrit is a
small thing that I should be judged by you, or of man's judgment. v. 4. I know
nothing by my self, yet am I not hereby justified; but he that justifies me is
the Lord.

25. The mysteries wherewith he is entrusted, are the Word and the Ordinances.

26. As a Steward entrusted with the Word; the frame of his Affection must be
Sincerity, (b) not to mix any self ends with the Word. ( b) 2 Cor. 2. 17. We
corrupt not the Word; but as of sincerity, as of God, in the sight of God,
speak we in Christ.] And the rule of Performance in reference to God, is to
speak as in his sight and presence: and in reference to men, to renounce the
hidden ( c) things of dishonesty, and by the manifestation of the truth, to
approve himself to the conscience of every one. ( c) 2 Cor. 4. 2. We have
renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, -- but by the manifestation of the
Truth commending our selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God.

27. Then also, as a steward entrusted with the Ordinances; the frame of his
spirit and affections must be free from prejudice, not preferring one Ordinance
before another: And the rules of Performance are, to dispense the Ordinances (
d) impartially, ( d) 1 Timothy 5. 21. I charge thee -- that thou observe these
things without preferring one before another, doing nothing by partiality.] and
to keep himself and the holy things pure: Himself, by not ( e) partaking of
other men's sins; ( e) 1 Timothy 5. 22. Neither be partaker of other men's sins;
keep thy self pure.] the Holy things, by not giving them unto dogs ( f) and
swine; ( f) Mat. 7. 6. Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast
ye your pearls before swine.

28. To discharge the truth committed unto him concerning the souls of Gods
children; the frame of his Affections must be Faithfulness unto them, for Gods
sake; and watchfulness over them, as one that must ( g) give an account, ( g)
Heb. 13. 17. They watch for your souls, as they that must give an account.]
And accordingly the rule of his Performance unto them, must be, in dispensing
the Word, to withold nothing from them which is profitable touching the whole
( h) counsel of God, ( h) Act. 20. 20. I have kept back nothing that was
profitable unto you. and v. 27. I have not shunned to declare unto you all the
counsel of God.] And in dispensing the Ordinances, to be jealous over them with
a godly jealousy, lest they should be corrupted from the simplicity which is
in Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 2, 3.

29. The end and use of the work is, that Gods glory through Jesus Christ; and
the common edification ( i) of every one by another, through the right use of
Gods graces, may be advanced. ( i) 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11. As every man has received
the gift, even so minister the same one to another -- that God in all things
may be glorified through Jesus Christ.

30. And the frame of the Affection whereby the spirit of the Pastor will be
enabled to reach this end, is ( k) Love. ( k) 1 Cor. 8. 1. Charity edifyeth.
and 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2, 3. Though I speak with the tongue of men and angels; and
have no charity, I am as sounding brass and a tinkling cymball: And though I
have the gift of Prophecy, and understand all mysteries and all knowledge, and
though I have all faith so that I could remove mountains, and have no charity,
I am nothing: And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I
give my body to be burnt, and have no charity, it profits me nothing. and
Ephesians. 4. 15. Speaking the truth in love, ye may grow up unto him in all
things. and v. 16. the Body unto the edifying of it self in love.] And the Rule
of Performance subservient hereunto, for matter of Doctrine, is, to speak as
the oracles of God: and for matter of Action, is, to do as of the ability
which God does give, 1 Pet. 4. 11.

The second Path.
31. The way to fit all Pastoral endeavors to the Flock, is threefold:

First, to make the work of the Ministry free from all worldly aims; as, to (
l) please men, to get ( m) profit, or to get ( n) humane glory. ( l) 1 Thessalonians.
2. 4. We speak not as pleasing men, but God which tries our hearts; for
neither at any time used we flattering words. (m) Ibid. v. 5. Nor used we a
cloak of covetousness. (n) Ibid. v. 6. Nor of men sought we glory, neither of
you nor of others.] to be free from entanglements of ( o) worldly cares, o) 2 Timothy 2, 3, 4. Endure hardness as a good soldier of Jesus Christ: no man that
warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life; that he may please
him who has chosen him to be a soldier.] And not to be engaged to administer
worldly ( p) judicatures in order to the civil Magistrate, ( p) Luke 12. 13,
14. And one of the company said unto him (viz. to Christ) Master, speak to my
brother, that he divide the inheritance with me: And he said unto him, Man, who
made me a Judge or a divider among you?

Secondly, to do the work toward the Flock, with a willing ( q) and ready
mind without constraint, ( q) 1 Pet. 5. 2. Feed the flock -- taking the care
thereof, not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready
mind.] with all gentleness and tenderness of affection, and nurse-like ( r)
loving care, ( r) 1 Thessalonians. 2. 7, 8. But we were gentle among you, even as a
nurse cherishes her children: So being affectionately desirous of you, we were
willing to have imparted unto you, not the Gospel of God only, but also our own
souls, because you were dear to us.] With all just, holy, and unblameable (
s) outward behavior, ( s) 1 Thessalonians. 2. 10. You are witnesses, and God also, how
holily, justly, and unblameably we have behaved our selves among you that
believe.] And without all burdens ( t) unto the Flock, so far as can be
possibly. ( t) 1 Thessalonians. 2. 6, 9. We might have been burdensome as the Apostles
of Christ -- But ye remember our labor and travel, for laboring night and
day, because we would not be chargeable unto any.

Thirdly, to undergo any inconvenience whatsoever, rather then to give
occasion ( u) of offense unto any at the Gospel, ( u) 2 Cor. 6. 3, 4. Giving no
offense in any thing, that the Ministry be not blamed; but in all things
approving our selves as the Ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions,
in necessities, in distresses, etc.

32. The way to fit the Flock to receive and admit of all Pastoral duties at
their Pastors hands, is fourfold:

First, to walk openly ( x) and in the light toward them, ( x) Joh. 3. 21. He
that does the truth comes to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest,
that they are wrought in God. and 1 John 1. 7. If we walk in the light, as he
is in the light, we have fellowship one with another. Now God is in the light,
by the manifestation of his truth to the conscience; if therefore a Pastor does
walk in this light to the Flock, he will fit them to receive his
administration.] Which ought to be done by preparing and pre-informing their
understandings concerning the course which is to be taken toward them; that
they may not seem to be surprised, or bound to walk by an implicit faith under
their Pastor, in blind submission.

Secondly, to make them sensible that all is done ministerially, as a service
of love unto them, and to be a help unto their joy, and not to exercise any
dominion over their Faith, 2 Cor. 1. 24. or ( y) Lord it over their persons, (
y) 1 Pet. 5. 3. Neither as being Lords over Gods heritage, but being ensamples
to the flock.] And yet not to give them occasion to take authority over their
Pastor, or to ( a) despise him, ( a) 1 Timothy 4. 12. Let no man despise thy
youth. and Tit. 2. 15. Exhort and rebuke with all authority; let no man despise
thee.

Thirdly, to deal with every one of them as well in ( b) private ^^ in
public, as need may be, ( b) Act. 20. 20. I kept back nothing that was
profitable unto you, but have showed you and have taught you publicly, and
from house to house.

Fourthly, to bring them to a contract with Christ, as espoused, ( c) and to be
presented unto him, ( c) 2 Cor. 11. 2. I have espoused you unto one husband,
that I may present you as a chaste Virgin unto Christ.

The third Path.
33. Although every Pastor is authorized in himself, by his office, to lead and
rule the Flock; and as one who is accountable unto God, must discharge his
conscience in the observation and practice of all Gods ordinances; And that
every Congregation has full power to do all things for its own edification,
decently and by an order, 1 Cor. 14. 40. Yet by the Rules of holy communion (
d) in Christianity, no Pastor, nor Flock, nor Christian also ought to walk or
stand by himself alone, if possibly they can be joined unto others in the
public profession ( d) Ephesians. 4. 1. Walk worthy of the vocation wherewith you
are called. and v. 3. Endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond
of peace. v. 4, 5. One body, one spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of
your calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism^ v. 6. one God and Father. and
v. 14. Till we all come to the unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the
Son of God, unto a perfect man. and v. 14. That we be no more tossed to and
fro, and ^^rried about with every wind of doctrine. v. 16. The whole body fitly
joined together and compacted. and 1 Cor. 9. 19. Though I am free from all men,
yet I made my self a servant unto all, that I might gain the (...). v. 20. To
the Jews I became as a Jew -- to them that are under the Law, as under the
Law. -- v. 21. To them that are without Law, as without Law, (being not without
law to God, but under the law to Christ) that I might gain them that are
without law. v. 22. To the weak I became as weak -- I am made all things to all
-- And this I do for the Gospels sake, that I might be made partaker thereof
with you.] If the Apostle did thus condescend to all, to be partaker of the
Gospel with those that had an interest in it; then, all that have any interest
in the Gospel, ought to condescend one to another, to partake of the same each
with other; and consequently, no man ought to stand alone in the profession.

34. So then, every Minister of the Gospel, in the duties of his Ministerial
charge, is bound in conscience to maintain a Brotherly communion and
correspondency with his neighbor Ministers; chiefly in matters of common and
public concernment. So that every one is bound to ask the question which the
Spouse proposes unto Christ in the Canticles, chap. 1. 7. Tell me (O thou whom
my soul loves) where thou feedest, where thou make thy flock to rest at
noon? And then to follow the duty prescribed in ( e) the Answer, ( e) Cant. 1.
8. Go thy way forth by the footsteps of the flock, and feed thy kids besides
the shepherds tents.

35. By which means all the Congregations of Professors will be, as they ought
to be, coordinate unto each other, as companies of horses in Pharaohs
chariots, Cant. 1. 9. combined in the same warfare for the same Kings service.

36. Now this conjunction and co-ordination of Churches, by the brotherly
combination of their Leaders; as it may not prejudge the liberty which they
have in Christ, so it should oblige them to a right use of that liberty, to
make it serviceable unto each other in the communion of Saints.

37. It cannot be serviceable to this end, and binding, without a free,
willing, mutual agreement of Brethren to walk in the same public ways;
First, of Doctrine and of Worship, for the honor of God; secondly, of
Government, for the good of Believers, to strengthen them in the way of the
Heavenly calling; Thirdly, of Discipline, for the rooting out of vice and
scandals which dishonor the profession.

38. To make this agreement free and mutual, there must be some Assemblies and
Conferences settled; and these so ordered, that all things shall be carried with
that equality, that none shall have cause to think himself borne down or
excluded from his right, or past by and concluded without his consent in
matters which do concern him.

39. And to do this, two things must needs be determined: First, what the
orderly constitution of the Assemblies must be, in their Members, and method of
handling matters by way of conference: Secondly, what the matters are which
they should meddle withal; and what the things are which they should not
meddle withal.

40. In all which, besides that which is clearly to be gathered from the word
of God, the practices and the tried courses of the Reformed churches should be
taken into consideration, and prudentially applied unto the circumstances of
our present condition. Wherein I beseech God to direct us to his glory, in the
advancement of our peace. Amen.

CHAP. V. Concerning the office and employment of Ruling Elders.
THat Ruling ( a) Elders are officers in the Church of God, may be clearly
gathered from Romans 12. 8. He that rules with diligence. (a) 1 Timothy 5. 17. Let
the Elders that rule well be counted worthy of double-honour, chiefly those
that labor in the word and doctrine. and 1 Cor. 12. 28. God has set in the
Church -- Governments.

2. That they are officers distinct from other officers, is also plain from the
same place; chiefly from that of 1 Timothy 5. 17. and from Romans 12. 4, 6. compared
with 8. For in 1 Timothy 5. 17. he does mention two sorts of Elders: first in the
general those that rule well; secondly more distinctly, those that in bearing
rule, labor in the word and doctrine. And in Romans 12. 4. the Apostle says,
that there are many members in the body of the Church, and that they have not
all of them the same offices: then, v. 6. he says, that the gifts of grace
which makes men capable of offices, are different: and then in the latter part
of v. 6. and v. 7. and 8. he shows what the particular differences of offices
are, amongst which he reckons up that of Ruling; from whence it follows,
that the Ruler is not only an officer, but a different officer from the others
named in that place.

3. The nature of the office belonging to them may be understood, 1. By the
names given to it; 2. By the things about which it is conversant; 3. By the end
which it has in being conversant thereabout; 4. By the parts of the work to be
done in it.

First, the Names given to these Elders are, Rulers, Governors, Overseers,
Stewards.

The name of Ruler in the original is twofold; one does import Superiority,
another Action; the first is (...), the second, (...); both are translated
Rulers: but (...) does properly signify one that stands over others in
authority; and (...) does properly signify one that does lead and guide others
in the way wherein they ought to walk.

The name of Governor, does signify one that gives directions and addresses
whereby others are ordered in a course, as a ship by him that sits at the
helm thereof.

The name of Overseer ((...)) does import both authority and action, by the
inspection which a Superior does take of one that is under his charge.

The name of Steward, does signify one that is to see the laws and orders of
his Masters house observed; and has the keys thereof committed unto his
keeping.

2. The Things about which the charge is conversant, are (in general) the
Church, and such as may be gained thereunto. Which is the spiritual ( b) house
and tabernacle of God, ( b) Ephesians. 2. 21, 22. It (viz. the building) grows
unto an holy temple in the Lord -- an habitation of God through the Spirit.]
the body ( c) of Christ, ( q) 1 Cor. 12. 27. Now ye are the body of Christ, and
members in particular.] and the Kingdom which is not of this ( d) world; ( d)
Joh. 18. 36. My kingdom is not of this world.] and therefore is not to be
governed by the laws of this world, nor can the officers thereof claim their
calling and authority from this world, nor ought they to meddle in their charge
with the ( e) affairs of this world, ( e) Luke 12. 14. Who made me a Judge, or
a divider over you? If Christ was no Judge or divider in worldly matters; then
none of his Officers, as under him.

In particular; this office is conversant about the Religious profession and
life of those that belong in any respect to the Church, whether they be in, or
out of office.

Thirdly, the End wherefore the Elders are conversant about these things, is,
that they should look both to the Church and to the Members thereof: to edify
that, and preserve it from scandals; and to make these fit to walk worthy of
the calling by which they are called in the Gospel.

4. The parts of their work are the several duties whereunto they are obliged,
which are chiefly these --

First, in respect of God, they are his ( f) stewards, ( f) Tit. 1. v. 5. with
7. Thou should ordain Elders in every city, as I appointed thee; if any be
blameless -- for a Bishop (an Overseer) must be blameless as the steward of
God.] and therefore must be ( g) faithful, ( g) 1 Cor. 4. 2. It is required in
Stewards, that a man be found faithful,] and administer their charge so, as to
be ( h) accountable unto him, ( h) Heb. 13. 17. Watch for your souls, as they
that must give an account.

Secondly, in respect of the Church; they must take ( i) care of it, ( i) 1 Timothy 3. 5. If a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take care
of the Church of God?] and that with ( k) diligence, ( k) Romans 12. 8. He that
rules, with diligence.

Thirdly, in respect of the Members thereof, they must ( l) watch over them, (
l) Heb. 13. 17. They watch over your soules] take pains for them, and ( m)
admonish them as occasion shall require, ( m) 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. Which labor
among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you.

Fourthly, in respect of the End of their employment, they must be interessed
and engaged,

1. In the election, calling, and dimission of Officers to and from charges in
the Church.

2. In the admission of worthy, and rejection of unworthy Members.

3. In the ordering of all matters of public worship, to be dutifully and
decently performed.

4. In the moderating of the carriage of matters at public meetings, whereunto
the Body of the Congregation is to be invited.

5. In the redressing of Scandals, by way of instruction, exhortation,
admonition, or censure, if need be.

6. In the restoring of the penitent, in healing of breaches, in the preserving
of all in the unity of the Spirit, in the helping of the weak to bear their
burdens, and encouraging of every one in the ways of truth and righteousness.

7. In the visiting of the ( n) sick, especially when they are sent for; to
give them comfort, and pray for them, ( n) Jam. 5. 14. Is any man sick, let him
call the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him, etc.

4. The manner how this office should be executed, is, That together with the
Pastor, in all matters of Spiritual government, as well in the Consistoriall,
as in the Classical and Synodicall meetings, to give advise, and according to
the Resolutions to act by common consent: and as the Pastor ought not to act by
himself, without their knowledge, any things of common concernment; so much
less ought they to act without his approbation, and the consent of each other,
or at least of the major part of the Eldership, upon mature deliberation.

CHAP. VI.
Some Rules taken from the Word of GOD, to show, How the Elderships of a
particular Church ought to settle the spiritual Government of the Flock
committed to them.

1. THe end and use of all Church-Offices and Government, is this; Fitly to
compact the members of Christ's body together by that which every joint
supplieth; that it may grow up in Christ in all things, and edify it self in
love. Ephesians. 4. 15, 16.

2. To bring this to pass, as every one ought to walk worthy of the vocation
wherewith he is called, in the unity of the Spirit with his Brethren, Ephesians. 4.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. So more especially ought the Officers of the Church thus to
walk before others, thinking soberly of themselves, according as God has
dealt unto them the measure of Faith, and gift of Administration. Romans 12. 3,
4, 5.

3. But if two cannot walk together except they be agreed, as the Prophet
says, Amos 3. 3. far less can many do so, except they be agreed: therefore in
all undertakings an agreement is to be sought for. First amongst the Members of
the Eldership within themselves; Secondly, between the Eldership and the Flock
over which they are set; Thirdly, between one Church and its
Neighbour-churches, if these at all be concerned in the matter; And lastly,
between the Churches that are united and concerned in each other, and the Civil
Magistrate, if the thing wherein they are agreed has any reference unto the
public. And this Rule of proceeding is grounded upon these precepts: If it be
possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men, Romans 12. 18.
And give none offense neither to the Jews nor to the Gentiles, nor to the
Church of God, 1 Cor. 10. 32. Let every one of us please his Neighbor, to his
edification for good Romans 15. 2. Phil. 2. 4.

4. To gain these Agreements, three things must be found and made apparent in
every spiritual work of Government: One, in the Matter; another, in the End
thereof; and a third, in the Manner of performing it.

First in the Matter, it must appear, that the thing to be done is in it self
lawful, that is, agreeable to the will and purpose of Christ, and no ways
prejudicial to any of his laws who is the only ( a) Lawgiver of the Church,
( a) Jam. 4. 12. There is one Lawgiver; who is able to save and to destroy,
Mat. 17. 5. This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him. and
Isa. 33. 22. The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our lawgiver, the Lord is our
King; he will save us.

Secondly in the End, it must appear, that the undertaking of the work is
intended only as a duty toward God, and a service of love ( b) toward the
Saints; ( b) Gal. 5. 13. By love serve one another. and 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11. As
every man has received the gift, so minister the same one to another, as good
stewards of the manifold graces of God -- that God may be glorified in all
things through Jesus Christ.] and not as an act of power; for no man has
dominion over another man's faith, but every one is bound to help another man's
joy, 2 Cor. 1. 24.

Thirdly, in the Manner of going about every work, two things must appear --

1. That it is undertaken in an orderly course, toward those first that are
chiefly concerned therein, and then toward others by degrees; without
preposterousnesse and precipitancie.

2. That the addresses which are made to every one of these in their proper
places, are to be with all lowliness, meekness, long-suffering, and
forbearance in love, to the end than the unity of the Spirit may be kept entire
in the bond of Peace, Ephesians. 4. 12. 3. And all vainglory, and provocation to
strife, and envy being avoided, no offense may be given or taken at the work
intended. Phil. 2. 3. Gal. 5. 26. 2 Cor. 6. 3, 4.

Thus then we must conclude: that in all acts of Government if the work be
defective in any of these properties, there will either be no agreement at all,
or no long continuance thereof. Therefore these general Rules must have an
influence upon all particular Deliberations and Resolutions, to make them
effectual. For the great point of difficulty in all acts of deliberation, is
this; To order a man's thoughts within himself, to discover a duty: And in the
matter of Execution, the difficulty is this; To order a man's ways toward
others, so as to find acceptance. Now by these Rules, by Gods assistance, all
these difficulties may be overcome. As for the particular acts of Government in
themselves, in admitting of Members to the Church, in ma^ing use of the Keys
of the Kingdom of Heaven, in administering the Seals of the Covenant, in
overseeing the Flock, and addressing or redressing them in their duties; they
ought not suddenly and hastily to be meddled withal, till these Fundamentals be
well digested; for by the Method, which is in them prescribed, they will prove
successful. And in a word, nothing will ever be found commendable or
warrantable, which in the undertaking, has not a rise from some clear Rule in
the Word; and in the application, is not proportionate to the capacity of those
to whom it is to be applied: for the Apostle does instruct us by his example,
to become all things to all men, to wiune some. 1 Cor. 9. 22.

CHAP. VII. Concerning the office and employment of Deacon^.
1. THe name of a Deacon is diversely taken in the Scripture; (the Original is
(...)) yet always signifying one that is appointed for, or does attend upon
some service: and according to the diversity of the service, the word is
differently taken.

2. Sometime it is applied to common service; sometime to peculiar service to
be performed in the Church only. It is applied to common service, Mat. 8. 15.
where it is said of Peter's wives mother, that she being cured of her fever,
rose and ((...)) ministered unto them. And in this sense it is used, Mat. 20.
26. He that will be great among you, let him be your minister, ((...).)

3. When it is applied to service peculiarly belonging to the Church, it is
again differently taken:

First, for the whole work which by Gods appointment is to be performed in the
Church, in all his Ordinances. So Christ is called, Romans 15. 8. (...), a
Minister of the Circumcision; so the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6. 3, 4. does call himself
a Deacon of God, and his service ((...)) a Deaconship; we render it Ministry:
the words are, Giving none offense in any thing, that the Ministry ((...)) be
not blamed, but in all things approving our selves as the Ministers ((...)
Deacons) of God. Here it takes in the Administration of the Word with the other
service.

Secondly, it is taken for that part of the Ministry which is contradistinct
to the Administration of the Word, and stands wholly in matter of Action: in
which sense it is taken, Romans 12. 6, 7. where the Apostle does distribute all
the offices belonging to the Church into two kinds, into Prophecy, and into
((...)) Ministry. By the first he means the whole dispensation of the Word;
and by the second, all that which belongs to matter of Action.

Thirdly, it is taken most properly for that part of Action and Church Service,
which is distinct from the proper work of the Elders; and so it is here to be
considered: and in this sense the quality of a Deacon is described, 1 Timothy 3.
from v. 8. till 14.

4. This office was instituted by the Apostles at Jerusalem, to redress an
inconveniencie which did fall out in the daily ministr^^ion; namely the neglect
of some widows more then of others; by reason of which inequality there arose
a murmuring and discontent, which by these Officers was remedied, as you may
read more at large, Acts 6. v. 1. till 7.

5. The proper work then of the Deacons, is, To look to the provision which is
made for the relief of the poor, that it be equally distributed according to
their necessities; and to this effect, they are to receive and keep the
collections which are made for that use; and they ought to visit, and consider
the state of the poor and sick, that knowing their wants, the Eldership (and
Congregation, if need be) may help to supply the same according to their
ability.

6. They ought in the work of their charge to be subordinate unto the
Eldership, upon whom the chief care of the Flock does lie: For, to ease the
chief Elders at Jerusalem, they were created: and the reason why they were
constituted to ease them, is still in force; for the text says thus, Act. 6.
1. There arose a murmuring of the Grecians against the Hebrews, because their
widows were neglected in the daily ministration. Verse. 2. Then the Twelve
called the multitude of the Disciples unto them, and said, it is not reason
that we should leave the word of God, and serve tables. v. 3. Wherefore
brethren, look ye out among you seven men of honest report, full of the Holy
Ghost and wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business; v. 4. But we will
give our selves continually to prayer, and the ministry of the Word. From
whence it appears, that the service of tables (that is, to provide meat for
the poor, and distribute unto them their portion) is not to be imposed upon
them that attend the labor of the Word and Prayer, but ought to be committed
unto some others. And that these others are subordinate unto them, appears
both by the nature of their employment, which is about a matter of lower
concernment; and by the manner of their admission unto it, which was by the
imposition of the hands of the Eldership: for the Apostles did appoint them to
their office, not only as Apostles, but as Elders of that congregation.

7. And because they are thus subordinate unto the Eldership by their primitive
constitution; therefore in the Reformed churches they are obliged to regulate
their matters by the advice of the Eldership, to whom they are bound from time
to time to show the accounts of their receipts and disbursments, and the
condition of the poor who are to be relieved. [In the Synodical Acts of the
French churches, cap. 4. and in the Church-Orders of the Dutch-churches, art.
25.

8. And because they are thus accountable unto the Eldership, they are bound to
keep exact reckonings of their receipts and disbursements. The Receipts come,
in Foraigne churches, chiefly in France and Low Countries, only from free
willing contributions, which at every meeting of the Congregation to hear the
Word, are gathered by the Deacons; and the Disbursements are indifferently to
all the Poor who offer themselves, but chiefly to those of their own
Congregation.

9. In larger Congregations of the Foraign churches, the Eldership has their
meeting apart from the Deacons, and the Deacons meet ordinarily by themselves
once or twice a week; but in lesser Congregations, the Elders and Deacons meet
ordinarily all together at least once a week.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning the Duty of Christians, as they are to be in a
particular Church, and under the government of Rulers set over them in the Lord.
1. WE understand by Christians, men that have given up their names unto
Christ, to be called ( a) by his name, ( a) Act. 11. 26. The Disciples were
called Christians first in Antioch. and Ephesians. 3. 15. Of whom the family in
heaven and earth is named; to call ( b) upon him, ( b) 1 Cor. 1. 2. All that in
every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ.] by calling him ( c) their
Lord, ( c) 1 Cor. 12. 3. No man can say that Jesus Christ is the Lord, but by
the Holy Ghost.

2. By a Church, is meant a congregation of such men called and gathered
together by the Word; Mat. 13. 37. till 44. to be ( d) separate from the world,
( d) 2 Cor. 6. 17. Come out from them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and
I will receive you. and Revel. 18. 4. Come out of her (viz. of Babylon) my
people] and in the use of all Christ's ordinances, to be an habitation of God
through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2. 19, 20, 2^, 22.

3. The duty of Christians as visible professors of Christianity; does stand in
a threefold Relation:

The first is to the Church, as it is the Body of Christ.

The second is to the Eldership of that Church.

The third is to the Members thereof.

Of the first, viz. Duties relating to the Body of Christ.

4. All Christians that glory in the name of Christ, ought to appear ( e) for
him amongst men, ( e) Matthew. 10. 32, 33. Whosoever shall confess me before
men, him will I confess also before my Father which is in heaven; but
whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father which
is in heaven.] And they ought so to appear as he has appointed, and not as
they think good, or as men appoint. Mat. 15. 9. In vain do they worship me,
teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.

5. Those that will appear for Christ, ought to apply themselves to some
particular Congregation professing Saintship, as Members thereof. Mat. 12. 30.
He that is not with me, is against me, and he that gathers not with me,
scatters abroad. Mat. 11. 28, 29. Come unto me -- take my yoke upon you. Gal.
6. 10. Them who are of the household of faith. 1 John 2. 19. They went out from
us, but they were not of us, etc. Isa. 8. 16. Bind up the Testimony, and seal
the Law among my disciples. 1 Cor. 1, 2. Unto the Church of God which is at
Corinth, to them that are sanctified -- called to be Saints. and 1 Cor. 12. 27.
Ye are members in particular.

6. It is foretold, that there should be many Congregations in the Church of
the Gospel, and yet all upon the same Mount Sion, and under the same defense;
and by Gods appointment to be as one Body, Isa. 4. 5. Upon every dwelling place
of mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, there shall be a cloud and smoke by
day, and the burning of a flaming fire by night. Joh. 10. 16. Other sheep, not
of this fold, them I must bring -- there shall be one fold and one shepherd.

7. Now to understand the Relation which believing Professors have unto the
Church, three things are to be considered. First, how every Believer does
stand, as to a particular Congregation. Secondly, how one Congregation does
stand as to another, in respect both of the Members and of the Rulers thereof.
And thirdly, how Believers should apply themselves unto particular
Congregations, and be received therein by their Elderships.

8. All Believers are baptized by one: Spirit into one Body, Of the first head;
how believers stand in a particular congregation.
1 Cor. 12, 13. and in that one Body they are called to the enjoyment of the
Peace of God, Coloss. 3. 15. and therein by God set in their several places, 1
Cor. 12. 18. and made members one of another, Romans 12. 4, 5. and joined and
compacted together by joints under their head Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 4. 16. whose
Body is every congregation of believers, 1 Cor. 12. 27. Now ye (viz.
Corinthians) are the Body of Christ, Romans 12. 5. So we (viz. Romans) are one
Body in Christ. And the Church universal, Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. the head over all
things to the Church, which is his Body, the fullness of him that fills all
in all.

9. From hence it is evident, that every believer is not only bound to make
open profession of his faith, (as is ( f) required Romans 10. 9, 10.) (f) If thou
confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart that
God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. For with the heart man
believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto
salvation.] but that in so doing he is bound to appear in the communion of (
g) Saints, standing in one body fast together with others, and striving for the
Faith of the Gospel, Phil. 1, 27. ( g) Ph. 2. 1, 2, 4. If there be any
consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit
-- be ye like-minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind;
look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of
others.] And by this conjunction of Believers, when an Eldership is rightly set
over them, particular Congregations are constituted. As Act. 14. 22, 23. The
Apostles having converted the Gentiles to the faith, ordained them Elders in
every Church, with prayer and fasting.

10. As single Believers are bound to associate themselves one to Of the second
head, how congregations do stand one to another.
another; so ought every congregation of Believers to associate it self to its
neighbour-congregation by the very same rules and bands by which particular
Christians are bound to join themselves one to another. For if all Believers in
the world are baptized into one Body, 1 Cor. 12. 13. and if all are called to
the Peace of God in that one Body, Col. 3. 15. and are bound to endeavor the
Unity of the Spirit one toward another, in the Bond of that Peace, because
there is but one Body of Christ in all the world, Ephesians. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4. which
is homogeneall (that is, of the same kind) in all the members thereof: And if
this whole Body is to be fitly joined and compacted together by that which
every joint supplieth, Ephesians. 4. 16. Then ought none of all the congregations
of Believers to stand separate one from another, but are bound to unite
themselves by their joints (that is their Officers) so near as possibly they
can, in all Spiritual relations, for their mutual edification in love, Ephesians.
4. 16.

11. So then, every true Believer that has made open profession In respect of
their Members.
of his faith, by being a member of any one Congregation, has a right of
membership unto all the congregations of the world, because all are but one in
Christ, Gal. 3. 28. and all have one and the same access unto the Father, and
are fellow-citizens, and of the same household of Faith, Ephesians. 2. 19.

12. It is then contrary to the mind of Christ, that those who make profession
of the same faith, and worship in the same way, should stand either single by
themselves, and not imbodyed with other professors; or stand so imbodyed with
some, as to be disjoynted from other bodies of the same profession.

13. Nor ought any Church Officers to take upon them such a In respect of their
Officers.
Relation to any particular Body, as to think themselves obliged unto none but
unto the members thereof, in their Ministerial charges; for if they do so,
they make themselves to be no joints in the body of Christ, (which every
officer is bound to be) and they hinder the compacting of the whole together,
which is contrary to the end of their employment, Ephesians. 4. 13. 16. and they
open a door to the cunning craftiness of men who lie in wait to deceive; that
it may seduce the simple and plain-hearted believer, and unsettle him. Ephesians.
4. 14. Romans 16. 18.

14. All Christians applying themselves unto a particular Of the third head,
how believers should apply themselves to a particular Congregation.
congregation, ought to come thereunto free, willingly, in the beauty of
holiness, Psalm. 110. 3. and not upon any other considerations then the love of
Holiness, Psalm. 84.

15. If any that are eminent in the world, do stand upon the points of Honor,
thinking that they have a right to the privileges of the kingdom of Christ, by
reason of their places in the world; and that it would be unbeseeming to them
to offer themselves to be admitted into a particular congregation: They do
greatly mistake the nature of Gods kingdom, and the state of true Honor; for
none are truly excellent and honorable but ( h) Saints, ( h) Psalm. 16. 3. The
Saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent in whom is all my delight]
and the Godly, whom God has set apart for himself, Psalm. 4. 2, 3. Now the
Kingdom of Christ is not of this world, Ioh. 18. 37. nor can it be entertained
with the worldly respects ( i) of persons, ( i) Jam. 2. 1, 2. My brethren, have
not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ the Lord of glory, with respect of
persons; For if there come into your Assembly a man with a gold ring in goodly
apparel, and there come in also a poor man in vile raiment, v. 3. and ye have
respect to him that wears the gay clothing, and say unto him, Sit thou here
in a good place, and say to the poor, Stand thou there, or sit here under my
footstool, v. 4. are ye not then partial in your selves, and become judges of
evil thoughts?] Because the world, and all that is in it, is either wholly
opposite ( k) unto Christianity, and does lie in wickedness, 1 John 5. 19. (
k) Gal. 6. 14. But God forbid that I should glory save in the cross of the
Lord Jesus Christ; by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the
world. and 1 Cor. 3. 19. The wisdom of this world is foolishness with God.]
or else, at the best, ( l) subordinate unto it. ( l) and 1 Cor. 3. 22. whether
Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things
present, or things to come, all are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is
Gods. As if he had said, Christ is subordinate unto God, ye are subordinate
unto Christ, the world and all things in it are subordinate to your use in
reference to Christ. Therefore it can be no disparagement to any in the world
to apply themselves to Christ in his ordinances; but it will be their greatest
honor, to exalt him; for such as confess him before men, he will confess
before his heavenly Father and his holy Angels, Mat. 10. 32. Luke 12. 8.

16. Nor do the Saints by their profession of being separate from the world,
make void any of the laws of nature; because they are commanded to be subject
unto every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2. 13. And the Lord of
glory himself (though not bound) did submit, by paying tribute, unto the
ordinance of Caesar, Mat. 17. 24, 25, 26, 27. and has commanded all to give
unto Caesar what is Caesar's, and unto God what is Gods, Mat. 22. 15. till v.
22. Now to Caesar is due ( m) submission, and ( n) honor. ( m) Romans 13. 1. Let
every soul be subject to the Higher powers. and 1 Pet. 2. 13. Submit your
selves -- unto the King as supreme, or unto Governors as unto them that are
sent by him. (n) 1 Pet. 2. 17. Honor the King.] As then by the Kingdom of
Christ, none of the great ones of the world lose any respect due unto them, but
rather receive an increase of Honor; so they ought not to refuse to yield unto
Christ the respect which is due unto Him, and his Kingdom; for by giving
themselves up to it, they are set above themselves, that is, out of the world
and the respects of it.

17. Every one then that will be called a Christian (whatsoever they are
amongst men, it makes no matter, God accepts no man's person) is bound as a
Christian to offer himself to be imbodyed into a Congregation, and to partake
of the privileges of the household of Faith, and ought professedly to ( o)
subject himself unto the Gospel, ( o) 2 Cor. 9. 13. They glorify God for your
professed subjection unto the Gospel of Christ.] and give ( p) himself over
unto the Lord, and by the will of God unto that Eldership whereunto he does
make his application. ( p) 2 Cor. 8. 5. They gave their own selves unto the
Lord, and unto us, by the will of God. and Act. 2. 41, 42. There was added
(viz. unto the Church) three thousand souls; and they continued steadfastly in
the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers.

18. Such as offer themselves in this manner unto the Eldership, And how they
should be received therein.
ought to be received without much ( q) difficulty or scrupulosity, ( q) Romans
14. 1. Him that is weak in the Faith, receive you, but not to doubtful
disputations.] even as Christ ( r) received us, ( r) Romans 15. 7. Receive ye one
another, as Christ also received us to the glory of God.] And such as come to
him, he says he will in no wise cast out, Joh. 6. 37.

19. Now concerning the outward form and manner of admitting Professors unto
the holy Communion, and distinguishing them from those that are without; we
find nothing distinctly enjoined in the Word, or extant in the practice of the
Apostles: Therefore that which may concern this matter, is conceived to be left
free unto the discretion of the Eldership, as they shall think it most fit, for
the edification and capacity of those with whom they have to do.

And herein the customs of the Reformed churches, in respect of
circumstantials, are found to be different; yet, in the main, their agreement
is this --

1. That every one who for the first time is to be admitted unto the Holy
communion, is to be examined in respect of his knowledge and conversation;
although from his infancy he has been borne, baptized, and bred in the
Congregation.

2. If he come from abroad; having years of discretion and judgment fit to
examine himself, it is expected he should have a testimonial of his former
life and conversation, and of his diligence in attending the Ordinances in the
place where he has lived. And being found knowing in the fundamental truths
of Christianity, he is desired

First, to declare that his purpose is to live and die in the communion of the
Reformed churches.

Secondly, to promise, that if he should conceive any scruples of the Doctrine
that is taught in the Reformed churches, he shall not conceal his doubts, and
fall away from the Fellowship into which he is received; but make the same
known unto his Teachers, to receive satisfaction therein.

Thirdly, to oblige himself to use all careful diligence to honor and adorn
his profession with his life and conversation, and to avoid all occasion of
scandal.

Fourthly and lastly, to promise to submit himself unto the Rules of
Church Discipline, according to the Word; and to respect those that are set
over him in the Lord.

All which he is engaged to do by word of mouth, and by giving his hand unto
the Eldership.

In some places, this admission of Members is left to the Pastor, to be
performed in private; yet so, as the reception of the party must be notified
unto, and ratified by the Eldership. In some places, all is done before the
whole Eldership. In some places also, the names of those that are admitted, are
published unto the whole Congregation from the Pulpit.

Of the second, viz. Duties relating to the Eldership.
20. Such as have given up their names unto a Congregation to be under a
Pastoral charge, and the government of an Eldership, ought to hear ( s) the
voice of their Pastors, ( s) Joh. 10. 3. The sheep hear his voice.] To ( t)
follow them, ( t) Ibid. v. 4. The sheep follow him, for they know his voice.]
To continue ( u) in their fellowship, and not to follow strangers, ( u) Act. 2.
42. They continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship.] Yet by
this they are not deprived of the liberty of hearing others besides their own
Pastors, that they may ( x) prove all things, and hold fast that which is good,
( x) 1 Thessalonians 5. 21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good.

21. They ought to obey their Rulers ( y) and submit themselves unto them; that
their work may be done with joy, and not with grief, ( y) Heb. 13. 17. Obey
them that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch --
That they may do it with joy, and not with grief.

22. This obedience and submission ought not to be formal, but hearty,
proceeding from ( z) a high esteem of them in love for their works sake, ( z) 1 Thessalonians. 5. 13. Esteem them (viz. those that labor, and are over you in the
Lord, and admonish you) very highly in love for their works sake.

23. As an inward affection and esteem, so an outward care for their Rulers is
requisite in Professors: They ought then to communicate unto those that teach
them in all good things, Gal. 6. 6. counting all that Rule well, worthy of
double honor; but especially to provide maintenance for those that labor in
the word and doctrine, 1 Timothy 5. 17. because the Lord has ordained that those
who preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9. 14.

24. They ought to mark and avoid all Teachers that cause offenses and
divisions amongst them, Romans 16.

Of the third, viz. Duties relating to their Fellow Members.
25. They ought to consider their fellow members; to provoke them to love and
to good works; not forsaking the assembling of themselves together, as the
manner of some is. Heb. 10. 24, 25.

26. They ought to hold forth the word of life, and shine as lights in the
world in the midst of a crooked generation, Phil. 2. 15.

27. To this effect they ought to do all things without murmurings and
disputings, that they may be found blameless as the children of God, Phil. 2.
4.

28. They ought to serve their brethren through love, Gal. 5. 13. and not to
please themselves, but others for their good to edification, Romans 15. 1, 2.

29. They ought not either to despise or judge one another for matters which
God has left free, either to be done, or not to be done, according as God does
give every one the measure of faith. Romans 14. the whole chap.

30. They ought to withdraw themselves from every brother that walks
disorderly and is a busy body, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6, 11. yet they ought not to count
him an enemy, but should admonish him as a Brother. ibid. v. 15.

CHAP. IX. Certain Rules concerning the Administration of the LORDS Supper, for
the decent ordering of the action. Offered to the consideration of those that
scruple at the gesture of Sitting.
1. IT is not lawful for us, in Gods worship, to do what we think good in our
own eyes; but what is most agreeable to his will.

2. For if we know not what his will is, we cannot worship him in Faith.

3. If we worship him not in faith, we cannot please him.

4. And if we please him not, we cannot expect a blessing upon our performance.

5. Therefore to be sure of a blessing, we must know and carefully observe that
which is most answerable to his will, in things belonging to his worship.

6. Now to know and observe this in the Sacrament of the Lords supper; Christ's
practice in the institution thereof, so far as he would have us to imitate the
same, and his intention in commanding us to imitate him therein, is to be
considered.

7. The necessity of considering Christ's practice and intention in this matter,
does arise from the Apostles commandment, who does herein very distinctly
refer us unto Christ himself for a warrant of that which is to be done;
saying, that in this matter, he delivered that which he received of the Lord, 1
Cor. 11. 23. and that we ought to follow him so far as he is a follower of the
Lord, ibid. v. 1.

8. Therefore we are bound to look unto Christ in the first place; and to the
Apostles afterward, with a reference unto the Lord: because finally our faith
must rest only in the Lord, as the object thereof; and the end and use of the
Apostolical ministry is, to call us unto communion with them; that by them we
may have communion with the Father, and with his son Jesus Christ, 1 John 1.
3. For we are sure, that in following him and fulfilling his intention, we do
nothing amiss; because He is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, Joh. 14. 6.

9. Christ's practice then in the institution of his Supper, in that which is to
be imitated, is this --

First, he took the Bread, and by giving special thanks over it, he separated
it from the common to a holy use; then he brake it, and gave it to his
disciples, and commanded them to eat thereof.

Secondly, he took the Cup, which in like manner by a special blessing he
separated from the common to a holy use; and then gave it to his Disciples,
commanding them all to drink of it.

Thirdly, this bread and cup the Lord did distribute being at the table with
his Disciples, where he spoke with them of his death and of the fruits thereof,
and of his coming again, as you may see more at large in Matthew. 26. from verse.
20. till 36. Mark 14. from v. 18. till 32. Luke 22. from v. 13. till 39. and in
John, the whole chapters, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. are to be compared with the other
three Evangelists, and taken in as the matter of his table-discourse.

10. Next unto this practice of the Lord, the Apostolical practice, which in
the Primitive church did herein follow the Lord, is considerable; that we may
observe thereby what is properly imitable in the Lords practice, by the Church.

11. Let us look upon that which the Apostle Paul delivers unto the church of
Corinth, Epist. 1. chap. 10, 11. I shall open the places briefly, and then make
some observations upon them.

In chap. 10. the Apostles scope is, to dissuade the Corinthians from
symbolizing with Idolaters in eating of things sacrificed unto idols. The parts
of the chapter are two: First, he forbids a mixed communion with Idolaters in
things pertaining to their Idol-worship, as such; from v. 1. till 23. Secondly,
he permits unto them a mixed conversation with Idolaters, in eating and drinking
even of those things which they had offered unto idols, with this caution, if
it were done without offense unto weaker brethren, from v. 23. till the end.

Amongst other arguments used to dissuade them from partaking with idolaters in
their Idol-worship, one is taken from their engagement to celebrate the Lords
supper, and from the relation which they had to the Lord in it, and to one
another. This is expressed from v. 15. till 22. where first he stirs them up to
attention, and to a serious consideration of that which he was to say. I speak
as to wise men (says he) judge ye what I say, v. 15. Then he declares unto
them three things; and by the answer of a doubt, does conclude his dehortation.

First he shows what is meant by the use of the Elements in the Lords supper.
The cup of blessing (says he) which we bless, is it not the communion of the
blood of Christ? and the bread which we break, is it not the communion of the
body of Christ? verse. 16. As if he had said, What do you mean by blessing the
cup, and breaking the bread at the Lords supper? for what end and purpose is it
instituted? Is it not to evidence that you have communion with Christ in his
body and blood, as his spiritual members belonging to him?

Secondly he shows what is meant by their joint partaking of the Elements. We
being many (says he) are one bread, and one body; for we are all partakers of
that one bread, v. 17. As if he had said; although in our selves we are many
and distinct persons, yet in reference to Christ we are (as of old the
shewbread was to the Lord) but one bread, and one mystical body; because we
all jointly do partake of that one bread which in a mystery is his body. And
this is brought in as a reason to confirm the foregoing point; For (says he)
we being many, are one bread, etc. that is, The reason why the blessing of the
cup and breaking of the bread does mean and import a communion with Christ in
his blood and body, is clear from our mutual relation and the conjunction
wherein we stand one to another, by this action jointly performed; which is
this: That we all by it respecting each other in Christ, evidence our selves to
be one bread and one body to him. So then hereby we plainly attest our
communion with him, seeing by this action, as relating unto him, we have
communion one with another.

Thirdly, he shows what is meant by the eating of Sacrifices. v. 18. Behold
(says he) Israel after the flesh; are not they which eat of the sacrifices,
partakers of the altar? As if he had said: consider the custom of the Jews
after the flesh in their sacrifices, and the ordinance that God gave unto them
concerning the eating of holy things: Their custom is, that such as eat of the
Sacrifices, have communion with the Altar, and partake in the worship by which
the sacrifices are offered up unto God; and if you look upon Gods ordinance
given to the Priests concerning holy things, Levit. 22. from v. 10. till 17.
you shall see that all strangers are expressly forbidden to partake thereof, and
that none but such as had a reference to the altar might eat of them; the Lord
intimating, and the custom of the Nation confirming it, that the eating of
sacrifices is not a common action, but a matter of worship importing a
communion with the Altar.

From all which the Apostle does tacitly insinuate thus much: That as the
chief thing aimed at in the Lords supper, is to evidence our communion with
Christ, and with one another in reference to him; and the clear purpose of the
Jews in eating of sacrifices, was to manifest their relation unto the Altar as
partakers of the worship and service done at it; So the meaning and intent of
eating things sacrificed unto Idols, must be, to have communion with the altar
of the Idol, and the idolatrous worship performed thereat. This inference is
not expressed, but only intimated, till a doubt be proposed and answered.

The doubt is proposed v. 19. thus: What say L^h^n (says he) that the Idol is
any thing? or that which is offered ^n sacrifice to Idols is any thing? As if
he had said: I do not intend to intimate unto you by this, that an Idol is that
which has a real being; for we know that an Idol is nothing in the world, 1
Cor. 8. 4, 8. consequently, I do not say that the things offered in sacrifice
unto Idols are any thing in reference to worship, further then the imagination
of the Idolater does fancy them to be; which gives no being to any thing. So
then in the proposal of the doubt, he does clearly deny that which it seems
to suppose; and then for a fuller answer unto it, he does show his clear
meaning concerning the sacrifices of the Gentiles, and infers from thence as
a conclusion, that their duty was, not to partake thereof.

His meaning concerning the sacrifices of the Gentiles, is, v. 20. in these
words: But I say that the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice
unto devils (Demons) and not unto God. As if he had said; But my meaning is, to
declare that the purpose of the Gentiles is to worship their Demons, which are
Devils, or imaginary, and not the true Gods.

Whereupon he infers his dehortatory conclusion thus: And I would not that
ye should have fellowship with devils. As if he said; Because the meaning and
purpose of partaking of Sacrifices, is to have communion in Worship; and it is
evident that the Gentiles do worship Demons, which are devils, or imaginary
gods; therefore I dissuade you from having any ^^^munion with them. And he
gives the reason why he does ^^^swade them from this, v. 21. in these words:
Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of Devils; ye cannot be
partakers of the Lords table, and of the table of Devils; As if he had said, I
dissuade you from this, because you cannot stand under two opposite relations,
and have communion with two opposites at one and the same time. The relation
which you have unto Christ, and their relation to the Devils, are opposite;
therefore you cannot stand under both at once, you cannot maintain communion
with both at once; but if you partake of the cup and table of the one, you must
abstain from the cup and table of the other.

13. Thus having opened the words; the observations which I will briefly make
upon them, are these --

First, we may gather from hence, that to symbolize with Idolaters in their
acts of worship, is a thing unlawful to Christians. We know that the Mass is
the greatest idol that ever was in the world; and that the act of kneeling was
brought in at the Popish communion to worship that Idol: we ought not therefore
to symbolize with them in that act of worship; for it is not lawful for us to
follow the corruption of an Ordinance, when we have Christ's imitable practice
made known to us: It is not lawful to mix the acts of Gods true worship, with
the chief act of an Idol-worship, such as is Kneeling at the Mass; For the
meaning and purpose of kneeling, is Adoration; the object of adoration is the
Body and blood of Christ, supposed to be in the Elements: but if we believe no
such real presence as they have fancied, then we make void the object of
adoration, and consequently the act intended toward it is disanulled also. But
if any does incline to kneeling, because it has been a custom hitherto used;
he may upon the same ground practice all other Popish idolatries and
superstitions. But if you will say, that you think Christ ought to be
worshipped there, and that you cannot come to his table with too much
reverence; You must understand, that Christ does not intend to be worshipped
there, but to be received; and that you must not be led by your own thinking,
but by the manifestation of his will in matters of worship; nor can any one
gesture be accounted reverence to him more then another, otherwise then as he
does appoint it to be in his worship. The standing at the first Passover in
Egypt, was a reverence; The sitting at the table with Christ, was in his
disciples a reverence to him; nay, and their suffering of him to wash their
feet, as their servant, was a reverence due to him as their master, because it
was his will to have it so. It is neither circumcision nor uncircumcision, but
the doing of Gods will, that makes us acceptable unto him. Now it is contrary
to his will, that we should follow another example of worship then that which
his Apostles have given us: It is contrary to his will, that we in his worship
should symbolize with Idolaters, and that we should seem to collude with them
in their act of Idol-worship, when we know that the Lord will not be adored,
but received in his Supper; and it is no reverence at all, but a very
irreverent and unbeseeming behavior, to put forth an act proper to adoration,
when he does call us to put forth an act of communion and fellowship.

The second observation is; That the eating of bread, and drinking of a cup at
the Lords supper, is a Table-action. This is to be gathered from verse. 17. We
are partakers of one Bread; and v. 21. Partakers of the table of the Lord, and
of the table of Devils. These expressions are here used with a reference to the
aim of fellowship and communion: whence I infer these conclusions.

1. Seeing the act of Communion is to be evidenced chiefly by the partaking of
one Bread by many; it does follow, that the more that bread, and the partaking
of it is one, the more the act of communion is evidenced. Then it follows
also, that the partaking of the bread ought to be as much one, as the nature of
a Meal does permit, and as Christ by his example does insinuate. Now the nature
of a Meal, does not only permit, but require, that such as have fellowship in
it, should be together as guests to partake jointly of it; and Christ's example
does clearly show that all his Disciples were in fellowship together with him
at a table. And therefore to partake of one bread, and of the Lords table, must
be understood to be such a table-action as is proper unto guests at a table.
From whence it will follow, that to carry the bread and wine up and down the
house, to persons sitting in several pewes, as in so many little chambers of
that house, is not at all suitable to the celebrating of the Lords supper,
because it does wholly take away the manifestation of that fellowship which the
Lord would have evidenced in it. Those that eat their bread apart, in several
petty corporations, do not show forth that they are one bread; as the Shewbread
was, which was to be set before the Lord upon the holy table in the Sanctuary,
Exodus 25. 30. and Levit. 24. v. 5. till 10. Which Bread did represent the whole
Congregation of Israel united as one unto the Lord, in twelve cakes set upon
one table; which type is now fulfilled in the Gospel, by the joint presentation
of the real members of Christ as one bread at his table, to his Father, to be
a living sacrifice unto him. Nor can it be said that those who sit in their
pewes at a distance from each other, are one Body, as men use to be at Meals;
for at meals none are one body properly, but such as eat together at the same
table: Therefore this custom is not suitable to that which is to be evidenced
at the partaking of the Lords table.

2. To show an act of Communion, we must partake of the Bread as it is one. Now
the bread is not one otherwise then as it is upon the same table, and blessed
with the same Blessing: therefore it will follow, that the partaking of it as
one, must be to receive it at the table, in a table-action: For if a Table is
appointed to show that we are to be at Christ's supper as his guests; and if it
be asked what Christ would have his guests to do? the answer must be taken from
Luke 22. 30. That he would have them eat and drink with him at table in his
Kingdom. To eat and drink (then) at his table, is to be his guest; and not to
have a bit of meat brought from the table. If Lazarus the beggar lying at the
rich man's gate, had received a dish of meat from his table, it would not have
made him one of his guests: but the other Lazarus of Bethany who sat with
Christ at table Joh. 2. 2. was properly a fellow-guest (or perhaps Christ's
host) because he did eat with him at the table. To have fellowship then in
partaking of the table, is to be at the table, and to do the action proper to a
table: But to carry the bread and drink from the table, to give it to every one
apart, is contrary to this Tableaction, and therefore not to be practiced any
longer, in this time of Reformation.

3. The table of the Lord, and the table of Devils, are set as parallel in
opposition to each other; therefore to partake of the one, and of the other,
are made contraries directly inconsistent together; and being actions directly
contrary, they must be of one kind; and if of one kind, then the table-action
used at the one, was the same with the action used at the other. Now it is
known that at the Idol-sacrifices, such as were invited, did sit and feast at a
table, 1 Cor. 8. 10. Sit at meat in the Idols temple. And it was the custom of
all ages to have a feast upon a sacrifice; you may see it at Jacob and Labans
parting, Genesis 31. 54. and at the Moabites friendship which they made with
Israel, Numb. 25. 1, 2. And to this the strumpet does allude, Prove. 7. 14. and
in Psalm. 22. v. 25, 26. the same thing is intimated by the promise of a
Spiritual meal whereby the souls of believers shall be satisfied and live for
ever. If then to partake of the table of devils, and of Christ's table, are
parallels in opposition; and if it is evident not only by the known custom,
but by the Apostles expression, 1 Cor. 8. 10. that in partaking of the Idols
table, they did sit at meat in the Idol-temple; then it will follow, that those
who did partake of the Lords table, did sit at meat in the Lords temple: For
the Apostle showing what he means by partaking in respect of the one table,
does also explain that which is to be understood by the same word in respect of
the other.

The third observation is, that the Apostle says, We all are partakers. We
all, shows that their custom was to be in a Body, and as a Body to partake;
and that the whole Body did partake at once, so near as could be. From whence
not only the separate partaking, but the single partaking also is condemned as
a thing unsuitable to the Lords supper. The practice then of the Mass Priest to
take the bread and wine alone in public, is hereby condemned; and the private
administration of the Lords supper to the sick (which some ignorantly and
superstitiously crave, as a Viaticum itineris supremi, (so they call it) the
provision for their last journey) is a corruption of the ordinance: For the
words Many and All, which the Apostle does use here, exclude the Administration
unto one alone.

14. In the eleventh chapter of this same Epistle, from v. 17. till the end,
the Apostle does speak of the celebrating of the Lords supper; and his scope is
clearly, to rectify the abuses and disorders which were crept in amongst the
Corinthians in the use of that ordinance: I shall open the text, and then make
observations.

First then, v. 17. he reproves them in general, that they came together not
for the better, but for the worse; namely, for the abuse of this ordinance.

Then in particular, he tells them what their faults were, correcting them for
the same; and instructs them in their duty, showing how the ordinance should be
observed.

He discovers their faults, from verse. 18. till 22. which are these --

First, that they were divided in sects, v. 18, 19. For first of all (says he)
when ye come together in the Church, I hear that there be divisions among you;
and I partly believe it; for there must be also heresies (sects) amongst you,
that they which are approved may be made manifest among you.

Secondly, that they did not come together so much to eat the Lords supper, as
their own suppers; and that in a divided and excessive way, v. 20, 21. When ye
come together therefore into one place, this is not to eat the Lords supper;
for in eating, every one takes before other his own supper, and one is hungry,
and another is drunken. As if he had said; When ye come together, ye do not
seem to intend the observation of Christ's ordinance, but the taking of your own
meals in several companies, in a disorderly divided way, and with excess of
eating and drinking in some, when others are fasting and hungry. Your faults
then are, that you come not only divided in opinions and affections, but in
your actions and behavior, you change the Lords supper into an ordinary meal;
and these your meals are taken separately, and in taking of them some are
excessive in drinking, and glut themselves, while others who partake not with
them are hungry. Thus their faults are opened.

The correction of these faults, is in verse. 22. What (says he) have ye not
houses to eat and to drink? or despise ye the Church of God, and shame them
that have not? What shall I say to you? Shall I praise you in this? I praise
you not. As if he had said, Do you not know that ye ought not to come together
in the Church to eat an ordinary meal? are not private meals to be taken at
home in your houses? By this means you make the Church of God contemptible,
and the society of Saints a common thing; and you make them ashamed, that have
not made provision for entertaining themselves plentifully as some of you do.
You dishonor then the house of God, and shame your brethren; you deserve
greatly to be blamed for all this, wherein you are extreme faulty.

Having thus laid their faults open, and corrected them for the same; he
instructs them in their duty, showing them how the Ordinance should be
observed, in reference to three things. 1. In respect of the ordinance in it
self, to imitate Christ's institution. 2. In respect of their private
preparation, to partake thereof worthily. 3. In respect of their public
meeting, to perform the action orderly in the Congregation. The first part of
the instruction concerns the things to be done by Christ's appointment; the
second part, and the third, concern the persons doing the same, to direct them
in the manner of performance, which has two duties; the one preparatory,
wherein every one is apart to fit himself for the ordinance; the other
executory, wherein all of them are to fit themselves each toward other in
their meeting to that effect.

The doctrine concerning the Ordinance it self, is verse. 23, 24, 25, 26. where
first he shows by what authority he does deliver this doctrine: For (says he)
I have received of the Lord that which I have delivered unto you. Secondly, he
relates unto them what Christ did and said in the institution of the Ordinance.
Thirdly, he declares unto them what the meaning of their action was, in
imitating that which Christ did, and remembering what He said.

Christ's actions and speeches are distinctly related, in respect of the time,
and in respect of the things done and said by him at that time.

The time was, the night wherein he was betrayed. That the Lord Jesus in the
same night wherein he was betrayed, v. 23.

The things done and said by him, relate the two parts of the Ordinance: the
first, concerning the Bread; the second, concerning the Cup.

Concerning the Bread, he did three things: He took it, he gave thanks over it,
and then brake it. v. 23, 24. Took bread, and when he had given thanks, he
brake it.

Concerning the Bread, he spoke three words: First, a word of command, Take and
eat. Secondly, a word of institution and consecration, showing what was meant
by the bread, This (viz. bread) is my Body which is broken for you. And
thirdly, a word of direction, instructing them what to do, and to what end they
should do it; Do this in remembrance of me. v. 24.

Concerning the Cup he relates in like manner that which the Lord did and said.

That which he did, is expressed in these words: After the same manner also he
took the Cup, when he had supped, v. 25.

That which he spoke, is in these words: saying, this Cup is the New Testament
in my Blood: Here is the word of institution and consecration. And, This do ye
as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me: this is the word of commandment,
and of direction. v. 25.

Hitherto the Apostle has delivered what Christ did and said at the
appointment of this ordinance: Now, in the verse following, he delivers unto
them doctrinally, what the true meaning and intent of their action is in
celebrating the Lords supper. For (says he) as often as ye eat this bread, and
drink this cup, ye show the Lords death till he come. As if he had said, Christ
having thus appointed his last supper to be celebrated, by the breaking of
bread, and partaking of the cup, for a remembrance of him, and of that which he
has done for us: your imitation of him in this ordinance, in the nature of it,
is a showing forth of his death; a testimonial of your faith in his death,
till he come again to receive you into life.

This is the doctrine which is delivered concerning the Ordinance it self, as
it is to be celebrated in imitation of Christ. Follows, the doctrine
delivered concerning the way to do this worthily, both in respect of every
Member by himself in particular, and in respect of the Body of the
Congregation in common.

The particular Members are taught, 1. What the guilt is of unworthy partaking.
2. How this guilt is to be avoided. 3. What the punishment of unworthy
partaking is; with the cause deserving it, and the effect following thereupon.
4. And how both the punishment, and the dangerous effect of it is prevented.

Concerning the guilt of unworthy partaking, the Apostle does infer it as a
consequence from the foregoing doctrines, thus -- verse. 27.

Wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.

That is; Seeing the Lord has ordained, that the eating of this his bread, and
the drinking of his cup, shall be the memorial of his body broken, and of his
blood shed for us; therefore if any man does not partake thereof answerably to
this end, and as it becomes those that celebrate the memorial of his death
till his coming; he shall be guilty before the Lord of his body and blood, as
if he were one of those that dealt with him unworthily, and put him to death
with wicked and profane hands.

The way to avoid this guilt, is to come with a previous examination of
ourselves: this is taught, v. 28. in these words:

But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread and drink of
that cup. As if he had said; But if you will free your selves from this guilt,
you must come with due preparation of heart unto the action of the Lords
supper; and this preparation must be a trial of your state in the presence of
God, so as to approve your selves in all things to be answerable unto his will,
in fulfilling the purpose of this ordinance.

Concerning the punishment due unto the unworthy partakers, the Apostle
teaches them that it is the judgment of damnation, v. 29. For (says he) he
that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself.
As if he had said; Be careful thus to examine and approve your selves in the
use of this ordinance unto God, to answer his will; for if you do not so, but
come unworthily, you shall by your eating and drinking procure a judgment of
damnation to your selves, as a just punishment of your sin.

The cause deserving this punishment, is their neglect of respect and reverence
due to God and his ordinance: the Apostle calls it, v. 29. the not discerning
the Lords body; that is, the want of care and respect due to the body of the
Lord, not taking notice of the dignity and worth of it, nor discerning Gods
purpose in offering it to us, but using it as a common thing, does deserve this
punishment.

The effect following upon this cause, in them was, that many of them were weak
and sick, and asleep. v. 30. For this cause (says he) many are weak and sickly
among you, and many sleep. As if he had said; And because the punishment of
condemnation is due unto you, therefore God does afflict you, to show his
displeasure, with outward judgments upon you in the flesh.

The means to prevent these evils are two: the first is our duty, which may
prevent the temporal chastisement; the second is Gods dealing with us, to
prevent the eternal punishment.

Our duty is to judge our selves, whereunto a promise is made, that if we
perform it, we shall not be judged of God. v. 31. For if we would judge our
selves, we should not be judged. As if he had said; These judgments of God
befall unto you, because you take not heed to your ways in his service; for if
you did judge and condemn your selves by repentance for your faults, God would
not thus judge you with such chastisements.

Gods dealing with us to prevent the eternal evil of the deserved punishment,
is, by such chastisements to free us from being condemned with the world. v.
32. But when (says he) we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we
should not be condemned with the world. As if he had said, However these
chastisements are justly inflicted, and judgments befalling us for want of
care to judge our selves, and show that we deserve damnation; yet God does not
inflict them otherwise then as a Father does, to correct us and chastise us in
love, that we may not be condemned finally with the world.

Thus he has instructed them, how every one should in private behave himself
in respect of this ordinance: Now in the two last verses of the chapter, he
does instruct them also how they should behave themselves in public; and
referres them to his coming, for other matters.

Concerning their public behavior in the Church, he ordains two things:
First, that they should tarry one for another, and not eat separately;
Secondly, that they should not eat to satisfy their hunger, in the church, but
at their houses.

Concerning the first he says thus, verse. 33. Wherefore my brethren, when ye
come together to eat, tarry one for another. Concerning the second he says
thus, verse. 34. And if any man hunger, let him eat at home, that ye come not
together unto condemnation. As if he had said; Well then, my brethren, let me
exhort you to celebrate the Ordinance jointly, and not severally: and to that
effect stay till you are all met together, to eat bread as one body and company
of Saints; and beware, under pain of condemnation, not to use this as an
ordinary meal to satisfy your hunger, but use it only for the end to which
Christ has appointed it; and if you be hungry, satisfy your appetite at home.

The reference which he makes of other matters, till his coming, is in these
words: The rest will I set in order when I come.

15. Thus I have done with the Analysis and meaning of the Text; now I shall
come to some brief Observations, to fit them to our present occasions.

First, then, we may take notice of the Corinthians custom; for by the whole
context it is apparent that they used to come to the Lords supper as to a
meal; which the Apostle does not at all discommend, but only rectifies the
abuse of the meal, by which they were fallen into disorderly separations, and
excesses of eating as at a common meal, for hunger. This being avoided, all the
rest of their practice is allowed, if they did only come preparedly, and to the
end for which Christ did appoint this ordinance, which by the primitive
institution was appointed to be a holy meal at his table.

Secondly, for the outward manner of celebrating this meal by the
Congregation, which is the chief thing we now look after, we may observe these
particulars --

1. That the place where they met to eat, was the Church, and not their houses;
for v. 18. he says, when ye come together in the Church. and v. 20. when ye
come together in one place. Ergo the place was the Church. From whence we may
gather, that seeing the proper place of this sacred meal was the Church; the
place of their ordinary meals was their private houses, and it was not lawful
for them to take their ordinary meals in the church, but only at their houses;
therefore it was not lawful also to take the Holy meal at their houses, but
only in the church, that is, at their public meeting place: for the Holy meal
appointed for a public meeting, is no less disproportionate to a private
house, then an ordinary meal which men take to satisfy nature, is
disproportionate to the church of God: Ergo, Private communion is not suitable
to Christ's institution; but the Holy meal is appointed to be in a public place
only, which the Apostle calls the Church.

2. From this celebrating of a Meal, and in the Church, and such a meal as
was to satisfy their natural appetite even as they were wont to do in their
private houses; we may gather clearly, that the Table Gesture which the
Corinthians did use at their ordinary meals wherein they did eat for hunger,
was also used in the Church at their celebrating of the Lords supper. For
seeing they changed the one into the other, it is not to be questioned but that
their gesture was the same in the one as in the other; and consequently, that
they sat at the Lords meal, as they did at their own; and if their sitting at
the one had been more reproveable then at the other, no doubt the Apostle would
not have left it untouched when he was mentioning their misbehaviours and
abuses of the ordinance, professedly, to rectify the same. So then, their
manner of eating as for the gesture, is allowed, not only because at this time
not reproved, but because in the foregoing chap. the Apostle does express
himself so, as does clearly import an allowance of the gesture, in making it
parallel to the Table-action used at the Idol-feasts, which in c. 8. v. 10. he
calls sitting at meat. So then to receive the Lords supper, as men use to do
who sit at their meat, is that which the Church of Corinth did practice with
the Apostles approbation, and it is that which we ought to imitate in them, and
in Christ himself: and consequently Kneeling, either at the table or in the
pewes, when the Elements are to be received, is altogether unsuitable both to
the Primitive institution, and to the Apostolical observation of this
Ordinance.

3. As we have observed here, that the action was a Meal, the place the
Church, and the gesture Sitting at meat; so we may further take notice from the
expression, v. 18. and 20. When ye come together: and from the commandment, v.
33. When ye come together, tarry one for another; That the whole Congregation
was to be joined in this action of eating a meal. And seeing the meal was to
be at a Table, and the Congregation did come together to eat, and that they are
commanded to tarry one for another; it is clear that their custom was, by the
Apostles direction, to eat all together of the same bread, at the same table:
which does again show the unsutablenesse of eating severally in distinct pewes.

4. As for the time, it is clearly left free to the will of the congregation;
for he says no more when he mentions their coming together, but this, When ye
come; leaving it indefinitely to their will and conveniencie, when they should
appoint it: whence we may gather that the Church is not bound to the time
wherein Christ did celebrate his supper; because that circumstance of time was
to the Lord necessary to be observed, for the fulfilling of the law of the
Passover to abolish it, and to substitute in the stead thereof the memorial
of his death, which now at all times is to be remembered, as Heb. 13. 15. we are
exhorted to do. And the typical circumstance of time which was under the law,
being fulfilled, we are now absolved from that observance, because the feast
which we are to celebrate is a perpetual feast, 1 Cor. 5. 7, 8. and therefore
at all times when the Congregation does think most convenient to meet together
to eat, it is observable.

From all which we may gather, that the Apostles did herein appoint the
Churches to imitate Christ's practice in all things which were proper to the
solemnity of a Meal, for the manifestation of the fellowship of those that
have a right to partake of it, as united together in the Lord. So then, the
nearer we come to this practice, the more we shall be conformable to the will,
and answer the intention of Christ in this his Ordinance.

16. Hitherto I have considered Christ and the Apostles practice, and the end
and use of the Ordinance unto which their practice was to be subordinate and
answerable: but because the Apostle does refer us in a special manner to
take notice of Christ himself in this matter, let us look a little directly
upon Christ's whole aim and purpose in the institution of this ordinance, and
that we may do this, the things which in his words and actions do institute and
discover his intentions, are to be reflected upon.

First then, the words by which he does consecrate the bread and wine, are very
considerable: This is my Body which is given for you; and this Cup is the New
Testament in my Blood which is shed for you, Luke 22. 19. 20. by which he
shows that his purpose was to leave unto his Disciples, in the use of bread
and wine, a representation and a pledge of the benefits which by his body and
blood were conferred upon their souls: therefore he gives unto the Bread and
Cup the names of that whereof they were memorials, representations and pledges;
that by a holy use thereof in Faith, the things remembered and represented
thereby might be obtained.

Secondly, the words of Direction instituting the Ordinance for aftertimes,
Luke 22. 19. Do this in remembrance of me: which the Apostle does explain, 1
Cor. 11. 6. to be a showing of the Lords death till he come; do manifest that
his intention was, that they should imitate his practice in his last Supper, to
keep the memory of his death in their mind, till his coming.

Thirdly, there is a word of promise relating to his coming again, and to the
conjunction of his Disciples with him in his kingdom. Mat. 26. 29. I say unto
you, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the Vine, until that day
when I drink it new with you in my Fathers kingdom. This promise is mentioned
also, Mar. 14. 25. and more generally, in Luke 22. 16, 19. and more distinctly,
in verse. 29, 30. where he promises his disciples a Kingdom, and a privilege
to eat and drink at his table in his kingdom. All which does clearly intimate,
that his intention was by this Ordinance not only to assure them of his coming
again, but of their society and fellowship with him, whereof this Meal was to
be an earnest and demonstration. So then he did intend that this Feast upon the
sacrifice of his Body and Blood, should be unto them not only a means to
confirm their Faith in his death, and in the effects thereof in the New
Testament, as a thing past, but also of their hope of the state of life to
come. So that this Feast was appointed to demonstrate also our expectation of
the Feast which is prepared for those that are to be with the Lamb at his
wedding, Revel. 19. 9.

Fourthly and lastly, Christ's action of serving his Disciples at his last meal
with them, does speak much of his intention toward them: for he thereby does
not only intend to give them an example of humility, that they should serve one
another, as he expressly does mention ( Joh. 13. 12. till 17. and Luke 22. 27.)
that he did serve them; but this service at his last meals, does speak them to
be his loving friends and familiars, as Joh. 15. 15. he calls them: It does
speak them his guests who did sit at meat at his table, as he declares it Luke
22. 27. and consequently it does manifest unto them and us, that his intention
was to show forth unto them, and in their persons so entertained by him, to
give to all his faithful servants by this Ordinance an assurance of the esteem
which he has of them now, and will have of them for ever in his Kingdom, For
elsewhere, viz. Luke 12. 37. there is an express promise made unto all his
Faithful servants, assuring them of the like entertainment; the words are
these: Blessed are the servants whom the Lord when he comes shall find
watching, (and consequently faithful to him in their charges) Verily I say
unto you, that He shall gird himself, and make them sit down to meat, and will
come forth and serve them. This then being promised unto all, and performed by
the Lord unto his disciples at the last Meal, whereof the remembrance is to be
kept by all; is a clear demonstration, that Christ's intention was toward them,
and is to all his faithful disciples, by the solemnity of the action to give
us an assurance of his love and esteem of us, that he accounts us as his
friends and familiar guests whom he does honor.

17. From all which, this Conclusion as a general rule is to be gathered in
this matter; Namely,

That manner of Administration of the Lords supper is most warrantable, which
does best express and imitate Christ and his Apostles practice in the use of
this Ordinance; which does represent and hold forth most effectually all
Christ's intentions in it; and which is most fit to accomplish most fully the
commandment of celebrating the Memorial both of his death, and of our
conjunction with him at his coming again.

And on the other side, that manner of Administration is least warrantable,
which does not answer and imitate Christ and his Apostles practice in the use
of this ordinance; which does not represent and hold forth any of Christ's
intentions in it; and which is not at all fitted to accomplish in any competent
measure, the commandment of celebrating the memorial both of his Death, and
of our conjunction with him at his coming again.

But it is now made apparent by that which has been hitherto said, that a
Table Gesture in sitting at meat, does best express and imitate Christ and his
Apostles practice in the use of this ordinance; That it does represent and hold
forth most effectually all Christ's intentions in it; and that it is most fit to
accomplish his commandment of celebrating the memorial of his death, and of
our conjunction with him at his coming again. And on the other side it has
also been made apparent, that the gesture of Kneeling, or any other behavior
inconsistent with a Table-action, at a meal, is least answerable and proper to
all this.

Therefore it follows, that the Table Gesture of fitting at meat is that
manner of Administration of the Lords supper which is most warrantable; and
that the gesture of Kneeling is least warrantable in this Administration.

CHAP. X. The practice of the best Reformed Churches, in the Administration of
the LORD'S Supper.
HAving hitherto taken from the Word of GOD, the grounds which make good this
Conclusion; I shall add for a close of this Discourse, a brief Relation of the
Practice of the best Reformed Churches; to show how in their Public meetings
this Ordinance is observed by them, in imitation and remembrance of the Lord.

1. They appoint commonly the Lords day, in the morning, for the time of
partaking of the Lords table; and in most places this is done every two months
once.

2. The Minister, after morning-Sermon, when he has prayed, and caused the
Psalm to be sung, and dismissed those that are not to partake; does speak by
way of Exhortation to those that are to come to the Ordinance; declaring the
institution thereof, the benefits to be received by the worthy partakers in it,
and the danger of unworthy partaking: whereupon the impenitent and scandalous
are warned not to presume to approach unto the table.

3. This Exhortation is by some delivered in the Pulpit, by some at the Table
it self; by some it is read out of a Book wherein the Conceived form by the
Church is contained, by others it it not read, but delivered in a free
discourse: for although they have Forms, yet they do not strictly bind their
Ministers to them.

4. There is a Table, before the beginning of the Sermon, covered with a clean
cloth upon it; and at the end where the Minister is to sit, the bread and wine
is set prepared, to be consecrated by him.

5. When the Minister has ended the Exhortation preparatory to the action,
before the consecration of the Elements he gives thanks, and prays unto God
for a blessing upon the Ordinance, and upon those that do partake of it. This
prayer is made at the Table, whiles the Minister is there alone; the prayer
being ended, he invites the Communicants to approach orderly without noise and
confusion,

6. The Elders and Deacons, in most places, partake first with the Minister;
and when these have received, they rise and serve the tables, which afterward
are filled.

7. According to the bigness of the Congregation, and the conveniencie of the
place, the Table is made longer or shorter, and-Forms are set on each side
thereof at a convenient distance, for people to sit, and to go in and out, and
they are ordered by the Elders to go in at the one end of the Table on each
side, and out at the other, every one following his neighbor; and as every one
does approach, he gives unto the Elder standing at the side of the Table
whereat he enters, his Token.

8. At every time the Table is filled, the Minister does repeat the words of
Consecration used by Christ, or the Apostle Paul, or to that effect; and
distributeth first the Bread, on both hands, to those that sit next unto him;
and then does shove the Vessel which contains the consecrated bread, unto
the rest along the Table as they sit in order, every one taking of it as it
comes before him a morsel; and the Elders of each side stand behind the
Communicants to shove the Vessel along the Table, for the quicker dispatch of
the action, and to bring up the Vessel from the lower to the upper end where
the Minister does sit, when all have eaten of the bread that is in it.

9. The Bread being distributed, the Cup in like manner is consecrated, and
given by the Minister on each hand one cup, to go all along from one to
another; every one when he has tasted of the wine, setting it down upon the
table before his neighbor, and he taking it up, drinking of it, and setting it
down again; and when all have drunk, the Elders carry up the Cups to the end
where the Minister sits, and set them filled before him; and a Blessing being
pronounced upon each Table-full, the Communicants rise in order, and go to
their seats, and another Table-full does come in their room, till all have
received.

10. The men come first in order, and then the women to partake.

11. There is a Basin held or set in some place, at the end of the table, where
the people come in or go out, to receive a collection for the poor. 12. When
all have received, the last Table-full does sit still at the table until the
Minister be gone up again to the Pulpit, to give thanks to God for all, and to
dismiss the Congregation with a blessing.

FINIS.

