THE SEVENTH And Last CANTO OF THE THIRD BOOK OF GONDIBERT, Never yet Printed.

By Sir William Davenant.

LONDON, Printed for William Miller and Joseph Watts at the Gilded Acorn in St.
Paul's Churchyard, over against the little North Door, 1685.

THis Seventh and Last Canto of the Third Book of Gondibert, having layn long
Buried in obscurity, came not to Light till after the Impression of Sir William
Davenant's Works: That this only Remain of that unparalled Heroic Poem might
not be lost, it was thought fit to be Published, as well to Assert its true
Genuine Birth, as also to show it Self not not to be Inferior to the best of
the other Canto's.

TO Sir WILLIAM DAVENANT, IN ANSWER TO THE Seventh Canto OF THE THIRD BOOK OF
HIS GONDIBERT, Dedicated to my Father.
O Happy Fire, whose Heat can thus control
The Rust of Age, and thaw the Frost of Death;
That renders Man immortal, as his Soul.
And swells his Fame with everlasting Breath.
Happy that hand, that unto Honors climb;
Can lift the Subject of his living Praise;
That rescues Frailty from the Scyth of Time,
And equals Glory to the length of Days.
Such, Sir, in you, who uncontrolled, as Fate
In the Black Bosom of Oblivions Night;
Can Suns of Immortality create,
To dazzle Envy with prevailing Light.
In vain they strive your glorious Lamp to hide
In this dark Lanthorn, to all Noble Minds;
Which through the smallest cranny is descried,
Whose Force united, no resistance finds.
Blessed be my Father, who has found his Name
Among the Heroes, by your Pen revived;
By Running in Times Wheel, his thriving Fame
Shall still more youthful grow, and longer lived.
Had Alexander's Trophies thus been reared,
And in the Circle of your Story come;
The spacious Orb full well he might have spared,
And reapt his distant Victories at home.
Let men of greater Wealth than Merit, cast
Medals of Gold for their succeeding part;
That Paper Monument shall longer last,
Than all the Rubbish of decaying Art.
At the Gilded Acorn in St. Paul's Churchyard, all Persons may be furnished
with most sorts of Acts of Parliament, Proclamations, Declarations, Orders of
King and Council, Speeches of King, Lord Chancellor and Speaker in Parliament;
with most other Speeches, Orders, and Votes of Parliament, Letters, Articles of
Visitation and Religion, Articles of Peace and Commerce, etc. Sermons on most
Occasions and Texts of Scripture, Controversies about Church Government, etc.
Books of Divinity, with variety of History Books, of Husbandry, Poetry, Plays,
School-Books, Controversies between the Protestant and Papist, Collection of
Gazets and other News-Books, etc.

THE Seventh Canto OF THE THIRD BOOK Dedicated to CHARLES COTTON Esquire;
The ARGUMENT.
Wakt by the Duke's Adoption, Hubert brings
Borgio beneath the shade of Nights black Wings,
To dark Verona: Orna is betrayed,
And Hurgonil, not Jealous, but dismayed.
The Chiefs their Passions vent to Hermegild,
But soon to Gartha 's braver Passion yield.
1.
UNlucky Fire, which tho from Heaven derived,
Is brought too late like Cordials to the Dead,
When all are of their Sovereign sense deprived,
And Honor which my rage should warm is fled.
2.
Dead to Heroic Song this Isle appears,
The ancient Music of Victorious Verse:
They taste no more, than he his Dirges hears,
Whose useless Mourners sing about his Hearse.
3.
Yet shall this Sacred Lamp in Prison burn,
And through the darksom Ages hence invade
The wondering World, like that in Tullie's Urn,
Which tho by time concealed, was not decayed.
4.
And Charles in that more civil Century,
When this shall wholly fill the Voice of Fame,
The busy Antiquaries then will try
To find amongst their Monarchs Coins thy Name.
5.
They will admire thy force against Gothic rage,
Thy Head of Athens, and thy Woman breast,
Which rescued these Records in a rude Age,
When the free Arts were frighted, and oppressed.
6.
If they who read thy Victories, thus confessed,
Find not thy wreathed Image, their blind Skill
In gathering Monarchs Medals, they will detest,
And think they made their long Collections ill.
7.
They Will highly bless thy Virtue, by whose Fire
I keep my Laurel warm, which else would sade,
And thus enclosed, think me of Nature's Quire
The chief, who still sing sweetest in the shade.
8.
To Fame who rules the World, I lead thee now,
Whose solid Power the thoughtful understand,
Whom tho too late, weak Princes to her Bow,
The People serve, and Poets can command.
9.
And Fame the only Guide to Empires past,
Shall to Verona lead thy Fancie's Eyes,
When Night so black a Robe on Nature cast,
As Nature seemed afraid of her Disguise.
10.
Ambitious Hubert to Verona came
In the dark Reign of Universal Sleep;
And means no Tears shall quench his Angers flame,
Tho all the Dwellers must be waked to weep.
11.
Till Fame had made the Duke's Adoption known,
He painfully suppressed this raging Fire;
But now it was above his Conduct grown,
And Bergio thus provoked it to aspire.
12.
Thy Wealth, thou painted City, who shall say?
Black art thou now, and sleep thy business seems;
Each dark abode is silent as the Grave,
Thy sleep were perfect Death if Death had Dreams.
13.
Thou civil Crowd of soft Inhabitants,
Sleep and forget thy Crimes; may Adice
No more relieve thy thirsty Medows wants,
But swelling here; thy drowning Lethe be.
14.
Wake but to kindle lust, and boldly think
Heaven has no Eyes, but the departed Sun;
May thy new married at Adult'ries wink,
Both soon seek Strangers, and each other shun.
15.
Sleep you who Ruin States by Trades Increase,
Rich Traffickers who fetch those Toys from far,
Which soften us at home, you plead for Peace,
Because our Luxuries we quit in War.
16.
Sleep as securely as your Carricks steer,
When in deep Seas your Gale is from the East,
You and Your Pilots want the Art to fear
The sudden Tempest breeding in my Breast.
17.
You Statesmen sleep, who States tame Lions be
For you and Lions sleep with open Eyes,
And shut 'em when you wake, you seem to see
Through darkness, and with Wink your sight disguise.
18.
Sleep you Oppressors, Monsters quickly bred,
When private Will is joined to public Power,
Like Bears in Winter long by slumber fed,
You wake with Hunger, that would Herds devour.
19.
Sleep all, till waking each with ravished Mind,
Shall the strange Glory of new Light admire,
And thinking it is the Morn, Curse when ye find,
Your City is become your Funeral Fire.
20.
Bargio did Hubert's Fury thus excite,
Which from his darkn'd thoughts breaks through his Eyes
As suddenly as Morning breaks from Night,
Oh glorious Chiefs from sleep to Battle rise.
21.
And now the Morn in sudden Glory rose,
And to salute the World, shifts from his Face
Night's Veil, as fast as Bolder unmask to those
Whom they saluting, would with kindness Grace.
22.
To restless Hubert, Borgio leads the way,
Near Orna's Window Hurgonil he spies,
Who there with Music welcomes Break of Day,
And as the Lark the East salutes her Eyes.
23.
For there at every dawn with Lovers lays,
Till this sweet Moon shall end their nuptial Rites,
And Joys begin, he love Reveillees pays,
Which made their morning sweet as Lovers nights,
24.
Such Aires the untuned Borgio ill abides,
For Music which is so the Soul of Love,
As Love is of our Life, his Soul derides,
Whom only Drums ambitions Noice could move.
25.
He often sends back, as he does forward pass,
His fatal Looks, which did the Count less awe
Than did that Amorous, but more dreadful Face,
Which he too soon in Orna's window saw,
26.
For there appeared, tho but obliquely placed,
As shrunk behind the Glass, a Youth, who seemed
Repleat with all those Graces, which have graced
Great Courts, or greater Love has ever esteemed.
27.
Such seemed this Amorous Youth, who soon withdrew
His Looks, and shut the Casement hastily,
As if he only watched to escape from view,
By stealth would see, and to be seen was shy.
28.
A Youth, who thus his Beauty seems to hide,
So guiltlessly in a suspicious time,
And in the Chamber of a plighted Bride,
Might blot the whitest Virtue with a Crime.
29.
Yet this as Loves false Fire, the Count did scorn.
Grave Tybalt, who these Rites attended, seems
So lost in Sleep, as if not yet the Morn
Were broke, and ranks his Vision with his Dreams.
30.
Yet Jealousy, which does by Thoughts subsist,
As Life by Air; grew stronger by their pause;
For they their Music silently dismissed,
And fearing ill Effects, must doubt the Cause.
31.
Music which here at Orna's dawn had sung,
For Love's Morn breaks not in a common Sky;
But now their Lutes did seem on Willows hung,
Where near some murmuring Brook dead Lovers lie.
32.
Wain Jealousy, thou fruitful little Seed,
Tho single, and as small as Atoms sown,
Yet faster rises than a forward Weed,
In many Stems soon great and fully blown.
33.
It Is Love's Alarm Bell too often hung
Near Lover's Beds, and keeps 'em still awake;
Yet Noble Hurgonil, when first it rung,
Scarce seemed to start, and now thus calmly spoke.
34.
Since Love the valiant Aids I must not dread
A Shadows force, and I should vain appear,
To let my Eyes be by a Vision led
From Her whose Image in my Heart I wear.
35.
Such Maiden Stratagems each plighted Bride,
Ruled by her Virgin Counsel does devise;
And thus my Faith in Orna must be tried,
Faith's Fort is best attempted by Surprise.
36.
She as betroath'd does till this Moon be past,
And Marriage Laws begin by Custom Sway,
And now she tempts my Jealousy to taste
How I will Reign, when she must long obey.
37.
That Youth her near Ally, such harmless Art
Assists, which may to Country Eyes seem bold;
But Courts Elixir Virtue does convert
The worst and most suspected Coin to Gold.
38.
Tybalt repll'd, this Trial, Hurgonil,
Exalts you both, it proves your love not light,
And shows that she wants guilt to give her Skill,
Where to direct her Jealous Trials right.
39.
Your solid healthful Love sweats not away
At the faint Heat of Jealousies pale Flame,
Nor even in Death will more than Souls decay,
Which dye not, but return from whence they came.
40.
And since her Trial is so useless made,
Her Error does her Innocence proclaim;
For as we trace strange Thieves by known Thieve aid
So our own Guilt lights us to others Shame.
41.
The Guilty often wake, when Jealous grown,
To watch Love's Treasons in another's Bed;
Yet after foul Adulteries in their own,
Sleep as secure from Terrors as the Dead.
42.
Thus as they homeward move, they timely draw
Discretion's Curtain o'r each others Eyes,
And would not see, what they with Sorrow saw,
Truth often more modest seems in a Disguise.
43.
Wise Nature does reprove our Jealousy,
It Is Fear, and Fear none willingly express,
The Jealous shrink like Spies from every Spy,
And what they find with Honors less confess.
44.
But why (misterious Love) to blemish Truth
In truest Lovers have thou Art devised?
Even in the Artless Sex, for that fair Youth
Was Gartha in a manly shape disguised.
45.
Whose Beauty stooped to Hermegild's advice,
And she of Vlpha, Orna's Woman bought
The Jewel Honor at a common price,
And was by stealth to Orna's Chamber brought.
46.
There she in Night's black Bosom lay,
As in dark Lanthorns Light for Treason lies,
And so when she peeped forth, 'twas to betray,
As those were made to shine for a Surprise.
47.
Calm Orna fearless slept, since free from Sin,
And little did her Woman's duty doubt,
Nor heard when she had took the Traitors in,
Who through her Windows let her Honor out.
48.
And still she slept with as becalmed a Breast,
As thoughtless Martyrs in a Monument,
Whilst Gartha (whose Success her Cares increased)
Shifts her Disguise, and to her Palace went.
49.
Where Hubert longingly expects that she
The reason of her Absence should unfold,
Who big with Plot longs for delivery,
And thinks Successes lost that are not told.
50.
With Hermegild she hastily arrives,
Where when she Hubert and bold Borgio spied,
Her Anger seemed to threaten Lovers Lives,
And at her Frowns has many a Lover died.
51.
The two fierce Leaders gravely thoughtful grow
Like scared Astrologers, as grieved to take
From this new Comet in her threatening Brow,
The Empires Doom, and thus her Passion spoke.
52.
Wild Rumor, which from Court to Brescia fled,
Has brought you here bright in your Angers Flame,
You, Hubert, who in War have others led,
Now for your own chief Guide choose common Fame.
53.
At Gondibert's Success, and new Renown
Your sick Ambition in a Fever seems;
Which from the Camp so drives you to the Town,
As fev'rish men shift Beds to change their Dreams.
54.
Back to your Camp, and come not here to boast
Of numerous Ensigns, which but seldom are
By Valor gained, tho often by Cowards lost,
Rags which the Beggar Honor wears in War.
55.
Dull force cannot wise Courts with threatenings fright,
Who breed strong not in Helmets but in Heads,
Those Battles which you know not why you fight,
And whilst you frown in Fields, smile in their Beds.
56.
More had she said, but studious Hermegild
Begged with his Looks, grown pale with Lovers Cares,
That her bold Passion would to Prudence yield,
And thus to Hubert he his Mind declares.
57.
Think not great Prince, that our Designs are slow,
But think your Courage makes a dangerous have;
The Cures of Inward Wounds then doubtful grow
To Art, when outwardly they heal too fast.
58.
The Duke's Adoption is a tender Wound,
Which cannot rough and hasty hands endure,
By gentle search are narrow Arteries found,
Where we the Spirits closer Walks secure.
59.
Think not the Wounds ill searched, which Artists close,
Whilst you to open it grow rashly bold;
As men ill cured haste desp'ratly to Blows,
Because new Wounds may lance and cure the old.
60.
Your Station is on Hills, your Glories all
Watch as a Beacon, that does bid 'em Arm,
And here your Name but whispered, serves to call
The sleeping Faction like a new Alarm.
61.
Retire, tho like the Sun declined you keep
Your Circle still, and give to others Light,
Since we must wish your Enemies a-sleep,
Give us betimes the benefit of Night.
62.
Preserve your Camp, no Force but of the Mind
Can make our way, and when such Force you doubt,
Think then that Giants, loath to die, can bind
And master Souls with Limbs from going out.
63.
Hubert's lost Patience, he did thus restore,
Then Gartha with such Reverence he did chide,
As Indian Priests in Storms check and adore
Their Idols Rage, but Hubert thus replied.
64.
Who doubts your Wisdom, Hermegild, which long
Has led fierce Armies, and calm Councils taught,
Must the worlds Mistress, grave Experience wrong,
As if she wanted Worth, which all have sought.
65.
Such who play with Truth, are punished by
Derided Anguish, till they serious turn,
As wanton Scepticks, who Effects deny?
Of Fire, see others smiling whilst they burn.
66.
Your Faith to me, your love of Gartha binds,
Which doubting, I her force of Beauty doubt
A Light held up, when Courts tempestuous Winds
Threaten to blow Heavens Lamps, the Planets out.
67.
Think my Impatience is the Armies Sin,
And if when Gartha with my wrong's is warmed,
Your Power can hardly keep her Passions in,
How should I stop three angry Legions armed?
68.
Her Anger Heavenly is, for as kind Heaven
Grieves that our own advantage we decline
By doing ill; so her Rebukes are given,
Because she suffers when the Loss is mine.
69.
Victorious Maid, I find deep Wounds of Cares
On your fair Brow; but so by Beauty shown,
As youthful Victors wear their boasted Scars,
To make their Virtue more than Beauty known.
70.
Tell me the Empire's safe, and tell me where
You and your Faction have so early met;
To humble those who are so proud to fear,
That at your Dawn their Sun must ever set.
71.
Gartha from each to all now shifts her Eyes,
As if too wild, and proud to be confined,
So proud with Praise, that she does Praise despise,
And spreads like Sails swelled with a prosperous Wind.
72.
Her Words abound, as Maids first Stories flow,
When to stolen Lovers they from Parents escape,
And fast she speaks, as Scouts chased by the Foe
Declare their Number, and their Battles shape.
73.
She tells how scarce from man she knew,
When so audacious made by her Disguise,
How soon her treble Voice a Tenor grew,
Her bashful Looks, bolder than Eagles Eyes.
74.
She makes her secret Progress fully known,
And how false Vlpha aided the Success;
Whose Treason though she scorned, she graced her own,
As Traitors Greatness makes their Treason less.
75.
Whilst thus her mourning Conquest she reports,
Their forward hopes shrunk back and seemed dismayed
To be instead of Sovereign Gold, with Courts
Small Plots (the common Coin of Statesmen) paid.
76.
Then thus spoke Hermegild to highest Heights,
The lowest Steps must be the first Degrees,
The strongest stoop to carry greater Weights,
And from concealed small Roots, spring lofty Trees.
77.
Nature disguised, does often from Lowness rise,
To high Effects; so does her Servant Art,
Courts which by Art subsist, and low Disguise
Often dress a King to play a Subject's part.
78.
These Clouds which threaten Hurgonil, ever long
Shall o'r the sleeping Duke a Tempest breed;
As weaker Winds may suddenly grow strong,
And split a Mast, which first scarce shook a Reed.
79.
The World is not subdued by Victories,
Nor by the Voice of Public Councils swayed,
It Is being wild best conquered by Surprise,
And easi'st ruled, when to the Yoke betrayed.
80.
Wise Courts for Man have many a little Snare
In Cities (now grown wild as Forests) spread
To take the useful Beast alive, whom War
Destroys, tho he be useless being dead.
81.
Now Borgio, who with Hopes swelled Sails had steered,
Grows troublesome, as Sails then strong winds change
Like Sails he slackn'd, when his Hope laveer'd,
And seemed as much a storm, as storms seem strange.
82.
Invite, said he, State Student to your Feast
Of Ruling Councils, an insipid Food.
When Canibal Ambition is your Guest,
Who is not fed with Precepts, but with Blood.
83.
Poorly you make us fall from public Heights,
To private Depths; and all your great Designs,
Are subt'ly shrunk to Lovers little Slights,
Your Indian Voyage was to Copper Mines.
84.
The Duke's Adoption by the King is sealed,
The Count by Marriage plight to Orna ti'd,
Fast by Confederate the Crown is held,
And we watch hard to scare a sleeping Bride.
85.
Accursed be Courts where you, wise Statesmen,
Your selves, and not your Master great, you keep
Your Watch with false Alarms, and only wake
To breed those Fears, which hinder others sleep.
86.
Falsehood condemned you free from public good,
Bind Truth to the Authority of Schools,
Least in your Priests you should be understood,
Priests you make false, and they confirm you Fools.
87.
Tho humbly first you low as Serpents crawl,
Yet soon you show your power, which is your Sting.
Wildly you catch at him, when you must fall
Who by your Weights grows weak, your governed King.
88.
Greedy as Lions o'r your trembling Prey,
Rolling your Eyes about with Jealous Care,
For fear some other strong Devourer may
In what you long have hunted, quickly share.
89.
You sell the Peace that with your Blood you bought,
Then in your Clossets other Quarrels feign
To break that Peace, for which like Fools we fought
And make the People purchase it again.
90.
At this old Hermegild renounced his Age,
For heat of Anger made his Visage young,
And soon in Words he would let loose his Rage,
But Gartha sooner thus prevents his Tongue.
91.
Is this your Lion Hubert, whom you bring
In terror from his Canvas Cage, your Tent,
That by instinct he may to free the King
Roar, if he find him not of Kings Descent.
92.
Or would he cure Courts tame Civility?
Or must the Ladies yield to him for fear?
Soon a dispis'd dead Lion shall he be,
If he pronounce his Savage Doctrine here.
93.
Rebels to Courts, the Force of useful Power,
Where Statesmen should be safe tho vexed with Cares,
To rescue whom your Fury would devour,
They breed not War for you, but you for Wars.
94.
Courts formed not War to keep the World alarmed,
Or vex the Quiet, but to tame the Rude,
To Right whom Tumults wrongfully have harmed,
And Conquer those who have the good subdued.
95.
Courts your wise Masters, did invent the odds
Of Camps o'r Crowds, you mustered by your wills,
Would now like Ruffian Giants brave your Gods,
Who smile in Clouds to see you heave at Hills.
96.
How wildly would the World be Ruled, if left
By Civil Courts to your uncivil Sway?
Justice would hardly dare to blush at Theft,
Nor Priests to sigh, when Priests become their Prey.
97.
What are your Battles where Ambition tries
Those Titles which avoid the Test of Law,
Battles, the Worlds confused Lotteries,
Where for the Prize thousands together draw.
98.
Like mighty Murderers you Honor boast,
Ofener by Chance than Valor give Defeats;
Vainly like Gamesters count not what you lost,
But what you won, hiding your base Retreats.
99.
By wretched Rapine urged to bold Attacks,
And when a City even by Treaty yields,
You often out do the Fame of Gothic Sacks,
And where they City's left, leave desert Fields.
100.
And when your conquering Train comes home quite tired
With emptying Cities, and with filling Graves,
Your Foreign Vices are at first admired,
'Till low you fall in Riots as your Slaves.
101.
Now Hubert did arrest her pleading hand,
Which earnest grew, and did her Tongue out-plead,
His Looks did Borgio's Silence soon command,
And on her Hand he Tears of kindness shed.
102.
And that sweet Pledge with fervent Kisses held,
As fast as Lovers then that fair Hand hold,
Which has the long sought Promise newly sealed,
When Rivals hopes grow warm, and theirs grow cold*
103.
He said she was Heavens private Mirror wrought,
For Kings that they might secret Truths discern;
He praised the Court, that her such greatness taught
As only Courts can teach, and Princes learn.
104.
Now with one Mind to several Cares they hie;
She hastes to Court to hasten Orna's shame:
And both the Chiefs disguised to Brescia fly,
Through Mists returning as in Crowds they came.
105.
Iubert will wait till her Designs appear
In larger Growth, for He was bred to sow
Courts little Fields, and well he knew that there
Small Rivals often to mighty Mischiefs grow.
106.
They look but wrong on Courts who can derive
No great Effects from outward Littleness;
Through Foolish Scorn they turn the Prospective,
And so contract Courts little things to less.
107.
Man's little Heart in narrow space does hide
Great Thoughts, such as have spacious Empire swayed
The little Needle does vast Carricks guide,
And of small Atoms were the Mountains made.
FINIS.
Books Printed for, and sold by William Miller, at the Gilded Acorn, in Saint
Paul 's Churchyard, near the little North-Door.
Juvenal with Cuts, by Sir Robert Stapylton, Knight, in Large Folio.

Elton on Colossians, Folio.

Dean Hardy's Sermons on several Texts of Scripture on diverse Occasions, Quarto.

A Letter of Advice concerning Marriage, Quarto.

A Pattern for Princes to Rule by, and Subjects to Obey by, Quarto.

Dod on the Lord's Prayer, Quarto.

Medice Cura Teipsum, or the Apothecary's Plea against Doctor Christopher
Merret, Quarto.

Cradock's Knowledge and Practice, Quarto.

His Principles, Octavo.

Richard Ward, his two very useful and compendious Theological Treatises, the
first showing the nature of Wit, Wisdom and Folly. The second describing the
Nature, Use, and Abuse of the Tongue and Speech, whereby principally Wisdom and
Folly are expressed; wherein also are diverse Texts of Scripture, touching the
respective Heads explained, Octavo.

Templum Musicum, or the Musical Synopsis, Octavo.

Complete Bone-setter, Octavo.

The famous Game of Chess-play, Octavo.

Shelton's Tachygraphia, Latin, Octavo.

Emblems Divine, Moral, Natural and Historical, expressed in Sculpture, and
applied to the several Ages, Occasions and Conditions of Man, by a Person of
Quality, Octavo.

Vines on the Sacrament, Octavo.

Betto de Ortu Sanguinis, Octavo.

Beverly's great Soul of man, or the Soul in its likeness to God, Octavo.

Pill to purge Popery, Octavo.

Warren's Catechism, Octavo.

Fettiplace's Souls narrow search for sin, Octavo.

Fettiplace's Christian Monitor, earnestly and compassionately persuading
sinners unto true and timely repentance, by the serious view of the seven
following weighty Crnsiderations.

1. The stupendous love of God unto man in Christ Jesus.

2. The great danger of Despair, and greater of Presumption.

3. The sweetness, easiness and pleasantness of the ways of God.

4. Falsehood and Flattery of the ways of sin.

5. Safe, joyful and blessed state of the righteous.

6. Dangerous and most deplorable state of the wicked.

7. Shortness and uncertainty of Life, terrors and amazement of an unprepared
death, and eternity of punishments after death, Twelves.

Clark of Comfort, which God's Children have, or at least earnestly desire and
long after, whilst they are in this World, together with the obstructions of
Comfort, and the removal of them, Twelves.

Jeoffery's New Years Gift, Twelves.

Clark's Looking-glass for Persecutors.

Mall of Holy Living and Dying, Twelves.

Clark's Treatise about Comfort, Twelves.

The Life of Mrs. Clark, late Wife of Mr. Samuel Clark, Twelves.

Wit revived, an excellent way of Divertisement in Questions and Answers,
Twelves.

Martial's Epigrams for the use of Westminster School.

Divine Examples of God's severe Judgments upon Sabbath Breakers, in their
unlawful Sports, collected out of several Divine Subjects, viz. Mr. H. B. Mr.
Beard, and the Practice of Piety, a little Monument of our present Times, etc.

A brief Remembrance, or the right Improvement of Christ's Birthday.

A second Sheet of old Mr. Dod's Sayings; or another Posie gathered out of Mr.
Dod's Garden.

Hunting for Money, the first Part.

The hunting Match for money, the second Part.

Bishop Hall's Sayings, concerning Travelers, to prevent Popish and debauched
Principles.

The whole Duty of Man, containing a Practical Table of the ten Commandments,
wherein the Sins forbidden, and the Duties commanded, or implied, are clearly
discovered. By Famous Mr. William Perkins.

Broughes Sacred Principles in Welsh, Octavo.

Bishop Prideaux on the Lord's Prayer in Welsh, Twelves.

Bishop Usher's Catechism in Welsh, Twelves.

With diverse other Welsh Books.

At which place you may be furnished with most sorts of bound or stitched
Books; as Acts of Parliament, Proclamations, Speeches, Declarations, Letters
Orders, Commissions, Articles, with other State Matters; as also Books of
Divinity, Church Government, Sermons, and most sorts of Histories, Poetry,
Plays, and such like, etc.

FINIS.

