A PEACEMAKER Without PARTIALITY and HYPOCRISY.

OR The Gospel-way to make up the present breaches of Brotherhood, and heal
the divisions, whereby some of the reforming Professors and Ministers of this
Kingdom at this time, sadly dishonor their profession, mainely obstruct our
Reformation, utterly destroy the safe constitution both of Church and State.

Wherein are handled, 1. How the means of Christian peace, as well Civil as
Ecclesiastical, may be found and ought to be followed, both by Pastors and
people. 2. What are the special lets of Ecclesiastical Reconciliation, and
what the causes of divisions are, and how to be remedied. 3. What are the
Grounds, Terms and Motives of Brotherly Unity and Forbearance, which the
Ministers and Members of the Churches of England ought to profess and practice
one toward another, for the Gospels sake.


All written upon several occasions and at several times by Mr. John Dury,
one of the Assembly of Divines, etc. and now published by Samuel Hartlib, to
whom they were sent.

Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in
unity.

Psalm. 133.1. For the divisions of Reuben there were great thoughts of heart.

Judges 5.15. A brother offended is harder to be won then a strong City, and
their contentions are like the bars of a Castle.

Prove. 18 19. London, Printed by R. Cotes for John Bellamy, at the three Golden
Lions in Cornhill near the Royal Exchange, 1648.

The Contents.
The Preface, being two Letters, sent at several times to Mr. Samuel Hartlib
by Mr. John Dury, wherein are handled,
I. HOw the means of Christian peace, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical, ought
to be followed, and may be found amongst Professors. Page 1. II. What are the
special lets of Ecclesiastical reconciliation, and what the causes of
divisions are amongst Ministers, and how to be remedied. p. 16.
A discourse concerning the ground, terms and motives of Brotherly Unity and
forbearance, which the Ministers of the Churches of England ought to profess
and practice one toward another for the Gospels sake.
Chap. 1. THe Introduction showing the scope and matter of the discourse. Page
26. Chap. 2. Concerning the Law of Christian Brotherhood, what it is, and
whereunto it binds us. p. 28. Chap. 3. Concerning the terms of unity and
forbearance in general. p. 32. Chap. 4. Concerning the terms of unity by
themselves what they are, why not regarded, and wherefore they ought to be
regarded. p. 33. Chap. 5. Concerning the particular terms of unity, whereunto
the Ministers of this kingdom have attained in the doctrine of faith, and in
their relation to Christ and his Church. p. 30. Chap. 6. Concerning the terms
of unity in the chief Acts of our religious profession. p. 41. Sect. 1. Of
single professors. p. 42. Sect. 2. Of Professors united to a Congregation. p.
45. Sect. 3. Of several Congregations, as they are, or ought to be
associated. p. 46. Sect. 4. Of officers and rulers of several Congregations
and their association. p. 49.
Chap. 7. Concerning the terms of forbearance, that therein is, and may be
found an agreement. p. 55. Chap. 8. Concerning the principles of mutual
toleration, wherein there is a full agreement. p. 56. Chap. 9. Concerning the
way how to settle and prosecute a mutual toleration, by rules wherein there is
an agreement. p. 58. Chap. 10. Of the rules of condescension, how they may be
found out. p. 60. Chap. 11. Concerning the causes of disaffection, and of
breaches, how they should be removed by common consent. p. 67. Chap. 12.
Concerning the motions which should induce us to make profession of this unity
and forbearance, why these are requisite, and what they are. p. 70. Chap. 13.
Concerning the necessity of brotherly unity in the Ministry. p. 71. Chap.
14. Concerning the usefulness and commendablenesse of brotherly unity in the
work of the Ministry. p. 84. Sect. 1. What the communion and correspondency
is, wherein our unity is to be settled. p. 84. Sect. 2. Of the excellency of
unity and of the fountain thereof, Charity. p. 89. Sect. 3. Of the common
rules of Christianity, as they are more especially obligatory unto Ministers
in the duties of their calling. p. 9. Sect. 4. Of the practice of those that
are set before us as infallible examples in the Ministry. p. 99. Sect. 5.
Concerning that which concerns the Office of the Ministry in it self. p. 104.

How the means of Christian Peace, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical, ought to
be followed, and may be found amongst Professors.
Discovered in a Letter sent to Mr. Sam. Hartlib by John Dury, September. 12.
1647.
SIR,
YOu have acquainted me with the resolutions of some of our leading men,
eminent in the prevailing side, to moderate matters, and compose our
differences. Happy had this Church and State been if that aim had been carried
all along from the beginning in the Counsels and endeavors of those, The
occasion and scope of this letter.
who have been entrusted with the management of affairs; and if it be not now
too late to quench this flame, or if it can be hoped that in the midst of so
great fears, so many jealousies, so different practices, and so loud clamours,
and so sensible injuries, men's spirits can be brought to mutualll confidence
and made susceptible of temperate thoughts toward one another, I would advise
all, but chiefly such as have power in the Houses, in the City, in the
Assembly, in the Army, and most of all the General and the Lieutenant
general, on whom the eyes of most men are fixed, to proceed after this manner,
and lead as in this way.

First, let our aim be (as in the sight of God who tries the Reins) to
purge our heart from a design to serve the interests of one side, What ought
zo be the right aim of those that treat for peace.
mainly to cross another. For he that looks upon his Brother with the eye of
a party, has put out the eye of a Christian. A Christian does not take notice
of men after the flesh, he looks upon the new creature in every one, and he
that does not walk after this Rule, there can be nothing but misery and
destruction in his ways, for the way of peace and truth he has not known.

Secondly, then if we can clear our aims from partiality, our Counsels may
be free from prejudice, and if this be, we will not shun the light but desire
to show that our works are wrought in God; and will be ready to declare to
all in public the true rules and maxims, by which our conscience is guided;
How they should manifest their aim.
by which we intend to walk, and by which we desire to be judged, by all,
in our proceedings; but if we either have no such rules, or are not willing to
declare them; we shun the light, we love darkness, and let us not deceive
our selves, there is no truth nor love to peace in us. And what although
hitherto perhaps we have not minded conscionably the equitable and charitable
affections which the Spirit of Christ does suggest; yet now being put in mind
thereof, if henceforth the motions of his Spirit be not rejected but sincerely
entertained, openly professed, and effectually followed, who does not know but
that yet a happy composure of our differences may be effected?

Thirdly, Declarations of the truth that is in us, are good; but however they
are no more but words; except then real actions answer them, How they should
prosecute their aim.
and speak the truth of justice and peaceablenesse in our proceedings, there
can be nothing but bitterness in the end. For nothing can prevent the cross
workings of men's spirits against us, but that which is able to beget and settle
a confidence in their minds toward us; and to beget this confidence, and
allay these jealousies which cause men's spirits boil up to a disturbance of
those proceedings wherein we mean well: I would suggest to our leading men
these impartial considerations.

The parts of this discourse.
1 That they ought to lay to heart the causes which hinder others to confide in
us, to remove the same.

2 That they ought to seek and find out the persons which are most capable of
receiving good impressions of us and from us, that the same may be given them,
and by them propagated unto all.

3 That they should make use of the proper means by which confidence is bred
in honest minds toward us, that the same may be set a working.

4 That they should observe the method and manner of proceeding requisite in
doing this, that the attempt may be effectual, and not miscarry.

Of these four heads I shall suggest somewhat tending to the advancement of
peace and truth as briefly as I can.

First, concerning the causes hindering others to confide in us, and begetting
fears in them against us, let me say this:

The causes of mistrust and fear.
He that does not confide in his neighbors, does hinder them to confide in him,
and he that does fear others, does beget in them causes of fear against
himself; if then we would have others to confide in us and not fear us, we
must also confide in them and not fear them. For if I cannot bring my spirit
to trust my neighbor, how can I expect that his spirit should be brought to
trust me? and if I think that he does not trust me, I will readily suspect
him: if I suspect him, I will either arm my self to oppose him, or weaken him
lest he oppose me; and if I give way to these thoughts, I am at war with
him in my heart, and the affection of Christian love and ingenuitie, which
only can beget confidence, is lost between us; love being lost, the fruits of
emulation, envy and passion will be found, and break forth in our nature.

I find the sequel of matters in our nature to lie thus:

Where I do not love, I cannot confide; where I confide not, I will find
cause to mistrust; where I find cause to mistrust, I will fortify my self
against the same; and if I fortify my self against my neighbor, I must
expect that he will do the like against me (for what cause has he to trust
me more then I do him?) therefore as long as I manifest no love, nor trust,
but force only, there can be no confidence expected from any toward me. The
maine hinderance then of confidence and cause of fear is the endeavor of
force; and if I once begin to endeavor force, I seek not only security to my
self, but the conquest of that which I think is mine opposite; because I
cannot naturally rest secure as long as that which I count an enemy is not
subdued; and whatsoever I do not trust, I am apt to account an enemy;
therefore whilst I make nothing my friend but mine own force, I am apt to
trust to nothing else but it. From all which this does follow, that as soon as
I forsake the simplicity of my love, I beget naturally fears within my self;
and when I take a course to secure my self from my fears by force, I multiply
fears in others, and give them cause to mistrust me. Let me then cure mine
own fears first which I have of others, and then I shall be able to cure the
fears which others have of me: if I take the beam out of mine own eye, I
shall see clear to take the moat out of my neighbors.



Isa. 8.12.13.
Truly to answer this, I know none other way but to follow Gods counsel by
the Prophet Isaiah. Say ye not (says the Lord) A confederacy to all them to
whom this people shall say A confederacy; neither fear ye their fear nor be
afraid, sanctify the Lord of hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and
let him be your dread. It is then nothing else but the base fear of men upon
politic considerations, The cure of our own fears.
and the want of the true fear of God upon divine Principles, which troubles
me, and drives me to courses which make others afraid of me; but if I did
not at all look to men, but unto God alone, if I did not confide in mine own
force, but in the Almighty, others would find cause to confide in me. As I
behave my self toward God, so I must expect that others will behave
themselves toward me; if I mean from my heart well toward others in God, God
will move others to mean so also toward me. 1 Pet. 3.13, 14.
And who is he (says the Apostle) that will harm you, if ye be follwers of
that which is good? if I mind nothing but that which is good to every one; what
cause have I to think that any will mind harm or evil against me? But suppose
I suffer wrong whiles I mind that which is good and righteous; the Apostle
says that I am happy; and if I am happy, I need not be afraid of men nor
troubled at my suffering. But what if I be afraid and troubled? is it not
because I am not willing to suffer in doing good? if then I to avoid suffering
for righteousness will secure my self by force, and make others afraid of
me; it is evident that I do not commit my self and my cause to God in well
doing, but I take it in mine own hand, to manage it by mine own strength, and
how this will prosper I need not to mention.



Matthew. 7.12.
the Doctrine and Rule of Christ is without all exception. Whatsoever you would
have others to do to you, do you to them also; the meaning is, do you it
first unto them, for we are commanded, to consider one another to provoke each
other to love and to good works. If I must consider to provoke, then he that
is to be provoked to love, The way to follow that which is good.
has not yet applied himself unto the duty, but I am obliged to go before
him in the way thereof, and therefore I must express my love to him first,
although he has not done his duty to me. If then I would have another to
trust me, it is clear by this rule, that I must first show that I do trust
him, but if I show not this, then I provoke him to the contrary, namely, not to
trust me. And if but the Law, which the Gentiles by common nature knew, were
heeded in this case, it would take away the causes of our differences and
jealousies, and teach us to follow that which is good. Quod tibifieri non vis,
alteri ne feceris, What thou would not have done to thy self, do not thou
to any. Is it that thou would not have any fear thee, or suspect thee, or
arm himself against thee? then do not thou fear and suspect him, or arm
thy self against him. Would thou not have all thy faults ripped up, and all
advantages taken against thee, to bring thee into discredit, then rip not up
the faults of others, and take no advantages against them to discredit them?
Would thou not be judged, condemned and disarmed? do not judge, condemn and
endeavor to disarme others; For with what judgment thou judge, Matthew. 7.2.
thou shall be judged, and with what measure thou do mete, it shall be
measured unto thee again; and if thou will disarme others and keep them as
captives under thy power, Rev. 13.10. Esa. 33.1.
thou must expect to be disarmed and led captive under the power of others,
for God does render to every one according to his works. Will thou then follow
that which is good? do not make thy self terrible unto any, because thou
would have none to be terrible unto thee; cure thine own distempers, mean
well toward others, and as thou have opportunity, make the power which thou
have in thine hand serviceable unto others for good; for he that has power to
do good to those that are under his power and does it not, is foolish and
weak; and by not using his power to the end for which it is given, does
overthrow himself by it. Summisque negatum stare diu, things at the height
stand not long. Therefore if a man has not learned of Christ to deny himself
in the use of his power, he must fall under the weight of it; now the weight
of it is nothing else but the jealousy of State which it begets in others that
are equals or inferiors.

I have done with the causes hindering others to confide in us.

2. The way to find out such as we ought to deal withal is,
The second thing to be considered is, How we shall find out those that are
fittest to entertain and receive the good which we do follow, and in case of
aversion from us, how to make them susceptible of better impressions. For to
conquer the world, it is not enough to mean well, and to do that which in it
self is good, but the good which is done, must be well placed also. A good
seed should be sown in fruitful ground, else how will it multiply?

Now to do this, let me offer these thoughts.

1. To free our selves from prejudice toward all.
1 No man is able exactly to discern his own, far less other men's hearts;
our prejudicate opinions deceive us no where more then in the thoughts of
persons, the imaginations which we frame to our selves of others and of their
principles ensnare our affections, and shut us up from that freedom of spirit
toward them which might be a means either to gain or to discover them to
us; for they byas our proceedings and corrupt that ingenuitie, without which
we are darkened, and neither can discern others, nor be discerned by them in
truth. For when we apply our selves to one this way, and to another that way,
and do not walk equally by the plain Rule of the new creature toward all,
we must needs be entangled, and lose our strength; which is upheld by nothing
so much, as by that plainness wherein it is always like it self. Our various
presumptions of men, and of their different designs, cause us to be with
child, and when they have put us in pain, they make us bring forth as it were
wind; nor can we at all work any deliverance in the earth by them to our
selves or others, because we bring nothing but earthly wisdom with us, to
subdue the spirits of men, before which the inhabitants of the world will never
fall. Therefore if we would seek out and find those that are fit to receive
the good which we would offer to them, let us never take upon us to judge
determinately of any man this or that way according to appearances; but leaving
him to God and himself, let us judge righteous judgment; as we desire others
to judge and presume of us by the Rules of Charity, so let us apply our
thoughts unto them, for this will keep us in a frame of freedom within our
selves and ingenuity toward them, without which no safe address can be made
unto any.

2. To address our selves to all by one rule, and observe by whom the good
which is offered is resented.
2 To discover then such as are capable of the good which we do follow, we
must address our selves unto all alike by one and the same Rule of sincerity
and truth; and where we find that the good which we have prosecuted is
resented, there we should apply our selves more particularly to multiply the
manifestation thereof unto them, and to fix more deeply the sense thereof into
their apprehensions: For where we see that God does cause the seed which is
sown to take root, there we may hope that being watered it will fructify by
his blessing.

3. To make a more special application to those that are of note.
3 And although our addresses should be thus toward all, yet this must not
hinder a more special application of our self to some, who are likely to be
more capable then others of good motions: such then as are of good report for
piety and parts, such as are noted for temper and moderation from humane
passions, and such as are apparently zealous for the works of Reformation,
ought to be looked upon with a special eye and sought out. They ought to be
dealt withal more plainly and more fully, for the setting of their judgments
aright and the clearing of doubts which they may have concerning our ways and
principles: and then we ought also to put an edge upon their affections to
concur with us toward a progress in public works; that the righteousness
which does reach alike unto the edification of all, may be advanced for the
completing of the work of our reformation.

4. Not to be much swayed with good or evil reports concerning any, but to
measure all by the true standard, the life of Christ in the Spirit.
4 And as public and private reports are not altogether to be slighted for the
finding out of men, so are they not either way easily and much to be credited:
for they are carried for the most part by interests, and a man of judgment
that does set a rule unto himself in all his ways, will both on this fide and
on that side arm himself against the strong impressions of evil and good
reports. Against the evil ones he will have in store charitable constructions
of things that may be well taken, lest his spirit be rashly byased to a
wrongful affection against him that deserves it not; and against the
largeness of the good ones he will balance himself with discretion and
prudence, lest he be swayed through too much credulity to a groundless
confidence in one that may deceive him; and thus keeping himself both ways
free, in an equal temper, neither too high nor too low in his apprehensions,
to rise and fall with the blasts of reports, he will be able to steer an even
course in his carriage toward all; measuring himself and all other men in his
and their actions by one and the same rule, which is the life of Christ in the
Spirit: for that is the only standard by which all are to be measured, that
is the only touchstone by which all spirits are to be tried whether they be
true gold or not.

In this search and discovery of persons, although none are to be excluded of
what quality and condition soever, yet those that are called Divines are
chiefly to be sought after, because they have a great influence upon the
spirits both of the multitude, and also of the ordinary sort of stayed men to
sway their affections. Except then we deal with these men according to these
rules to gain them to our aim, we shall find the ways of peace and union
mainely obstructed, and the gall of bitterness now stirred and overflowing in
many, almost impossible to be allayed.

I have done with the discovery of persons fit to be dealt withal.

The third point is concerning the means by which confidence may be begotten
in these toward us, and set a working toward all, for the composure of
differences. This means I conceive is none other but a free and orderly
Treaty to be set afoot between some of us and some of their side. And to the
end that by this means mutual confidence may be begotten, The means to
beget confidence is a treaty, of which the requisites are briefly noted.
equal power to propose matters to be taken into consideration, and equal
freedom from awful prescriptions must be assured unto all, and an equal
engagement must be conscionably laid upon all alike to meet; to meet I say
constantly and never to leave off the Treaty, till the end for which it shall
be undertaken be attained, or at least the course which therein should be
followed shall be brought to a full period.

The disagreement was originally about the frame and constitution of Churches,
The subject thereof is twofold.
but now it is about the power of settling the government of the Kingdom; the
first controversy has still an influence upon the latter, so that this will
never be well agreed, without some determination of that.

1. Concerning civil government to be transacted in the Parliament.
The treaty concerning Civil government, can be no where set a foot but in the
Parliament. The Parliament is there, where by the Kings authority according to
the constitution of the Kingdom, the bodies of Peers and Commons are met, to
order the affairs of the Kingdom entrusted to their care: Only now for
matter of order, it is to be wished, that the things henceforth to be debated
and voted should look rather forward then backward: that is, that the Houses
should rather determine things tending to our settlement in time to come; then
alter or unsettle things present, or call things past into question before our
settlement be in view, or the foundation thereof established. If an Act of
Oblivion were past on all sides, for things done in the heat of strife since
the parties were formed, and positive Counsels entertained for preventing of
breaches hereafter; we might hope to see better days shortly, then otherwise
we are like to enjoy in this generation.

But I shall leave the civil Treaties to those to whom they are entrusted by
the Kingdom, and beseeching the Lord to give them one mind in his fear, to
make them all faithful to their public trust without selfe-seeking, and
interests of parties, I shall speak of a Treaty which may relate unto the
settlement of the Churches.

2. Concerning Church matters. To advance which,
This Ecclesiastical Treaty is of absolute necessity, that ingenuous men may
not mistake one another, as for the most part in these differences they do;
for it is clear that matters are misunderstood on both sides; and being
misrepresented hainously to the simple multitude by many, and no body laboring
effectually to rectify mistakes, 1 Railing is to be restrained on all sides.
our divisions must needs be multiplied, and our breaches made greater. If
then the freedom which hitherto has been taken and abused on both sides, to
traduce each other in the Press and Pulpit, can neither by authority nor by
persuasion be restrained, we are never like to gain any advantage for the
composure of men's affections by a Treaty, though never so fair, never so
orderly, never so peaceable and effectual in it self; for it will never
become so unto others; because as long as the winds blow fiercely, the Seas
will be stormy; as long as railing accusations continue, passions will be
raised; and whiles passions rule, conscience is asleep, judgment is darkened,
and men are not capable of rational and good proposals. For this Reason also,
the men to be chosen for the Treaty on both sides, must not only be
conscionable, judicious and learned, but moreover free from all preingagement
and passion. 2. The countenance of authority is to be had to set it afoot.
Then the Treaty it self although for the same cause it may not be public
(for then it must have public authority, whereupon a thousand inconveniences
will follow to make it fruitless) yet it must not be altogether private, but
should have the foreknowledge and countenance of authority to beget it, lest
it be wholly slighted and inconsiderable: So then let some of the peaceable and
chief leading Statesmen of both sides (being thereto either deputed or
allowed by the rest of each side) order and direct the Treaty in a course
which shall be wholly free from partiality, and let a jealousy be raised
against the intent and purpose of such a Treaty, let it be declared that it
shall not be to conclude any thing (for that cannot be done without the full
knowledge and consent of parties) but only to try what hopes there may be of
finding a sure way to procure an accommodation, either by the means of a
reconcilement, or by the means of a mutual forbearance of in offensive
differences. 3. The persons are not to be many who treat.
Such a Treaty of three or at the most of four chief Divines on each side,
who should be wholly set apart from all other employments to apply themselves
day and night to this work, and who should have the freedom, at all times
severally and jointly without the formalitie of an ordinary Committee to meet,
may by Gods blessing become a means to lay the ground of a confidence between
the parties; if only the fit method and manner of proceeding first in the
Treaty it self, and then in the communication of that which they shall agree
upon can be observed.

The Reasons why I would have no more but three or at the most four on each
side to treat are these.

1 Three or four truly moderate and quiet spirited men, will be sooner
found, easier spared from other taskes, and be able to meet more frequently,
and constantly then a greater number on each side.

2 This smaller number will be less subject to distraction and disagreement
within it self then a greater number.

3 This number will be sufficient to make a trial, and to discover the way
toward an Accommodation which without prejudice to either side may be
tendered to all. But if a great number should be engaged on each side, they
might beget a new division if the parties should not consent unto their results.

4 The way and method of Treating, which is only safe, and wherein lies a
secret inforcement toward an agreement in Christianity cannot be followed by
many so well as by few. And to make this good,

Let us now speak of the last point which is the method and manner of
proceeding both in the Treaty it self, 4. The method and manner of proceeding
in the treaty.
and in the communication of the results thereof to gain the assent of parties.

In this method and manner of proceeding, something there must be preliminary
to make the work more sad and serious to those that go about it, and these
that go about the work, more pious and conscientious in it. Something there
must be also decretorily observed to make the work more orderly and
effectual toward the end for which it is to be set afoot.

As for the preliminary or preparatory work, I would have the Divines that
shall be chosen and those that do choose them to meet alone, to set a day
privately apart amongst themselves, 1. For the preliminaries.
to seek Gods face with Fasting and Prayer, that they may receive his
direction in the work which they shall take in hand. At this time of their
humiliation I would have them to be exercised not only in Prayers and mutual
exhortations to provoke each other to the duties of servent love and of
sincerity; but also in conferences whereby they should (as in the presence of
God calling upon him at the proposal of every new matter) deliberate upon
three points. First, of the distinct and particular end which they should set
before their eyes in their future Treaty to determine it. Secondly, of the
special and appropriate means to reach that end in righteousness according
to the will of God. Thirdly, of the orderly course which should be followed in
the prosecution of these means by their Treaty amongst themselves. Of which
three heads a Note should be made in writing for a memorial and rule of
proceeding to be faithfully observed. Herein all should declare their
willingness to be engaged toward each other as in the fear and presence of
God, and that the engagement may be more effectually binding, and not liable
to doubts in time to come, at the end of the day and of their conference they
should attest and solemnize their mutual engagement by the subscription of
their hands unto an Act or instument which afterward should be laid up in the
Reposiorie where all their other Acts are to be kept as the ground of their
future proceeding. And I would advise that amongst other things to be mentioned
in that Writing or Instrument, they would oblige themselves expressly unto these
clauses. 1. That they shall not only do all things conscionably and sincerely
between God and themselves, but also that they shall deal openly and clearly
one toward another, without all mental Reservations, in all points of their
Treaty. 2. That they shall look to nothing in all their consultations but to
the prosecution of clear and undeniable duties of Christianity, without any
respect to outward interests to their relations unto parties, or to any humane
concernments whatsoever. 3. That none shall secretly divulge or openly publish
any thing which in their Treaty shall be agreed upon as an Act, neither by
word of mouth or otherwise directly or indirectly to any; without
foreknowledge, leave and full consent of all that are joined in the Treaty. 4.
That nothing in the world shall retard or stop them from endeavoring to
proceed constantly toward the Period of their Treaty which they shall have
agreed upon to prosecute.

And for the better observation of these clauses I would advise the Statesmen
themselves by whose authority they should be called and appointed to meet; not
to desire to know any of the results of their Treaty, before it be brought to
a full Person, and they of themselves think it fit to impart the same unto
them. I have pregnant reasons for this, which I need not here to mention. It
will be absolutely most expedient, that immediately after the first meeting
(wherein the Statesmen should be with them to enter them upon their work) they
should wholly leave them unto themselves; except only to call upon them now
and then from time to time to encourage them to proceed constantly without
interruption.

2. For the work it self and the way to proceed therein.
And thus much for the preparative engagements, now I come to the work of the
meeting to give advice concerning the matter, the manner, and the circumstances
thereof, to make it orderly within it self, and without all prejudice
effectual toward others, which will be if the right way of communicating
their results be taken and followed.

In these things I shall be brief, because the particular determination of all
things of this nature, does belong properly to those that are appointed to
meet; yet because generals may give without all prejudice some overtures to
advince their negotiation; I shall offer these following thoughts to their
consideration.

First, then I conceive that all their meetings to treat should begin and end
with prayers, and that by turns one of each side should preside and lead their
actions, so that every time by course a new man should have the chair.

Secondly, he that does preside or lead the action shall gather the results and
put them to paper; and after the Treaty they shall be registered in the book
of their Acts, and at the end of every meeting subscribed by all.

Thirdly, there shall be two books kept, one containing the Diurnall or brief
Narrative of the daily proceedings of each Meeting: another containing nothing
else but the results of each treaty, or the advices which shall be agreed
upon, to advance the accommodation of differences.

4 To keep these two books there shall be a peculiar Trunk or Chest or Box,
with two several locks fixed to the meeting place, and every one of the one
side shall have a key for the one lock, and every one of the other side a key
for the other lock, so that none of either side alone shall be able to open
the Cheff, but any two of both sides shall have power to do it; and to make
use of their Registers as they shall think good.

5 The times of their meetings should be constantly appointed once for all,
and inviolably observed, because they are wholly to be set apart to attend the
work without interruption.

6 If at any time by reason of some invincible impediment, as of sickness or
some other unavoidable accident, one of the number be absent, the meeting shall
not be void; yet the Acts thereof shall not be Registered, till he that was
absent has seen them and approved of them.

7 Nothing shall be carried by the major part of voices, what is not consented
unto by all shall not be any Act.

8 The matter of the Treaty shall not be concerning doctrinall truths,
because it is supposed that there is no material difference therein between
the parties: but concerning practical duties relating either to the
constitution or to the government of the Churches, or to the exercise of
Religious worship, in a private or public way.

9 The manner of their Treaty shall not proceed by way of debate and dispute to
argue what is right or wrong, in respect of the particular practices of
parties, but it shall proceed in the way of positive Declarations and Answers
unto certain Questions, which shall be proposed as cases of conscience, to be
resolved from the Word of God, and the undeniable principles of Christianity.

10. He then that sits in the chair shall ask of every one what matter he
would have taken into consideration; what shall be offered by every one shall
be noted in a memorial by it self; then the question shall be in what order
the things offered shall be thought upon, and when that which is to be first in
order shall be determined, a question shall be framed thereof, as a case of
conscience to be resolved by the word; from which every one shall gather his
Answer, and bring it in against the next meeting in writing, and when the
writings are compared, that wherein they all do agree, shall only be taken as
a result of their Treaty; and that wherein they differ shall be left
untouched, except some proposal be made which does take with all, for the
reconcilement of the difference.

11 In bringing in their answers they shall avoid large discourses, and set
down that which they shall deliver, upon the point to be resolved, in short
Aphorisms and Propositions per thesim and Antithesim: and to facilitate the
matter, each side should contract their several answers into one sum,
containing that in which they all do agree; that so at their meeting together,
the comparison may be made only between two writings, out of which the
agreement is to be extracted, as a common result upon the Question which was
proposed.

12 When the resolutions of all profitable questions tending to an
accommodation of our differences, shall be thus gathered without contradictory
debates into clear and distinct propositions, which shall be taken from Gods
Word, to be offered as an advice unto the dissenting parties toward an
agreement; then they shall be put into some order and ranked under their proper
heads of matters, to be communicated unto the rest of each side.

13 The way of communicating matters I conceive may be this:

3. For the communication of that which shall be concluded.
First, let the preliminarie determinations of the Treaty be published by
setting forth the Art and Instrument of the mutual engagement of those that
are called to the Treaty, and let this be done immediately after the Treaty is
begun, to the end that the rest of both sides may know the end of the Treaty,
and be desired to recommend the effect thereof to God in their public and
private Prayers.

Secondly, when the Treaty is at an end, let there be a brief narrative
published of the order and method of proceeding used in the Treaty, to let all
see how equally and amiably matters have been carried.

Thirdly, when this is done toward all indifferently, then let the results of
all the deliberations upon all the questions be printed, but not made common to
all; only first to the Statesmen who set the Treaty afoot a certain number
of copies are to be imparted, that they may distribute and send the same to
the most peaceable and moderate spirits of each side, to engage them to declare
how far they give their assent thereunto, and when the chief shall have
declared their sense thereof, and it does appear that the advice is not
rejected; the Houses of Parliament may be moved to move the Assembly of Divines
to declare their sense and approbation of the same; which being done, the
Houses should concur with their authority not only to permit, but to
recommend the practice thereof unto all.

Thus I have done for the present with these suggestions rather to satisfy
your desire, and discharge mine own conscience, then that I have any great
hope they will be laid to heart; yet who knows where this seed may fall, and
what God may do with it? I know assuredly that he will do good to Israel to
these that are of a clean heart: Psalm. 73.1. Matthew. 5.9. Iam. 3.1^.
I know that the peacemakers are pronounced blessed and called the Sons of
God, and that the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace of them that make
peace. Now the God of Peace and Truth be with you always. Amen.

From Sion House September. 12. 1647.
A Preface to the ensuing discourse: showing what are the special lets of
Ecclesiastical Reconciliation, and what the causes of Divisions are amongst
Ministers, and how to be remedied.
SIR,
YOu know what hopes you gave me when I was at Sion House, that some effectual
course would be followed to reconcile our differences about matters of
Religion. I did thereupon impart unto you very freely my thoughts concerning
the whole business, how it might be advanced as I conceived.

The Treaty of an accommodation begun at London.
Since that time being here at London, the hopes which you gave me were
confirmed by the zeal and forwardness of those, who in the City gave
occasion to the best affected to meet at several conferences, whereof the aim
was very laudable and necessary, viz. to prevent both in Church and State the
imminent dangers of Tyranny on the one hand, and of Anarchie on the other: and
to find out and set on foot the means of brotherly unity and amiable
concurrence in carrying on the work of our present Reformation.

But without effect left off.
What the particular causes are wherefore the motions then made were not
effectual, and the conferences of this kind have since been left off: I shall
not at all mention, for you know them well enough; and we all have just cause
to mourn for this, that in our outward profession of the Gospel, there is so
little true spiritual zeal for necessary duties of Communion, and so much for
private concernments; and that our disease if we continue long in these
distempers, is like to prove remediless.

As for me, although I cannot but lay this sadly to heart, yet I do not suffer
the discouragements which cause most men despair to work upon my spirit any
fainting impressions: but have rather given way to a charitable inclination,
which I love to entertain within my self, which is, to hope for a possibility
of our reconcilement, notwithstanding all the backwardness which is apparent
in the leading men of both side. I have (I say) kept up my spirits, in a
resolution to proceed in these motions partly upon this hope, partly upon other
principles, The false Principles of some men in spiritual enterprises.
then I perceive most men do walk by: for most men move only as they find
cause by outward appearances to expect the success of their enterprises, and
some are so very tender of their repute of being engaged, that except they be
sure of gaining what they pretend to seek, they will not hazard their labor,
nor seem forward in any thing, although in it self never so answerable unto
the way of God in the Gospel. But I have been otherwise taught to look upon
my self: I shall never value my credit amongst men, or my pains above my duty;
I shall never be afraid to be counted a fool to the prudent of this age, and
to lose my labor for the Gospels sake. He that cannot freely venture the
reputation of his prudencie upon the ground of a duty, without consulting the
appearances of flesh and blood, is not yet instructed to walk by Faith and
above sense, and he that is not willing to serve Christ without success, is
not worthy to be employed by him. Therefore I conceive that in this business
of seeking peace and ensuing it, which God does command me to do, Psalm. 34.14.
and of maintaining peace, if it be possible, and as much as in me lies, which
in like manner is commanded, Romans 12.18. (I say in this business thus enjoined
and bound upon my conscience) I conceive that I owe to God an implicit
obedience; What the resolution ought to be of him that seeks peace according
to Gods will.
that is to say, an obedientiall resolution, and an attempt to do what I can
toward the effect, although I see no appearance of success: for he that
commands me to hunt peace, does presuppose that it will flee from me, and when
it is fled, he that does bid me overtake it, and if I overtake it, to hold it
fast if it be possible, and as much as in me lies, does not therefore give me
any assurance that I shall overtake it, and be able to hold it; but this only
he requires, that I should do my utmost endeavors. Now if I demurre upon the
matter, and will not do this except I can perceive that I shall be able to do
it, What the lets of such a resolution are.
as I pretend for my credit: in this case I serve not the will of him that
commands me, but mine own: for I walk not in the obedience of Faith, but in
the dictates of my fancy: for now I lean to mine own understanding, and
suffer the pride of my heart to be my counselor, which being unwilling to be
foiled in any undertaking, does make me quit the work, because I think I
shall not have the credit of it. But if for some other reasons, I demurre upon
the duty and suspend mine action, as perhaps, because I see not I can gain
this or that benefit by it; or because I think it not seasonable to appear
till matters of State be so and so contrived; that such and such a business
may come in at such a time for such a design, etc. (although in matters
merely humane, arbitrary and external, I do not blame this prudentiall
contrivance; yet I say) if any such consideration should byas my resolution
toward the performance of that which in it self is a duty, and of a
spiritual nature, (as I fear it does with many) then I walk no more by the
grace of God in simplicity, but by the wisdom of men in the world; then my
aim is not to serve Christ, but rather to make use of Christ and his kingdom,
and of my interest in the work of the Gospel to serve either mine own turn or
the turns of other earthly men out of it; and if I do so, it is clear that I
do the work of the Lord deceitfully, and the reward of an hypocrite will be
given to me.

Upon these grounds I have laid aside all such hidden things of darkness,
which I have seen sway with some in the works of this nature; and therefore I
am persuaded I have herein a good conscience toward God, which does give me
confidence to cast my self upon him, hoping for a blessing upon these
endeavors, because I look to nothing but the doing of his will therein.

Motives dissuading the publication of the ensuing Treaty.
Although then I may ingenuously confess that I cannot rationally foresee, as
the times now are, and as most men stand affected to each other, that these
motions will be entertained (for they will suit no ends of parties) but am
rather apt to conceive that some who think themselves wise, will laugh at me,
and at this discourse; that most will not relish the motions, as being somewhat
out of the common way; that many will mistake my meaning, misconstrue my aim,
and fall foul upon me perhaps for what they have misconstrued and mistaken. And
finally that few or none that seem to be Pillars, will heartily join and
help to advance either these or other impartial ways of peace. (I say)
although this may be confessed; Motives inducing thereunto.
yet I cannot forbear to offer these thoughts unto you, both that I may
discharge my conscience toward God in the vow which I have made to prosecute
Peace and Truth, by walking in the light (whatsoever some may or do think of
me) and also that they may stand not only for me as a witness, that I have
sought without partiality the ways as well of Truth as of Peace amongst
Brethren: but also rise up in judgment (if you think good to publish them)
against those, who for wordly ends and self will (lest they should seem to
lose ground) keep us at a distance, and making our divisions irreconciliable
weaken our hands in the Gospel. Here I desire not to be mistaken, Why some do
keep up our differences and what guilt they draw upon themselves thereby.
for I say not that any do purposely intend (except they be the Emissaries of
Jesuits, of which too many are crept in amongst us, in this dissolution of all
order) to make our divisions irreconciliable; and to weaken our hands in the
Gospel: God forbid that any professing the Gospel should be thought so
maliciously partial. But this I I mean to say freely; that all such as by the
management or composure of these differences seek any way rather to please
themselves, then in the spirit of meekness to please others to their
edification; I say of these, that they keep us at a distance, that they widen
our breaches, that they make our divisions by little and little
irreconciliable, and so they weaken both their own, and their Brethrens hands
in the Gospel, and herein they not taking heed to themselves, principally serve
no bodies turn but Satan's; and become his instruments most effectually to
hinder the power and prevalencie of the Truth. For it is Satan's maine interest,
What Satan's interest is in the difference of Ministers.
above all others to set and keep the Ministers of the Gospel at variance
amongst themselves, and disagreeing in the way of their testimony. For as long
as they are kept so, he is sure that the world, the wickedness and greatness
thereof, and the height of men will not fall before the throne of Jesus Christ
by their means. For if we will look upon Satan's kingdom, and consider the
ways by which he does set up, and settle the Mystery of iniquity in
opposition to the kingdom of God among men; we shall perceive that one of
them is this. That he being the Prince of this world, does establish the
government thereof by mere power and deceiving Policy. This government he
endeavors always to put in the hands of such men, How Satan does prosecute
his interest.
who intend to make use thereof only for their own ends, which commonly are
none other but greatness and glory: for this cannot be denied, that as the way
of self-denial and humility is proper to Christ and his Kingdom: So the
practices of men in seeking themselves by power and policy are the works of
Satan's spirit, and of their own corruption in order to his designs. And as
the end of natural men in the world, is only to maintain and enlarge
themselves, according to their own will by their own ways; so the end of
Satan in teaching them to manage their affairs, rather by power and policy,
with an absolute command, then by loving persuasions and convictions of the
mind, with the evidence and demonstration of the Truth, is only to oppose in
the souls of men the kingdom of Christ which is the light of Truth and the
life of righteousness and holiness. For by these Christ is the King and
Conqueror of souls; for by the light of Truth he rules in the understanding,
and by the power of righteousness and holiness he rules in the will and
affections of his subjects: if then Satan can gain the opportunity to set his
ministers aworke, who by the outward means of power and policy for their own
temporal ends, draw away men's minds from the attention unto, and the
apprehension of Truth; and put out of their affections, the frame of meekness,
love and humility, wherein the life of righteousness and holiness does stand;
if (I say) he can get such instruments, which he can act either directly or
indirectly to draw men's minds from the way of Christ by this way of his own
creating; then he has clearly gained his end; because he will be able to
keep men's understandings in darkness; that is, in ignorance or doubt of the
truth; and their will and affections in confusion and disorder, that is, in a
frame opposite to the Law of God and his righteousness. The direct means of
erecting Satan's kingdom.


Now Satan will be able to do this directly by his instruments, when he can
cause the profession of ignorance to be advanced, set up and commended by
authority, or commanded by a Law, or when he can cause the knowledge and
practice of any thing; besides that which is settled by mere humane authority
for certain ends of State to be made a crime punishable by death; by infamy or
by any other penalty, and when he can cause the whole frame and profession of
Religion to be fitted only to establish that greatness, wherein the glory of
the outward state and the authority of his instruments does consist. All which
Satan does with a high hand grossly in the Mahumetan, but with more subtlety,
and most completely in the Papal state; and this he is able to do every
where else in some competent measure wheresoever the maxims of absolute
dominion are maintained, and where the great Idol of Politicians, which is
called the reason or interest of State is only worshipped; and the true reason
and interest of Conscience and Religion is laid aside and comparatively not at
all regarded: I say wheresoever this course is followed, there Satan is able to
oppose the kingdom of Christ directly.

The indirect means whereby Satan sets up his kingdom.
But where he cannot attain to this he takes the nearest way he can to
gain the same purpose indirectly, which is done by making all doctrines of
Truth doubtful, and all Gospel Ordinances full of confusion.

Now to make all Truths doubtful, he raises disputes, and does find out
ways to make them undecidable: and this he does chiefly by the means of those
that should be the unanimous witnesses of that Truth, which is called into
question, when they are disunited amongst themselves. And to confound the
Ordinances, he sets every one promiscuously upon the administration thereof
in his own way; not only by giving a freedom unto all both to do without
control what they please in such matters, and to condemn and oppose every
one that is not of their way; but also by disanulling the authority by which
all order should be settled in Church and Commonwealth. And to bring all this
to pass, his main endeavor is to cause the Ministers of the Gospel, either to
be subordinate unto his ministers in all things at their will; or by variance
of judgment amongst themselves, and difference of practices from each other to
lose their way; to neglect the rules of unity and forbearance which the Word
prescribes to uphold the communion of Saints, which is their strength; to
break the bonds of love and peace; and having engaged them into quarrels, to
bring them within the compass of his reach, that is, to move them to act their
controversies, by the ways of the power and policy of his kingdom for self
aims: For if he once can corrupt the simplicity of their minds so, that
they mind not truly the duty of being conformable to the Word in every
thing, and to the spiritual aim of Christ's walking in the world; and if he
can engage them into worldly designs to advance the same in a worldly way, he
has gotten them clearly within his reach; where he will endeavor to the
utmost, first to cause them utterly forget and lay aside the aim of their
spiritual calling. Secondly, to allure them unto, and affect them with the
appearance and glory of his dominion. Thirdly, to act them by the principles of
outward fears and hopes to that which he would have them do; and when he
has once gotten them thus far under the power of this snare, he will be able
without resistance to carry them headlong amongst themselves to more and more
uncharitableness and unconscionablenesse of conversation, whereby breaches
will be multiplied and made irreconciliable. For although a difference arise
but from a very small and circumstantiall matter amongst them (as it does
naturally fall out amongst other men;) yet Satan aiming at them above all
others, to get advantages against them, if he does find them in such a case;
either without brotherly and charitable affections, or inclined to please
themselves; he will be able to work upon them first jealousies, and by
jealousies mistakes, and by mistakes a distance and strangeness, by reason of
worldly aims differently carried on; and when plots and passions are come to
some maturitie, cross courses and mutual provocations will be set on foot,
real injuries will be offered; complaints and clamours will break forth,
which in continuance make the divisions of hearts past all remedy, and
irreconciliable: because it is not possible that men who aim at worldly
matters, should deny themselves either the use of their wit and passions in the
prosecution of their design, or neglect the strength which they have in hand,
when they think it can serve their turn. For if they should do so, they
should seem to quit their designs, and so lose at once both the credit and
profit thereof, which to men that make use of their reason only to compass
their own will; and to that effect can employ both power and policy, is a
thing altogether insufferable, as being no less contemptible then folly, and
as hateful as death.

This I conceive to be one of the mysteries of iniquity, by which Satan does
prevail against the Ministers of the Gospel even against many men that are
otherwise godly and able, but are not sufficiently aware of his wiles, by which
they are drawn from their own and ensnared in his way, by which means their
hands being weakened in their work, he gains his end at least indirectly by
their infirmities and miscarriages.

Therefore all such as are conscionably sensible of their own frailties and of
those dangers, should be wakened from security to become watchful over their
own souls in these times of temptation: for amongst the Protestant Churches,
where, with the increase of knowledge, a true sense of Christian liberty is
begotten in the minds of professors; Satan has none other way to fit to erect
his kingdom as this is, of dividing the Ministers: for which cause as we see
their divisions daily increased, so the remedies should be the more earnestly
thought upon, and offereed with freedom and tenderness unto all
indifferently, but chiefly to those who are nearest in principles, and have
least cause to walk asunder and be at a distance.

The remedy against Satan's way of corrupting the ministry.
These remedies can be none other, but the helps to holy communion amongst
Ministers in the prosecution of spiritual aims, tending to the advancement of
Truth and Peace. For the unity of their spirits in the simplicity of Truth is
their strength: and the evidence of grace without worldly wisdom in their
walking, will make them not only invincible, but even irresistible: because
the power of the Word of life, which is a two-edged Sword; and the armor of
righteousness on the right hand and on the left (when they are handled in
sincerity without all mixture of humane policy) will be prevalent to make
them triumph in Christ, 2 Cor. 2.14.
and to cause the inhabitants of the world to fall in due time before them;
that in the day of Christ's power (which we hope is approaching) all the strong
holds of Satan may be surrendered unto him.

This ensuing discourse then concerning unity and forbearance, to show the
ground, The end of the ensuing discourse, and the occasion of putting it to
paper.
terms, and motives thereof, was by me conceived, as a propesall of matters
belonging properly to the consideration of the Orthodox Ministers of this
kingdom, who dissent only from each other in the way of government; that if
our private or public conferences had continued as they were begun in
simplicity, the heads thereof might have been a subject of further
deliberation amongst us; For to that effect they were put to paper at the
desire of some, but seeing the motions tending to a reconcilement of our
Religious differences seem to be obstructed so, that there is little or no
hope to gain any further meetings and conferences in this kind, and for this
aim; therefore I have enlarged them a little and altered the frame thereof
somewhat, And of enlarging and publishing the same.
and now shall leave them to you to be disposed of as God shall direct you for
the public good to make use of them. For whether the obstruction of these
thoughts of reconcilement, arise from the unwillingnesse of some, who perhaps
think it not wisdom to venture their pains in such a way, or from the State
contrivements, or preingagements, and combinations of others, who by any of
these means, think themselves strong enough to gain their own desires another
way. Whether (I say) from any, or from all of those causes, the obstruction
does arise, it is to me a matter of no discouragement, but rather an occasion
to be willing to appear so as I am, in the presence of God free from
interests, and before men, without all pretense to wisdom, strength and
authority: That so far as those motions shall be found agreeable to the will
of God, and suitable to the conscience of those, whose wisdom, strength and
authority is the obedience of Faith in performing their duty, they may be
entertained with singleness of heart, and if so many of us as have freed our
spirits from the bondage of fears and hopes in respect of outward matters, and
have given our selves up to walk openly, by known and undeniable rules, and
by the Law of unprejudicate love to be without offense toward all, should but
resolve upon this provocation, to lay the matter of duty represented therein,
more seriously to heart then hitherto we have done, and to ripen further
thoughts concerning the same; who knows what God may work thereby? It is not
impossible for him to blow upon the dead bones of our scattered affections,
from the ways of peace and communion, to bring them to a concurrence in the
acknowledgement of some rules which shall relate to nothing but his own will;
and if any such spirit of life be breathed but in a few of us, we may hope
that it will not be without effect toward others; but that some resolutions
may ensue, which God will bless with successefulnesse in the prosecution.
However I am resolved without all appearance of success to cast this bread
upon the waters, and commending my self unto his providence leave these papers
to you to be disposed of, as you shall think fit in your discretion, which
with your self is recommended to to the grace of God by

Your faithful friend, and servant in Christ, JOHN DURIE.
Written this 8th. of May, 1648.
A DISCOVRSE Concerning THE GROUND, TERMS, And MOTIVES OF Brotherly Unity and
Forbearance: Which the Ministers of the Churches of England ought to profess
and practice one toward another for the Gospels sake.
CHAP. I. The Introduction, showing the Scope and Matter of the Discourse.
ALthough the case is doleful, and highly to be lamented, that there is no
where in the world so much strife and division apparent, as amongst those that
are named Christians, nor that amongst any Christians greater animosities do
break forth, then sometimes amongst those that are the Ministers of the Gospel:
yet this is a most certain and undeniable Truth, and worthy of all
acceptance, That the doctrine of Christianity in it self, is nothing else but
the glad tidings of everlasting peace; that therein Christ is revealed to be
the Prince of love and peace; that none but his followers are capable of peace
and unity with God; and that amongst men the true directions to live in love
and peace one with another, are no where to be found, but in his kingdom.
Which being so, it will follow (notwithstanding all these divisions) that none
should more willingly undertake, nor can more profitably entertain the
thoughts of peace and unity, for the composure of differences and ending of
strife amongst men, then they whom God has called to be Preachers of his
Gospel, and whom he has appointed to be witnesses of the Covenant of his
grace and peace.

And seeing all they to whom this Covenant is tendered, and by whom it is
received through Faith; are bound to live in the unity of Faith and Love, as
being all one in Christ, and confederates one to another by virtue of that
Covenant: Therefore I shall offer my self in the way of the heavenly calling
(as one to whom the Gospel is revealed, and to whom the testimony of Jesus in
the Covenant of peace is committed) unto those that are my Brethren in the same
Ministry, humbly entreating them all, but chiefly such as are most
conscionably wise in looking rather to the will of God in the duties of their
Ministerial function, then to the interests of a party amongst men, to
observe and consider with me, concerning the ways of Unity and Forbearance
which they ought to mind amongst themselves, and acquaint their hearers
withal, these three assertions.

First, that the ground wherefore they ought to profess and practice Unity
and Forbearance one toward another, is the undeniable Law of Christian
Brotherhood.

Secondly, that the Terms of Unity whereunto they have already attained, are
full and satisfactory, and that the terms of the Forbearance which they should
intend to practice are plain and easy to be acknowledged and settled amongst
them.

Thirdly, that the Motives which should induce them to the acknowledgement,
profession, practice, and setlement thereof; are as strong as unavoydable
necessity, and the highest relation unto duty can make them.

And to make good these three Assertions, I shall with as much brevitie as I
can declare my sense thereof distinctly and plainly, without any great
inlargements, as intending chiefly to speak to men of understanding.

CHAP. II. Of the first Assertion. Concerning the Law of Christian Brotherhood,
what it is, and whereunto it binds us.
THe undeniable Law of Christian Brotherhood is this, That all such who are
begotten of the same heavenly Father, by the same Word of Truth, in the same
womb of the free woman, the Jerusalem which is above, are children of God, and
truly brethren one to another in Christ, and having the same sense of their
relation one to another in Christ, and in all the chief Acts of their Religious
profession, the same rules to walk by, in the household of faith, they are
bound to acknowledge each other to be Brethren, and as Brethren to walk
together in holy Communion for the administration and observation of Christ's
Ordinances in that whereunto they have attained, and to bear with one another
in that whereunto they have not yet attained.

Now so it is, that such as are acknowledged to be Orthodox and godly
Ministers in this Kingdom of England, are begotten of the same heavenly
Father, by the same Word of Truth, (which is the doctrine of Faith revealed in
the Scriptures) in the same womb of the true Church, and have the same sense
of their relation unto Christ, and in all the chief Acts of their Religious
profession have the same Rules to walk by.

Therefore it follows undeniably, that they are truly Brethren one to
another in Christ, and that they are bound in conscience to acknowledge each
other to be Brethren, and as Brethren to walk together in Holy Communion, for
the administration and observation of Christ's Ordinances in that whereunto they
have attained, and to bear with one another in that whereunto they have not
yet attained.

And lest any should make a doubt of this Truth; the first proposition
expressing the Law of Brotherhood, shall be showed from clear places of
Scripture, and the second containing an application thereof unto the Ministry
of this kingdom, shall be verified of them by a more special deduction of
the particulars expressed therein.

The places of Scripture wherein the Law of Brotherhood is clearly manifested,
are amongst many others these.

Christ says to his Disciples.

Matthew. 23.8. All ye (namely, my Disciples) are Brethren.

Romans 8.29. Whom he (viz. the Father) did foreknow he also did predestinate to
be conformed to the Image of his Son, that he might be the first borne
amongst many Brethren. Ergo, they are made all brethren unto Christ, and so
Brethren to each other.

Jam. 1.18. Of his own will, he (viz. the Father) begot us (viz. believers)
by the Word of Truth. Ergo they all being children of the same Father and
begotten of the same seed, are Brethren to each other.

Job. 1.12. As many as received him (viz. Christ) to them he gave power to
become the Sons of God, even to them that believe in his name. Ergo, those
that receive Christ the same way, are alike Sons of God, and a like his
Brethren.

Heb. 2.12. I will declare (says Christ) thy name unto my Brethren. Ergo, if
Christ does own believers before God as his Brethren, shall they not own one
another as such?

1 Cor. 12.13. By one spirit we are all Baptized into one Body. Ergo, those
that have received the same Spirit are bound to become one body, and
consequently to be united together as members one of another.

Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6. There is one body and one Spirit, one hope of your calling;
one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all. If all these are
one and the same in and to all believers, then all believers are united unto
each other by them, and woe be to such that by their divisions give the world
cause to believe, that there is not one body, but many, nor one spirit, but
many, nor one hope, nor one Lord, nor one Faith, nor one Baptism, but many,
nor one God, but many.

Gal. 4.26. Jerusalem which is above, is free, the mother of us all. If we are
of one Father and Mother, then undeniably Brethren to each other.

Phil. 2.1, 2. If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love,
if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels of mercies, fulfill ye my joy,
that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one
mind. Ergo, such as are in Christ and made partakers of the same spirit, are
bound to have fellowship one with another, and in their fellowship to impart to
each other matters of full joy, by mutual consolation and comfort, by mutual
bowels and mercies; and to be able to do all this, they must study unity
amongst themselves, in the same mind and in the same love.

Phil. 3.16. Whereunto we have attained already, let us walk by the same
rule, let us mind the same thing. Ergo, Brethren, though not agreed in all
things, yet are bound to profess so far as they are agreed.

Ephesians. 4.1, 2, 3. Walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called, with
all lowliness and meekness, with long suffering, forbearing one another in
love; endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace.
Ergo, it is a part of our calling wherewith we are called, to practice mutual
Forbearance; to the end, that Unity and peace may be preserved, and such as
mind not the duty of Forbearance, have therein renounced their calling.

1. Pet. 1.22. Seeing you have purified your souls in obeying the Truth
through the Spirit unto unfeigned love of the Brethren; see that ye love one
another with a pure heart fervently. Ergo, one of the ends for which the Spirit
is given to make us obedient to the Truth for the sanctification of our souls,
is this; that we should affectionately express our love unto the Brethren. In
these places we see what the ground of the Law of Brotherhood is amongst true
Christians, and what the duties thereof are.

But if neither this Law, nor the duties thereof be at all regarded by those
that pretend to be the chief of Christians, is it not either a testimony
against them, that they indeed are not what they pretend to be true, and
faithful Ministers of the Gospel of peace? or if they needs will be counted
such; is it not then before the world a testimony against the Gospel it self
and Christianity, that it is not amongst us what it is said to be, viz. the
way of true love and peace? Therefore the great Character of true Christians is
to be laid to heart seriously in these times of universal strife, wherein all
pretend more then others unto Christ, namely this which Christ has given us
himself, Joh. 13.35. Hereby shall all men know that ye are my Disciples if ye
have love one to another. From whence must needs follow, that if ye have no
love one to another, by this all men shall know, that ye are not his Disciples.
Therefore let us not deceive our selves, it is not the bare dogmaticall knowing
of the truth that will approve us to be Christ's Disciples, there must be a
real practice of it, and this practice is nothing else but to walk in love,
as Christ has loved us: Ephesians. 5, 1, 2.
For herein we shall approve our selves to be dear children and followers of
God, because the new commandments which Christ has given us, John 13.34. is
this, That ye love one another, as I have loved you, that ye also love one
another. And John his beloved Disciple tells us, that we know that we have
passed from death unto life, because we love the Brethren, 1 John 3.14. from
whence he does in the same place infer this consequence: he that loves not
his brother abides in death. Let therefore no man flatter himself with a
vain show of the Truth of Christianity; this is an infallible Rule; None is a
Christian indeed and truth but he that loves the Brethren. If then we can
make it appear that the Ministers of this kingdom are to esteem one another
truly Brethren because fully united unto Christ, and that by the Law of
Christian Brotherhood they are bound to make profession of that unity, and to
behave themselves one toward another, as it becomes the Brethren of Jesus
Christ, and the brethren of each other in Christ; if (I say) we can make these
things appear to be an undoubted duty, then we may hope, that on the one
hand such as pretend to be Christians, and yet mind not at all this
distinguishing duty, but continuing to walk offensively in strife with every
one, dishonor their profession, will be discovered to be void of truth; and
on the other hand such as are sincere will he stirred up to show themselves
zealous in the way of Truth, for the effectual performance of the duties of
Brotherly Unity and Forbearance toward all those whom they are bound to
acknowledge to belong to Jesus Christ no less themselves.

CHAP. III. Of the second Assertion. Concerning the Terms of Unity and
Forbearance in general.
BY Unity we mean the concurrence of men's judgments, affections and actions
about the same thing in one and the same way, and for the same end.

By Forbearance we mean the refraining from uncharitable and unkindly
affections and behaviors toward another in some things, although there be
some difference between us and him in judgment and in the way of acting about
these things.

By the terms of Unity and Forbearance we understand all those things, which
determine the judgment and conscience of a Christian to the profession and
practice of these duties, as he owes them unto Christ and his members.

As then the profession and practice of Unity is grounded upon the Law of
Brotherhood according to that of Abraham unto Lot: Genesis 13.8.
Let there be nostrife between me and thee, I pray thee, for we be Brethren:
So the profession and practice of Forbearance must be grounded upon the Terms
of some Unity: for where there is no Unity at all, if ever the disunited
parties come within the reach of one another, there no Forbearance can be
expected; but where there is some Unity, because there also will be some
concurrence, therefore there will needs follow thereupon some restraint of
strife, which is a Forbearance: for the affections of men are to be answerable
to the natures of things; as then things wholly opposite, cannot possibly agree
to bear one with another, in that wherein their opposition does lie, when they
are are to act upon the same subject; no more then things agreeing can intend
to oppose and destroy each other in that wherein their agreement does lie: So
it is with the Motions of men's spirits, both in the way of opposition and
agreement, when either of these is fundamental. For as in case of opposition
the Apostle does argue thus, 2 Cor. 6.14. What fellowship has righteousness
with unrighteousness? what communion has light with darkness? and what
concord has Christ with Balial? So in case of agreement he argues in like
manner thus, 1 Cor. 12.21.26. The eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of
thee, nor again the head to the feet, I have no need of you. And whether one
member suffer, all the members suffer with it, or one member be honored, all
the members rejoice with it.

So then all Forbearance from strife and opposition, must proceed from the
presupposall of some Unity; and where no Unity is presupposed, there can be
no such Forbearance: Therefore before we can speak of the terms of
Forbearance, we must consider first the terms of our agreement, to see how
full and satisfactory these will be found.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the terms of Unity by themselves what they are, why not
regarded, and wherefore they ought to be regarded.
THe thing whereof we are to make enquiry at this time is this, Whether yea or
no the terms of Unity whereunto the Ministers of this Kingdom which are
counted Orthodox and godly have already attained, are not full and satisfactory
to make them acknowledge one another to be Brethren? If it can be made out
that the terms of their Unity are such, then it may be inferred that they
ought to behave themselves each to other as it becomes brethren, which to the
grief of many is very slightly, or not at all performed. Now to resolve the
question, let us consider that which makes men fully and satisfactorily
brethren in Christ; whether it be not truly found in them, although by many
of them not at all regarded.

We shall say then, that which formerly has been asserted; If such as are
acknowledged to be godly and Orthodox Ministers in this kingdom are begotten
of the same heavenly Father, What the terms of brotherly unity are.
by the same Word of Truth, in the same true Church; and have the same sense of
their relation unto Christ, and in all the chief Acts of their Religious
profession have the same rules to walk by; then they have attained already
unto that unity, which is full and satisfactory to make them acknowledge one
another to be Brethren. But so it is, that they are thus begotten, that they
have this sense of their Relation to Christ, and these Rules to walk by in
their Religious profession. Therefore the Unity whereunto they have already
attained is full and satisfactory, to make them acknowledge one another to be
Brethren. To these three heads then the particular terms of their Unity are
to be referred, viz. 1. To the doctrine of Truth, which is the seed of the
heavenly Father begetting them to himself. 2. To the sense of their Relation
unto Christ in the Church. 3. And to the Rules of their religious walking; that
if in every one of these the Unity whereunto they have already attained be
found fully satisfactory to oblige them to a mutual acknowledgment of
Brotherhood; then the public profession thereof, may not any longer be held
in unrighteousness, as it is done by many to the great dishonor of their
Ministry, and of Christianity it self. For it is a very sad thing and
extremely destructive to the honor of true Christianity, to see those men,
that in all main things are fully agreed, and cannot be otherwise esteemed as
to men, then truly sincere and godly in their walking, The cause why
brotherhood is so little regarded.
not only to drive opposite designs and courses one to another in Religious
matters, without just cause, but even hatefully, to seem willing to destroy
one another only through want of charity in themselves, and for mere
infirmities and incivilities in others, which the fundamental Laws and aims
of Christianity oblige them to bear withal. And the more holy and heavenly
these men seem to be in the ways wherein they agree with their Brethren; the
more destructive and pernicious is the consequence of their failing, in this
kind, unto the Brotherhood of Christianity; because it causes every small
matter of difference to be heightened so in the minds of their followers, that
all the grounds of Unity, of Love, of Forbearance and of mutual edification,
are not only weakened, but directly cast off and disregarded.

See forth in the example of James and John's disciples.
This does put me in mind of the failing of John and James which is mentioned,
Luke 9. ver. 53. till 57. Christ was going with them toward Jerusalem, in his
way he passes by a Village of the Samaritans, and they perceiving that his
face was toward Jerusalem would not receive him, and give him civil
entertainment: whereat James and John were so highly offended, that they would
have revenged this injury, with their utter destruction by fire from heaven:
but Christ did rebuke them, and told them two things; first, ye know not (says
he) what manner of spirits ye are of. Secondly, The Son of man is not come
to destroy men's lives, but to save them. As if he had said, Your spirit is
distempered, and you discern not that Satan has caught you in his snare, and
you remember not, that my aim is to save men's lives; and not with vengeance to
right my self against them to their utter destruction. From this History we
may observe these Truths.

1. That it is incident even to godly men to be transported with zealous
distempers wherein Satan does take hold of them. For it cannot be denied but
that James and John were truly godly and faithful Disciples of Christ; and
that here they are transported with a zeal, which is not godly, but devilish,
is altogether also undeniable.

2. That the devilish zeal of godly men, may arise in them from their love to
the Truth, and from a sense of the indignities done unto it, which they cannot
brook at the hands of unworthy men: for it is clear that nothing could
occasion this excess in James and John so much as their great love and high
esteem of Christ's worth, and the injury which they thought was done to him
and themselves by such men as they thought Samaritanes to be; viz. men of
corrupt Principles in Religion, Schismatics and unworthy of their society:
John 4.9.
For the Jews had no dealings with the Samaritans.

3. That this love to the Truth and sense of the indignities done to it by
unworthy men, may be mixed with the spirit of self-love, which is
indiscernible unto them that are led thereby. For it may be conjectured, that
although the Disciples loved their Master sincerely, and thought him highly
affronted by the Samaritanes, that would not give him lodging-roome; yet that
they should not have been sensible at all of their own inconveniencie of not
being refreshed with meat when they were hungry, and of the affront done to
themselves, not to be civilly entertained when they were weary, is not at all
likely, but it may be probably gathered from circumstances, that the
disappointment of their expectation (messengers being sent before to make ready
for them) when they were weary and hungry, did heighten both their discontent,
and the sense of the injury done unto their Master.

4 That even godly men, when they are ensnared into passions occasioned by
injuries, will for small matters of private concernment, be sometimes set upon
thoughts of revenge, take up destructive resolutions, and thereby forget the
maine end of their profession; for we see all this in the Apostles, and by
Christ's reproof of them, and his reason taken from the end of his Ministry,
whereunto all his and their actions were to be subordinate, it appears that
they are put in mind of what they had forgotten.

Now as it was with James and John in this case, so it is with many godly men
in like cases. For in these times of controversy, wherein divisions are
beightned to the utmost, it does often fall out, that men being of different
parties, for far lesser causes then Jews and Samaritanes were divided; yet
look upon one another with no less animositie then did the Jews upon the
Samaritanes, and the Samaritanes upon the Jews; that is, with so much
prejudice, that if they find a man but looking toward that party to which
they have set themselves in opposition, as the Samaritanes found Christ's face
set toward Jerusalem, they will be ready to deal with him as the Samaritans
dealt with Christ, and his Disciples, refuse him civilitie, use him inhumanely,
and perhaps offer injuries both in deeds and words. These injuries will
sometimes be taken as reflecting upon the Truth of the profession; sometimes
upon the justice of the cause and the innocence of the party which we favor;
and if withal (as oft-times it falls out) some private concernment of our
own is mixed with the public interest; that will mainly heighten the sense of
those injuries, and transport us unto some excess of zeal: For when any
degree of passion for self concernment does meet in our affection with any
object of true zeal, and a ground of public interest, to mix withal and
raise it self upon; then it becomes a mighty one, and a giant-like passion;
as when in the first world, Gen 6. 2, 3, 4.
the Sons of God came in into the fairest of the daughters of men, and those
bore children unto them, they were mighty ones and men of renoune: so it
falls out here, that in the Spirits of men, mighty resolutions and purposes
of high revenge are begotten upon such occasions: and when Satan does find us
in any such distemper, he has a fit opportunity to in fuse his poison into
cur aims to cause us forget the end of our spiritual calling which is not to
destroy but to save the lives of men, by rectifying them and building them up
in the Spirit of meekness and of love, with all long-suffering and
Forbearance. Thus we may see by daily experience, that when humane parties are
formed, (for in Christianity there is none) and when inhumane injuries are
mutually offered about religious concernments, it is one of the hardest things
in the world, to prevent or to rectify the distempers which arise from thence;
but yet we must say in this case what Christ faith in another; Matthew. 19.26.
With men this is impossible, but with God all things are possible. Therefore I
believe that God is able both to prevent and rectify such excesses of passion,
two ways.

The remedy of these distempers.
First, by wakening our consciences effectually toward himself in minding us
of the end and way of our ministerial function, as it is in Christ: that is to
say, to teach us to aim at nothing but to be conformable unto Christ, by
minding the same thing which he did mind toward God, and by walking in the
same way, wherein he is gone before us, to glorify his Father in his
Ministry.

Secondly, by setting a spiritual edge upon our affections toward men; not to
consider them after the flesh, but after the spirit, as they are, or may be in
Christ Jesus our Brethren. That is to say, to walk in all things toward them,
by the Law of Christian Brotherhood, and make the positive rules thereof bear
the only sway in all our resolutions. For by these principles, and by these
alone, we shall be enabled both to free our selves from the trouble which
otherwise will fall upon us for small and inconsiderable matters of difference
in judgment and practice, and also to cause all outward concernments fall flat
before the Majesty of Gods will in the duties of peace and Brotherhood, but
without these we shall be found void of all strength to do any such thing,
and every little trifle will make us fall from our own sted fastness. Whence
it is, that because these principles and duties have been and are disrespected
in our work of reformation amongst those that undeniably are Brethren;
therefore the scandalls which are given to the weak, and observed by the
wicked, to discredit our proceedings, are multiplied, to the sadding of the
hearts of all that are godly; nor is there any other way imaginable as I
conceive, relating to conscience, fit to remove them, and to heal the breaches
which follow thereupon, but this, to manifest unto those that are faithful to
their principles and conscionable in the Ministry, that the relation wherein
God has set them one toward another, is a brotherly Unity, which in it self
is so full and fatisfactory, and by his commandment is so strict and
obligatory, that whosoever does not take up the profession thereof, and
endeavor to observe the duties belonging thereunto, shall not only be found a
transgressour, but even inexcusable and unworthy of the name of a Christian.
For this cause I have laid to heart this subject of Brotherly Unity and
Forbearance, that if God permit, it may clearly, though briefly be laid open
to some of the Ministry, that seem wholly to neglect the consideration
thereof. For my scope is only to name the chief heads of their agreement, to
show how full and satisfactory it is in my opinion to settle the profession and
practice of a Christian Brotherhood between them: (offering this, that if any
shall make a scruple of the Truth of that, which shall be afferted concerning
this matter in brief; that a large deduction and demonstration in due time
shall be made thereof) to the end that such who heighten matters of strise
amongst Brethren, that multiply controversies unadvisedly, for small matters;
and that walk by dividing Principles rather then by the spirit of Unity in
the Gospel of Peace, may have cause to reflect upon themselves; to consider
seriously of the error of their way, and shape their course otherwise then
hitherto they have done, lest happily they be found guilty of that
contentiousnesse and disobedience unto the Truth, whereunto the Apostle has
sadly threatened a heavy judgment of wrath and indignation, of Anguish and
Tribulation, in the Epistle to the Romans Cap. 2. v. 8, 9. from which I beseech
the Lord to grant unto us all, the seal of our deliverance, and the effect all
evidences thereof in a conversation which is holy and blameless in love.

CHAP. V. Concerning the particular terms of Unity, whereunto the Ministers
of this kingdom have attained, in the doctrine of Faith, and in their relation
to Christ and his Church.
FOrasmuch as I am very confident, that the Ministers of both sides are fully
convicted of each others Orthodoxy in all those Truths which contain not only
the substance and Fundamentals of Christianity, but also all profitable
matters unto edification; therefore I shall assert the sulnesse and
satisfactorinesse of this Unity briefly in a few propositions, which I am sure
do contain much more as to the agreement in doctrinals; and no less as to
the agreement in their relation unto Christ and his Church, then is requisite
to make up a Brotherly Unity.

First then, it is undeniably evident, that they all acknowledge and receive
the same holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, to be the only Word of
God, outwardly given both to the Church in general, and to all men in
particular, as the only rule of Faith and Obedience, which in it self and to
all believers is clear and sufficient for the attainement of salvation, and for
their direction in all good works.

Secondly, they all agree that in doubtful places of Scripture, the
Interpretation thereof is to be taken from the undoubted analogy (that is,
the proportion) of Faith, which is in other ^^eer places of Scripture, and from
the right Analysis, (that is, the resolution or division) of the context of the
same place.

Thirdly, it is evident, that they all believe unanimoufly, that in these holy
Scriptures is revealed unto us, that there are three bearing witness in
beaven, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and that these three are
one, and the only true and living God, of whom the true knowledge is life
eternal.

Fourthly, they all agree to profess and teach that we have hope to be
justified and saved by Faith only in God through Jesus Christ alone; who
according to the Scriptures is the Messiah promised to the Fathers, and sent
into the world; and who being the only begotten Son of the Father from
eternity, was in time made flesh, a true man, like unto us (sin excepted) in
all things; and be coming a Mediator between God and us, suffered our
punishment, and paid the ransom for our sins to satisfy Gods justice, and
does still make intercession for us in heaven.

Fifthly, they all agree fully in this, That there has been always, that now
there is, and ever shall be unto the end of the world amongst men a true
Church, wherein God is worshipped according to his will in spirit and truth, by
the Ordinances of his own appointment. That unto this Church the promises of
perpetual assistance by the spirit and word of protection against the gates of
hell and of remission of sins, are made in and through the Covenant of grace:
and that such as live in this Covenant the life of repentance and faith here,
shall in the resurrection of the just hereafter partake of the life of eternal
glory with Christ, when all the wicked shall be punished with the everlasting
judgment of being cast out of his presence into utter darkness and endless
torment.

Sixthly, besides these necessary truths (which I confess to be sufficient to
oblige me to acknowledge every one a true Brother in the Faith of Christ, as to
the Doctrinall part, who does believe the same.) I say, besides these
Fundamentalls they all agree with the reformed Churches in the other Doctrines
of Faith, contained in their Confessions and public writings, such namely as
concern, 1. The Creation of the world and of man. 2. The decrees of God and
his providence. 3. The fall of man, his sin original and actual, and the
freedom of his will. 4. The restitution of man's fall by Christ. 5. Christ's
person, offices, natures and works of redemption, and the application thereof.
6. The Law and the Gospel. 7. The use of good works and their rewards. 8. The
nature of Faith and Repentance. 9. The state of regeneration, justification,
sanctification and perseverance in conversion. 10. The univerfall Church and
marks of a true particular Church. 11. The worship of God. 12. The Ministers
of the Church and their calling. 13. The true and false Ordinances. 14. The
Sacraments of the Lords Supper and Baptism, and such like; wherein over and
above necessary truths, most things that are profitable and expedient for
edification are fully expressed, and by all assented unto, so that the unity of
Faith in this kind is without all doubt very abundantly full and satisfactory.

Seventhly, seeing the bare theorie of truths dogmatically assente unto, is not
all that is requisite to make up a Brotherly unity between Christ and our own
souls; but there is also a subsistence and evidence of our interest in, and
relation unto him necessary to complete this union. Therefore in like manner to
complete a full and satis factory unity in our Christian brotherhood one
toward another, there ought to be some evidence of this subsistence of our
relation unto him manifested unto each other. And hereunto all the godly and
orthodox Ministers of this kingdom will heartily agree; That none are to be
counted true members of Jesus Christ and belonging unto his mystical body, but
such as by faith embracing fiducially with their heart the fundamental and
saving truths of Christianity, make confession thereof with their mouth, and
endeavor in their life and conversation to walk in holiness answerable
thereunto; that is, not after the flesh, but after the spirit, in love toward
one another, as God loved us.

CHAP. VI. Concerning the terms of unity in the chief Acts of our Religious
profession.
OUr Religious profession is here taken notice of, as it is public, and does
oblige us to stand in some relation toward others through the communion of
Saints.

The chief Acts thereof are four:

The first is, of professors as they stand single by themselves in reference to
the worship of God in public.

The second is, of professors as they stand united unto a congregation, in
reference to the visible constitution and government thereof.

The third is, of several Congregations in reference to their mutual
association

The fourth is, of the Officers and Rulers of these several Congregations, in
reference to their interest in each other, and the joint administration of
their public charges.

If then in all these acts, the fundamental rules whereby they are to be
directed and managed, are fully and satisfactorily the same, and not unknown
but rather acknowledged by the professors of both sides; it will follow, that
both sides ought to look upon each other therein as upon Brethren, and practice
the duties of Brotherhood one to another which are answerable unto this
acknowledgment. But if not withstanding this unity and agreement in these
rules, and in the acknowledgment thereof, the duties are neglected, then the
sentence of the Apostle James 4.16. is to be laid to heart; To him that knows
to do good and does it not, to him it is sin. And that of our Savior which
is more full and plain, Luke 12.47. The servant which knew his Lords will and
prepared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with
many stripes. Now that in these Acts of the profession, the sundamentall rules
obliging us unto holy Communion are acknowledged on both sides to be the same,
will appear in these following particulars.

Sect. I. Of single Professors.
When we look upon Professors (such namely as we have already described to
be believers of the doctrine forenamed; and to have that relation unto Christ
and his body which has been formerly mentioned;) when I say we look upon these
Professors as single, that is, as standing by themselves, and not embodied
into any particular society; yet we intend not to exempt them by this notion
from either a visibilitie of their profession, or a compliance in that wherein
they ought to concur with other Christians. For they are to be counted
single; not as if they might take up a single and fungular way of prosessing
Christ by themselves alone, which is neither common nor perceptible unto other
Christians, but they are to be counted single only as they are men, not
engaged as yet, unto any particular Congregation to be members thereof
professedly. Suppose then a man to be a true Christian and a mere stranger to
all the men and Churches of a Nation, where he finds the name of Christ known
and publicly professed by some, and not at all known and profesled by others,
the question may be concerning him, threefold. 1. Whether he should make
himself known to be a professor yea or no? 2. How be should manifest his
Profession? viz. Whether yea or no he should not join with others in the Acts
of public worship? And 3. What the Acts of public service and worship are,
whereunto be should join, if he should apply himself to other Professors?

Now in the answer to these three questions I suppose that both sides will
fully agree upon these rules as a directory for him to walk by, in such a case,
and to the first the answer is this.

1. Although a man stand single, and is not embodied into any paertioular
society; yet he ought to make it appear unto the world and to other
Professors, that be is a Christian, that is, be ought to appear in public as
a Professor of Christianity.

The grounds of this Rule are these command ements. Matthew. 5.16. Let your light
so shine before men, that they may see your good works and glorify your
Father which is in beaven.

Phil. 2.15, 16. Shine ye as lights in the world, holding forth the word of
life.

Ephesians. 5.7. Walk as children of light.

Verse. 10. Prove what is acceptable unto the Lord.

Verse. 11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but
rather reprove them.

Phil. 1.27. Let your conversation be as it becomes the Gospel of Christ.

Mark. 8.38. Whosoever shall be ashamed of Me and my Word in this adulterous
and sinful generation, of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when be
comes in the glory of his Father with the holy Angels.

2. To the second question, whether yea or no, he should not joy ne with
others in the Acts of public worship? the answer will be affirmative thus.

He that should appear in public as a Professor of Christianity, ought to
assemble himself together to call upon the name of God in Christ, with such as
meet to that effect.

The grounds of this rule are these places of Scripture.

Heb. 10.24, 25. Consider one another to provoke to love and to good works.
Forsake not the assembling of your selves together, as the manner of some is.

Act. 3.1. Peter and John went up together into the Temple at the hour of
Prayer, the ninth hour.

Act. 16.13. And on the Sabbath we went out of the City by a river side where
Prayer was wont to be made, and we sat down, and spoke unto the woman which
resorted thither.

Act. 17.1, 2. Where was a Synagogue of the Jews, and Paul as his manner was
went in unto them, and three Sabbath days reasoned with them out of the
Scripture.

3. To the third question, What the Acts of the Profession are in the public
service and worship whereunto he should join, if he should apply himself
unto other Professors. The answer will be twofold.

The first is concerning the Acts of service, belonging unto the communion of
Saints, wherein all Christians are bound to join together as Christians without
respect of persons, or societies grounded upon particular interests; and it is
that which the Apostle does command, Timoth. 2. Ephesians. 2.22. To follow
righteousness, faith, charity and peace, with all such as call upon the Lord
out of a pure heart.

The second concerning the public Acts of divine worship in the assemblies,
whereunto Professors should resort; of which these positions will be
acknowledged by all.

1. That the main and principal Acts of public worship are the preaching and
publishing of the Word of God, and the offering up of Prayers and thanksgivings
unto God: which will be found a truth in these places of Scripture; Act. 6.4.
Romans 10.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. and 1 Cor. 14. per totum, and 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3, 4.
and Chap. 4.11.16. Col. 3.16. Heb. 13.15.

2. That these Acts should not be ordinarily performed by every one that will
put himself forward to speak, but by some that are known to have the gift of
prophesying, and are approved; set apart, and called to that duty. Which will
be evidenced in these places of Scripture; Romans 10.15. and Chap. 12.6, 7, 8.
and 1 Cor. 12.18.27, 28, 29. and Chap. 14.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34.40. Ephesians.
4.8.11, 12. and 1 Timothy 3.1, 2.10 and Chap. 5.22. Tit. 1.5, 6.10, 11. Hell. 5.1,
2, 3, 4. and 1 Pet. 4.10.17.

3. That those Acts should be both for the matter and manner answerable to the
Oracles of God, and the rules of the word, and done by those that perform
them, not formally and by rote, but understandingly in spirit and truth: as is
clear by these places; Rom 12.6. and 1 Pet. 4.11. 1 Timothy 1.13. and 2.15. and 1
Cor. 14.19, 20. John 4.23.24.

4. That although it is not in the power of any men to prescribe unto, or
impose upon, the Churches and Ministry of Jesus Christ, any set forms of
public worship, otherwise then Christ has ordained: yet that the Ministers of
the Gospel may and ought without prejudice to their liberty in Christ, agree
amongst themselves, to observe some rules of uniformitie in their public
ways, to the end that the occasions of dissonancie and confusion may be
avoided, and the fruit of public edification by all spiritual means and
helps to decency and orderlinesse in the Acts of solemn worship, may be
advanced, will be gathered from these Scriptures: Gal. 1.1.8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
and 1 Cor. 11.1.23. and Chap. 7.23. and Chap. 14.37. Matthew. 15.9. Col. 2.6, 7,
8. and 1 Cor. 14.40. and 1 Cor. 11.16. Col. 2.5.

Sect. II. Of Professors united to a Congregation.
ALthough it is acknowledged by all, that Professors whiles they stand single,
if they walk orderly, and behave themselves as it becomes the Gospel, do
partake of the spiritual communion of all Saints, and have an interest in the
public Ordinances, with all the Churches, wheresoever they conveniently meet
with them, whiles they are unsettled. And although this their interest is never
lost, after their settlement in a particular Congregation, so long as they
remain faithful and obedient to Christ, no more then they who are made free
and partake of the privileges of a particular company in London, do thereby
abridge themselves of their common rights and privileges belonging to them as
they are naturally freeborne, or naturalized in the nation, so long as they
fall not from their allegiance. Although I say, this is agreed by all to be
so; yet it is also acknowledged on both sides; that Professors ought not to
stand single, but should be united in and to a body rightly constituted and
governed according to the will of Christ, which being clear from these
Scriptures, Romans 12.4, 5. and 16.17, 18. and 1 Cor. 1.10, 11, 12. Ephesians. 2.19,
20, 21, 22. and 4.16. Phil. 1.27. Col. 2.5.19. Gal. 6.10. does give a ground to
these following Rules, concerning the constitution and government of particular
Congregations, wherein both sides, if they will understand one another rightly,
I am confident are fully agreed.

1. That such persons as have by their professed subjection unto the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, made it apparent that they are united unto him as the head by
Faith, and to all his members by love, may and ought to be united together in
one Church Fellowship, which is called a particular Congregation; according to
the sense of these Scriptures, 2 Cor. 8.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and chap. 9.13. Ephesians.
4.13, 14, 15, 16. and chap. 2. verse. 19, 20, 21, 22. and 1 Cor. 12.27. Phil.
1.27. and chap. 2.1, 2. and 1 These. 4.9, 10. Act. 2.41, 42.

2. That the particular Congregations thus constituted ought to be governed by
Elders and Deacons, whereof the first are overseers of the ways and state of
the flock: the second servants of their necessities, both are Officers thereof,
walking as Brethren, as servants and as members of each other in their
administrations by a Brotherly equality; whereby all usurpation of Lordly
power in any of these over the inheritance of Christ is made void, and all
affectations of humane titles tending thereunto, is acknowledged to be utterly
unlawful in the household of Faith, according to the truth revealed in these
Scriptures, 1 Timothy 3. per totum, Acts 6. Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4.5, 6. 1 Tit. 1. per
totum, Heb. 13.17. 1 Timothy 5. per totum, 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and 1 Cor. 12.
per totum; Matthew. 20.25, 26, 27, 28, 29. and chap. 23.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Ephesians.
4.11.16.

3. That the particular Congregations thus governed have power within
themselves, to exercise all Christ's Ordinances necessary and useful for their
own edification and preservation from sin and disorder, which power does
originally proceed from their obligation to be obedient unto his will,
according to these Scriptures, 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. and 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. and
chap. 4.8. and chap. 5. per totum, and chap. 6. per totum, Heb. 3.6, 7, 8
compared with Heb. 2.1, 2.5. Matthew. 17.5. and 1 Cor. 7.19.

4. That the Officers of every Congregation may be chosen and called by the
Congregations themselves; of such persons as being competently gifted and tried
for the exercise of their charges shall be ordained thereunto, according to
the rule of Gods Word, by the imposition of the hands of a Presbytery;
according to these Scriptures, Act. 6.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and 1 Timothy 3.10. and chap.
4.14. and 5.21, 22. Act. 14.23.

Sect. III. Of several Congregations, as they are or ought to be associated.
THat there ought to be an association of those Churches which profess to
walk by the same rules, is granted on all sides; only in the way to settle
and maintain this association, and to determine emergent differences thereby,
the difficulty does lie; but if that wherein there is a full agreement were
made use of, for the increasing of love, I am persuaded that the offenses which
occasion all our breaches might be taken out of the way. Therefore those
terms of unity, which in this kind are undeniably consonant to the principles
of Brotherly Communion, and some others, which upon some friendly conferences
have been assented unto by some leading men of both sides, shall here be
offered toward the manifestation of the grounds of this association, in these
Propositions following.

1. The association of Churches should arise and be entertained freely upon
the ground and motive of Brotherly care only, and not by any ties of mere
humane Authority: This does follow from the property of co-membership, and
the ends thereof mentioned, 1 Cor. 12.25.

2. That brotherly equality wherein Christ has set every Congregation in
respect of another, is to be upheld by the association, and not at all to be
diminished, according to these Scriptures, 1 Cor. 12. verse. 13. till 25. and 1
Pet. 5.5. Romans 15. verse. 1. till 8.

3. So far as the several Churches do find themselves obliged, and for
mutual edification think it most expedient to entertain their association
either consultatively or judicially, they ought to enter into it, without
prejudice, and make use of the neerenesse whereunto God has brought them, to
his glory and their mutual comfort.

4. Although every several Congregation has power within it self to
administer all Christ's Ordinances; yet no Congregation may lawfully intend by
the use of those Ordinances to stand and walk by it self, as divided and
separate from other Congregations professing the same Faith and obedience
toward Christ. The reason of this is clear:

First, from the commandments which enjoyne the study of unity amongst all
Christians, such as these, Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5, 6. and 1 Cor. 12.12, 13, 14,
15.21. and 1 Cor. 1.10, 11, 12, 13.

Secondly, from the nature of divisions, or intentions to division, amongst
Brethren, which the Apostle does condemn as the fruit of a carnal mind. 1
Cor. 3.3. Romans 16.17, 18.

Thirdly, because this intention is contrary to the request of Christ in his
prayer unto the Father, where he desires that all believers may be made
perfect in one, John 17.23. and if all believers, then all Congregations of
believers.

5. If several Congregations may not intend to stand, as by themselves, and
walk as separate from one another, in the administration of Christ's
Ordinances, which they have received by a common rule, and are to profess
before the world in public as one body in Christ, then it will follow clearly,
that it is far less lawful unto them in the prosecution of matters tending
to mutual edification, in ordinary or in extraordinary and weighty matters, of
common and necessary concernment; to stand and walk by themselves alone
without a due respect unto their Brethren, and some tie of association toward
their neighbor Congregations. So that I take this to be an undeniable
principle and maxim of Brotherly association in Churches. That nothing which
with conveniencie, and to the benefit of the Gospel it self, or to the
edification of others therein, can be done unitedly and jointly, ought to be
done dividedly and separately. For when Christ does pray for a perfect union of
all believers which may work upon the world a belief that the Father has sent
him; Ioh. 17.23.
I cannot conceive that he does mean any thing less, then such an
association which may reach unto all the Acts of his worship, and the visible
administration of all duties and ordinances belonging to his Kingdom. For
nothing, but such an union professedly maintained in his name, is able to
convince the world finally, that he is come from the Father. Thus far then,
or rather thus near, the Congregations ought to be associated if it be
possible; and that it is possible and will be effected in due time, is
certain, because Christ has prayed that it should be, for the manifestation
of his name unto the world; and the Father cannot deny him this request.
Hitherto I have insisted upon that which I conceive is, or will be assented
unto by all, upon the undeniable grounds of brotherly communion. Now I shall
offer the other Propositions which for a more part cular accommodation of
differences have been assented unto, See also the papers of the Divines of the
Assembly given to the Committee for accommodation lately published, Page 4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9 and p 29. 30, 31. and elsewhere.
and are agreed upon by some leading men of both sides as follows.

6. All professors, whether single or in a body, are bound in conscience to
give an account of their ways to their Brethren, or to any that shall require
it of them, and that not arbitrarily but as a duty appointed by God to be:
observed. Mr. Buroughs Irenicum, page 43.

7. Concerning the admission of members, which come from one Congregation into
another, to be thereunto distinctly associated, because this does reflect
commonly upon some particular interests of men, wherein the rules of holy
communion are not taken notice of, therefore offenses are frequently given and
taken up in this matter, which to prevent these agreements have been offered as
a remedy thereunto.

1 That no Congregation should be gathered and made up of the Members of other
settled Congregations, except they be in an orderly way dismissed by these with
whom they were associated.

2 That no member coming from another Church with which we are in brotherly
Communion, shall be admitted to become a distinct member of our society, till
the Church from which he comes be made acquainted with his purpose to
associate with us.

3. That none who is said to belong to that neighborhood or association, which
is called a Parish, (though he does not profess himself a member in that
way) shall be received as a member of any distinct Congregation, until the
Officers thereof have enquired concerning his life and conversation of those
that are Rulers of the said neighborhood, and of the Congregations nearest
unto his habitation, to whom it is likely, he may have had some relation, or
which may have taken notice of his ways and profession.

One of the chief mysteries and original causes of our manifold divisions does
lie in this outward circumstantiall manner of the association of members into a
Congregation, and the reason hereof as I take it, is, partly because men
naturally seek rather to please themselves in the satisfaction of some humors
of their own, then to edify others, partly because the true use of Christian
liberty, and the relation wherein all true professors stand one to another in
Christ, is either not understood, or not minded; in comparison of some
circumstantials of our own coining to our selves, upon any one of which we
use to lay more weight then upon all the fundamentalls of Christ's appointment.

And till his grace and good spirit discover and work out this self pleasing
humor, we cannot hope for peace and unity almost in any thing, although our
agreement be never so fundamental in all things.

Sect. IV. Of the Officers and Rulers of several Congregations, and their
association.
THe Officers of every Congregation are under a twofold relation of unity to
each other: First, as they are Professors: Secondly, as they are Officers, that
is, specially entrusted with a charge in the profession: As they are
Professors, they are nearer in Brotherhood then as they are Officers. For their
profession does give them an immediate interest into Christ, and to one another
in him: but their Office does give them no interest either in him or in each
other, further then they are true to the profession: whence it follows that
except they be associated in the mystical body of Christ, they cannot be
associated in the ministry thereof. It follows also further, that the
relation wherein they stand to each other as Christians, being the only
foundation of their Brotherhood; all the other relations, which are
ministerial, must yield and be subordinate thereunto So that all the bonds,
which may settle their association in the ministry, must be intended no
further then they serve to advance and confirm the brotherhood and
association, which is settled upon the truth of Christianity. For if any
combination of Ministers be framed otherwise, or to any other end, then to
strengthen the fundamentalls of Faith, and to increase the fruits of true
Christianity in holiness and love: it will beget nothing else but a Papacy,
because the root of the Papal Hierarchy, and the foundation whereupon that
mystery of iniquity was raised in the Church, was nothing else but the aim of
an association of Church Officers subordinating the profession to their places,
and making use of the fundamentals of truth, to set up themselves above others:
for it may be evidenced, that all the superstitious devices and politic
practices of Popery to blind men, and by an implicit faith to keep them in
subjection, resolve themselves at last into this principle and aim, of setting
up themselves above Christianity in the hearts of men, which is properly the
Temple of God. Therefore it cannot be deni d, that they spring originally from
hence, seeing every thing is ultimately resolved into that, whereof it was
first begotten. From all which I draw this conclusion in brief, that all
associations of Church Officers or of any other public Officers of what kind
soever, who subordinate not themselves, and the interest which they have in
each other by their Offices and by their associations, unto the ends of
Christianity, to exalt the unity thereof, that Christ may be seen above all
therein; but seek to make the way of Christianity, or the association of
Christians subordinate to the advantage of their places above others, are
Papal and Antichristian.

Let then all parties look to their aims in their associations, whether they
be called Independent or Presbyteriall Associations, and whether they be
settled upon Episcopal or Erastian principles; and let all Magistrates look to
their interests and ways of prosecuting the same by their associations;
whether they be Democraticall, Aristocraticall, Parliamentary or Monarchical,
whatsoever their character, frame, or model is, as to the matter of
circumstantials, which is all that ordinarily men as men look after: Let (I
say) all these Officers of each kind, or such as out of the mixed multitude,
upon the ruins of others, do thrust themselves into places of trust and
profit, and seek to strengthen themselves by combinations of their own
framing; (I say again) let all these look well to it, every one in his
particular association, if their whole aim and the frame of their society be
not, to subordinate themselves and their combinations and confederacies to the
setting up of that union, which is essential unto the profession of
Christianity, and which alone shall last eternally; they shall be utterly
broken to pieces without all remedy. For the Word of God by the Prophet Isaiah
cannot fail, Isa. 8, 9, 10. which says, Associate your selves ye people, and
ye shall be broken in pieces, gird your selves and ye shall be broken in
pieces, gird your selves and ye shall be broken in pieces: take counsel
together and it shall come to naught, speak the word and it shall not stand.
For God is with us.

Here the Prophet speaking in the name of the Church does provoke the whole
world, and bids the people thereof a defiance, that though they join all in
one, and gird themselves with all their strength and all their counsels and
resolutions be brought to full maturitie, yet that they shall be without
effect, that they shall be broken to pieces in their associations, and
disappointed in their counsels, and resolutions, because God is with his
Church, as the head of their association. Thus we see that the Spirit of God
does blow upon all the designs of men so far as they are not subordinate
unto God: for wherein men are not subordinate, they are opposite unto him, and
he will certainly be stronger then his opposits.

And if the Question be made concerning the Church, and those that belong
thereunto, what their duty is in times of trouble and fear when all the world
is providing for their safety, with confederacies, strength and counsel? (I
say) if such a question be made, the answer will be found in the following
words of the Prophet from verse. 11. till the end of the Chapter, whereof this
is the sum.

First, that they should take heed lest they be drawn and engaged into
worldly confederacies, for humane fears; but that they should sanctify God
alone in their hearts, and make him their fear, verse. 11, 12, 13. because the
Lord will be to all those that do so, a sanctuary, but to others a rock of
offense, verse. 14, 15.

Secondly, that they should bind up the testimony and seal the Law amongst the
Disciples of the Lord; that is to say, that they who are taught of God (for
these are his Disciples) should make the testimony of Jesus the only bond of
their unity, and that the seal of this bond should be their obedientiall
submission unto the Law of God, verse. 16.

Thirdly, that they should arm themselves with patience to wait for the Lords
coming, who is hid from the eyes of the world, and with resolution to appear
before him, although the world does wonder at them, verse. 17.18.

Fourthly and lastly, when in cases of difficulty men shall be destitute of
counsel, and not know what to do; then to consult only with the Law and the
Testimony, and not to betake themselves to any other Oracle, verse. 19, 20. and
whosoever does not follow this advice shall be driven into utter despair,
verse. 21, 22.

Thus we see what the counsel of God is concerning humane associations; what
the issues thereof will be, and what the way is to preserve our souls from
that despair which does attend those that forsake God, and subordinate not
their counsels and associations to his will.

This then will be our wisdom to take this warning, whether we be
Professors or Officers: but chiefly this must be the ground of the
ministerial association, in reference to their charges; to make use thereof
only for the furtherance of holy Communion in the profession of Christianity.
And although I cannot say that it is so amongst the Combinations which now are
on foot, yet I am sure that these grounds will be assented unto by all that
are taught of God; and that their practice may be answerable thereunto, I
shall offer that whereunto both sides do agree, and which without
contradiction will be sufficient to enter them upon a Ministerial
correspondencie both for the advancement of true Brotherhood in Christianity
amongst themselves, as also for the preservation of themselves and of their
flocks, from partaking of other men's sins.

For to these two heads, the matters of agreement in the point of association
may be referred.

Of the first I shall offer these Propositions.

1 The Officers of Sister Churches, making profession of their brotherhood in
Christ, should desire to advance each other to perfection; and to that effect
should have frequent meetings for brotherly conferences, 2 Cor. 13.9. Malach.
3.16.

2 The chief ends of their meetings and conferences should be, to maintain
the unity of the Spirit whereunto they have attained; to make it more complete
in love, and to gain others to concur with them by the truth therein.

3 They should for these ends set themselves in a way to make their conferences
effectually conscionable, constant, without interruption and disorderlinesse;
which way may be settled upon these grounds.

First, upon a voluntary engagement, freely entered into, which should contain
these heads: that seeing they acknowledge one another fellow members of the
body of Christ, and fellow servants of the same Master, in the same household of
Faith, for the accomplishment of his will; that therefore they are resolved to
give to each other the right hand of fellowship in doing the work of their
Ministry, Gal. 2. ver. 1 -- 11.
that they will entertain brotherly meetings and conferences to that end: and
that they will never suffer any circumstantiall differences of opinions or
practices, to break their association or hinder their ordinarily appointed
meetings and conferences.

Secondly, upon some rules and orders which in like manner every one should
assent unto freely, and expressly, so far as he does find himself convicted
of the justice and equity thereof, the substance of which orders may be this.
That in their conferences confusion shall be avoided, that an equal and
orderly freedom of speech shall be yielded unto all, and that a liberty of
dissenting unpartially upon reasons alleged shall be given unto every one.

Thirdly, upon the means of some correspondency between several
associations: for seeing all that are willing to associate, cannot possibly
meet at the same conference^, by reason of the distances of places and men's
different occasions, therefore several knots and companies of associats will
arise, and lest they being unacquainted with one another ways, take
disagreeing resolutions and mistake one another meanings therein; for this
cause, some means of correspondencie between distant associations, is to be
agreed upon for the communication of matters belonging to the advancement of
truth in love between them.

Hitherto we have looked upon the first head wherein there is an agreement in
the Rules by which the association is to be framed for mutual edification; now
follow the matters of agreement belonging to the second head, which is the use
of their association for the preservation of themselves and of their flocks
from partaking in other men's sins. Of which I shall set down almost word by
word that which I find granted by Mr. Buroughs in his Ironicum or Heart
Divisions, page 43. which I conceive the Brethren of the other side will fully
assent unto, and ought to lay as a sufficient ground of associating in a
brotherly way: His words are these.

1 They (viz. the dissenting Brethren) acknowledge that Synods of other
Ministers and Elders about them, are an Ordinance of Jesus Christ, for the
helping of the Church against Errors, Schisms and Scandals.

2 That these Synods may by the power they have from Christ admonish men or
Churches in his name, when they see evils continuing in or growing upon the
Church, and their admonitions carry with them the authority of Jesus Christ.

3 As there shall because they may declare men or Churches to be subverters of
the Faith; or otherwise according to the nature of the offense; to shame them
before all the Churches about them.

4 They may by a solemn act in the name of Jesus Christ, refuse any further
communion with them till they repent.

5 They may declare, and that also in the name of Christ, that these erring
people or Churches, are not to be received into followship with any the
Churches of Christ; nor to have communion one with another in the Ordinances of
Christ.

To these Propositions, if a full assent be given, as by many no doubt there
is; I cannot imagine what should hinder, or may obstruct the profession of
their unity and a concurrence to settle their associations for a joint and
mutual assistance in the work of brotherly preservation of each other, from
the guilt of other men's sins.

Thus then we see that the terms of our brotherly unity are full and
satisfactory in all these respects, and if notwithstanding all this we are
divided in our ways, and in our affections unwilling to practice any thing
jointly, which is suitable to these acknowledged principles; are we not guilty
before God and men of the neglect of a fundamental duty in Christianity, and
that inexcusably? surely we will be found so, if we set not our selves in
another way then hitherto we have walked in one toward another.

CHAP. VII. Concerning the terms of forbearance, that therein is, and may be
found an agreement.
HAving showed how full and satisfactory the unity is, whereunto we have
attained, and which ought to be professedly acknowledged and put in practice;
it remains now that we speak also of mutual forbearance, in that whereunto
we have not yet attained. For if it be made apparent, that we are not only
thus far agreed, but that we have also the same sense of the terms, that
is, of the Principles and Rules whereby a forbearance may be settled in that
wherein we are not yet agreed; then I cannot see what in conscience or reason
should keep us still at this distance: But I am confident it may be made
undeniably apparent that we have the same sense of the terms, that is, of the
principles, rules and conditions, whereby a forbearance may be settled amongst
us; therefore there is nothing in conscience or reason, that can keep us at
this distance. Now if the Question be, what then the causes are that keep us
from joining in a forbearance? and what the difficulties are to practice that
wherein we are of one mind? My answer is, that I am very willing to confess
my ignorance of these causes and difficulties, rather then to reflect upon the
jealousies, upon the designs, upon the passions and distempers of either side,
and to lay open the uncharitable failings, and the unfriendly proceedings of
both sides against each other. I shall only say that the chief difficulty
concerning the terms of settling a Christian forbearance amongst us in my
opinion has been this; that this matter has never been prosecuted in that way
of simplicity, which becomes the Gospel, nor upon the terms, wherein either
there is undeniably, or there may be found infallibly, a full and satisfactory
agreement; and whether yea or no any course will be taken to prosecute it
otherwise hereafter, I know not, but I shall in the mean time endeavor to
acquit my conscience, by showing my sense of the principles and rules thereof,
whereunto I am persuaded none will be dissenters, who do lay to heart without
prejudice their duty, in the profession of Christianity.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning the principles of mutual toleration wherein there is a
full agreement.
THere be two maine principles of a Toleration whereof both sides have the
same sense to the full. The first is concerning the necessity; the second
concerning the limits and bounds of a Toleration amongst Christians.

Concerning the necessity of some forbearance amongst Brethren in
Christianity, all will undeniably acknowledge these two Propositions.

First, that God has commanded his children and servants both to bear one
another burdens, and to bear with one another infirmities, and to forbear
one another in love, as appears in these places of Scripture, Gal. 6.1, 2.
Ephesians. 4.2. Colos. 3.12, 13. and 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. Romans 14.1.

Secondly, that this duty is not only necessary (necessitate praecepti)
because God has commanded it, but it is also necessary (necessitate medii) as
a means of mutual edification; which cannot possibly be advanced without the
observation thereof. And the reason hereof is evident, because in many cases of
humane failings, and in some of different opinions and practices, if there
should be no forbearance at all, debates would be sharp and endless, about
every small matter, and for every trifle; the affections of love would be
lost, the peace of the Churches disturbed, Schisms made unavoidable, and the
healing or preventing of breaches become altogether impossible, Romans 14.13. and
15.1, 2, 3. Phil. 2.1, 2, 3, 4.

And concerning the bounds and limits of this forbearance, all will undeniably
acknowledge, that it ought not to be extended indifferently unto all persons,
opinions and practices, but that these four propositions are agreeable to the
truth of Christianity.

First, that it is not the mind of Jesus Christ that his servants should agree
to bear one with another in that which they know to be evil and contrary to
his will, but that their duty is in such cases to endeavor the removing of
evil, by zeal and brotherly admonitions, as will appear in these places of
Scripture, Rev. 2.2. and 1 These. 5.14, 15. and 2 These. 3.12, 13, 14, 15. and 1
Cor. 5.2.7.11.13.

Secondly, that it is not the mind of Christ that any of his servants should
profess themselves willing, or obliged, to bear with any person which does
endeavor, and with any doctrine or practice which does tend to overthrow the
faith in his name, which is delivered to the Saints Jude 3.
, or to destroy the life and power of godliness either in the private or
public profession of Religion Tit. 1.10, 11. 2 Timothy 3.5, 6, 7, 8. Gal. 5.7.
til 13.
, or to dissolve the bonds of holy communion amongst Christian brethren Phil.
3.2. Iud. 19. Romans 16.17, 18.
, or to abolish the orderly relations and obligations natural and moral,
without which humane societies cannot stand 1 Timothy 5.8. Mat. 15.4, 5, 6. 1 Timothy
4.3.
, or to put down the authority which God has set up in and over humane
societies for the Administration of justice therein 2 Pet. 2.10. Romans 13.1.
till 8.
.

Thirdly, it is the mind of Jesus Christ that his servants in all matters
merely circumstantiall by him not determined should be left free to follow
their own light, as it may be offered, or arise unto them, from the general
rules of edification and not constrained by an implicit faith to follow the
dictates of other men; and although it may sometime fall out, that in things of
this nature their ways may be different from the ways of their brethren; yet
that ought not to make any breach of love amongst them, but they should esteem
all cross and partial practices about them, utterly unlawful; because they
beget disputes and jealousies, and tending to divisions, bring forth hatred and
mutual persecutions. Romans 14. per totum, Gal. 5.13, 14, 26. Phil. 2.3, 4.14,
15.

Fourthly, that in matters of greater weight, which are not merely
circumstantiall, but are conceived to be determined by the word, yet so, as
that it is differently understood: in this case the mind of Christ is, that the
rules of Christian charity and mutual edification, be inviolably observed
with all long suffering and forbearance. And this course ought to be continued
so long, either as there is hope to gain the advantage of loving conferences,
whereby differences may be reconciled, and mistakes and scandals prevented and
taken out of the way; or so long as there is cause to think that God may
reveal his profitable truths to such as err not wilfully, but through
weakness of judgment and harmelesly, Phil. 3.15, 16. and 2 Timothy 2.22, 23,
24, 25, 26.

CHAP. IX. Concerning the way how to settle and prosecute a mutual Toleration,
by rules wherein there is an agreement.
HItherto in this matter of forbearance we have looked upon the principles of
our duty, which we conceive both sides will fully assent unto, if now we can
also from thence gather, and from other undeniable and known truths, find out
some rules which may direct us in a way, how to settle and prosecute to a full
period of practice the duties of this forbearance; and if these rules being
found out can be applied to the case in hand between the parties, by some
transaction so fully and orderly, that none who does assent unto the principles
and the rules, can except against the proceedings therein; if (I say) these
rules can be thus found out and applied, then we shall be able convincingly to
conclude that all such as follow not the practice thereof, walk neither
answerable to the light which they have received, nor to the vocation wherewith
they are called in the profession of Christianity, and consequently, that as
they are not upright in their way, so they shall be frustrate of the felicity
promised thereunto, and receive the reward of hypocrites: for in this case that
which Christ said unto his Disciples, is to be said unto the ministry, and to
the professors of this kingdom, John 13.17. If ye know these things, happy are
ye if ye do them.

But if you know them not, you cannot be happy in doing them; and if knowing
them, you do them not, your profession shall be found vain, and your end
eternal misery; for not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 7.21.
but he only who does the will of God, who is in heaven. From all which we
must gather this conclusion, that if we know that there is a forbearance,
which is necessary, it will not be enough for us to know what the principles
thereof are, but the way how to practice the duties must also be sought after,
and regularly followed. Let us then do this, and endeavor to find the rules
of such a transaction as will beget between the parties a settlement of that
toleration, whereof we have seen and allowed the principles.

And to this effect if any Treaty or conference be intended (for without some
such thing nothing can be settled) there must be, before all other things, an
agreement found in the aim of the transaction, and in the means to bring it
to pass.

For if these two be not determined by common consent, and a resolution fixed
to proceed according to that determination, nothing will take effect or be
successful in the transaction.

The aim then of the transaction should not be to settle a forbearance which
should leave the parties or confirm them in the distance, whereinto they are
unhappily fallen: But both sides should expressly declare that the Treaty is to
be set afoot, and professedly intended for these two ends. First, that a door
may be kept open and enlarged, to further a more perfect unity then as yet
the parties have attained unto. Secondly, that a path and course to maintain
the further unity, which will be attained by Gods blessing, may be prepared
and made more plain and easy then hitherto it has been.

If this aim be sincerely taken up, the means to bring it to pass will
neither be difficult to be found, nor without success, when they are set a
work amongst true Christians. I shall offer therefore at them.

First then, the means to open a door to advance the parties to a more perfect
unity, then as yet they have attained unto, is to find out, and settle rules
of mutual condescension.

Secondly, the means to make the path plain and easy to maintain and walk
in the unity which shall be settled, is, to remove move by common consent and
upon conscionable motives all the causes of disaffection and of breaches. For
if both sides cannot only yield and stoop to embrace each other in love, but
also remove all that which may occasion the dissolving of that embracement, we
may be sure that peace and unity will be settled without interruption.
Therefore in hope that either now or hereafter this may be laid to heart, and
followed to produce a necessary toleration, I shall offer my thoughts of these
two means.

CHAP. X. Of the rules of condescension, how they may be found out.
We have formerly seen that some toleration amongst Christians is necessary;
if so, then undoubtedly some condescension also toward one another, because
without some yielding it is not imaginable that any mutual forbearance can be
settled or transacted amongst parties, that are at variance; and although this
might suffice to satisfy the scruples of some, who perhaps will boil at the
matter of condescension, as prejudicial to the truth of the holy profession,
yet I shall add a word to show the lawfulness of such a course, as being a
duty recommended unto us by God, and necessary for edification.

The Apostle Romans 15.1, 2. says that we ought not to please our selves, but
that every one of us should please his neighbor for his good to edification.
Now in this case every one is supposed to be strong, and the neighbor, whom
he ought to please, is by the Apostle supposed to be weak. Therefore we are
all bound to yield unto each other, as supposing others to be weak that we
may be able to edify each other. And to press this home as a duty to the
conscience of all, he does give us Christ example, as a pattern thereof in
this particular, that he did not seek to please himself, but condescended even
to bear reproaches, that we might be edified by that which is written of
him, verse. 3. and 4. And then to make an application of this unto the end for
which he does prescribe it as a duty; he first prays to God for us, and
secondly exhorts us to the imitation of Christ's example. His prayer is, that
God would grant us to be like minded one toward another according to Christ
Jesus, that we may glorify God with one mind and mouth: where he intimates
two things, which are in this matter very considerable. First, that except we
have this grace to be so minded unto each others as Christ was to us, we
cannot be at unity amongst our selves. Secondly, that except we be united
with one mind and one mouth in our profession of Christ, God cannot be
glorified by us, verse. 5 and 6.

Then his exhortation is a consequence inferted upon these premises thus, ver.
7. Wherefore receive ye one another as Christ also received us to the glory of
God. Now Christ received us to the glory of God (that is, to the participation
of Gods love and goodness) by a great condescension unto our weakness,
studying not to please himself but us to our good; therefore we are all bound
to yield unto each other in like manner: so then some condescension is both
lawful and requisite. Compare with this, that which is further to this purpose
delivered concerning Christ, Phil. 2.4, 5, 6, 7. and 1 Pet. 2.21, 22, 23.

But to press further the point which in this duty is to be heeded, let us
consider the precept given by the Apostle, Romans 12. 16. and his own practice,
which he sets before us elsewhere to be followed as an example of that rule.

The precept is this, Be of the same mind one toward another, mind not high
things, but condescend to men of low estate (or to mean things) be not wise in
your own conceits. As if he had said, it is your duty to be like minded
toward each other in love, and that you may not be taken off from performing
this, take heed to your thoughts, that you neither affect high matters, wherein
naturally men use to please themselves, nor that you be in love with your own
wisdom, but study rather to make your minds pliable, and bring your selves
to condescend to men and matters, that are mean and low, for except you all
resolve upon this, you can never be of the same mind one toward another: So
then we see that some condescension is not only lawful, but wholly requisite
to maintain love and unity and resist pride and self-love, whence strife and
confusion does proceed.

Answerable unto this rule was the Apostles own practice, mentioned 1 Cor. 9.
for our imitation, for there from the first verse till the 19th. he shows
that although he had a full right to take maintenance from the Church of
Corinth, for his service done to them, yet he would not do it, but
condescended rather for their weakness sake, to make the Gospel of Christ
without charge unto them, lest he might be thought to abuse his power in the
Gospel. So then to prevent an inconveniencie he did condescend to quit his
right to a benefit and a conveniencie, which he might otherwise have lawfully
enjoyed. But then from verse. 19. till the end of the Chapter, he speaks of
another kind of condescension wherein he did exercise himself, and which he
relates that he might therein be imitated by others: which was this, that
although he was free from all men, yet he made himself a servant to all,
that he might gain the more. Verse. 19. To the Jews he became as a Jew, to
them that are under the Law as under the Law. Verse. 20. To them that are
without Law, as without Law (though he was not without Law to God, but under
the Law to Christ). Verse. 21. To the weak he became as weak, and he made
himself (by way of condescension) all things unto all men that he might by
all means save some, Verse. 22. And the reason why he exercised himself in
this duty, was not only for the good of others, but for his own good also in
three things. First, that he might partake of the Gospel with every one in
every condition, Verse. 23. Secondly, that he might keep himself in a fit
temper of spirit, so to run in his calling, as to receive the prize, and so to
fight as not to beat the air, Verse. 24, 25, 26. And thirdly, that he might
be master of his own body, lest if he neglected the duty of bringing it into
subjection, he might be found himself a reprobate after all his pains in
preaching the Gospel unto others, Verse. 27. Thus we see that the Apostle does
make this not only a duty which as lawful, but in some sort necessary to the
faithful discharge of the ministerial function, even so far that without
the performance of it, a man can neither gain all sorts of people to the
Gospel, nor partake fully of the Gospel himself, nor be in a temper so to
run and strive as to gain his incorruptible crown before others, nor at
last escape the danger of being a castaway, although he has painefully
preached the Gospel unto others. From all which we must conclude, that the
study of condescension, chiefly in a Minister, with whom I am now dealing, is
not a matter of indifferency, but a duty of very great importance. And if so,
then we are obliged in conscience, not only to resolve upon the practice, but
to seek out the rules by which our conversation in this matter may be ordered
aright: for seeing in every duty, there are some rules, and in this of
condescension (because none do set themselves to the practice thereof) the
rules are not looked into. Seeing also none ought in any thing to presume to
prescribe rules unto others, but all should rather in all humility search
after the discovery thereof in the holy Scriptures, and then hold forth in
simplicity that which God does teach them, and they find profitable for the
edification of others, therefore we shall apply our selves unto this search,
and offer that which we suppose neither side will except against; and yet may
prove a sufficient directory for the practice of condescension, and the
transaction of a forbearance in the cases of our divisions.

We shall say then, that to find out without difficulty the rules of
condescension toward a forbearance, three things should be reflected upon.

1 That wherein there can be no yielding. 2 That wherein there may be and
ought to be a voluntary yielding. 3 That which may draw forth, and oblige the
spirits of men, to discover the things whereunto they shall be willing of
themselves to yield.
Concerning the first, there can be no condescension proposed which should
oblige any to make profession of any thing otherwise then it is in his heart.
For no man can with a good conscience yield to profess any untruth, or
transact to relinquish his sense and opinion of any thing which he does
esteem a point of truth or of right, I say no man can condescend to relinquish
his opinion, or his challenge of a right to a privilege: because the matters
of truth and right can edify no man, but disedifie both our selves and others,
if they be denied and professedly given up. A man may dispense with a truth so
far as not to speak of it, to all sorts of persons, or at all times, because
they cannot bear it, nor is it seasonable for edification to speak all truths
at all times: as we may see by Christ's example, John 16.12. and the Apostles
practice, 1 Cor. 3.1, 2. and the rules, Matthew. 7.6. and Romans 14.1. And
concerning a point of right a man may dispense with the use of it, as we see
the Apostle does, 1 Cor. 9. But no man ought to yield himself obliged to deny
any truth, or not to bear witness to it when it is opposed, or not to
challenge his right to a privilege, when it is called in question, for to do
so were to betray truth and righteousness, which cannot stand with a good
conscience: therefore no condescension may be intended to suppress the
profession of these things, but rather a transaction is to be intended to this
purpose, that both sides shall bear with one another in such a profession
without offense, and grant a freedom to each other to declare the truth, as it
is in their hearts, for this is the duty and one of the commendable characters
of those, that shall abide in the tabernacle of God and dwell in his holy hill,
Psalm. 15.1, 2.

Concerning the second, namely that wherein there may and ought to be a
voluntary yielding on all sides; I shall not take upon me to specify any rules
(for that is to be referred to the transaction of the forbearance it self) but
I shall only mention the heads of matters, whereof rules may be determined
and gathered from the Word.

As first, there may and ought to be a mutual condescension toward the
settling of ways and expedients of different sorts, of orderly proceedings at
several places and times in public meetings, for the confirmation of the
unity of the spirits of brethren, in the common profession, and for the
avoiding of confusion. As for example, at the public meetings in some places
they have no Assessors adjoined to him that is the Prolocutor, in other places
they have; in some places the Prolocutor or Mediator of the meeting is
perpetually the same, in other places he is continually changed; and that
either by a new election through the plurality of votes, or without any
election by a vicissitudinary succession of one after another, into the office
of presiding over the meeting: in some places nothing is determined without the
consent of all, in other places it is otherwise: and where the consent of all
is required, in some places the Preses of the action is obliged to ask every
man's vote distinctly and in order; in other places that custom is not
precisely observed, but it is free for any one to speak when he can get a
turn, and if matters go against his sense, to enter his dissent; and
elsewhere, who does not give his consent, is not obliged to the determination.
In all such ways of orderly proceedings, if those that entertain the meetings
for their mutual edification do alter their constitutions according to
circumstances of times, places, persons, and affairs, upon grounds which they
think valid for the end for which they meet, (I say) in all such ways a
condescension may and ought to be mutually intended; and there ought not to
be any breach of unity and affection for the difference of opinions amongst
Brethren in matters of this nature. Only a care is to be had, that the
general rules of order and decency be observed according to the Apostles
commandment, 1 Cor. 14.40.

Secondly, there may and ought to be a voluntary condescension to all the
means which are thought by those, who are of repute, fit and expedient to give
just satisfaction to any that are possessed with prejudices against us, or to
clear mistakes, or to prevent the evil effects of sinister reports, or to take
away all inconveniences and scandals of that nature: (I say) there ought to
be a yielding to all motions in that kind which do not prejudicate the truth:
because all things that are commendable and of good report are to be followed;
and all the occasions of murmurings, of jealousies and of discontents are to
be avoided. In such a case as this, Peter condescended to make an Apology for
himself to those of the circumcision who contended with him for his going unto
Cornelius, Act. 11.2, 3, 4. till 19. and Paul at the advice of James and the
Elders of Jerusalem went into the Temple and condescended to observe the
customs of the ceremonial Law to take away the prejudice which many had
against him, Acts 21. verse. 18. till 28. Another time Paul of his own accord
did circumcise Timothy by way of condescension to the Jews, who were weak and
would have been offended if that had not been done, Act. 18.1, 2, 3. but when
the cause was altered, and by condescending to circumcise Titus the liberty of
the Gospel would have been prejudged toward the Gentiles, he would not at all
yield unto it, Gal. 2.3.4, 5.

Thirdly, there ought to be a condescension in matters of indifferency, such
as the Apostle does mention, Romans 14. throughout, to bear with the weak:
item, in matters of offense, which may be foreseen, we are bound to prevent
the same by yielding unto the weak and ignorant, lest either our good be
evil spoken of, or our Brother be grieved at what we do, or his conscience
be emboldned by our example (whiles it wants light, to discern its own
liberty) to sin, Romans 14.15, 16. and 1 Cor. 8.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. and chap.
10. verse. 23. till the end.

Fourthly and lastly, there ought to be a condescension to bear with all men
in that whereunto they have not yet attained; that by the things whereunto they
have attained, and our friendly converse with them, according to the rules of
edification, they may be gained. Concerning this way of condescension toward
others, these places are considerable, Matthew. 12.18, 19, 20. and 1 Cor. 9.19.
till the end, Gal. 4.12. and 6.1. 2 Timothy 2.24, 25, 26, and 1 These. 5.14, 15.20,
21. Phil. 3.15, 16. And all things which flow from the principles of Charity,
Gentleness, meekness, and humility, with prudency and discretion, for the
good of those that err, and are ignorant, may be called a condescension, and
ought to be practiced in imitation of Christ and his Apostles, from whom the
rules of forbearance are to be learned, Col. 3.13.

Concerning the third which is the way to draw forth the spirits of men, to
discover the things whereunto they shall be willing of themselves to condescend
unto others; I shall offer an expedient which I suppose none who desires to
walk in the light will think unreasonable or unconscionable, and that is
this. That all such as would be borne withal in any thing by others, should
offer first unto those from whom they expect a brotherly forbearance, all that
condescension which they intend to use, and the rules of forbearance by which
they purpose to walk toward them: for this is according to Christ's
fundamental rule of justice, Matthew. 7.12. Whatsoever things you would have men
do to you, do ye even so to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets. If
this one rule were rightly applied and followed, there would be no great
difficulty in transacting this matter; chiefly if we take up the practice of
it, not upon the grounds of humane policy, but of Christian obedience to the
duty which is commanded, Heb. 3.12. Exhort one another daily whiles it is
called to day, and Heb. 10.24. Let us consider one another to provoke unto love
and to good works, and Phil. 2.15, 16. Be ye blameless and harmless, the
sons of God, without rebuke, shine as lights in the world, bold forth the
word of life. From all which this expedient will follow toward the finding out
of the rules of condescension; that every one who does delight to go before
others in good works, and walk in the light, ought (in obedience to the will
of God revealed in these commandments) of his own accord to offer unto his
neighbor, with whom he does desire to walk in peace and unity, a full
discovery of those principles and rules, by which he does find himself
obliged in conscience, according to Gods will, to walk toward every one in
the ways of condescension.

If every one would do this freely and fully, it would be easy, without any
danger of disagreement or of debates about particular interests (which
continually trouble the ways of our profession) to set down the rules of
condescension and forbearance, for that might be taken as a rule to bind every
one, which he should offer freely, and acknowledge to be an obligation upon
his conscience; or which being offered unto him by others, should by the Law of
love bind him to practice the like unto them. For I conceive this to be equal,
that what another does yield unto me (supposing the matter in it self to be
lawful) I should yield unto him in like manner, even as I would have him yield
unto me that which I offer unto him; as then I would not have any to press
upon me any thing of a Religions concernment, further then my light from the
Word does lead me to embrace it: so I ought not to intend to press upon
others any thing of that nature further then their light does lead them, but as
I would be born withal, so I should bear with another, till God give in more
light to either of us, by private meditations or regular conferences. In the
mean time let that which is yielded on all sides be settled as a rule of
agreement to walk by, and improved to the best advantage of peace and unity.
Thus we see, that if every one would but hold forth his principles of light
and life unto others, and would bind himself as in the presence of God, to
walk answerable thereunto; we might easily come to the settlement and
observation of the rules of condescension.

CHAP. XI. Concerning the causes of disaffection and of breaches, how they
should be removed by common consent.
THe first and original causes of disaffection and of breaches are for the
most part not taken notice of, and hardly discerned by many, even then when
they are discovered, because they lie very close to our nature, for they are
commonly nothing else, but the neglect of charitable inclinations and duties;
and the unadvised admitting of prejudices, and entertaining of evil surmises,
which not being observed and cured, fester in the mind, and first breed a
shinesse or wariness of him, against whom they are conceived, then a distance
from him, afterward a strangeness to his ways; and lastly a breach of unity
with opposition. The causes of prejudice are very many in all sorts of men;
those which the ungodly and natural man does entertain, against a
conscionable and religious walking with God, I need not here to meddle withal
( Viz. R. Junius, in two Treatises, the one called The cure of Prejudice, the
other, The cure of Misprision.
another has handled that subject profitably at large, and showed the cure
thereof) but those which godly and religious men, through humane frailty
entertain one against another, are the matter which here is to be considered,
to make the way of unity and forbearance plain and easy, and I shall now
only name them, and point at the cure thereof in a word or two; because I do
intend to speak to men of understanding only, to whom God has committed the
charge of souls, and my aim toward them is, not to dictate any thing, but
only to discover the possibility of a cure of this disease; first in
themselves, and then in their hearers, by the removal of the chief causes of
all our prejudices; which I shall reduce to two heads, whereof the one is
openly, the other is secretly offensive.

That which does openly offend, and causes prejudices to rise in the minds of
men, who are otherwise godly, and against men who are truly godly and their
Brethren, is the irregularitie of disputes and debates about matters of
Religion, which is mainly twofold, some irregularitie there is, in respect of
the matter, some there is, in respect of the manner of disputing.

In respect of the matter prejudices are raised, when men strive about
needless matters, and contend for words, and this the Apostle does often warn
Timothy to avoid, as a thing whereunto the Ministers were and would be much
subject, 1 Timothy 1.4, 5, 6. and chap. 4.7. and chap. 6.4, 5.20. and 2 Timothy 2.14,
15, 16, 17, 23.

In respect of the manner of debating matters which are necessary and
profitable; prejudices are raised diverse ways, but that which is the most
common and hurtful, is that, of passionate and provoking expressions against a
man's person and his opinions to make him odious, and his errors thought to be
extreme dangerous in that wherein he dissents from us; these railing
accusations, and all other injurious and insolent proceedings, breed averse
affections, and stirring up men's spirits to strife and contradictions, augment
prejudices extremely, and fill the Churches with disturbance and confusion.

That which does offend more secretly and does beget much prejudice, is the
perverse and uncharitable observation of men's failings, when they are construed
suspiciously to the worse sense, and then whispered in the ears of others,
that are leading men, under the pretense of a caution, or warning given unto
them, to take heed of this or of that, for the strengthening of their hands in
partial designs, and the promoting of particular interests. This dark
malicious devil, who covers himself oft-times with a cloak of light and a
zeal for holiness and truth, is exceeding busy in our days, and hurtful to
our affairs, and does work his mischief, not only against him, who is
blasted in his reputation, to make all the good which his talents may produce
unprofitable unto others; but also against the Authors of such whisperings
themselves, to make them the ringleaders of division and of evil intelligence
amongst brethren.

These are in brief the chief causes of our prejudices, these must needs be
removed; else the way of a lawful condescension and forbearance will never be
plain and easy in the settlement, nor lasting in the continuance; it will
then be of absolute necessity that some course be taken to remedy the same.
Therefore I shall for the present only advise, that when a brotherly
transaction of matters, toward a mutual forbearance shall be intended, then
some rules should be thought upon, debated, and by common consent settled,
concerning three things.

First, how needless disputes and multiplicitie of new controversies, breaking
forth in the Press and Pulpit may be prevented.

Secondly, how the injuriousnesse of censures and of proceeding, which men of
partial dispositions and of high thoughts run into, may be rectified; when
disputes are necessary: And

Thirdly, how the secret mischief of suspicious whisperings and talebearing
amongst Brethren may be prevented, and being discovered satisfactorily
corrected.

And that some rules of righteousness may be found in the Word to remedy
these evils, and may be raised from the nature of Christian charity,
equity, ingenuitie, piety, discretion, and prudencie: I suppose none will
deny, who does believe that the holy Scriptures with and by the spirit of God,
which is promised to the children of God are able to make the man of God
perfect, and thoroughly furnished unto every good word and work.

Thus I have made out (as briefly and as distinctly as this occasion seems to
require) the truth of the first and second assertion of this discourse, namely
that the Ministry of this kingdom is undeniably obliged in conscience to the
mutual profession of Brotherhood; and that the terms of their unity and
forbearance, are both in themselves full and satisfactory, and may be settled
reciprocally amongst them, in a plain and easy way, if the men that lead
others, were but willing to look to God more then to men, and to conscience
more then to outward interests.

CHAP. XII. The third Assertion. Concerning the motions which should induce us
to make profession of this unity and forbearance: Why these are requisite, and
what they are.
BUt now although these things are evidently thus demonstrable, and by all that
which hitherto has been alleged; it may be manifestly apparent, that these
who are the leaders of the flocks, should not only stand united, and walk by
one rule in that whereunto they have attained; but also, that their differences
may and ought to be composed in love by amiable meetings, by orderly
conferences, and by the settlement of a necessary and lawful forbearance of
each other: although (I say) all this is so, yet we see to the great dishonor
of God, the lamentable disadvantage of the truth, and the extreme grief of
many godly souls, that this has not hitherto, either been done or
effectually prosecuted and intended by those that are in the work of the
Ministry, or if it has been intended by some, yet not so as it ought to have
been, that is, upon the grounds which are proper unto their vocation.

What the causes of this neglect may be, we shall not now particularly search
into; only in general, we may take notice that all such failings in duty
may proceed from two main causes; either that men (otherwise knowing and godly,
yet) consider not the necessity of this duty in respect of the evils that
follow upon the neglect thereof, or that the excellency, commendablenesse and
worth thereof is either not known, or if not unknown, yet not laid to heart.
Now then in this our present sad condition if any thing can be suggested which
may be a help to remove these causes of our failing in this kind, it may be
hoped, that godly and conscionable men will be more careful of the
performance, and more fearful of the neglect thereof, then hitherto they have
been. Therefore it will not be amiss but may be of very great use, to offer
some motives and inducements to incline them without partiality to these
resolutions, and this we shall intend to do if God permit.

CHAP. XIII. Concerning the necessity of Brotherly unity in the Ministry.
IF then we should take into consideration the absolute necessity of this
duty, it will appear that the present evils whereinto these Churches, and
the state of this kingdom are fallen, and which threaten all with unavoydable
ruin, are mainely brought upon us through the neglect of that ministerial
unity and correspondencie, which is suitable unto Christianity.

For whosoever in the fear of God shall lay to heart the woeful condition of
the Churches of Christ in this land, will perceive that amongst the manifold
causes of our miserable breaches and sinful distractions, The cause of all one
miseries.
the original and consequently the greatest of all the rest is this; That such
as are called to be the Ministers of the Gospel, who by their own confession
are Brethren and fellow laborers in the same employment, do not maintain
those duties of Brotherly love, fellowship and communion, which by the nature
of their work, and by the appointment of their Lord and Master are made
necessary for the manifestation of his glory, and for their own mutual
edification. For seeing by that which has been hitherto showed, it must needs
be acknowledged, that they ought to stand together and look upon each other as
Brethren begotten of the same Father, as fellow soldiers in the same fight and
warfare, and as fellow members in the same body of Christ: Seeing (I say) this
is confessed and cannot be denied to be so, it will follow also undeniably,
that they ought in conscience to discharge the duties belonging to these
relations, which are not only to profess a Brotherhood, but to be knit
together in fervent love, to have the same care one for another, and jointly to
communicate in things belonging to the kingdom of Christ. But that these
duties, notwithstanding all these relations, are neither really thought upon,
nor at all prosecured to any purpose almost by any, is no less undeniable, and
must needs (although to our great shame) be plainly and ingenuously confessed.
Seeing then the guilt of this their fault is so great and so apparent, that no
color of excuse can be pretended to extenuate it, therefore the judgment is
ripe for them, and the punishment has now in the sight of all the world most
justly overtaken them: For whereas they were lately in a capacity to be as
happy within themselves, and as profitable to the Kingdom of Christ abroad, as
any of all the Ministers on earth if they had continued in their unity, now
they are like to be more unsettled and more miserable within themselves, and
less respected by others, and less useful both at home and abroad toward
the cause of Christ, then any that are elsewhere in all the Churches, and this
only, because they have suffered themselves in their profession to be
divided, and have not regarded nor do they yet regard the duties of their
Christian Brotherhood so much as outward concernments. The guilt of the
Ministry.
For by this means they have corrupted the Covenant, and are become partial
in the Law, and caused many to stumble at the Law, Mal. 2.8, 9.
and therefore the Lord has made them contemptible, and caused all their
adversaries to prevail against them, so that they have just cause to give
glory unto him, to lay their hands upon their mouths, to be sensible of their
guiltiness, and to accept of the punishment of their transgressions. Ephe.
4.1, 2, 3.
For if the very vocation wherewith all the professors of the Gospel are called
unto God, does oblige them to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace one with another; far more does it oblige the Ministers, to intend
before others this great and fundamental duty in the vocation wherewith they
are called. And if all the members of the mystical body of Christ are by Gods
appointment fitly joined together, and ought to be compacted in their stations
to make the increase of the body unto the edifying of it self in love, by that
which every joint supplieth, then it must needs also be granted, that the chief
joints of these members are more especially appointed by God, and obliged in
conscience to be united in their relations, and compacted in the duties of
their ministerial employments. But how far they are not only distant from
this conjunction, but have even an aversion unto it, I need not at all to
mention (the thing is clear as the Sun at noone day) nor shall I search at
whose door the fault does principally lie, whether here or there (for I know
that every one will justify his own proceedings). But this I shall freely
say, and I say it with grief of heart; and therefore I hope without offense to
either side; that this is the great sin of the Ministry, and the misery of
this Nation, that at this time, when a concurrence of affections and of
endeavors, is so absolutely necessary for the preservation of the truth in the
very fundamentals thereof, The sinful misery following upon this guilt.
and when we all are called forth to fight in the same cause as it were for our
life, that (I say) at this time there is so much of animositie prevailing, and
so small a sense of Christianity in common duties and of imminent dangers
found in men's hearts, that it is almost impossible to move any to compassionate
one another calamities; far less to draw any to rise up and stand united,
for each others conservation, that (I say again) it is so with us at such a
time, this is the great sin of the Ministry and the misery of this Nation.
For where is the man to be found that does truly mourn, and not rejoice
rather at his opposites parties failings and miscarriages; and yet we know
that charity does not rejoice at iniquity? where is he that does seek to
heal breaches upon common principles and without a particular interest? 1 Cor.
13.6. 1 Cor. 13.5.
and yet we all know that charity does not seek it self; and who is he
that does blow a ^^^^trait from the battle and seek for a cessation from
needless and injurious controversies? who is he that does endeavor a through
and unprejudicate reconciliation? and who dare own a Treaty for mutual
condescension, without a fear of being cast off, or fallen upon by his
Brethren? and yet we all know; that we are seriously exhorted, even because
the Lord is at hand, to let our moderation be known to all men; Phil. 4.5. 1
Pet. 3.11. 1 Cor. 9.22. Romans 12.18.
and that we are expressly commanded to seek peace and follow after it; and
that it is our duty to become all things unto every one for their edifications
sake; and, if it be possible and so far as in us lies, to have peace with
all men.

What shall we say then to these things? shall we still justify our selves
notwithstanding the manifest transgression of all these rules? No surely, for
to cover or to excuse this fault would aggravate the guilt thereof; and to
discover or condemn it, is the way to gain pardon for it; but to reform and
remove the causes thereof, is that only which in this case will make us happy:
for it will avail nothing to confess our sin, except it be forsaken. Let
us then look upon it so, as to resolve effectually upon a course of
reformation. Our sin, in a word, is this breach of Christian unity. The
chief causes thereof are carnal self-seeking, disorderly controversies, and
the want of true brotherly inclinations, notwithstanding the manifold bonds,
and the name of brotherhood taken up amongst us. The remedies of these causes
are, that we should learn self-denial from Christ, that we should not
strive nor cry, nor let our voice be heard in the streets, Matthew. 12.19, 20.
nor quench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed, but that we should
in truth and sincerity, as in the presence of God, consider one another, to
exhort and provoke each other unto love and to good works. Heb. 10.24.
Now to move us effectually hereunto (next unto the express and known will of
God, which is before all others the greatest of inducements) I know nothing
that should be more powerful with us, then the discovery of the doleful and
pernicious effects of our divisions and distempers. The doleful effects of our
divisions as punishments of the sin. Upon all in general.
For whilst we are thus at a distance for points of outward order, the inward
substance of the profession is not regarded. Whilst we contend for
circumstantials, concerning the ways of going about our work, the maine of
the work is left undone; and whilst for temporal jealousies about small
matters, Brethren uphold no spiritual correspondency, Satan in matters of the
greatest concernments has gotten this advantage against us, that the whole
doctrine of truth is become doubtful unto very many; and the Gospel it self,
and in it the ways of peace (the chief object of comfort) are made a matter of
strife and contradiction unto all. And if we will observe particulars, we
shall perceive that amongst other things by this way of strife and
contradiction, he has prevailed chiefly in this, that the very being of an
orderly Ministry is called in question, and opposed most universally: For to
abolish the work, and the office of the ordinary ministry, is that about which
under several pretenses all his agents on all hands, are most earnestly
employed, and by their means all the fundamentals of order and ordinances in
the Church are already unsettled, and all the grounds of authority in the State
are almost quite overthrown: For by and upon some principles of that, which is
called a new light, it is free for every one to do what seems good in his
own eyes without control, or giving account thereof unto any. This
licentious freedom does lead them that follow it to the fulfilling of all
their fleshly desires, and does confirm them in all manner of confusion,
wherein the spirit of railing, of bitterness, of envy, of contradiction and of
uncharitableness in opposing and censuring others, does increase strife and
hatred, and multiplieth scandals infinitely, all which bring forth the woes
that lie upon us. For to rail and calumniate without shame is become the very
trade of many; nor is there any way left almost either in Church or
Commonwealth to redress the injuries of this kind, though never so gross and
palpable. All this breaks the hearts of the godly, staggereth the weak,
gladdeth the adversaries, opens a door to all profaneness, and causes the
Name of God to be blasphemed, and the way of truth to be evil spoken of in
the world, at which Atheists and Papists triumph and exult with joy, expecting
in the end, that the effect of all this will be the utter ruin and desolation
of all Protestants.

He that cannot see these evils to rise originally from the misbehaviours of
Brethren in the Ministry of the Gospel about their differences, is wholly
blind; he that does not feel the inconveniences thereof is senseless, and
he that cannot grieve for the same, is hardened in sinfulned.

Now because all these inconveniences reach unto all the Professors in some
sort alike, therefore every one (though chiefly the Ministers, as chief of the
Professors) should be moved thereby to contribute their whole strength toward
the speedy removal thereof.

But besides these common evils, there is in this neglect (whereof the
Ministry is most of all guilty) something which does more especially reflect,
(and that justly) upon themselves, more then others, More especially upon the
Ministry.
and from them upon their Ministerial function, as tending to make void the
authority, and wholly frustrate the end of their ordinary vocation. For
although personal faults ought not to prejudice the vocation and the credit of
the function; yet because it is very natural to all men to make a consequence
from the one to the other, therefore the Apostle will have even the meanest of
the profession to behave themselves so, as it may not suffer any disesteeme for
their sakes. For speaking of servants professing Christianity to Titus and to
Timothy, Tit. 2.10.
he will have them to show all good fidelity unto their masters, that they may
adorn the dectrine of Christ our Savior in all things, 1 Timothy 6.
and to honor their masters, that the name of God and his doctrine be not
blasphemed, through their misbehaviour. If then Christianity it self will
suffer in the opinions of men, and be discredited by the faults of the meanest
that take the name thereof upon them, how shall it not be discredited by the
miscarriages of those that are the chiefest of the profession? and how shall
the credit of the ministry be upheld in men's opinions and affections, if those
to whom the charge thereof is committed, dishonor their administration? and
how can they be thought to honor their administration, if they walk not
answerable unto the end thereof? Now there is nothing more opposite unto the
true end of the Ministerial calling, then this very neglect of duty, whereof
they are at this time found guilty: For the end, use and effect of the
Ministerial work is, to reform the world; Ephesians. 4.1^, 13.
To perfect the Saints, and to edify the body of Christ, till we all come in
the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect
man; but this effect must needs be made void, and this end frustrate, as long
as the Ministers maintain no Brotherly communion one with another, but stand
at their distances, and are single by themselves; so as to have no familiarity
of concurrence about their Masters work, even although he has therein
strictly commanded them to be united. For how can they reform others, that
are not reformed themselves? How can they be thought fit to perfect the Saints
so long as they seek not one another perfection? how can they be said to
advance the unity of Faith who do all things belonging to the profession of
faith within themselves dividedly? How can they in the work of the Ministry be
able jointly to build up the same body of Christ, who in that work maintain no
communion one with another in reference unto his body; but rather set
themselves to make up every one a separate body for himself? and how can they
be able to bring all unto the unity of the knowledge of the Son of God unto a
perfect man through love, whose imperfection in love is such; that they do
value no common relations unto Christ and his service further then these set up
some private interests; nor do mind the unity of the spirit through the love
of Christ which is common unto all, so much as to entertain either
commembership, or ministerial fellowship, or true Gospel-work-acquaintance
with any, that are not either settled in the circumstantiall courses of their
way, or willing to come up unto them therein? We see then upon these grounds,
that except this neglect of duty be reformed, and the true end of the
Ministerial work without humane aims, be heartily entertained by those to
whom it is entrusted, the effects thereof will never prosper in their hands;
but Satan (as hitherto he has done since they were divided) will continually
prevail against them all, till he has brought them unto final destruction
and irrecoverable desolation.

This then is the danger whereinto we are fallen, and to lay this to heart is
that matter of absolute necessity, which by all should be apprehended, but
chiefly by those that are called to the Ministry, that they in doing their
principal duty, which is to study unity in the truth in Christianity, may
uphold the holy profession, and thereby intend their mutual preservation. For
without all doubt their very being in this kingdom, if they take not this
course, will be very shortly in a most desperate condition; because as it is
undeniably apparent, that hitherto nothing but their own disunion about matters
extrafundamentall, has made Satan and their enemies to prevail against them.
The application to exhort to unity.
So it is clearly manifest that henceforth nothing but their mutual union will
be effectual to maintain what they yet hold, or restore what they have lost
in the minds of men, and of their standing in the profession; he then that
does decline to concur in the ways of spiritual unity with those that
offer and sue for the same unto him, and being convicted of this danger does
not endeavor to prevent it, shall be found guilty of all the evils that
follow upon our breaches, of all the ruin that befalls unto these Churches,
of all the confusions that from thence arise unto the Commonwealth, of all the
dishonor done to the name of Christ for want of order in his house, and of all
the shame and reproach which this Nation is either now aspersed withal abroad
amongst their Neighbors, or will in after ages cleave unto it. If then there
is any love to the Fundamental truths of the Gospel, if there is any zeal for
righteousness and against damnable heresies, if there is any just hatred due
to Blasphemies, and to the ways of profaneness and licenciousnesse, whereby
the kingdom of Satan is erected, and settled upon the ruins of Christ's
kingdom amongst us; and if there is any faithfulness and constancy to be
expected from those that professing Christianity, have entered into solemn
protestations, vows and covenants to stand united according to the will of
God, for the advancement of a common reformation, and the settlement of our
union therein: if I say there be any such thing as love to truth, zeal for
righteousness and faithfulness of Christian Covenants; I may adjure such as
pretend thereunto, to show themselves at this time therein, for their own and
their Brethrens preservation, that by the duties of Brotherly unity in the
holy profession, they may be found to keep faith and a good conscience
without blame.

For as it is not possible, that the Faith once given to the Saints can be
maintained by any, without a good conscience, so the integrity of a good
conscience cannot be kept without observing the end of the holy Commandment,
which is the practice of love out of a pure heart. Now this practice amongst
Mininisters in their Ministerial charges, can be none other but a
conscionable concurrence of their spirits in that aim, wherein the all relate
unto Christ, to strengthen one another hands in the works of his service. For
their unity and love to each other can have no truth, but as it relates unto
him, nor can it relate otherwise unto him, then by fulfilling his will, in
doing the works of his service; and if this aim be lost in any, let them
pretend what they will, their conscience is not sound, their performance is not
acceptable, nor will their endeavors be for ever established; hence it is,
that because many have left off to aim sincerely at this (who either delight
to stand wholly by themselves, and give way to dividing principles and
practices; or think it more expedient to stand wholly associated, but give way
to the means of humane power to trust more thereunto then to the duties of
Christian love and serviceablenesse) therefore it is just with God to withdraw
from such of both sides that walk in these ways, and from their undertakings,
the blessing of his presence. So that by reason of the want of his strength to
go along, and conduct, to guide them, all their hands are weakened, nothing
which is undertaken does prosper, the service of Christ's house is not advanced,
the stewards thereof are either divided by themselves, or scattered by others,
and generally they are as men without a heart, afraid one of another: and
through these their breaches, a whole deluge of damnable errors, and a full
current of all unrighteous, wicked and scandalous practices, has overwhelmed
and almost drowned the Churches; so that the very floodgates of hell seem to
be opened upon us, and have covered us with the proud waves of all
licenciousnesse.

And although it cannot be denied, but that it is just with God, to suffer
Satan thus far to prevail against all for the sins of all, and to make
this breach upon the Leaders for their failing in the Ministry; yet it is
far from me to think, A doubt answered concerning the office of the
Ministry.
(as some do) that the promise of God is failed in this our age; at if there
were neither true Church nor Ministry any more amongst us, or any where in
this world, but that the gates of hell, having prevailed against the Church,
which Christ did once institute by his Apostles; a new mission must be
expected, and a new foundation laid for the erecting of his kingdom. I say God
forbid that I should think so. Yea, let God be true but every man a liar: for
I believe that heaven and earth shall pass away, Romans 3.4. Matthew. 24.35.
Matthew. 16.16, 17, 18, 19.
but the word that is gone out of Christ's mouth shall not pass away. Now
Christ upon a special occasion said distinctly unto his Disciples three
things, which are these.

1 That his Church should be built upon the rock of that truth, whereof the
Apostles made confession, which was, that Jesus was the Christ, the son of
the living God.

2 That the gates of hell should not prevail against that Church.

3 And lastly, That the keys of the kingdom of heaven with authority to bind
and loose on earth, whatever should be bound and loosened in heaven, shall be
given to this Church. These promises I believe to be so sure that they shall
never fail: Therefore I must conclude, that neither the foundation of the
Church, nor the Church which is builded thereupon, nor the Ministerial
authority of the keys given to that Church, shall fail so long as this world
does last. For what although some do not believe, and are disobedient to the
will of God; shall their unbelief and disobedience make the faith and truth of
God without effect? God forbid, yea all men are to be found liars, that God
may be found true; for he has concluded all in unbelief, that he might have
mercy upon all: therefore in his sayings he shall be justifified, and when he
is judged overcome. We must therefore acknowledge that by our unrighteousness
the righteousness of God is to be commended; and that although we of this
Nation should utterly fail him, and be no more worthy to be counted his
Church, yet that he will never fail to do what he has said unto the seed of
Christ amongst men, and never recall the word which he has spoken concerning
his Church. But this we are bound to believe, Isa. 59.21.
that wheresoever there is a societic of men believing with their heart, and
with their mouth making openly profession of this truth, that Jesus is the
Christ the Son of the living God, there is a Church existent; and wheresoever
a Church is existent, there the authority of the keys is not wanting; because
Christ has said that the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. I shall
then confidently conclude from these premises two things, first, seeing there
are societies of believers which are here existent and known to be built upon
that truth, which is the foundation, that therefore notwithstanding all these
failings in particular duties, whereof they are guilty, that yet Gods promise
for the main will never be wanting to them, as to his Church. Secondly, I may
infer this also, that notwithstanding all the advantages which Satan seems to
have gotten, both against the Ministry of this Church, and against their
administrations therein (whereby he does blast them, and the fruit of their
labors) yet we may be sure, that he shall never prevail so far as to make
void the privilege of the Church, which is to have a right to the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, and thereby to the administration of all Christ's Ordinances.

Now then although indeed it is very sad and lamentable, that the Builders
themselves should be so far wanting to their duty, as by their divisions to
give such an advantage unto Satan, that he should be able, visibly to pull
down more then they are able to build up: yet we know that all things, even
these same and such like failings, The comfort of believers against these
evils. Psalm. 76.10.
will work together for the best toward those that love God, and that all the
advantages which Satan has gotten against the kingdom of Christ, will tend
together to Gods greater glory and Satan's own overthrow at last. For as the
wrath of man shall surely praise the Lord, so the plots of Satan and all his
prevailing upon the infirmities of his Saints, when he shall have mercy upon
Zion, will redound exceedingly to the increase of his glory, by the
manifestation of the riches of his grace, and of the stabilitie of his
purposes, in setting up the kingdom of Jesus Christ through a final and
total destruction of all the enemies thereof. Seeing then I have cause to hope
for such an issue of this warfare, I shall not fear that the discovery of this
failing in the Ministry will be taken as a reproach to discredit them toward
others in their function (which I acknowledge in its own way and degree to be
of God and not of man) but rather as an admonition of love to show to those
that are conscionable the necessity of laying their own condition to heart,
and of seeking the remedy thereof, in that way wherein it may be found. And
that I may not be wanting unto this design, I shall add one thing more, The
necessity of unity further pressed.
for the demonstration of the necessity of this duty of brotherly unity,
which is so much neglected amongst us, that afterward I may come to speak
more fully of the usefulness and excellency thereof.

In the profession of Christianity the Apostle says, that neither
circumcision avails any thing nor uncircumcision, Gal. 6.15, 16.
but a new creature. And as many as walk by this rule, Peace (says be will)
be upon them and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. Here then we see that the
fruits of Peace and of mercy are Gods blessings upon the life of the new
Creature; and where these fruits are not at all apparent, but on the contrary a
spirit of strife, of bitterness, of hatred and of merciless affection does
prevail, there we needs must say, that the old creature is still alive,
because the wisdom which is earthly, Iam. 3.14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
sensual and devilish, which is the old man's rule, brings forth such effects.
Now it is the proper work of the true Ministers of the Gospel, to persuade all
men to live the life of the new Creature, and to mortify the members of the
old man, Col. 3.5.8.
which are upon the earth, whereof these are a part. But if through the spirit
of division and variance, the Ministers themselves are entangled in these
passions, and that even one against another; so that they do not show forth
all meekness with all long-suffering and forbearance, wherein they ought to
receive each other to the glory of God, as Christ received us, how can they
perform this work? how can they persuade others to walk by a rule which they
mind not, and wherein they themselves are not exercised? It is clear then, that
to do the proper work of their Ministry, it is necessary for them to intend
the duty of brotherly love and unity.

Moreover it is said here, that neither circumcision nor uncircumcision does
avail any thing in Christ Jesus, and if this is so, then the division and
distraction, which is amongst us for things of such a kind is sinful and
necessary to be left off; for I am sure that circumcision to the Jews, and
uncircumcision to the Gentile was a matter of greater concernment, then any
thing about which we at this time are divided. And if that ought not to have
made a breach between them, far less these things amongst us. Now that which
by the new Creature is available in Christ Jesus, Gal. 5.6.
is faith only which works by love. If then the Ministers of the Gospel are
appointed by God to beget faith and love in their hearers (that is, to persuade
the unbeleevers thereunto, and to build up and confirm and increase the
believers therein) by the testimony of Jesus, and by their unity and love
amongst themselves, how shall they be able to do this, except they be first
agreed to hold forth the same testimony, and except there be some amiable
concurrence amongst them in the works of their Ministry? Therefore as faith
and love are inseparably necessary to make a true Christian: so the testimony
of Jesus, and the spirit of unity are inseparably requisite for the work of
the Ministry. For as there is an absolute necessity lying upon the Ministry
to bear witness unto the truth, toward the manifestation thereof, for the
saving of their own souls: So they are also no less necessitated to maintain
the profession of their unitle, for the edification of their hearers. For
without this profession, that manifestation will never in reason be found a
truth fit to convict the world, which otherwise it may be; because as it is
just, that when witnesses do not agree, their testimony should not be
received, so it is equitable that when they do agree, their testimony should
not be rejected. And if by this only default, they make their testimony
without effect, it is evident, that to establish the truth and not to discredit
it, to uphold the Ministry and not to make it contemptible, to build up the
Churches and not to ruin them, and to confirm the faith of the Professors and
not to stagger them, the profession and practice of Brotherly unity amongst
the Ministers of the Gospel, is absolutely necessary. For all may see, that are
not blind and senseless; that originally nothing but the neglect of this
duty, has deprived us of all our hopes and blessings, and brought us under
the yoke of all these miseries. Upon all which this consequence does
manifestly follow; that the only way to preserve the remnant which is left
entire, to restore that which is not utterly decayed in the Church, and to
help this distracted State unto some settlement (if there be any possibility
of attaining it) is this. That the Ministers of the Gospel should set
themselves to concur and correspond together, that they may hold forth unto
the world in the testimony of Jesus Christ, the loveliness, the
peaceablenesse, the meekness and the unity of his spirit, to the end that
both they and their hearers may follow therein his footsteps, as he is gone
before us to leave us an example. For this is a path of the new and the living
way, which he has consecrated for us; and out of this way no man can come
unto the Father, it is therefore absolutely necessary, that such as will enter
into the holiest, become followers of God as dear children, and walk in love
as Christ also has loved us, and made himself as one of us, even our Brother,
to gain us unto God.

CHAP. XIV. Concerning the usefulness and commendablenesse of brotherly unity
in the work of the Ministry.
Sect. I. What the communion and correspondency is, wherein our unity is to be
settled.
HItherto we have reflected upon that which does make the study of brotherly
love and unity amongst us absolutely necessary to avoid the danger of ruin
and destruction, and the guilt of hindering the progress of the Gospel in the
world; now we shall reflect also upon the usefulness and commendablenesse of
the duty in reference unto the work of the Ministry. It is no generous
disposition to be drawn by mere necessity and fear unto a duty, but to be
moved thereunto by the loveliness of grace, and by that which is excellent
therein, is praiseworthy and argues a noble and virtuous inclination.
Therefore we shall set our selves to work upon this inclination, and
endeavor to waken it in every one that has ingenuitie. And my aim shall be
rather to deal with the understandings of all (able to consider of their
ways) to demonstrate that which I conceive to be a duty; then with the
affections of any, to persuade them unto a performance, before they are
convicted of that, which is the will of God therein. For I shall speak to
Ministers, and such as I must suppose to be conscionable; and to those I knew
nothing so effectual to persuade, as to evidence unto them, that a matter is
conformable unto the will of God, for nothing but this does interest conscience
into action.

Now lest I should be mistaken in that which I shall desire to offer as a
duty of the Ministry, I shall contract all, which for the present I have to
say, to one assertion; which having opened, I shall endeavor to make good.

The assertion is this.

That although there were no danger of any enemies, Act. 20.28, 29, 30. Phil.
1.27. 1 Cor. 1.10, 11, 12.
or of inward breaches and divisions in the Church (for the preventing of
which, to study the unity of the spirit it wholly necessary) yet that for the
true (1) Ministers of the Gospel, in the duties (2) of their ministerial
charge, nothing is more conscionable, (3) nothing more profitable, (4) nothing
more commendable, (5) and nothing more suitable to the glory of God, (6) and the
perfecting (7) of the Saints, then to (8) maintain a Brotherly communion (9)
and correspondency one with another, and that such as lay not this duty to
heart, but love rather to stand and walk by (10) themselves, and to maintain
the principles (11) of a singular distance from their brethren in the
Minnistery, will not be able in the end to approve their consciences unto God,
that they walk worthy of the calling wherewith they are called. This assertion
is somewhat large, therefore to open the parts thereof, that my meaning may be
the better understood, I shall say of the several heads thereof thus.

1 That by the true Ministers of the Gospel are meant none but such persons as
are authorized by an ordinary and regular way of calling to administer the
public ordinances of Christ in his Church.

2 That by the duties of their Ministerial charge are meant the works which
in and toward the Church are to be performed as an office, and such are, To
labor in the word and prayer, to have the care of gathering and constituting
the Church, to rule and govern the Saints committed to their charge as one body
in Christ, to dispense the seals of the Covenant to those that belong unto it,
and to exercise Church discipline over those that are liable to it. all which
they are bound to attend as occasion is offered, and the edification of the
Church does require.

3 That when I say a thing is conscionable, I mean that it is prescribed by
God in his word as a duty which cannot be neglected without contracting of
guilt unto the conscience.

4 When I say, that a thing is profitable, I mean that it does yield in its
own kind some benefit to him that uses it.

5 When I say, that a thing is commendable, I mean that it has qualities for
which it is to be esteemed and embraced by all.

6 By brotherly communion and correspondency I mean not a bare name and
profession of brotherhood, but a real conjunction of the thoughts, of the
desires and affections, and of the endeavors of men, proceeding from this
principle, that they acknowledge one another to be the children of the same
Father, or at least the servants of the same master: for as a master is a
father to servants, so fellow servants are brethren in service.

7 By the meaning of the communion and correspondency, I mean a constant
following of the duties thereof, through the acknowledgment of some professed
engagement obliging thereunto.

8 By the glory of God in this duty to be aimed at, I mean besides the
general praise due to him for all his goodness, a more special manifestation
of the unity of his Name in all his Saints.

9 By the perfection of the Saints in this duty to be advanced, I mean three
things.

1 The building of them up into one body, by the oneness of the Name of God,
Ioh. 17.22, 23
as Christ and the Father are one, that they may be perfect in one.

2 The strengthening of them with might by the Spirit in the inner man, Ephesians.
3.16.
that being knit together in love, they may be comforted unto all riches of the
full assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgment of the Ministry of God,
Col. 2.2.
and of the Father, and of Christ.

3 The powerful propagating of the Gospel of truth in the world, to be a
testimony thereunto to convict it that Christ is sent of the Father, John 17.23.
and a means to call in all the elect of God, to the communion of Saints out of
it.

10. By the standing and walking by ones self.

I mean not the distinction of charges (as if none might stand or walk in a
distinct office, wherein another has no right to intermeddle) or the
maintaining of the particular rights, belonging to particular Congregations,
(for I hold that every Church has within it self a right to all Christ's
ordinances, in respect that it is built upon the foundation) but I mean the
disjoynting of men's practices, and the dividing of their affections and
purposes in the exercise of their distinct charges, whereby as parties in
opposition to one another, they set up marks of distinction and separation
between themselves and others, whom they cannot deny to belong to Jesus Christ
and to be built upon the same foundation with themselves.

11 By the maintaining of principles of a singular distance, I mean such a
plea for the rights and privileges of particular associations of professors,
as does make void the fit joynting and compacting of themselves together with
others that stand upon the same foundation, that according to the purpose of
God the whole building may be fitly framed together and grow unto an holy
temple in the Lord. Ephesians. 2.21.
For all are called unto the unity of the same body by God; 1 Cor. 12, 13.
Col. 3.15. Ephesians. 4.13.
and the ministerial work is appointed to bring all to the unity of the same
faith and knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure
of the stature of the fullness of Christ. If therefore any plea be taken up for
a singular distance which is grounded upon disjoynting principles; this will
not suit with the purpose of God, which is to make up the whole body of Christ
into one, that by the compacting of the members thereof, there may be an
effectual working in the measure of every part, Ephesians. 4.16.
to make the increase of the body, for the building of it self up in love. What
principle then soever does overthrow this compacting of the whole, for this end
to be fulfilled in and by every part; is destructive to the glory of Christ,
and the happiness of his members. If then the principle of Christian liberty
and the plea for it, and for the particular rights of distinct Congregations,
is made, by the subtlety of Satan, the chief instrument of our divisions and
distractions at this time, and in this kind, it must be qualified by the
principle of holy communion, and the plea for the unity of the members of
Christ, and for the common rights of the profession of Christianity. For the
Apostolical rule is clear, that we are indeed called unto liberty, only we
must neither use liberty, nor plead for it, Gal. 5.13, 14.
that it may give an occasion to the flesh, but we are commanded by love to
serve one another, because the whole Law is fulfilled in this, Thou shall love
thy neighbor as thy self. And if this Law be not observed, Romans 13.9.
it is clear that we walk not worthy of the calling wherewith we are called,
what ever the truth of our principle, or the justice of our plea may be in it
self. For it is not the Theoreticall upholding of a truth that will save us,
but the doing of the will of God: woe be then unto us, if by our disputes for
that which we think to be truth and righteousness, Satan does ensnare us;
and by the practice of a singular distance, does so far lead us out of the way,
as to make us his instruments to divide and disjoynt the spirits and the
practices of professors; that the essential unity of the whole, and the
visible conjunction of the members, being put out of the thoughts and aims of
common professors, all societies may be broken to pieces, and all relations to
common duties made void, according to the will and fancy of every one, that
will pretend to be a Saint in such or such a degree above his neighbor; that
so by our singular distances through strife (for selfe-interests) scandals may
be multiplied, and the honor of Gods Name in the holy profession blasphemed
in the world. Therefore to avoid all this, nothing is so fit or more necessary
and useful, then to maintain this communion and correspondency, which we
plead for, which is nothing else but a free and voluntary concurrence of
spiritual counsels and endeavors, which God as the Father of Spirits and King
of Saints does require in his children and Office-bearers, for the advancement
of the kingdom of his Son, that it may appear unto the world, that the Church
is his house, that he is the ruler of it by his Word and Spirit, and that the
Ministers thereof depend unanimously upon him, as his children and servants;
and that in their mutual relations they stand united to each other, not by a
rule of their own choosing and transacting; from which they may exclude one way
or other whomsoever they please, but by the common rule which is his love,
whereby they are bound to each other as Brethren, and as his servants, that is,
fellow members of the same body of Christ; for all the members of every body,
are but servants to the head in the whole and to to each other for the heads
sake, and for the good of the whole. Although then every member has a faculty
of life, and a right through that faculty to act in and by it self, the work
of its own office; and has immediately from the head its direction what to
do; and is not under the command of any particular fellow-member yet in the
use of this faculty, and in the exercise of this right, every member is
directed by the head to subordinate it self to the service of the whole, and
to depend upon the unity thereof, and not to stand or act by it self: for the
Apostle says, that the eye cannot say to the hand I have no need of thee; nor
the head (though head, and over all the rest) to the feet (though but feet, and
under all the rest) I have no need of you, but even the weakest and the most
unseemly members are the most necessary, and every one of them in the
performance of their duties toward the whole (for none of them are allowed to
do any thing for themselves alone) are made to depend upon each other. If this
doctrine were laid to heart, and applied practically (without disputing) to
particular matters now in dispute, and if our brains were less, and our
consciences more exercised in looking herein to that which is (without all
dispute) the known will of God, we should not need to be troubled with the
nicities (though we might confer about them) of the proper seat of right to
power and government, and with the national debates of the prioritie of the
universal, and of the rights and privileges of the particular Churches, upon
which rocks our affections being now split, all the duties of necessary
communion, correspondency, and concurrence are neglected amongst us,
notwithstanding all the known excellency, commendablenesse and usefulnes
thereof. Therefore my purpose is to set before the consciences of those that
seek life, the loveliness of this duty whereunto we have already attained; if
so be we will but put forth our hand unto it, as to the tree of life in the
midst of the Paradise of God, and not feed upon the Theory of disputable
opinions concerning particular rights and privileges; which are to us a tree
of the knowledge of good and evil, whereof the fruit does work nothing but
death and enmity between God and us: and between man and man nothing but
strife and distances, by reason of our pride wherewith our knowledge does puff
us up, to appear somewhat more then others in all our undertakings.

Sect. II. Of the excellency of unity and of the fountain thereof, Charity.
THe holy Ghost has set himself of purpose to commend Unity and Charity unto
us, (which now I am to speak of) in two several places of Scripture, which I
shall make the matter of this Section, to represent only the heads thereof in
brief unto such as are conscionable, that by themselves they may lay the thing
to heart and weigh it consideratly, that God may persuade their affections to
the practice thereof.

The excellencies of brotherly unity are set forth in the 133. Psalm. where
first by way of preface and proposition the holy Ghost does call upon us, and
invites us to contemplate and observe the same with admiration in the twofold
property thereof, viz. the goodness and the pleasantness which is in it.
Behold how good and how pleasant it is, for Brethren to dwell together in
unity, Verse. 1.

Then secondly, by way of proof and demonstration he does show wherein that
goodness and pleasantness does consist, and whence it does proceed. The
goodness and pleasantness of brotherly unity does consist in this, that it
does bring with it to those that maintain it, all manner of blessings in great
plenty. The blessings are both spiritual and bodily, the first in the Church,
the second in the Commonwealth.

The spiritual blessings bestowed in the Church, are the graces of the holy
anointing, it is like the ointment, whose excellencies are 1. in their worth,
the precious ointment; 2. in their use and application, which is to consecrate
and make men Priests unto God, by the virtues conferred upon their principal
faculties; upon the head, the beard, Aarons beard; 3. in their abundance and
fruitful proceeding from the head to all the inferior parts, it ran down upon
the beard, went down upon the skirts of his garment, Verse. 2.

The bodily blessings bestowed in the Commonwealth are the fruits of the earth
in the highest parts thereof both far from the Church, and near unto the
same. As the dew of Hermon (a hill and land far from Jerusalem near Jordan)
and the dew that descends upon the mountains of Zion, Verse. 3.

All this goodness and pleasantness does accompany brotherly unity, because
the Lord has commanded the blessing to be there ( viz. where unity is) and
the blessing which he has commanded is, even life for evermore, Verse. 3. and
consequently all the means of life, and if of life eternal, then of temporal
also, for we have the promise, that if we seek the kingdom of God and his
righteousness all other things shall be added unto us, Matthew. 6.33. Now from
all this which is the clear doctrine of the holy Ghost, I shall make this
inference only, that if these promises are made to brotherly unity, by reason
of the blessing of God upon those that maintain it in Church and Commonwealth,
then we may denounce the contrary threatenings unto those that maintain it not,
Romans 2.8, 9.
for the wrath of God is upon those that are contentious and obey not the
truth. Hitherto of unity. The ground of it is love, as may be gathered from 1
Cor. 12.25. where the same care of members one for another (which is the effect
of their love) is the cause why there is no rent in the body, and consequently
why unity is preserved: For where that loving care is not, unity is not, but
a rent will be, as we may daily perceive in our doleful estate. Therefore
all the excellencies that belong to brotherly unity are first and originally
to be attributed unto charity. But then there are yet other excellencies, which
are more immediately attributed unto it by the holy Ghost, in 1 Cor. 13. where
the Apostle having in the foregoing Chapter, from the beginning, reckoned up
the spiritual gifts, which are given to the Saints in the Church to profit
withal in the unity of the body, (as is clear from Verse. 7. compared with
Verse. 12, 13. of Chap. 12.) he comes in the conclusion of that Chapter to
exhort the Saints to covet earnestly the best gifts; and to encourage them unto
this duty, he promises to show them the way which is ((...)) most excellent.
Which is that which immediately in the following 13th. Chapter he begins to
describe. From whence this inference does offer it self, that as the chief and
most excellent means to attain to all spiritual gifts, is the practice and
exercise of love, so the neglect of that duty is the chief cause of the decay
and loss of all spiritual gifts.

Now the Apostle in the description of this way does show a Threefold
excellency, and usefulness of love. The first is, that without it no
spiritual talents or good works are profitable to the Church, or to our own
salvation, Verse. 1, 2, 3. The second is, that in it and by it all virtues
tending to make a man perfect, are wrought in us, Verse. 4, 5, 6. 7. The third
is, that above all other graces, it is the only durable and lasting unto
eternity, Verse. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Which doctrine being referred to the
foregoing proposition in the last verse of Chap. 12. will produce this
argument, or demonstration concerning the excellency of love.

That virtue without which no gifts nor good works are useful unto any, and
by which all virtues are wrought in us, and which alone lasts unto eternity,
is the most excellent way to spiritual gifts. But so it is, that charity is
that virtue; Ergo, it is of all others the most excellent way to spiritual
gifts.

The Minor or the Assumption of this argument is made good concerning charity,
in the three several parts thereof forementioned.

First then, that without it no spiritual talents and outward good works are
useful; the Apostle does make out in many particulars. For he first mentioned
the gift of utterance, suppose a man could speak with the tongues of men and
Angels, yet if he want charity, he is to his auditory but as sounding brass,
or a tinkling Cymbale, Verse. 1. Afterward the gifts of prophecy, of
understanding all mysteries, of all knowledge, of all faith to do miracles,
yet if there be no charity, he declares that all this is of no use and virtue
neither to the Church nor to him that has it, Ver. 2.

Then concerning good works, he supposes the largest and most compassionate
relief of the poor; and the greatest constancy in martyrdom for the truth,
even that a man should give his body to be burnt; yet if there be no charity,
all these works will avail him nothing, Verse. 3. Charity then is more
excellent then these gifts, and is to be counted the life, and as it were the
soul of them all.

Secondly, that by charity all virtues are wrought in us, the Apostle does in
like manner declare in many particulars. For the virtues which make us perfect,
for our behavior toward persons in actions and about things, they all proceed
from charity.

For our behavior toward persons: if others be cross and froward, it
teaches long-suffering. If they be good and vertuons, it teaches kindness;
if they are in glory and prosperity, it does not envy their condition; if we
in respect of our selves find some excellencies or eminencies in our own
condition which others have not, it does not suffer us to vaunt thereof toward
others, nor to be puffed up thereby within our selves, Verse. 4.

For our behavior in actions whether they be our own or other men's, whether
evil or good, charity does teach the virtues which are to be exercised in
them.

In our own actions in respect of the form, charity does not behave it self
unseemly; in respect of the end, it seeks not her own. In the actions of
others, if they be evil, it is not provoked easily to wrath, or sharpness by
them, if they be good, it does not think evil of them, Verse. 5. its own
proper action is joy; whereof the object is not iniquity but truth, whether in
our selves or others, Verse. 6. For our behavior about things, if the things
are indifferent and present as done by others, it bears with them; if the
things are good, and said or promised by others, it believes them; or absent
and expected from others, it hops for them; if the things are evil, it
endures them, Verse. 7. Thus in all respects it does make a man complete in all
virtues: So that it is not without cause, that the Apostle does call it, the
bond of perfectness, and in that respect does exhort us above all other
endeavors to exercise our selves therein, Coloss. 3.14. Above all these things
put on charity which is the bond of perfectness.

Thirdly, that of all other graces necessary to make us perfect unto salvation,
charity is alone the permanent virtue, the Apostle does show. First, by
declaring that it never fails. Secondly, by comparing it with Prophecies,
with Tongues and with knowledge, which all shall fail and vanish away, Verse.
8, 9, 10, 11, 12. And thirdly, by exalting it above Faith and Hope, as the
greatest of these graces, Verse. 13.

And if to all this we should add the commendations which the Apostle John in
his first Epistle does give unto this virtue, as the chief means of our
communion with God, of comfort within our selves, and of our inoffensivenesse
toward our neighbor, we might be very large upon this subject; but to such
as in their Ministry have any conscionable respect unto the express will of
God, and who can discern the things that are excellent; this will suffice at
this time, to commend unity and charity considered in themselves as they are
good, pleasant, lovely and desirable.

Sect. III. Of the common rules of Christianity, as they are more especially
obligatory unto Ministers in the duties of their calling.
BEsides the loveliness and excellency of these virtues which does commend to
all the practice thereof in a common way, there are three special
considerations, which ought to induce Ministers of the Gospel to entertain in
the works of their Ministry one with another, the duties of brotherly
communion and correspondency following thereupon. The first is taken from the
rules, which are common to all professors, without which none can be
answerable unto the calling, wherewith he is called unto Christianity it self.

The second is taken from the laudable practice of those who are set before
them, as infallible examples in the Ministry.

And the third is taken from the consideration of those things, which God does
peculiarly require of them as they are Ministers. So that none who neglects
these duties will be able to approve himself in the beauty of holiness,
either a true Christian by the common profession; or an upright follower of
Christ and his Apostles in the Ministry; or a faithful servant to the trust
committed unto him in his charge; but in the day of accounts must expect to
receive, not the praise due to the good and faithful, but the reproof to be
given to the wicked and slothful servant, Marth. 25.21.23.26.
together with his reward.

As for the duties of the common profession, wherein professors are obliged to
relate to one another, and which to that effect are mainly pressed upon the
consciences of all again and again and commended unto us in the Scriptures as
matters, which to uphold the integrity of the profession before the world, are
most of all necessary, they are nothing else, but the effects of unity and
love in truth and holiness. For truth and holiness are the fundamentalls of a
single profession; but without the effects of love and unity in these, there
can be no common profession, or public manifestation of the life of Christ
unto the world by a body of Professors. And for this cause Christ has made the
fundamental law of the profession in common, and the badge of his disciples
unto the world to be this, that they should love one another as he has loved
them John 13.34, 35. A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one
another as I have loved you, that ye also love one another: by this shall all
men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another. Now if
this Law is common to all as they are Christians, so that the transgressors
thereof do forfeit their right in Christianity and are not to be
acknowledged Christ's Disciples if they persevere in this fault, then it is
evident that such of the Ministry as observe it not in their Ministerial
relation one toward another, are far more guilty then others, because their
charge in the common profession does oblige them more to this duty then
others, in as much as they are more bound thereby to uphold the truth of the
profession then others are; for they are the joints of the body, and the
instruments of the communion between the members; which if they through want of
love to each other, do either break or not advance, they are not only guilty
of their own disunion from their fellow laborers in the Ministry, but also
of the disjoynting of all other professors and members of Christ, one from
another in the way of the common calling. And this is so much the more to be
heeded, by how much the Scripture is more frequent and earnest in pressing this
duty and the effects thereof; then any other thing requisite in the obedience
of Faith. To reckon up all the particular commandments and strong motives
which are in the New Testament, to enforce the practice of this duty, is not
my purpose at this time; but I would only remonstrate unto those that intend
to be faithful unto God and conscionable in their ministry, that as the
fundamental Laws of the common profession, which are the practice of love and
unity, belong more unto them in respect of each other, then unto single
members, in respect of one another, (because mutual love and unity in the
Ministers entertained or not entertained does beget or destroy the same in
common professors) so the effects, means and consequents of those duties are
more eminently the concernment of their calling then of any others. Therefore I
shall briefly point at some places of Scripture wherein the chief effects and
means of those fundamentals are earnestly recommended unto all, that the
Ministry of this age may see therein the rule of their comportment, and how
far we are strayed from it. We are then all commanded, and that as a duty
wherein we are to walk worthy of the vocation wherewith we are called, to
study the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, because all our
fundamental relations to all the means, and to Christ and God the Authors of
our salvation, are one and the same, Ephesians. 4.1, 2, 3, 4. 5, 6. and 1 Cor.
1.10, 11, 12, 13. and 2 Cor. 13.11. Col. 3.13, 14, 15. Therefore we are
commanded again and again to be of the same mind each toward another, Romans
12.16. Phil. 2.2. to have the same love, and to be of one accord, Phil. 2.2.
and 1 Pet. 3.8. and 1 John 4.7, 8.11, 12. and 5.1. and 2 John 5, 6. and 1 Pet.
1.22. and the measure and hight of this love is, that we are bound in imitation
of Christ to lay down our lives for our brethren, 1 John 3.16. and Joh. 15.12,
13. far more then ought we to deny our selves in lesser things.

The effects of these graces and the means to honor the holy profession by
the practice thereof, are of two sorts; the one positive, the other negative.

The positive effects of the spirit of love and unity, are the expressions of
all good will toward others in the common profession, and the use of all the
means whereby the integrity thereof may be upheld in every one. These are
chiefly,

1 Mutual care to build up each other, to pray for each other, to keep each
other in the love of God, Jud. 20.21. and to this effect. 2 To look to each
others things, and not to our own things alone, Phil. 2.4. and 1 Cor. 10.24. 3
To serve each other in love, Gal. 5.13. 4 To please our neighbor for good to
his edification, Romans 15.2. 5 To provoke one another to love and good works,
Heb. 10.24. and to follow the good whereunto we are provoked, Hebr. 12.14. 6 To
exhort and admonish one another, Heb. 3.13. Romans 15.14. 7 To prefer others to
our selves in love and by humility, Romans 12.10. Phil. 2.3. 8 To have compassion
on each other in cases of infirmity, considering our own condition, lest we
also be tempted, Jud. 22. Gal. 6.1. 9 To bear one another burdens, and in the
spirit of meekness supporting the weak, to restore one another, Gal. 6.1, 2.
and 1 These. 5.14. Romans 15.1. 10 To make a difference of faults, and to save
some as pulling them out of the fire, Jud. 22, 23.
The negative effects of this spirit are the inclinations and endeavors
whereby all evils which may occasion the breach of unity or love are avoided.

And to this effect we are commanded,

1 Not to seek or to please our selves, Romans 15.1.3. Phil. 2.4.6, 7, 8. 2 Not
to have any evil will or hatred against any, 1 Pet. 2.1. and 1 John 2.9, 10,
11. 3 Not to be vainglorious, to provoke any, or to envy one another, Gal.
5.26. 4 Not to revenge or recompense evil with evil, Romans 12.17.19.21. and 1
These. 5.15. but to forbear and to forgive one another in cases of offense,
Ephesians. 4.2. Col. 3.13. 5 Not to murmur nor dispute, nor to give offense unto
any, Phil. 2.14, 15, 16. and 1 Cor. 10.32. 6 Not to strive, nor to fight, nor
to beat our fellow servants, Matthew. 24.49. and to avoid this it is especially
required in the Ministers of the Gospel, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25.
Of all which and such like duties, whereof the Scriptures are full, and which
tend to perfect the Saints in their holy communion, and to direct brethren in
the common profession of Christianity to advance truth and holiness in
themselves, and others, we must say this, that they oblige Ministers in a
threefold respect above others. For they are not only bound to observe these
rules in all their ways as they are Christians, but they are moreover bound to
observe them, First, toward all more eminently then other common professors,
because they are appointed to be the Salt of the earth, and the light of the
world, and as a City built upon a hill that cannot be bid, Matthew. 5.13, 14.
Secondly, toward their fellow Ministers more especially and distinctly then
toward others, because they are bound to them by a double tie of followship,
viz. by that of Christianity, and that of the Ministry. And thirdly, they are
bound to observe these rules toward the works and in the performances of
their Ministerial administrations more exactly then in and toward other
common duties; because those works and performances are of a more important
nature, then other works, as being more universal and more leading in their
kind, and such as more nearly concern the glory of God, and reflect upon the
souls of men in order to him, so that a small failing in any of these is more
hurtful to the profession then a greater fault in any other kind. So that we
must forcibly conclude, that because all the common rules of Christianity, are
more obligatory unto Ministers toward one another in the duties of their
calling then unto common professors; that therefore the chief and most
fundamental rules of the holy profession which concern love and unity,
communion and correspondency, are more binding toward them, chiefly in the
works of their Ministerial administration, then toward any others: and
consequently that the neglect of the least of these duties, in any of them, is
a greater guilt and less excusable, then in any others, the commission of a
gross misdemenour. A little moat in the eye will trouble the whole body more,
then a great handful of dirt and dust cast upon any other part of the face,
and the least prick that may be in the heart or in the pia matter of the brain
(as Physicians say) will kill a man infallibly; but a great wound in the flesh,
nay a stab through the whole body may be cured. A thorn in a small joint will
endanger a gangrene to the whole body, whereas a great impostume in a part of
the flesh will be without danger and, may be a means (though with some trouble)
to purge the whole of many evil humors. Thus a little spark of disaffection
in one Minister against another, or breach of unity in the least duty of
their charge, may prove infinitely more hurtful to the whole Church of God,
then great and gross hostilities in common professors for matters of outward
concernment.

Now amongst all the faults and defaults of Ministers in their charge, that of
the want of mutual love, and of care to maintain the unity of the spirit in
the profession of Christianity; together with a delight to stand at a distance
by themselves, is to me one of the greatest, because it does directly cross
the chief end of their Ministerial function, which is to gather the believers
into one visible body, and to bring that body to the perfection of spiritual
unity (which may be clearly gathered from John 17.21, 22, 23. compared with
Ephesians. 4.12, 13, 14, 15, 16.) And if this be the chief end of their
Ministry, then the maine neglect of the means by which this end may be
obtained, and without which it cannot be prosecuted, must needs be their
greatest guilt; whence it will clearly follow, that to maintain no communion in
spiritual things one with another is one of their greatest faults, because
most directly cross to the end of their administration. So then, if to
maintain spiritual communion is a duty in this respect fundamental and
necessary, then it follows that the engagements unto a concurrence, and the
lawful ways of spiritual correspondency are also fundamental and necessary
to the work of the Ministry, and must be entertained, because without these
the duty of holy Communion cannot be maintained, nor the unities of the
Church brought to any visible perfection, but rather visibly dissolved.

Thus then upon this consideration it is an undeniable Scripturall truth, That
for the Ministers of the Gospel, in the duties of their Ministerial charge,
nothing is more conscionable, nothing more commendable, nothing more
profitable, and nothing more suitable to the glory of God, and the perfecting of
the Saints, then that they should maintain a brotherly communion and
correspondency one with another, and such as neglect it, walk not worthy of
the calling wherewith they are called in the common profession of Christianity.

Sect: IV. Of the practice of those that are set before us as infallible
examples in the Ministry.
ALthough the mediatory actions of Jesus Christ in the flesh, as he is our
Savior, are not imitable, nor were they performed to be imitated by any, for
he alone is the only Mediator between God and man; yet his relations unto
us, as our brother, sanctifying us in our flesh; Heb. 2.11.
and the ways of his converse amongst men were such, that in all cases of
duty, wherein we are to come to God, or to behave our selves dutifully one
toward another in respect of God, he has left us either an example which we
are bound to imitate, or a precept which we ought to observe, and which he
himself did practice. For in this, he is the Captain of our salvation,
because he went before us in all things, and we are bound to follow not
only, him before all others, but also none further then they are found to be
his followers, 1 Cor. 11.1. and for this cause we see that the Apostles as in
all other things, so chiefly in these duties of love, unity, forbearance, and
condescension toward the weak, do allege his practice as the strongest
argument that can be used to oblige us thereunto. Thus, 1 John 3.16. He laid
down his life for us, and we ought to lay down our lives for the Brethren.

Ephesians. 5.1, 2. Be ye followers of God as deer children, and walk in love as
Christ also has loved us.

Coloss. 3.13. Even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye.

Gal. 6.2. Bear ye one another burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.

1 Pet. 4.1. Forasmuch as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm your
selves likewise with the same mind. And the Apostle,

Phil. 2. Having used many strong inducements to persuade us to love and
unity, Verse. 1, 2. and to dissuade us from strife and division, verse. 3. then
verse. 4. he exhorts us to mutual care of one another; whereunto as an
argument is brought in Christ's example, as the chiefest of all other motives,
Verse. 5, 6, 7, 8. Let this mind be in you which was in Christ Jesus, etc. and
Christ says to his Father, John 17.22. The glory which thou gave me, I have
given them, that they may be one even as we are one. By glory I understand
here grace, as 1 Pet. 5.1. partaker of the glory that shall be revealed.

As concerning Christ's practice in his Ministry to avoid braches and
contentions between him and others, it is set forth by the holy Ghost in Isa.
42.2, 3. and Matthew. 12.19, 20. thus: He shall not strive nor cry, neither
shall any man bear his voice in the streets, a bruised reed shall he not
break, and the smoking flax shall he not quench, till he send forth
judgment unto victory.

And concerning his way to bring us to unity with himself and with God; the
Apostle does set it forth as an example to be imitated, Romans 15. Verse. 2, 3.
Let every one of us please his neighbor for his good to edification, for even
Christ pleased not himself, etc. which is further applied to our practice,
verse. 5, 6, 7. The God of patience and consolation grant you that ye be like
minded one toward another, according to Christ Jesus, that you may with one
mind and one mouth glorify God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
wherefore receive ye one another as Christ also received us to the glory of
God. And then explained in showing what the work of Christ's Ministry was,
Verse. 8, 9. Now I say that Jesus Christ was a Minister of the Circumcision for
the Truth of God, to confirm the promises made unto the Fathers, and that the
Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy, etc. Where we may clearly
understand that by Christ's Ministerial behavior, which was without strife,
free from all clamours and disputes, and which did tend to the uniting of all,
both Jews and Gentiles, both circumcised and uncircumcised unto God, we are
taught to be without partiality, to endeavor the communication of Gods glory
unto all, and obliged in our Ministry not to stand and walk by our selves to
satisfy our own desires and enjoy our rights and privileges which we
pretend unto for private content, but rather to please others to their
edification, although we should suffer reproaches for their sake. For thus
Christ was reproached by the Pharisees (who were much in love with their own
holiness) for conversing and eating with Publicans and sinners, Matthew. 9.
Verse. 10, 11, 12. and Chap. 11.19. and upon this ground of pleasing others and
receiving all that came in his way to the glory of God, Christ conversed, did
eat and drink with the Samaritanes with whom other Jews had no dealings, John
4.9. till verse. 43. Nor was it without a mystery, that at his death he was
crucified between two Malefactors, that the Scripture might be fulfilled which
says, and he was numbered with the transgressors, Mark 15.27, 28. For by God,
and by himself justly in respect of the imputation of our sins to him, and
by sinners unjustly he was numbered in his life, and in his death one of them,
for their good to save them. This example of Christ in his Ministry made the
Apostle Paul become all things unto all men that he might gain some and
partake of the Gospel with every one, as he himself does set forth his own
practice, to exhort us to follow it, 1 Cor. 9. verse. 19. till 24. Now if Christ
and the Apostles did thus behave themselves with indifferency, and apply
themselves without respect of persons by their Ministry unto all, that were
any way capable of the outward means of edification (though great sinners
otherwise) how can the practice of a Separation, or of a Semiseparation be
warranted, and that even from those, who in respect of their profession cannot
be denied to be our brethren? Should we dare to put upon matters that are
merely circumstantiall, and upon things no where expressly enjoined, but rather
taken up by our selves, more weight then upon all these fundamental duties of
Christianity, and upon the undeniable practice of Christ and his Apostles in
the work of their Ministry? If we do make our selves, and our own ways
the measure of all perfection, surely we become perfect Idols to, and
Idolaters of our selves in Gods worship. For if in the outward means of
worshipping and drawing near to God in public, though his own ordinances be
observed as he has appointed them, as to the outward man, (for to the inward
fellowship he himself alone does admit whomsoever he pleases) yet if then
we love to set our selves at a distance from others, or reject others from
being partakers with us of the ordinances, either because we count them in
holiness inferior to us, or because we are not satisfied concerning their
sincerity, or because they come not up to join in opinion with us, concerning
all the circumstantials of our way. If I say for these, or such like causes,
we stand aloof in the common profession; and think that God is no where to be
found but in our way and society; do we not Idolize our selves? do we not
make our selves the only rule of all perfection, and say in our hearts, Stand
thou by thy self, Isa. 65.5.
come not near, for I am holyer then thou. And what can be imagined more
opposite to the love, humility and condescension of Christ and his Apostles in
the way of their Ministry? Let us therefore take heed to this snare, let us
count nothing perfect, but that which upon the grounds of the common profession
is conformable to the example of Christ and his Apostles, who came into the
world to save and draw sinners unto God, not by a distance, but by a
condescension unto them in their weakness.

As for the communion and correspondencie which the primitive Ministers
maintained one with another in the Ministerial works; we shall find that it
did tend to these four ends.

First, to advance the conversion of the Gentiles to the faith and profession
of Christianity.

Secondly, to build up and confirm those that had received the truth of the
Gospel, that they might be settled therein.

Thirdly, to preserve those that were settled from the danger of seducers.

Fourthly and lastly, to strengthen themselves in the works of their
employment toward the Churches. All which aims are still necessary to be
followed, and therefore the means which are serviceable thereunto, and which
they then used must not now be neglected, if they can be set afoote.

First, we find then that for the propagation of the Gospel amongst the
Gentiles some went forth to preach unto them the name of Christ, and took
nothing of them. To receive such and bring them forward on their journey after
a Godly sort, was a work of holy Communion commended in Gajus by the Apostle
John, as being a duty, which all ought to intend, and the ground why all ought
to intend it is, that all may be fellow-helpers to the truth. 3 John 6.7, 8.
This practice then is still to be followed by all that are called to the
Ministry, so long as the propagation of the truth shall be necessary.

Secondly, for the confirmation and edification of converts in the faith by the
care of neighbor Ministers corresponding with those that did convert them, we
have an example in Acts 8.14. where the Ministers of the Church at Jerusalem
sent to Samaria two of their number to confirm the believers and build them up
in the faith; in like manner when they heard that some were turned unto the
Lord in Antioch, they sent Barnabas, and he went to the same end and purpose,
Acts 11.20, 21, 22, 23.

Thirdly, for the preservation of the truth from the danger of Seducers, and
the decision of doubts in doctrine and practice cast in amongst the professors
to trouble them, we have an example of Brotherly Communion and Correspondency
in Acts 15. verse. 1. till 30. where one Church does crave and another does
contribute assistance, counsel and authority in a Synodicall way toward the
decision and settlement of the difference which broke forth amongst them.

Fourthly, the example wherein Ministers amongst themselves did strengthen one
another in the work of their employment toward the Churches, is that of the
Apostles of the Jews and Gentiles, who having communicated together concerning
the doctrine which they preached, Gal. 2. verse. 2. and made known to one
another their practice, Verse 3, 4, 5, 6. to gain mutual approbation and
confirmation therein, Verse 6.7, 8. they did enter into a contract of
followship, Verse. 9. and an obligation of Communion and communication of good
things between their Churches, Verse. 9, 10. Nor was it found lawful or
answerable to the truth of the Gospel, that upon humane considerations or
partial respects that Communion should be broken, Verse. 11. till the end.

From all which again does follow that which formerly has been concluded;
that nothing is more conscionable, nothing more commendable, nothing more
profitable, and nothing more suitable to the glory of God and the perfecting of
the Saints in the work of the Ministry, then that the Ministers of the Gospel
should maintain a Brotherly Communion and correspondency one with another, and
that such as neglect this duty walk not worthy of the calling wherewith they
are called in imitation of Christ and his Apostles.

Sect. V. Concerning that which concerns the Office of the Ministry in it
self.
IF we reflect upon the Ministerial office in it self, and consider that
whereunto it has a special reference, we shall find, that all Ministers that
are faithful to their charge are bound at all times to have respect unto four
things.

The first is their relation unto Christ as they are under him who is the head
of the Church.

The second is their relation to the Church, as therein they are Officers.

The third is their relation to the works of their charge in the Office.

The fourth is their relation to their fellow laborers in these works.

None of these respects must be wanting, because without their subordination
unto Christ, they are no Ministers, nor are they otherwise in Christ, but as
they are members of his Church, nor can they be counted members without a work
to perform, because the use of every member is to be an Organ of the soul in
the body: now the soul of this body is the spirit of Christ, and every true
believer is a member Organicall in his own place, that is, appointed to some
useful work. Nor is any member alone, but it is put together with the rest,
to make up the whole by mutual conjunction and cooperation, therefore none
does work as it is alone, but as it stands united with its fellow laborers
in every work. And as none of these respects can be wanting in the office of
the Ministry; so none besides these are needful; for if a member does duly
depend upon his head, and stands in its right place in the body; and has a
lively faculty to do its own work, and is no ways disjoynted but fitly
compacted and linked to the other members in doing its work, nothing can be
further desired or wished for in it. These are then the essential and proper
relations, under which a Minister as an Officer of the Church is to be
considered. Now if it be found that in the profession of truth and holiness,
nothing does make him so fit for his office in all these relations, as to
maintain the duties of brotherly love, unity, communion and correspondencie,
and that without the study of these, he cannot stand aright in any of those
relations; then I suppose that these duties will without contradiction be
acknowledged to be the most commendable and useful that he can apply
himself unto, and that without the observance of the same, he cannot be said
to walk worthy of the vocation wherewith he is called.

Let us therefore take these relations into a more distinct consideration, and
see how therein by these duties a Minister is fitted for his office.

First, then a Minister by his Office is subordinate unto Christ, as a Servant,
as a Disciple, and as a friend of his; and to make these relations evident to
the world and sure to himself, is to make his calling and election sure; which
is effected when both others are made to see, and he himself does assuredly of
himself know, that what he does in his charge, is done to serve Christ as it
becomes his Disciple and friend. But except his behavior in all the works
of his charge be suitable to that love whereby Christ his master did love us,
and thereby did unite himself unto us, these relations will not be evidenced.

For to be a faithful servant of Christ he must make two things appear.
First, that he serves none but him alone, as the Apostle does, Gal. 1.10. and
as Christ requires of all to be done, when he tells us that none can serve
two masters, Matthew. 6.24. And secondly, that he applies himself to the same
work which Christ did. For he commands all his servants to follow him, John
12.26. namely, in that service which he performed, which was to do the will
and manifest the love of his Father unto us; therefore the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4.5.
in order to this, does profess not to preach himself, but Christ Jesus the
Lord, and himself a servant to the Corinthians for Jesus sake. This was to be
a servant of the love of Jesus to us, to invite all to be reconciled to God
for his sake, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19.21. and 6.1. As the employment is nothing else
but a service of love, Gal. 5.13. that is, to express the love and fulfill the
Law of Christ, 1 Cor. 16.14.
Gal. 6.2. so the infallible character of a disciple by which he is to be
distinguished in the world from all others, is mutual love and unity, as is
clear by John 13.35. and herein as well as in holding forth the word, they are
to approve themselves to be the light of the world, Matthew. 5.14. which will
appear by comparing these two places, Phil. 2.14, 15, 16. with 1 John 2.9, 10,
11. The whole relation then of being a true servant and Disciple, is evidenced
by nothing more then by this work of love and mutual unity. Lastly also it
is evident, that none can claim the title of being Christ's friend, but by the
performance of this duty: For Christ has intailed the right to this dignity
wholly upon this condition; which is clearly expressed John 15.12, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17. This is my commandment, that ye love one another as I have loved you;
greater love has no man then this, that a man lay down his life for his
friends: Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you, etc. And when
in verse. 15. and 16. he has showed, how much by his friendship to them he
has obliged them already; and what further obligations they should receive
from his Father, he concludes, verse. 17. thus. These things I command you,
that you love one another. So that he puts all the relations which we have to
him of servants, of disciples and of friends, upon the expression of our love
to each other; from whence we must forcibly conclude, that if there be no
such expression of love, but rather of disaffection, and of hatred to one
another in our Ministry, that we make it apparent unto the world; and to our
own consciences, when they awake, it will be evident, that we are none of
his servants, nor his disciples, nor his friends; but rather the servant,
disciples, and friends of his enemy, Ephesians. 6.1^.
the Prince of wickedness in heavenly matters. Therefore let no man be
deceived with fair pretenses of holiness, and with large pleas and discourses
about special rights; the Apostle tells us, that if we have bitter envy and
strife in our hearts one against another, and if we glory therein, we lie
against the truth: Iam. 3.14, 15.16.
For the wisdom by which men are led in such cases, descends not from
above, but is earthly, sensual, and devilish.

Secondly, in relation to the Church, as it is a house of God, the Ministers
therein are builders, 1 Cor. 3.10, 11, 12. as it is the household of faith, they
are stewards of the Mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 14.1, 2. and as it is a flock they
are shepherds thereof, 1 Pet. 5.2. Now if in building the same house there be
no concurrence and correspondency between the builders thereof, how will it be
fitly framed together as it ought to be? Ephesians. 20.21. Can builders that have
no spiritual communion, but are rather disunited in their ways, frame fitly
one and the same house for Gods spirit to dwell in? And if in a great household,
where one steward cannot oversee all, several stewards being appointed to do
all by one and the same rule of administration; yet they agree not amongst
themselves, but walk different ways and cross each other: will not this
distraction disorder the affairs of the household? will not this reflect upon
their Lord and Master, as if he could not govern his family in peace? And if
several shepherds belonging to a great flock to feed it jointly, do every
one take a part thereof for himself, and feed it separately each from other,
without any care to maintain good neighborhood and acquaintance, but rather
to cross one another in their walks, and draw sheep one from another, how
will they be able to answer it to him that has entrusted them with the joint
care of his flock? I find that when the soul which is in love with Christ does
seek to find him out, Cant. 1.7.8.
it is afraid to turn aside unto the flocks of his companions; and when it is
directed how to come to him, it is bid go forth by the footsteps of the flock,
and feed besides the shepherds tents: whence we may observe, that the
multitude of flocks under many pretending to be Christ's companions, do
perplex the soul, and turn it aside from him, but the unity of the flock
under shepherds that are united, is the way wherein Christ is to be found.

Thirdly, their relation to the works of their employment does wholly
necessitate them to maintain mutual love and unity; because not only these
duties in themselves are a principal part of their work; but what ever else
does belong to their charge, whether it concern the Church or the Gospel; it
can neither be acceptable unto God, nor profitable unto men, except it be
done in the spirit of love and unity.

First then, that these duties are recommended unto them, as a maine part of
the very work, which is chiefly to be aimed at in their profession, I suppose
has been abundantly made out by that which formerly has been alleged.

Secondly, that nothing can be acceptable unto God without this frame of
spirit, is evident, because God is love, and he that loves not, knows not
God, 1 John 4.8. and on the contrary he that dwells in love, dwells in God
and God in him, ibid. Verse. 16. Moreover he that does not all his works in
love, as he is commanded, 1 Cor. 16.14. transgreseth the whole Law, by the
unlovely frame of his spirit, because as love is the fulfilling of the whole
Law, Romans 13.8, 9, 10. So the want of it, must needs be the transgression of
the whole Law; and he that is not subject to the Law of God cannot please him,
says the Apostle, Romans 8.7, 8.

And as nothing can be acceptable unto God, which is not done in love, so it
cannot be profitable unto men; For if God bless it not, how can it prosper
toward them, and how can he bless that which is displeasing to him? And then
the Apostle tells us, that knowledge is apt to puff men up, but it is Charity
which edifieth, 1 Cor. 8.1. And what I say of love may be verified of unity;
as it is the fruit of love inseparable from it in Christ's aim: John 17.23. and
equally recommended to us by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.10. and 2 Cor. 13.11. Ephesians.
4.1. Ephesians. 4.1. till 7. Phil. 2.2. whence we see, that all things which are
to be done by any must thus be qualified to find acceptance; but if we look
more distinctly upon the proper works of their employment toward the Church
and for the Gospel; we shall perceive more clearly the intrinsecall coherence
which is found between these duties and the Ministerial administrations.

For the works of their administration toward the Church are all the
Ordinances of God belonging to the public worship in the word and prayer,
whereunto the Sacraments, Acts 6.4.
the Government and the Discipline are subordinate, that therein by the Word
and Prayer the Saints may have communion with God through the Spirit. The whole
substance and sum of all that they have to do, is expressed by the Apostle,
Ephesians. 4. from Verse. 11. till 17. where I observe that all the gifts and
Offices which Christ has given to his Church, Ephesians. 4. Verse. 11.
both the extraordinary, of Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, and the
ordinary of Pastors and teachers, their work is the same toward the Church
unto the worlds end; namely this. 1. To be serviceable in perfecting the
Saints, and in building up the body of Christ, Verse. 12.
in Faith and knowledge, till they all come to the unity thereof, unto a
perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. Verse.
13.
Where we see that the end of their work is nothing else but the perfection
of unity, and consequently if any should not aim at this, it is evident that
they come short of the true end of their administration of the ordinances, and
shoot not at the mark which God has set before them.

Secondly, their service is to preserve by this means the Professors of
Christianity from that unsettlement which is brought upon those that are
children in understanding by the different doctrines of men and their sleights
and cunning craftiness whereby they lay in wait to deceive the simple and draw
disciples after them: whence we may gather that if the true Ministers had done
their work as they should have done in love and unity from the beginning of
the Reformation, the deceivers of these times would never have prevailed so as
they have done hitherto. But because this has not been intended, therefore
they have gotten all the advantages that they can desire and wish for, both
against us and all other Protestants.

Thirdly, their work is not only to unite them in faith and knowledge, Verse.
15.
and to preserve them from seducers, but to endeavor their growth in all
things into him, who is their head Christ, by the sincerity and truth of love.

Fourthly, and to this effect their work is to compact them and join them
together as one body to build up themselves in love by that which every joint
is able to supply unto another. Verse. 16.


Whence we may most evidently perceive that the whole substance of their work
toward the Church and Saints to perfect them and build them up, is in effect
nothing but this, to unite them in the faith and knowledge of Christ, to
preserve them from unsettlement, and to cause them grow up within themselves by
the loving communication of their graces to each other. As concerning the work
which they are to intend for the Gospel to maintain the profession of it in the
world; it is in a word to uphold the truth which is after godliness; that it
may be acknowledged to be the grace of God which brings salvation: Tit. 1.1.
and that it may appear unto all men; to teach them to deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts, Tit. 2.11, 12, 13, 14.
and to live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world, looking for
the blessed hope and the glorious appearing of the great God and the Savior
Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works.
Now to hold forth this word of life, the Apostle requires in all Professors,
and therefore most of all in the Ministers of the profession, that they should
do all things without murmurings and disputings, Phil. 2.14.
and that they should be (in their conversation) blameless and harmless, as
the Sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse
nation, and that they should stand fast in in one Spirit, Phil. 1.27.
with one mind, striving together for the faith of the Gospel. Where we may
observe that in that work which is proper to the advancement of the Gospel of
truth in the world, the holiness of life, the peaceablenesse and the unity of
the professors, are the necessary requisites without which nothing in this kind
can be effected: For this work has two parts. The one is toward the
children of truth, the other is against the adversaries of truth. Toward the
children of truth, the work is in respect of the common profession, to
concur in the ways of righteousness, of faith, of charity and of peace
with all those that call upon God out of a pure heart, 2 Timothy 2.22. and in
respect of the aim of mutual edification for practice, it is to exhort one
another daily whiles it is called to day, Hebr. 3.13. and to provoke one
another to love and to good works, Heb. 10.24. and for knowledge, it is to
endeavor that their hearts may be comforted, being knit together in love, and
to all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgment of
the mystery of God and of the Father, and of Christ in whom are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.2, 3. Where we ought to observe
that the study of love and unity have not only an influence upon the common
profession, and that part of the peculiar work of edification, which is
practical to maintain it, but also that it is a means to confirm and comfort
the hearts of the believers in all the riches of the full assurance of the
knowledge of the highest and most secret Mysteries. And consequently that where
this study is not entertained, there both the profession and all the comforts
which arise unto the souls of believers practically and intellectually from
their peculiar interests in each others edification, do wholly decay, and the
great mysteries of our salvation concerning God and the Father and Christ are
darkened, made doubtful, and by some utterly contradicted, all which is brought
to pass now adays as much, if not more then in any age heretofore by our
dissensions.

As for the adversaries and gainesayers who are to be opposed, if we take
them to be the principalities and powers of darkness and spiritualities of
malice in high places, a chief part of the armor by which we are to fight
against them and preserve our selves from their assaults is, to have our
Loins, (that is, our affections) girt about with truth (that is, with sincere
love, which is the bond of perfectness) Ephesians. 6.14. and to have our feet shod
(that is, our ways of conversion fitted) with the preparation of the Gospel of
peace, (that is, with means of peace, Col. 3.14. with Ephesians. 4.15.
to prepare men to entertain without offense and peaceably the Gospel of the
peace of God, which is revealed in his word to us, Ephesians. 6.15. But if we take
the opposers to be men, although sometimes their mouths must be stopped, Tit.
1.10, 11, 12, 13. Tit. 3.9. 2 Timothy 2.23.
and they sharply rebuked, namely, when it is evident that they are vain
talkers, unruly deceivers and liars: yet always matters of strife and jangling
both with them and all others, are to be avoided (which we now have not
heeded) and the behavior of the servant of God even in his greatest zeal, and
in the worst of times must never be precipitate and hasty, that is, without
long-suffering, 2 Timothy 4.2, 3. But chiefly toward such of whom there may be
hope of recovery, all gentleness, patience, forbearance and meekness of
instruction is with great care to be used, as the Apostle does teach Timothy,
2 Epist. 2.24, 25. which is a lesson almost utterly forgotten in these our
days amongst some that esteem themselves the chief of Professors. Thus then
we see that there is no particular part of all the Ministerial work wherein
the spirit of love and unity must not appear, as the principal agent to make
it successful.

Fourthly and lastly, their relation to each other as fellow laborers in these
works, is properly that of joints, which are between the Members of the body
to unite them to each other, and to make them dependent upon the head. For in
Ephesians. 4. verse. 16. the Apostle does clearly speak of the visible body of the
Church, as it has a spiritual communion with Christ, and within it self by
the means of that which every joint supplyeth; if then every part by his joint
(that is, by his Minister, to whom is joined a society of Saints as a part of
the whole) is bound to supply to another part, that which is his effectual
working toward the building up of the body in Love, then it is absolutely
necessary for him to correspond and concur with his neighbor and
fellow-joynts: for how can any part supply any thing to another part of the
body without the joint thereof? So then we must observe that the Associations
of the Saints (which are undeniable true parts of the whole) should edify one
another, by that which every joint supplyeth. For to that effect joints are in
the body, and the Apostle says in the whole body: to let us understand that
all the particular Associations of Believers in respect of the common
profession are to be counted as one Association, and that by the joints which
God has set in the whole, the parts therefore are fitly to be joined
together; whence we must gather, that Ministers are not only joints to unite
individual Professors into a society, but to unite one Congregation unto
another; for he says, that the whole is compacted by joints, it follows
then that the Congregations, though distinct by themselves, and one within
themselves, as to their several joints, yet ought to be further joynted with
other Congregations, and not to be at a distance and stand by themselves as
parts of the whole disjoynted from each other a which is the posture whereat
many desire to stand, and is the practice of too many upon several pretenses,
to the great dishonor of the Gospel in the common profession of Christianity.

But how contrary this is unto the true end of the public worship of God, to
the calling of the Ministry, to the aim of Christ in giving gifts unto men,
to the perfecting of the Saints, and to the edifying of the body of Christ, I
hope such as are conscionable will be able to see by that which has been
hitherto said. And although I think it needless, to speak much more of this
relation which Ministers ought to maintain one to another, seeing it has
already been proved, that all the Commandments of brotherly love, of unity,
of mutual care, of communion and correspondency which are given to all
Christians in the common profession, are more particularly binding unto
Ministers toward each other, in respect of their Ministerial charges: Yet I
shall briefly mention three or four special duties which seem to be enjoined
more distinctly unto them, rather as they are Ministers, then as they are
Christians, because they have a respect rather unto their public charge and
employment, wherein they relate one another, then unto the common profession by
it self.

First, they are not only bound to serve all men Ministerially as Christ
served us, but they are by his example and precept more distinctly commanded to
serve one another, Matthew. Chap. 20. Verse. 27, 28. Whosoever will be chief
among you let him be your servant, even as the Son of man came not to be
ministered unto but to minister, and give his life a ransom for many.

Secondly, they are bound to look first unto themselves, and then to the
flock, Acts 20. Verse. 28. Take heed therefore unto your selves and to all the
flock over which the Holy Ghost has made you overseers, etc. For Verse. 29. and
30. they are foretold that amongst them grievous Wolves will enter in, and of
their own selves (that is, some of their own vocation) men shall arise
speaking perverse things, to draw away Disciples after them. If then all must
look diligently lest a root of bitterness spring up in the Church and many
be defiled thereby, Hebr. 12.15. far more is it the duty of Ministers, to
look to each other herein.

Thirdly, they are bound to look upon themselves and their gifts, as not for
themselves but for all, and chiefly for each other to profit withal, according
to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. Verse. 7. The manifestation of the Spirit is
given to every one to profit withal; to the Ministers ordinarily the greatest
and most useful manifestations are given; and they can profit most thereby one
toward another, because in being profitable thereby unto each other; they are
enabled so much the more to be profitable unto all.

Fourthly and lastly, in the use of their spiritual gifts wherein they intend
to be profitable unto all, they are to subject themselves one to another; as
it is written, 1 Cor. 14. Verse. 29.32. Let the Prophets speak and let the
others judge. And the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets.

From all which as the duties of mutual love and unity are necessarily to be
inferred, so the means to maintain and exercise the same, which are the ways
of spiritual communion and correspondency, must needs also be acknowledged to
be their duty; for where the end is commanded, there the means also, without
which that end cannot be attained; is also commanded: so that we must clearly
conclude that this is an undeniable Scripturall Truth.

That the Ministers of the Gospel are bound to maintain brotherly unity,
communion and correspondency one with another; because in the duties of their
Ministerial charge, nothing is found more conscionable, nothing more
commendable, nothing more profitable, and nothing more suitable to the glory of
God, and the calling by which they are called to the perfecting of the Saints,
and to the edifying of the body of Christ, then this duty is; and therefore
whosoever does not walk by this rule, does not walk worthy of the vocation
wherewith he is called in the Gospel; and whosoever does walk thereby, peace
and mercy be upon him, and upon all the Israel of God. Amen.

FINIS.
BRotherly Unity amongst all Christians, especially amongst the Ministers of
Christ, being in it self so excellent and comely at all times; and
(considering the danger and sad consequences of our present divisions) so
desirable and necessary at this time: I conceive all overtures and counsels
having a true tendency thereunto worthy the public light. And do therefore
approve the publication of this ensuing discourse, entitled, A Peacemaker
without partiality and hypocrisy, etc.

June 6. 1648. Joseph Caryl.


