A MEMORIAL CONCERNING PEACE ECCLESIASTICAL AMONGST PROTESTANTS.

By JOHN DURY.

LONDON, Printed for W. Hope at the sign of the Unicorne in Cornehill, Anno
1641.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY: OR TO His Majesty's COMMISSIONER. And To
His Reverend and loving Brethren in Christ, the PASTORS and ELDERS of the Kirk
of Scotland, met together at their general Assembly appointed to be held at
Saint Andrews in July, Anno 1641. The humble and earnest suit of JOHN DURY
Minister of the Gospel of God,
Reverently and humbly shows,
THat seeing for the space of these ten years bypast, your Petitioner, as
without all prejudice and partiality against any Protestant Church or person;
so with all favorable permission, good liking, approbation, and encouragements
from chief men of all sides, whom in a Civil or Ecclesiastical way it does
concern, has solicited the work of reconcilement amongst Protestants: wherein
he is gone so far, as in a private Theological way of Treaty may be
proceeded with foreign Churches, to prepare their minds unto further
resolutions in due time. And now finding, by Gods good Providence, an
opportunity of public meetings, both here in England, where his solicitation
is laid to heart; and also in his native Country and Church, where hopefully
his purpose may be in like manner promoted by public approbation and counsel
of the godly, wise, and learned Ministry:

Therefore he thinks it a part of his duty to defer his humble respect unto
your Reverend Assembly, entreating for the love of the Spirit, and by the
Communion of Saints, that in the fear of God, so good an endeavor, though
meanly hitherto countenanced, may not be slighted; but that the scope and
prosecution thereof may be taken up without prejudice, according to the true
meaning thereof, which is laid open in the printed English Relation, and Latin
Information herewith offered unto you: And that the writ given to M. Alex.
Henderson, containing a draught of the particular means and manner of
proceeding, wherein the way of your sued for concurrence is specified, may be
taken seriously to heart, and some Declaration of Christian advice, and answer
thereupon returned, which may conduce, and help to advance the glory of God
through the unblameable and peaceable profession of the Gospel of Jesus Christ
amongst Protestants: And I your Petitioner, as in duty bound, shall pray daily
for your eternal and temporal felicity, and his Majesty's long life, in a
peaceable and prosperous Government over you, and all his Kingdoms.

A MEMORIAL Concerning PEACE ECCLESIASTICAL amongst Protestants: Which JOHN
DURY offers to Master ALEXANDER HENDERSON, to be sent or presented unto the
General Assembly of the Church of Scotland.
Worthy Sir, and loving Brother in Jesus Christ,
MY earnest desire is, that this well meant, and (as I conceive) very
warrantable Negotiation of mine, may not be mistaken by any, and chiefly by
you in Scotland, to whom I owe reverence in the Church of God.

For, As I was not drawn to this work by any man upon any private
considerations; so I have never served any man's end, nor sought my self in it,
but only God, and the manifestation of his Truth. This he that searches the
hearts of all men knows to have been, and still to be mine only true and
constant aim. Nor do I presume to interpose, and cast my self up as a Judge,
and Arbitrator of the differences between Churches; but being earnestly in love
with truth and peace, and having been stirred up by men that seek the truth in
holiness and peaceable affections, to endeavor the advancement of the one and
the other, I have presented hitherto my self unto God, and to all his servants
without partiality, as an humble solicitor of the counsels of Peace, for the
public good of Protestant Churches, that therein the truth of his Gospel may
be conferred and made known unto the world. And this I find I am warranted
to do, not only by the necessity of the times, and the dangers whereunto the
Professors of the Gospel are brought, through the prevarication, and implacable
animosity of some of their Leaders and controversall Writers; but also by the
express Commandments of God; which press me, first, to seek peace with all
men, Romans 12. 18. Heb. 12. 14. Heb. 10. 24.
so far as in me lies, if possibly it may be had: And secondly, to provoke
others, whom this duty in like manner does concern, unto the same affection
of love, and of good works. Let me then be looked upon as a public
solicitor of peaceable counsels and thoughts, and as a provoker of godly men
unto the affections of charitable duties; for this is the sum of that which I
intend.

Therefore, To perform this task more effectually toward every one, I have
taken notice of that part of the duty wherein we are distinctly commanded to
contemplate, and attentively to consider one another, (for this is the force of
the word (...),) to the end that we should sharpen and stir up one another
(for thus much the word (...) implies) toward the perfection of our holy
calling and profession.

And therefore give me leave, in obedience to this Commandment, chiefly at
this time, to consider you of my Nation, as an object fit to be provoked to all
the duties which God has commanded in his Gospel for the glory of his name:
Give me leave (I say) to believe that you desire to be provoked, and that you
will effectually be stirred up hereunto, as unto a necessary duty, although by
such a weak and contemptible instrument as I am, it is thus meanly proposed
unto you: For I hope you will do it so much the rather and the readier,
because it is not backed with Authority, that it may appear you are persuaded
and moved by the grace and Spirit of God, and not by any humane and outward
consideration toward that which is required of you in your heavenly calling.
Be pleased then to consider not who it is that makes the proposition, but
what it is that is proposed; and in whose name, and to what end and effect
these endeavors were and are undertaken.

The end you have already heard; the name in which the proposal is made, is
the name of our God, and Savior Jesus Christ, who is called the great God, and
the Prince of peace. If therefore you profess your selves to be his faithful
subjects in the Kingdom, and Ministers in the Gospel of Peace, I may call upon
you by your allegiance, that you decline not the counsels of peace, because he
has commanded, saying, Seek peace, and Psalm. 34. 14.
follow after it. And as for the thing required at your hands to be done at
this time, it is thus to be conceived; That although sometimes I am enabled to
use great boldness in a private way, yet, being now to make my address unto a
whole Church, I have reason to fear lest I seem to abuse my Liberty which is
in Christ. Therefore I am far from prescribing any thing, and will only
represent my earnest wishes and humble requests unto you, as they are briefly
set down in the Petition hereunto annexed, and as now by this writ this shall
be more particularly explained and declared for the opening of my meaning
therein.

Be pleased then to consider, that my constant suit to all Protestants is, that
they would live in the Communion of Saints one toward another: for, seeing
they all believe that there is a Communion of Saints, and that every one in
particular thinks himself interessed therein, as being sanctified by one and
the same Spirit; therefore I suppose that none may or will be unwilling
(chiefly when he is called upon) to communicate the fruits of his spiritual
talents toward the building up of truth, and of righteousness in his
fellow-saints. Now I take the ground of holy Communion, which ought to be made
manifest amongst Protestants, to be this:

First, That they jointly attained unto the acknowledgment of the same saving
faith, as it is revealed in the form of sound words and Doctrine, which the
holy Scriptures teach, renouncing thereby all Popish, all Socinian, and other
whatsoever heresies and errors, which overthrow the ground of our salvation.

Secondly, That they have submitted themselves unto the same rule of life and
obedience, in all actions toward God and man, to be jointly directed therein
by the will of God revealed in the same holy Scriptures, renouncing
consequently thereby all Popish idolatry, all humane traditions, and all
superstitious constitutions, as no ways binding in respect of conscience, or
to be imposed as observable in the worship of God.

Seeing then all Protestants appeal only unto the word of God, and reject all
doctrines and practices, as untrue and unwarrantable, which have no ground in
the same: therefore I conceive them to be really brethren in Christ. And
although the more weak, and less knowing party (as commonly it falls out) is
unwilling to acknowledge the other for a Brother, yet nevertheless, because
there is a commandment of God, bidding us that are strong, to bear with the
infirmities of the weak, and forbidding us to please our selves, and injoyning
both Romans 15. 1. 1bid. v. 7.
them and us to receive one another as Christ received us unto the glory of
God. Therefore I find that we are bound to labor to gain our erring
brethren, with all meekness alluring and drawing them on toward more
knowledge, toward moderation, and toward godliness, and brotherly love: To
which effect, we should endeavor to rectify in them those mistakes for which
they show their spirits to be averse from us; and to give them also occasion to
rectify in us those sinister thoughts for which we conceive our spirits justly
alienated from them. For indeed, it is for the most part almost nothing but
mistakes on both sides, and mis-interpretations of each others meanings and
actions, which make the division. These mistakes and mis-interpretations
therefore should be taken out of the way on both sides: which may be done, if
that wherein both Churches fully do agree betwixt themselves, and disagree
from Papists, were brought into a sum, and means used to cause that sum to
be acknowledged by common consent, as a testimony of their unity in the faith
and practice of true Christianity. Now, to make such a sum, a Symboll of
their agreement in faith and obedience, as it is not difficult to be done, so
it may be effectual to rectify their mistakes, and bind up their hearts in
brotherly love, if the public Confessions of all the Churches were compared
together in things necessary, and useful for unity and mutual edification;
whereof the consent being gathered and approved by us, then afterward it might
be insinuated with countenance of authority unto foreign Protestant States,
to make them willing to propose the same unto their Ministry, to move them to
approve of it in like manner as of a testimony of a spiritual unity. This, I
say, is no hard matter to be done; and yet would be a sufficient means to
unite all our spirits together, and take away the hurtful scandal of our
divisions.

This being done, needless disputes and curious School questions, which have
bred much strife, might, in the second place, be cast out from the Pulpits,
and other profitable, though high and sublime mysteries of godliness, might be
regulated by common consent, to oblige ordinary Preachers to handle the same
without curiosity, prudently and plainly, as may be answerable unto vulgar
capacities, for popular edification. Thus it is conceived that controversies
might be made less in number and in weight. Which being done, a course could
be settled to entertain correspondencie in spiritual things, belonging unto
the advancement of the kingdom of God toward those that either know, or as yet
know not his name: To which effect these things should be taken into
consideration:

First, How, and by what means, answerably to the will of God, scandals,
heresies, and breaches of brotherly love and unity should be prevented betwixt
the Churches in time to come.

Secondly, How the increase of knowledge, which daily is enlarged, in some
places this way, and in other places that way, according to the different gifts
of Gods Spirit diversely bestowed, and always profitable in several persons,
may become profitable in common to all, and be communicated without grudging or
envy, or danger of disturbance to any, arising from preposterous
contradictions and disputations. And to bring this to pass, thoughts have
been long ago entertained, and some endeavors used to procure the means of
true Christian learning, and holy knowledge.

The first is a full body of practical Divinity, which in stead of the ordinary
Philosophicall-jangling-School-Divinity, might be proposed to all those that
seek the truth, which is after godliness, and especially to the young
Scholars of Theology in the Universities.

The second is, a substantial explication of the literal and material sense
of the Text of the holy Bible, to be a help unto all both learned and unlearned
in matters of doubt, which ought to be decided by the word of God.

The third thing belonging to the advancement of Gods Kingdom, which may and
ought to be consulted upon, is how to propagate the truth and light revealed
unto Protestants toward others; that such as are yet in darkness and deadly
ignorance, may be drawn unto the light of life which shines in the Gospel.

These are the objects of my solicitation and endeavors amongst Protestants,
whereunto not only many have given their consent, and decalred a ready mind
for concurrence; but some also have really and effectually put to their hand to
labor in the work with us: others are more and more coming on, and no doubt
by your example most of them will be raised and stirred up from that accustomed
drowsinesse and slacknesse in resolution, wherewith our flesh and blood is
clogged when we intend spiritual matters: But he that is able to waken the
dead, and raise them up out of their graves, and who will once bring us united
together with Christ in glory, is able also to quicken men's spirits toward
these duties, and make them concur in one purpose, to understand aright the
sincerity of one another intentions.

Now then, If I may use freedom of speech through Christ, to require of you
that which I conceive you ought to do, and beseech you to settle a resolution
in your Assembly, that henceforth you will lay to heart such public thoughts,
that as in other things you have abundantly approved your zeal toward the
truth, so in these duties of love and public edification, you may go before
others, and be found laudable Patrons to the communion of Saints: Which may be
brought to pass, if you will make an Act for the entertainment of
correspondency with foreign Churches about this matter, and in consequence of
that Act, defer Authority to some fit persons of your Body, who may in your
name concur to correspond and entertain with others these thoughts of
spiritual and common edification. To such then as you shall appoint to heed
this work I will promise to make mine address, and give you by them true
information of that which is, or shall be done herein by others hereafter: And
from them reciprocally I desire to receive the advice and counsel which you
shall think fit to impart toward the work, that it may in due time be
brought to a full period, through the assistance of Gods Spirit, in the supply
of your joint prayers and cooperation. And because in this spiritual combat
our prayers are our chief strength and weapons, therefore my further request
is, That you would recommend the work unto the prayers and supplications of
your Congregations; that it may be mentioned before God, to this effect,
namely, that his saving truth revealed to the Protestant Churches, may be not
only freed from all scandals of needless disputes, and dangerous divisions
amongst themselves: but also have a free passage toward others, and be
enlarged toward all the ends of the world, through the unity of their spirits
in the bond of peace, and their godly zeal to entertain holy Communion one with
another, for the advancement of the kingdom of Jesus Christ our Savior. What
shall Papists fast and pray, and erect societies, and spend great revenues to
breed and send forth Emissaries, to undermine the truth, and propagate their
superstirions and idolatries: and shall we no nothing for the advancement and
propagation of the true faith and knowledge of Christ Jesus: Shall they be more
cunning and diligent to overthrow and divide our Churches by worldly wiles of
destruction, then we are circumspect and zealous to maintain our selves and
all Gods children, so far as in us lies, in unity, by spiritual rules of
mutual edification: Oh, let never this fault be any more found in any of us.
It may suffice, that hitherto the neglect of our duty, in this and other
things, has brought us to this extremity whereunto you see Ecclesiastical
matters are reduced amongst Protestants. If therefore there be any bowels and
compassion, if you intend to entertain any fellowship of the Spirit, and if
you can supply any comfort of love derived to you from our head Jesus Christ,
fulfill the joy of peaceable minded Christians, and in these things be like
minded with us; Enlarge your selves as we do, and open your hearts by some
written Declaration fit to be imparted unto foreigners, to bear witness
that you are willing and ready to seek and entertain peace with all true
Professors of Christianity. And if withal you shall think fit to give any
advice unto me (a mean instrument of this work) or to suggest some profitable
counsel concerning the heads of consultation here proposed unto you, I am a
most humble suitor unto you, that you would either insert the same into your
Declaration, or communicate it apart unto me: For by the communication of your
spiritual talents in this kind, you will cause many thanksgivings and praises
to be offered up by many unto God on your behalf, and in particular by my
self, who in the midst of many outward discouragements, and inward failings,
am bound to wrestle sometimes with my self, and sometimes with others, against
the spirit of envy and strife which dwells in our flesh, for the unblameable
ways of peace and truth which are in Jesus Christ. To his grace I commend you,
and shall not cease to pray, that in all your labors for the Gospel, you may
find the infallible direction of his holy Spirit going along with you, till
you see the blessed effects of his good will and direction over you, with joy
unspeakable, and comfort unto your souls, through the apprehension of the
glory of our God, which I wish may shine now and for ever, in and over every
one of you severally, and your whole society jointly; of which I shall always
study to be found

The most faithful and affectionate servant in Christ Jesus, JOHN DURY.


