The Word of the Lord to all Rulers, Governors, and Magistrates of England, to
try themselves by what Spirit and Power they Rule by.

That they may come to know, whether they Rule by the Power of Jesus Christ,
the true light that lighteneth every man that comes into the World, unto whom
all Power is given both in Heaven and in Earth; which is the higher Power which
every Soul is to be subject unto; or the Power that man became subject unto
through the Fall.

With a Warning to them, that they hearken not unto the Priests of England, by
whom they have so long bin deceived, even by that lying spirit that is gone out
into the mouths of all the false Prophets, which have hitherto prevailed to
persuade them that they should not hearken to the true Power within them, which
is the true light that lighteneth every man that comes into the World.

Also it may be profitable for all men, that they may come to see the
difference between the true power that every soul is to be subject unto for
conscience sake toward God, and that power that is not to be obeyed for
Conscience sake: but rather suffer according to the will of God.

With some Quaeries put forth concerning the ground of all true Power, and
Government, which is from that power that every soul is to be subject to for
the Lords sake, and not that which is set up in, and by the will of man.

This have I Written in the Word of the Lord God, as I was commanded by the
Lord, on the sixteenth day of the sixth Month, about the eighth hour of the
day, as I was eating meat in my own house; saying, Rise, and Write what I shall
say unto thee concerning the Rulers and Magistrates of the Land; Which was done
in the will and countenance of God: Who am a friend to all men, for the Seeds
sake. Known to men by the Name of,

Thomas Davenport.

The Word of the Lord, to all Rulers, Governors, and Magestrates of England, to
try themselves by what Spirit and Power they Rule by, etc.
Hear the Word of the Lord ye Rulers and Magestrates of England, thus says
the Lord God, who is come near unto you in judgment, that ye may all be tried;
and therefore try your selves whether ye be in my power which is the higher
Powers that every soul is to be subject unto, for there is no power but of me;
and all that are in this Power, rule for me, and not for themselves, nor in the
will of man, but in my will, and for me, says the Lord. And if ye be the
higher Powers, then are ye also subject unto me even unto my Law, which is the
light in you and so your Power is of me, and every soul is to be subject unto
you for my sake. Now all that are not in my power, rule not for me, but for
themselves, because they are gone out from my Spirit and Power, into that which
does resist my Power, in which the Enmity is against my Seed, unto which the
damnation is to: Now unto this power, none is to be subject for Conscience
sake; but for Conscience sake suffer according to my will, because it is that
which prevailed over man at the first, when he turned aside, and went out from
me into the power of darkness, which I had separated from me; and so I drove
him out, to wit, man from my presence, and placed my Flaming Sword to keep him
out from my life, who was shut up in death, as I had said unto him, out of
which that power he had chosen, could not deliver him, nor by any other could
he be Redeemed, but by my Sword by which he is kept out; in which stare are all
Mankind in now who are in their fallen nature gone out from my Spirit, and so
are gone out from my Power, which is the life, by which the whole Creation is
to be Ruled and Geverned* And now in this state, though men are standing in the
place of Magestrates, and professing themselves to be such as do Rule for me;
yet being gone out from me, are gone (...) from the power which is of me, and
by me says the Lord; and are holding up another power, which is of another
Kingdom, that does oppose it self against my Kingdom and Power, unto which
every soul is to be subject.

And now, all you who profess your selves to be Christian Magestrates, and to
maintain my Law, consider whether ye be such, yea or nay; see whether ye have
owned my Son, whom I have sent a light into the world, unto whom is given all
power both in Heaven and in Earth, unto whom every Knee must bow, and every
Tongue confess; ye that say, ye maintain my Law, see whether you have known
and owned the Lawgiver; for there is but one Law, and one Lawgiver which is
Christ; And this Jesus Christ is to be known within you, which is the Immanuel,
God with us, even God manifested in the flesh, as also says the Scripture, the
which if you reject to know and believe in, you have rejected my Law, and gone
out from my power, which you profess to Rule in, and Govern by, and to have
owned with your Mouths; and all who are sound here, their professions will not
cover them, whose works deny me, for all they do is in my sight abominable,
and unto every good work they are reprobate.

And now, O you Magestrates, consider whether you have Ruled for me, or for
your selves, says the Lord God, and see whether you have not been Crucifying
to your selves my Son, whom I have sent a light into the world, and so have
Crucified and slain my power in you, by which you should have Ruled your selves
first, and so the Nations over whom you are placed; for if a man rule not his
own house, how should he take care for the Church of God? And now, how can it
be otherwise, but that you should be found having your hands in persecuting the
righteous Seed, even my Sons and Daughters, says the Lord, which I have chosen
out of the world, to bear witness to my name? For had you known, and owned me,
you would have known and owned my servants, sons and daughters also; but my
words are fulfilled, If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you;
and if they had known me, they would have known you also; but they have not
known you, because they knew me not: And now you Magestrates, confider whether
ye are of me, even in my power; Does now my witness which I have placed in you
(that bears witness to my name) testify against you, or for you? See whether
by it, you are not condemned in your selves, for I the Lord God who has not
left my self without a witness in any of the sons of men; Therefore I say to
you, do ye now honestly consider and hearken unto me, and in the coolness of
the day you will hear, and on your Beds, for I the Lord God am he, who
searches your hearts, and show unto you your thoughts, and the intents of your
hearts: Now enter ye into my secret place, commune with your own hearts, and be
still, and see there what my witness does testify unto you, for that is your
state before me, says the Lord; and if your hearts condemn you, I am greater
then your hearts: And I the Lord, who am the true and faithful witness, that
cannot lie, am near unto you all, and will be a swift witness against you; and
also will come near unto you in judgment, to plead with you: And this will I
do to try you, even as I have tried them that have gone before you: And if you
will not endure my judgments, but turn them to Gall and Wormwood, and kick at
them with the heel, as they did; then will I come against you in my fury, as I
did to them. And this I did to have healed them, but they would not be healed,
therefore were they everturned* For thus says the Lord God, I, even I am he,
that wounds, and heals, and kills, and makes alive. And now, if ye will not
suffer your selves to be wounded, then shall you not be healed; and if not
killed, ye shall not be made alive: For he that saves his life, shall lose it;
and he that loses his life for my sake, shall find it. If any can receive
this, let him receive it.

And now O you Rulers and Magistrates, Is it not time for you to know
judgment? therefore flight not the day of your visitation; for this is it
wherein I the Lord God am warning you, and proving you, whether you will now
turn unto me at my reproof; and now go to, and see whether my witness I have
placed in you, will not testify against you, that I would often have gathered
you; but ye, (like to old Jerusalem) would not be gathered; therefore if you
will not be gathered, but continue in your rebellion against me, this shall ye
have at my hand; Ye shall be scattered, who despise the riches of my goodness
forbearance, and long suffering; and my goodness leads you not to repentance,
but after the hardness, and impenitency of your hearts, treasures up to your
selves wrath, against the day of wrath, and revelation of my righteous
judgments; for according to your deeds will I reward you, says the Lord. But
my desire toward you is, as my witness in all your Consciences will testify
unto you, which has not consented to your sins, nor takes delight in your
destruction, but that you may all live, and not die. And now thus says the
Lord God, If ye will turn now unto me, and keep my judgments, and not depart
from my Counsel; then will I heal you: which if you love the light, and come
to the light, and bow down unto it, and believe in it, and diligently hearken
to it; then will you come to know true judgment, wisdom, understanding, and
the fear of me, even the true power, in which you should rule and govern the
Nations; but if ye reject the light, then do you reject me, and put away true
judgment from you, and go from my power in which you should rule.

And therefore O ye Magestrates, be you warned from me, says the Lord God,
that ye go not from my Counsel, for then woe be to you, if ye turn from my
Prophet, which I have raised up unto you, to be your Councellor, says the
Lord; for whosoever refuses to hear the voice of that Prophet, that I have
raised up, that soul shall be cut off from his people. Now if you hear the
false Prophets, the Priests of England (they will make you vain, for they have
rejected my Prophet, that Moses my servant prophesied of; the true light, that
lights every man that comes into the world,) they will lead you out from
my Prophet, and Son, out of my Council, says the Lord God: for they have gone
out from me, and so have rejected my Council, and have not stood in it, as the
false Prophets that Isaiah, Jeremy, and Ezekiel Prophesied against: Now, my
sheep hear my voice, they know me, and will follow me; and a stranger they
will not follow, but will flee from him, for they know not the voice of
strangers.

And now, O ye Rulers, and Magestrates, try your selves by what spirit you are
led, and be no more deceived by them who daube with untempered Mortar, and cry
peace, when there is no peace; for from the least of them to the greatest, they
are all given to Covetousness; even both the Prophets and Priests, every one
deals falsely, for they have healed your wound deceitfully, crying peace, when
there is no peace, says the Lord. But to whom of you shall I speak, and give
warning, that ye may hear and fear before me? behold your Ears are
uncircumcised, that ye cannot hear: for behold, the light of the Lord is unto
you a reproach, ye have no delight in it; and so my power by which you should
rule and govern the Nations, you will not know, because you delight not to know
me, says the Lord: Therefore be you all warned, now you have time, that ye
prise it, for my Spirit shall not always strive with you, as it has not
striven with them that have gone before you, who rejected me, therefore were
they consumed, says the Lord God.

And now, all you Magestrates and Rulers in England, what is the power ye rule
by? Is it of me, says the Lord? See what it differs from those that were
before you, who persecuted the Prophets, Christ, the Apostles, and all the
Saints, who bare their testimony to my name, and against the world: And was it
my power by which such Ruled and Governed, who were thus persecuting my
servants, Sons and Daughters, who could not for conscience sake submit to their
wills? And have not the same persecutions in this my day attended them, in all
parts of these three Nations, (and elsewhere) where ever I the Lord have sent
them to declare my Message, even to bear testimony to my name, and against the
ungodliness of men, warning them every where to Repent, left they perished?
For behold, I have sent among you Prophets, and wise men, and some of them have
you persecuted, by Whipping, Stocking, Stoning, beating in your Synagogues and
Streets; some have suffered the trials of cruel mockings, and some persecuted
from City to City, and some of them have ye killed. Moreover I have sent unto
you my Son a light into the world, Saying, surely ye will reverence my Son: But
they said, this is the Heir, Come, let us kill him, that the Inheritance may
be ours: and so they slew the Lord of life, whom I have sent a light into the
world, and have preferred and set up above the light, a murderer; and so the
old City Jerusalem, is yet standing, which is called Spiritually Sodom, and
Egypt, where the Lord lies Crucified. And now ye Rulers and Magestrates,
consider this, Is it because such men are set up in the highest place of
Authority among men, by reason of their greatness in the world, and not for
their understanding, wisdom, and the fear of my name, are they set up above
their Brethren? not in the Lord, but the things of the world; therefore to
conclude, that they stand in my power, and are therefore to Rule and Govern the
rest of their Brethren: Nay, unless they from my power in them Rule for me,
the which ye will not do, if ye plead not the cause of the poor and needy,
strangers, Widows, and fatherless; set open the Gates to the Prisoners, and
let the oppressed go free, taking off the heavy burdens, and yoak^ that have
been put upon the necks of the poor: Seek the good, and not the evil: hate
the evil, and love the good, and establish judgment in the Gate, that the
spoiled may be strengthened against the strong and mighty, that judgment may
run down as water, and righteousness as a mighty stream. And can these things
be done, while these abominations stands untaken down? as namely, Law,
Priesthood, Temple, Tithes, Worldly Honor, as bowing to men, and respecting
their Persons, contrary to my Law, the maintenance of which being imposed upon
the Consciences of my people, sons and daughters, whom I have set free from all
impositions of men, that are contrary to my pure Law in them, and my Covenant
established with them, to walk before me in truth and righteousness, wherein
they are to Worship me, even in spirit and in truth, as is made known unto them
in the spirit of my Son* whom I have given unto them for an everlasting
Covenant that cannot be broken: And now, unless my Servants, Sons and
Daughters break Covenant with me, cannot submit to such things as are by you
imposed on them.

Therefore O ye Magistrates, how do you Rule for me, when you go about to
force my people to break Covenant with me? Was it not the practice of the
Heathen, and wicked Rulers that knew not my name and power by which they should
have Ruled, to compel my Servants, Sons and Daughters, to have denied my Name,
as Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, and the Jews, and others, who persecuted me, as
the Scriptures, my Servants, have spoken forth (by the moving of my spirit in
them) have declared of? And come now, O ye Magistrates, and try your selves,
what spirit and power ye have been led by: Now if you have been led by my
spirit, then are ye my Sons; but see whether it have not been by a lying
spirit, which is gone forth into the mouths of all the salfe Prophets, and see
whether they have not prevailed to persuade you, to hearken unto them, whom I
have determined a consumption, and an utter destruction to come upon them, and
to strip them of all their coverings, that the shame of their nakedness may
appear unto all men; yet, for all this, shall not your guilt be taken away from
you, if you turn not to me, says the Lord; because you have been warned by my
Servants from my mouth of their deceit, and have not turned from them, but
still you have hearkened to them, to continue the yoke upon the necks of my
people, whom I have determined to deliver by my mighty hand, and an
outstretched arm, as I did deliver my servants of old, out of the hands of
Pharaoh, that cruel oppressor; even so will I now deliver my servants, sons
and daughters; for my hand is not shortened that it cannot save, says the Lord,
neither mine Ear heavy, that it cannot hear, as before I have heard the cries
of my people: And now have I heard their cries that are come before me, and am
now coming to deliver them, that write upon my Name: Therefore consider these
things betime, lest ye become such as I the Lord have destroyed from before my
Face for their disobedience, says the Lord God.

Quaeries.
Quae. 1. WHether there be any Power, Rule, and Government to be set up and
imposed upon men, but only that Power and Authority, Rule and Government, that
every Soul is to be subject unto for Conscience sake toward God?

2. Whether that Power, Authority, Rule, and Government, which men have
invented to themselves, to maintain their own outward fleshly carnal
Privileges, and to bring the poor into subjection unto their own wills, be the
power that every Soul should be subject unto for Conscience sake?

3. Whether Jesus Christ be not the true ground of all Power, Rule, and
Authority, that every Soul is to be subject unto, being that all Power both in
Heaven and Earth is given unto him, to Rule and Govern the Nations? And
whether the Rule and Government be not only upon his shoulders, which is the
endless Power, Rule, Authority and Government, of whose Dominion there is no
end?

4. Whether ever any in the Power and Authority of God, did ever persecute the
Servants of the Lord, or did uphold any that were their persecutors; but such
as Pharaoh, who was out of the power and authority of God, and rejected it, who
knew not the Lord, saying, Who is the Lord, that I should obey him? And whether
it be not the power of the World, which are the powers of darkness, that
persecutes the righteous Seed? And whether such as persecute, and such as
tolerate persecution, be not all of one Seed, and be not in the enmity against
God, even such as are borne after the flesh?

5. Whether there be any Rulers and Magistrates, that are in the just power and
authority to Rule and Govern, but such as are in the power and authority of
God? And whether there be any in the power of God, but such as are the Minister
of God for good, even to execute wrath upon them that does evil, and for the
praise of him that does well? And whether this be not the power only, that
every Soul is to be subject unto? And if any Rule not thus, Whether he bear
not the Sword in vain?

6. Whether those be Rulers, and Ministers for God, that are out of the power
of the Lord, and are set up by those that are out of the power of the Lord
themselves, (and that Rules for themselves, and not for the Lord) to maintain
their worldly Lusts, Riches, and Honor, who are made Rulers by Men, not for
truths sake, as they are men fearing the Lord; but for the Worlds sake, even
because they are Rich and Great in this present World, and to maintain the
Worlds Interests?

7. Whether has not the Lord showed unto man, what is Good, that is, to keep
Judgment, to do Justice, and to love Mercy, and to Walk with God? And can
ever this be done, (even Judgment kept, Justice done, Mercy, Truth, and
Righteousness loved; but Gifts and Rewards taken, and men's persons respected,
and the Cause of the poor and needy not pleaded,) till Judges, Justices, and
Rulers be as at the first I who are men fearing God, hating Covetousness, and
dealing uprightly.

8. And whether that of God in all your Consciences does not bear witness to
the truth of all these things? and that generally, Rulers, Governors, and
Magistrates, in their Rule and Government, are turned from truth and
righteousness; and whether they ought not to turn out from the Power of
darkness* into the Power of the living God, to Rule and Govern for the Lord
God of Heaven and Earth; Unto whom every Knee must bow, and every Tongue
confess, and to whom every one must give an account of himself of the things
done in the Body, whether they be good or bad? And so in the light, all is left
without excuse,

FINIS.

