Seismo ega. OR HEAVEN and EARTH SHAKEN.

A Treatise showing how Kings, Princes, and their Governments are turned and
changed By Jesus Christ as King of Kings, and King of Saints.

Hagg. 2. 6. (...)

Thus says the Lord of Hosts. Yet once, it is a little while and I will shake
the Heavens and the Earth, and the Sea and the dry Land. And I will shake all
Nations.

By JOHN DAVIS, M. A. sometime Lecturer at Christ Church in LONDON, and now
Pastor of a Congregation in Dover.

LONDON. Printed by T. C. for Nathaniel Brook at the Angel in Cornhill. 1655.

The Epistle of the Author to the Reader.
Christian Reader,
ALl men in the world are naturally acted by a principle, either of Love, or
Fear; and there is something in the ensuing Treatise to meet with both.

Natura hominis Novitatis avida.
Men are greedily addicted to Novelty, new fashions and opinions, new strains
and modes, new matters and methods; yea Pamphlets of news are taking, and I
fear me too much.

The Title tells you of a Great Earthquake, or Heaven and Earth shaken, which
denotes the great and sudden turn and change of things: Now while things are
turning and changing they appear new to us; they have not the same face now
they had before. And surely men are more obliged to converse with News in
things, then News in Books; Men compile your News-books, but God makes News in
things.

If what is here presented were foreign, and such as did not relate to you,
you might justly pass it by, and pitch on that which is of more concernment to
you. But let me tell you, there is no Turn or Change mentioned here, but that
which relates to you, and wherein you are concerned, and have been Actors one
way or other, for good or evil; either provoking by your sins, or interceding
by your prayers: and therefore (me thinks) you should love to read your selves
over, and the new things that you have made.

Turns and Changes, especially in great bodies of Kingdoms and
Commonwealths, are great Turns, turns of great and public interest; but
not always prosperous, and so makes way for your fear.

The greatest Statesmen have studiously avoided (as much as they could) all
Innovations, knowing the trouble and danger that follows thereon; lest while
they design the common good; dregs should be stirred up in the spirits of
people, that they could not easily settle and allay again.

I heartily wish you the increase of a godly fear, that amidst all the Turns
and Changes which you read of, you may yet more and more experience that
blessed turn and change of heart, from darkness to light, from things below,
to things above, from creatures to Christ; and then all these Turns shall not
only not hurt you, but do you much good.

The Method I have observed and studied, has been to inform you as plainly,
and to apply that information as closly as I could.

I have laid things down by way of Propositions; and those Propositions such as
might make way for, and give light to one another, the foregoing to the
following Propositions; and all of them put together, might acquaint you with
that which was intended in this work.

That you might the better take in, and retain things in your mind, I have in
every Chapter perfixed the several Propositions therein opened; and most of
them are (all should have been) in a differing letter from the body of the Book.

The XXI. Chapter makes mention of twelve Sections, which I confess I intended
for the heads of twelve several Chapters, with such application as are in the
other parts of the Book: but I was afraid of being tedious. I know uot how that
which is here done will suite with the spirits of the godlywise; to whom I
desire to approve my self in this business. And if I might receive any
encouragement from them, it might easily draw forth my thoughts which I have
had, of the Turns of Councils and Armies, of Laws and Trading, of Continents
and Islands; The great turns at Sea, as well as upon the Land; of affairs
concerning the Church as well as the State. But I shall add no more now but
this petition: That the God of all wisdom would wise us to know the Times, and
our duties in them; and help us to serve our generation, and to do the work of
the day in the day; To live by faith, and by faith and patience to possess our
souls, until the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom I am,

Your truly affectionate Brother to serve you in his Gospel JOHN DAVIS.

Errata.
PAge 20. l. 2. for eight r. seventh. Page 43. for three r. third. Page 75. for
underpowers r. undercowers.

To the Reader.
REader, this is a bookish-age, and whereas Learning was heretofore graced by
judicious Scholars, it is now much vilified by illiterate scriblers. What
Scaliger said of France, omnibus scribendi datur libertas, paucis facultas; All
men may write, but few are able to write; is verified here in England: All have
liberty to write, but few ability. Hence it is that so many lean pamphlets and
pieces come forth daily, treating of Inferior and inconsiderate things. This
Author acquaints you with the great Shakings, the great Alterations, which God
and Christ do make in Heaven and Earth upon performance of divine Promises: He
treats of the use and ministration of Angels therein; he shows that all power
is Christ's; that the Princes of the earth have all their power from him; he
informs of what use Government and Governors are, how subject to change;
what is the evil of abusing power, what is the cause of Civil Wars and Fatal
Turns; He tells you how severely the Lord Christ will deal with the
Potentates of the earth, whose power is erected against him and his; which are
things of an high nature, and well handled. Though Galen said of Moses works,
Multa dicit, nil probat; and Augustine of Manichaeus, dixit and abiit, he gave
no reason of what he said; yet it is far otherwise with this Author, who
judiciously and solidly makes good what he has asserted. The Matter, Method,
and Composition, are waters from his own Cistern, and honey from his own Hive.
He has not larded his book alieno adipe, with the fat of other men. The work
speaks for it self, being elaborate, well compacted, and weighty through
words of truth; and doubtless will find acceptance amongst those who have
their senses exercised to discern of such things. Its most true which Erasmus
says, Nihil morosius hominum judiciis; nothing is more peevish then the
judgments of men: what one magnifies, another vilifies; and what is vilified
by one, is magnified by another; yet it is some comfort that men's judgments
are like their pallats; what suites not with one does with another; and where
the wine is good, few will distaste it. Reader, buy and try; if thou be
pleasured or profited, the Author has his aim; if neither, he will not be
provoked, knowing Nunquam tam been agitur cum rebus humanis ut meliora placeant
plurimis; Such is the disposition of humane affairs, that the best things ever
please fewest.

W. Gr.

The Contents of the Book.
CHAP. I.
Shows the occasion and Scope of this Treatise.
CHAP. II.
HHandleth these eight Proposals. 1. God delivers his Prophesies in way of a
Promise. 2. New Testament Promises are set forth in Old Testament language. 3.
Both Prophesies and Promises, are to be taken in the largest sense. 4. That
both Prophesies and Promises admit of diverse Degrees, Seasons, Manners of
fullfilling. 5. That under one Person or things named, a whole Series both of
persons and things, is to be understood. 6. God performs his Promises in these
latter Ages, in a way of proportion to his former glorious workings. 7. The
inflicting of judgment on the Adversaries of his Church, is subordinate to the
performance of his Promises. 8. That the time of fullfilliug Prophesies and
working great changes is at, or before the coming of Christ.
CHAP. III.
Shows the Meaning, Doctrines, and Method of Haggai 2. 6, 7, 8.
CHAP. IV.
Handles this Doctrine, In the great Turns of Ages, God dispenses himself
in the way of a Promise. 1. This holds out God as a Father. 2. Exalts the
honor of Christ the Son. 3. Honors God in the person of the Spirit. 4. Makes
notably for the security and improvement of grace. 5. Notably confounds the men
of the World. 6. Greatens our estate. Use 1. of Instruction, showing 1. In
great Turns, are great wants. 2. It shows the vanity of the creatures. 3.
That Gods ways are in the deeps. Use 2. of Exhortation to search out the
Promises of the latter Age. The Motives are six. 1. This renders you children
of wisdom. 2. Its a blessed preservative against the infection of sin. 3. It
advances your faith and love. 4. Its proper to conquer difficulties and
discouragements. 5. Its apt to make you watchful and dutiful. 6. It advances
your heart in praises.
CHAP. V.
Shows that when Christ is about to perform his Promises, he causes Changes
in Natural bodies. How? 1. Jesus Christ has given a being and constant course
to Heaven and Earth. 2. He maintains what he has given. 3. The creatures thus
made and maintained, are at his beck. 4. That it is his pleasure they should
sometimes step aside from their ordinary constant course. 5. Christ governes
them in all their turnings aside. 6. That these turns carry the nature of
Signs, yet favor not Astrological Predictions. Why? because, 1. This is the
beginning of taking to himself his great power. 2. By this means he speaks to
all the World. 3. By this way of working, he minds us that the creatures are
not in that state he intends for them. 4. By these turns in Natural bodies, he
knows how to draw forth spiritual actings in his people. Use 1. of Instruction.
1. To see Christ's excellency. 1. In that he causes these turns. 2. In that he
can do more. 2. Its a vain thing to set against Christ. 3. Its easy hence to
conceive the Promises of this life shall be performed. Use 2. of Exhortation.
1. To consider Christ in all these Changes. 2. To fear before him. 3. To
advance your faith. 4. To exalt him above man, or means.
CHAP. VI.
Shows the change of Angels, and this Doctrine, That Jesus Christ in the
great turning Providence, imployes the ministration of Angels. For clearing of
which Doctrine, take notice of these nine things. 1. Jesus Christ, God-man, is
head of Angels. 2. Angels are to serve him; not in his person alone, but in
serving of his Saints. 3. Angels are to serve Christ and his Saints, in the
destruction of their enemies. 4. Angels are to have more apparent declaration
made of their service toward Christ and his world. 5. Angels are brought in in
the visions, and so in the execution of those visions. 6. Angels have work
deputed to them, concerning Kingdoms and Nations. 7. Angels and Saints shall
be joined together hereafter; and therefore they are conjoined in the work
here. 8. Christ's last dispensations are his greatest, wherein he uses Angels.
1. In the working of his wisdom. 2. When he takes to himself his great power.
3. Upon more immediate administration of Saints. 4. Showing forth his
unchangablenesse. 9. Christ must have his Angels, as well as the Dragon his.
Use 1. of Instruction. 1. To see Christ his excellency who is far above Angels;
because they are but his servants: where Heb. 1. is breifely opened. Use 2. Of
Exhortation. 1. To behold those glorious works. 2. To draw forth your faith and
love. 3. To provoke you to come forth in the service of these latter days; to
be fellow servants with the Angels.
CHAP. VII.
COntains the shake of Kings, for four Reasons; because, 1. They make the great
turns in the Earth. 2. They pretend to be exempt from man's power. 3. Dealing
with them, is a compendious way of dealing with the world. 4. They are
decked*with all worldly power, and seem to be the fittest match for Christ. Use
of Instruction to see that there is 1. A meanness in their Majesty. 2. That the
management of particular places must be reckoned for. 3. He will surely account
with meaner men. 4. Its lawful to appe ale from Princes to Christ. 5. Judicial
proceedings against Princes, is stamped with remarkable Characters of Christ.
Use of Exhortation. 1. to meditate on these dealings of Christ. 2. to give unto
Christ the honor due to his Name.
CHAP. VIII.
Pos. 1.
Shows, Pos. 1. All power is given to Christ in Heaven and Earth; Where
observe, 1. All power is in Christ. 2. All power is his due, upon the taking of
our nature. 3. though it be his due, it is rightly said to be given to him. 4.
Jesus Christ has had but little honor of all his power. 5, Christ will exalt
himself in such turns upon Kings, as that they shall honor him in their
consciences. Use 1. Of Instruction to teach us, 1. the riches of Gods love to
Christ. 2. that the Father is fully satisfied in the power laid on him. 3. the
pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in Christ's hand. 4. Christ returns all his
power to the Father. Use 2. of Exhortation: 1. To flock about Christ in love.
2. to come with resolvednesse to be at his disposal. 3. tremble ye wicked ones,
though the mighty of the Earth. 4. The Lord reigns, let the earth be glad.
CHAP. IX.
Pos. 2.
Shows that Kings reign by Christ. 1. They are, or are not, by him. 2. He
blesses or blasteth them, in the work of Government. 3. What wisdom or power
they have, they cannot put forth without him. 4. the continuation, or
succession of them, is from him. 5. Bad Kings, as well as good, are from him:
where observe 1. Good men may be bad Kings. 2. the badnesse of Kings is not
from Christ: for, 1. Its not by his command. 2. Its not by his working. 3. He
does not stir them up to any wickedness. 4. though Christ be no cause of
their badnesse, yet he permits it. 5. In permitting them he puts forth a
righteous judgment. 6. He orders their badnesse for good. Use of Instruction.
1. that their being Creatures of Christ's making; stamps Authority on them. 2.
When we rise against Government, we rise against Christ. 3. Ascribe the good of
Government to Christ. 4. Hence take a ground of patience under evil Governors.
5. Christ must needs be glorious. Use of Exhortation in six passages out of
Psalm. 2. 1. To be wise. 2. To be instructed. 3. to be in fear. 4. To serve
him. 5. to rejoice with trembling. 6. To kiss the Son.
CHAP. X. Pos. 3.

OPens that setting up of Government is for the worlds good: as appears, 1. In
that it is set to keep the world in order. 2. Persons so set, and kept, enjoy
propriety. 3. Government promotes the increase of good things in our propriety.
4. Government protects your Peace 5. Setting up of Government is, when God
makes some men able and willing to manage Public Affairs, and draws others to
consent and subject. 6. This is notably for the good of not some but all ranks
of men. 7. Its extensive to the whole life of all those men. 8. There is honor
due to them, who are thus set up for Government. Use of Instruction to show, 1.
That God is a faithful Creator. 2. Rulers had need be of much wisdom, and
publicknesse of spirit. Use 2: of Exhortation. 1. To esteem them highly. 2. To
make honorable mention of them* 3. To speak to God for them. 4. To submit to
every*Ordinance. 5. To testify our thankfulness, by service in person, and in
purse.
CHAP. XI.
Pos. 4.
UNfolds that Governors and Governments are apt to change; which these six
things will further inform you in. 1. Governors change by death, and in their
manners while they live. 2. Manners and forms of Government, as well as
Persons, are liable to change. 3. People change in their minds and conditions.
4. Change of Governments, Governors, and People, causes change of Laws. 5.
they change in their league and trade with Neighbor Nations. 6. Jesus Christ
King of Kings, makes a change on Governors and Governments, by sending Plague,
Sword, or Famine, on them. Use of Instruction. 1. Lesser bodies will change. 2.
See the creatures vanity. Use of Exhortation to Princes. 2. To exalt
righteousness. 2. To be little in their own eyes. To All. 1. to raise up your
hearts to mind things above. 2. to be content in these turns. 3. to contend
to have the change for better.
CHAP. XII.
Pos. 5.
Shows that Kings abuse their power; for 1. they serve themselves more then
others. 2. they turn the power which should be for good, to the hurt of others.
3. Power was set against Christ in his person when he was on Earth. 4. It is
against Christ and his interest Now. 5. the power of Kings is given up to
Christ's enemies. Use of Instruction, to see 1. the foundation of turns on
Kingdoms. viz. Departing from the right ends. 2. How little Kings deserve the
name of Sacred. 3. Judge not of men or causes to be good, by the greatness of
them that follow them. 4. Vndeceive your selves, about the true value of
earthly powers. 5. that those in power be circumspect.
CHAP. XIII.
Pos. 6.
Shows, that abuse of power tends to the breaking of power, which is apparent;
1. When those in power indulge their own laziness. 2. When they take no
account of underofficers. 3. When they rule by will. 4. When they look not
after the execution of good Laws. 5. When they are unjust. 6. When they
sinfully conform to neighbor Princes. 7. When they persecute those who are
good. 8. When they interpose unduely in the things of God. Use 1. of
Instruction, to see the cause of great turns among us. Use 2. of Admonition to
Princes. 1. Take heed of your hearts in lawful things. 2. Take heed of
coveteous self-love. 3. Exalt not your selves unduely. 4. Anger and malice
misbecome a Prince. 5. Forget not the kindness of others to you. 6. Look that
your Courtiers prove not flatterers.
CHAP. XIV.
Pos. 7.
PRinces being wicked, people grow wicked too; because 1. Wickedness in men of
high place is misrepresented to the people. 2. Wicked Princes leave good Laws
unexecuted, and sin unpunished. 3. Then wickedness comes to be established as
by a Law. 4. Because of the Priests of the Nation. 5. People are migtily led by
example. Use 1. To show how much Rulers have to answer for. 2. To show that
examples move much. 3. To take notice of the wickedness in us. 4. See how just
it is to suffer from Princes, when we grow sinful by them.
CHAP. XV.
Pos. 8.
THat abuse of power, and wickedness of people adapt to Civil war. How abuse
of power works on good men's spirits. How wickedness adapts; See it thus. 1.
Pride in Princes, produces pride in people. 2. Pride introduces luxury. 3.
Luxury introduces poverty. 4. Poverty makes people discontented. 5.
Discontented people meditate their pressures. 6. Pressed people hardly pay for
any public uses. 7. People grow weary of their Trades. 8. They fear more then
they feel. 9. There be Incendiaries that augment their fears. 10. These
incendiaries have many followers. Use 1. To Princes, to consider their abuse of
power. 2. To people who complain of Wars, yet are the cause of them. 3. To
admire Gods goodness that we have no more Civil Wars.
CHAP. XVI.
Pos. 9.
Shows that Civil Wars produce fatal Changes; for 1. Then Government is
destroyed. 2. Equity and Laws are not then to be heard. 3. Then Religion, and
devotion, are stifled. 4. Learning and Trading fall down dead. 5. A rich people
is made poor, and a strong people weak. 6. No safety to any then. 7.
Plantations are nipt in the bud. 8. The victory of Civil Wars is much to be
lamented. Use. 1. Admire Gods goodness that we are a Nation. 2. Consider how
much we are engaged to those in power, by whose care it comes to pass that
Wars break not forth. 3. Look on some inconveniences as eligible, when they
prevent what is fatal. 4. It should be far from us to promote a Civil War.
CHAP. XVII.
Pos. 10.
Neighbor Princes fall off from us, or come forth against us, when we are in
Civil War: which is opened thus. 1. God has bounded and limited all Nations in
their Territories. 2. Confederacy is as needful for a Nation as a Person. 3.
Its of great concernment, what, and with whom, confederacy is concluded. 4.
Islands have more liberty of choice, as to their confederates, then those that
live in a Continent. 5. We may have cause to break with those with whom we have
been confederate. 6. Its possible some may break unjustly from us. 7. Those
with whom we are in League, may be devoured by their adversaries. 8. Its
possible notwithstanding confederacies abroad, we may be disjoynt at home. 9.
This distraction tempts your friends to shake you off. 10. It opportunes your
confederates to become your enemies. Use 1. See how little help there is in
men. 2. See what wickedness is incident to Nations as well as persons. 3. Take
hence one argument more against your Civil War. 4. Learn, its a curious work to
manage affairs in Civil Wars. 5. Admire Gods providence toward us, who has
busied our Neighbor Nations.
CHAP. XVIII.
Pos. 11.
OPens that unkind and unjust dealings of neighbor Nations produce foreign
Wars: as thus. 1. The pride and lust of ruling men, cause these hard dealings.
2. Those who are great, would be great alone. 3. These great leaders obtain
many followers. 4. They conclude they have a fit season for their rage. 5. A
people under present pressures are exceeding sensible. 6. They resolve if they
recover, to do to others, as others thought to have done unto them. Use 1. To
see the spreading of sin, that it reaches Nations as well as persons. 2.
Nations as well as persons, are liable to trouble upon trouble. 3. God is
appealed unto in War. 4. To admire again Gods goodness to us.
CHAP. XIX.
Pos. 12.
Shows, that Jesus Christ will deal in severity with the Kings of the Earth;
because 1. Kings are in covenant with their people, and break their Covenants.
2. In this dealing Christ appears no respecter of persons. 3. In this dealing
Christ makes his wisdom outshine King-craft. 4. Christ is to overcome Satan in
his territories. Use 1. Read the sinfulness of Kings in Christ's severity. 2.
See the impartial and unspotted holiness of Jesus Christ. 3. See what to
expect, and to what to refer our present providence.
CHAP. XX.
COncludes with showing, how the twelve Positions formerly handled, instruct us
in our present Turns and Changes.
CHAP. XXI.
Shows the great Turns on Nations, arising from the consideration of Christ as
King of Saints, set forth in twelve Sections. 1. Jesus Christ is King of
Saints, as well as King of the World. 2. Christ has his high honor upon his
sufferings. 3. Christ puts forth the power he has as King of Nations, for his
people, to whom he is King of Saints. 4. Jesus Christ shall have more visible
glory in this World. 5. Bitterness is mingled with all Governments, that
Christ may be sweet. 6. Christ pours out on his people a mighty spirit of
prayer, which he in his Government as King of Saints, returns full answer to.
7. Jesus Christ shall have a willing people in the day of his power. 8. Some of
the Kings of the Earth shall be among this willing people. 9. Christ having
great work to do, stirs up the spirit of Princes and people. 10. The great work
of the latter days shall be to exalt holiness and righteousness. 11. Saints
shall have notable Conquest over their enemies. 12. These things shall be by
degrees.
CHAP. XXII.
COntains the Uses of that Doctrine, that Christ is King of Saints. 1. Use of
inviting Instruction, discovering, 1. Christ's excellency. 2. The properties of
his Kingdom. 3. The glory of his Saints. 1. Christ his excellency in four
things. 1. His right and Title which is the justest: being. 1. By Election. 2.
By Donation. 3. By Birth. 4. By purchase. 5. By Conquest. 2. His Qualifications
are greatest. 3. His Administrations are the highest. 4. His Communications are
the largest. 2 The Properties of his Kingdom being, 1. Spiritual. 2. Universal.
3. Eternal. 4. Bringing in perfect peace. 3. The glory or excellency of his
Saints; for, 1. They shall be more Saints. 2. They shall live safely. 3. their
enemies shall be ruined. 2. Use of Exhortation. 1. to know him. 2. to fear him.
^. to trust in him. 4. to embrace him with love. 5. to be like to him. 6. to
glorify him. 7. to be obedient to his laws; where you have, 1. the six Laws of
Nature with Gospel Light. 1. Peace is to be sought. 2. Stand to your Covenants.
3. You must be thankful. 4. Serve one another. 5. Be merciful and forgive. 6.
Reproach not one another. 2. You have many Gospel strains set out to highthen
your obedience.
THe Appendix shows Astrological Predictions to be frivilous and impious; where
these five things are granted. 1. that the Stars have a powerful ruling
excellency. 2. that by their light, heat, and motion, they work great
alterations in the Air. 3. that having this power over the Air, they do
diver^^y affect compound bodies. 4. Scripture speaks plainly, that they are
for times, and seasons. 5. that there may be some present Predictions about
weather and such things. But two things are denied. 1. that Stars have any
power over the Reason or Will of man to necessitate or enforce them. 2. that
Astrologers can rightly pretend to foretell such things as depend on man's will,
or are any way contingent: and this appears by seven Arguments. 1. Such
Predictions are derogatory to Gods prerogative of fore-knowing. 2. Such
predictions are cross to the word of God. 3. We reason from the Nature of the
Stars. 4. We reason from the Nature of Art. 5. We argue from that part of
Astrology, that is about weather. 6. these Predictions are derogatory to the
excellency of Man. 7. We reason from the Nature of contingent things. Object.
But many things they foretell come to pass Sol. 1. Not so many as they brag
of. 2. Not from any causing virtue in the Stars. 3. Blind men sometime hit the
white; so may Astrologers. 4. their coming to pass is a strong argument
against them. 5. It may come to pass in a way of judicial vengeance. Use 1. to
the professors of the Mathematics. 2. to their Disciples, dehorting them from
Figure-casting.
Seismo ega. OR Heaven and Earth shaken.
CHAP. I. The Introduction, showing the occasion and scope of the ensuing
Treatise.
THe works of the Lord are great (says the Psalmist) sought Psalm. 111. 2.
out of all them that have pleasure therein. When God is working we must eye
him; and when his works be great, we must be searching them out; and not soon
weary, but taking pleasure both in the works and search. Gods works to us of
this Nation, have been honorable and glorious (as it is verse 3.) and his
righteousness enduring v. 3.
for ever. No marvel then, if they be taking, with the mind and hearts of his
people, who entertain them with the highest esteem and most joyful
admiration: verse 4. He has made his wonderful v. 4.
works to be remembered; the Lord is gracious The occasion.
and full of compassion: I appeal unto your consciences that read, whether the
grace and full compassion of God, have not made his works wonderful among us;
Now God will not have his works written in the sand; he makes his works
wonderful, and his wonderful works to be remembered, and surely his people
cannot forget them; they are engraven on their hearts, and they cannot but
remember v. 5.
them* v. ^. He gives meat to them that fear him; He is ever mindful of his
Covenant. Consider v. 5. the malice and rage of adversaries; and we cannot but
reckon it among the wonderful works of God, that his people have a bit of
bread, that they have meat for their mouths, and drink to quench their thirst;
but when its added, He is ever mindful of his Covenant: His Covenant, and his
mindfulnesse of his Covenant; and so giving them meat, renders this common path
of providence, this so giving them meat, to be truly wonderful. v. 6. He has
showed his v. 6.
people the power of his works. How! few are there that take notice of the
works of God; and fewer that take notice of God in his works: But this is the
favor that he shows his people, not only his works, but the power of them:
their Verity, and Judgment, Truth, Uprightness and Steadfastness, v. 7. and 8.
as it is v. 7, 8.

Vision is the glory and light of life; he lives most like a man, not that
eats and drinks most, sleeps and sports most, but he that with the acting eye
of Reason, sees most of things, and their difference: He lives most like a
Christian, that by Heb. 11. 1.
faith se^th him that is invisible, makes a real presence of things absent, and
an evidence and tr^e enjoyment of things hoped for: our present and
after-happinesse is in vision, by faith here, really and truly; but more
hereafter, when we shall see him Heb. 11. 27
face to face, and know as we are known, 1 Cor. 13. 12. Daniel and John, the
greatly beloved Prophet and Disciple, were both much honored with Visions and
Revelations: our Savior commends Abraham for that he saw his day and rejoiced,
Joh. 8. 56. Those who are Abraham's seed, cannot but eye Christ and rejoice in
the dawning of his day: if God have The scope.
an hand to work, surely we must have an eye to see, an heart to believe, and a
tongue to praise him. God does not work little things for his people; it stands
not with his love, and their condition; and when he does great things, we must
meet him and them with great observation. I have heard an Ambassador residing
here, should write home that he lived in a Land of wonders; well noteing how
great turns passed on us, and how little blood was shed about them; then if
strangers see so much, we should see more. Doubtless God has revived his
works of old; made his arm bare, commanding and creating deliverances for us.
How often has he brought us to the gates of death? and then said return,
return, ye children of men. How many, and mighty, malicious and prosperous,
have our enemies been? and yet how destroyed? How little and low, how despised
and nothing, have your Councils, Armies, Allies, your all been? and yet God
has remembered us in our low estate. He has not been weary of doing us good,
although we have soon been weary of Mic. 6. 9.
serving him. There is a voice in the r^d (says the Prophet) and surely
mercies, deliverances and salvations, have their voice also; and the greater
any danger or deliverance is, the louder is the voice. Oh! that we could hear
so as to love and learn righteousness: Oh! that we were wise to read Gods
works out of his word, his providence in his prophesies, Dan. 12. 10. The wise
shall understand: Thus to understand him, will be our wisdom. When the Devil
tempted our Savior, it was by showing him the World and the glory Mat. 4. 8.
of it; But behold here a better vision; the glory of the world, and worldly
Kingdoms, and the fall of them; Mountains tumbling down, and Vallyes filled
up; high things brought low, and low things exalted. How! many and mighty,
precious and seasonable, have been the returns of fervent, righteous, faithful
prayers? Jam. 5. 16.
They were made in former Ages, but are answered Now: our forefathers had the
honor to sow, and we the blessing to reap the fruits of their prayers: Oh!
the riches of the grace of God, that hightens our mercies by steeping them in
blood: Our Adoption, Reconciliation, Redemption, Remission of sin and salvation
is by the precious blood of Jesus: the glorious truths of the everlasting
Gospel come to us dyed in his blood, who was the great Martyr, and in the blood
of many Rev. 3. 14.
his servants and Martyrs: Rev. 6. 9. Our present Liberty, Peace, and
Enjoyments, did they not cost the dearest blood of many valiant Worthies?

Oh! let not, let not the blood of Christ, his Martyrs and Soldiers condemn
us; Let it not be said, God stretched forth his hand to a foolish and
gainsaying people; that the Ox knows his owner, and the Ass Isa. 1. 3.
his Masters crib: and that we know not, care not, consider not, when God works
such glorious things. When David had the water of the Well of Bethlehem brought
2 Samuel 23. 15, 16.
to him, he poured it out before the Lord, because it was the blood of these
men: Oh! that now your hearts might rebound these mercies to Heaven, whence
they came, in humble thankfulness, and watchful obedience; seeing they are the
blood of your brethren. When the time of performing great promises and
prophesies Dan. 9. 2.
drew nigh, God raises up Daniel's spirit to search: Oh! that we might be
praying and searching, praying and reading, praying and inquiring, and not
giving over, till we come to some understanding of these blessed mysteries. Now
to help you in this search, to inform your understanding, to be instrumental
to draw forth and establish your faith about the great works of this latter
Age, is the scope of this ensuing Treatise. The Lord in much mercy bless you
and it together, that those good ends may be obtained.

Chap. 2. Handles these eight Propositions.
FIrst that God delivers his prophesies in the way of a promise. 2.
New Testament Promises are set forth in Old Testament language. 3. That both
prophesies and promises, are to be taken in the largest extent. 4. That they
admit of diverse degrees, seasons, and manners of fulfilling. 5. That under one
person or thing named, the whole series both of persons and things is to be
understood. 6. God performs his promises in these latter ages, in a way of
proportion to his former glorious workings. 7. The inflicting of punishment, on
the adversaries of his Church, is subordinate to the performance of his promise
to his people. 8. That the time of fulfilling Prophesies and Promises, and
working great changes, is at or before the coming of Christ.

Before we come to the particulars which we intend to insist upon; give me
leave first, for the better understanding of the matter and the Scriptures
produced, to lay down these eight Considerations.

God delivers his Prophesies, in the way of a Promise. Prophesies are the
foretelling Prop. 1.
of things that shall come to pass in their Prophesies (...) ed, in way of a
promise.
proper times. God cannot speak to his Saints but in away of love; his
foreteling things to come, tells you how he loves them. Our God is a God of
power and grace: and promises are the engagements of both: The Father works,
and Christ works, for his peoples special good: and you have them both at
work in performing prophetical promises.

The prophecy of Christ his coming in the flesh, its in the way of a promise,
Isa. Isa. 9. 6.
9. 6* Unto us a Child is borne, unto us a Son is given: faith in the promise,
speaks him born and given, although this was a long while after, Isa. 7. 14.
The Lord himself shall give you a sign. Behold a Virgin shall conceive: which
is rendered in the Gospel Mat. 1. 22.
of Matthew by t^o words: one is, (...), tha^ which was spoken holding out the
proph^si^; for Isaiah is called a Prophet, and his speaking is prophetical
speaking: for it was sp^ken of the Lord by him. The other word (...) that it
might be fulfilled, holds out the performance of that promise, which is, when
the event answers and makes up what was in the promise.

That proph^sie that the Gospel should shine on the dark (...) entiles, is in
the way Isa. 9. 2.
of a promise, Isa. 9. 2. So in Hag. 2. 7. (the prophecy we intend to open in
the next Chapter) Thus says the Lord of Hosts, is by the Author to the Hebrews
rendered Heb. 12. 26. Now he has promised: spoken by way of promise (...). And
the ground of this is, the overflowings of Gods love, which cannot speak of
things a far off, but withal* tells you, how he is, and will be engaged about
them; what does concern the present time, is too narrow to express his love,
and therefore he speaks it out in things that are to come.

Prop* 2. N. T. Promises are set out it O. T. language.

Rev. 11. 1.


New Testament promises are declared in Old Testament language. Thus the
erecting of Gospel Churches, the new edition and reformation of them, is called
in a phrase of the Old Testament, a Temple, Rev. 11. 1. John is bid to measure
the Temple, when he speaks of Gospel Churches.

The happy state of the Church is termed by a Jewish phrase The Tabernacle of
God among men, Rev. 21. 3. signifying Rev. 21. 3.
the glorious state of Gospel times: and thus in the place before named, filling
the house with glory, implies the same thing.

Babylon was of old an enemy to Israel, and the great enemies in Gospel Times
are called Babylon also; and the destruction of those enemies in Gospel Times,
is termed the fall of Babylon, Rev. 14. 8. Rev. 14. 8.


The Visions concerning Church affairs are now, and so formerly in the
Prophets, expressed by Angels, Horses, Trumpets, Women: and as they agree in
the instructing language, so in the promising language also; and the reason,
why our promises are thus express^d, may be,

1. Because the same spirit breaths in both the T^staments, Old as well as New.
To them was the Gospel preached, Heb. 4. 2. Heb. 4. 2.
as well as to us: no marvel then, if the promises be in the same, language.

2. God would have the Gentiles to know his heart is now as full to them, as it
was to his Israel of old; and therefore he speaks to them in the same language
he spoke to Israel.

3. God will have his ancient people, the Jews whom he will convert, to
understand his love fully; which that they may the better do, he speaks unto
them in his and their own proper language.

That these Promises and Prophesies are to Prop. 3.
be taken in the largest extent, in the letter and Pro* and Proph. to betaken in
the largest senser.
mystery, according to the scope of the place and Analogy of faith*Thus.

Babylons falling, Rev. 14. means that the Seat, Power, Doctrine, Subjects,
and all, are ready to tumble down. Promises and prophesies hold out the
raisednesse of Gods wisdom and love, and therefore must be of large extent:
They speak to, and of all persons, times and conditions, therefore must be
large. Prophesies contain largnesse of wisdom and knowledge, and promises
largeness of, love: and therefore there must be a largeness of expression to
hold them forth. When God said unto Jacob, Genesis 32. 9, 13. I will Genesis 32. 9,
13.
do th^e good: Jacob understood it largly; for he turns it into an argument of
prayer, and twice repeats it: Litteral sense does not undermine the mystery,
nor that overthrow the litteral sense: Gods promises are suitable to his
commands, keeping pace with them; they are conjoined as Arteries and Veins in
the body; Now the commands are exceeding large, Psalm. 119. 96. and so are the
Psalm. 119. 96.
promises. Math. 5. 28. tells from our Savior, that looking and lusting is
committing Adultery: and the promise of giving Christ includes in Paul's
arguing, the giving of all other good things, Romans 8. 32.

The spirit has framed up Faith with a large make and frame; and promises are
for our faith in the largeness of it; and so must be large also. Prophesies
and promises are expressions of Gods mind: Now we must not limite the holy One
of Israel, but take him in the fulness of his expressions.

Prop. 4.
That these Prophesies and Promises admit of diverse Degrees, Seasons and Manner
of They have diverse degrees of fulfilling.

Hos. 11. 1.


fulfilling; thus, Hos. 11. 1. I called my Son out of Egypt was truly made good
when Moses brought the Children of Israel out of Egypt; for Israel was Gods
son, but it had a farther degree of fulfilling in Mat. 2. 15.
Christ, Math. 2. 15.

Jer. 31. 15.
Jer. 31. 15. concerning Rachels weeping, Bis hic locus impletus est: The place
was twice fulfilled, says Musculus. Rachel was the Mother of Benjamin, and so
the mother of the Benjamites, the Tribe that kept close to the house of David:
She was buried near Bethlehem and is put to denote the whole Land of Judah,
which was in a mourning condition at the time when they were carried away
captive, and then Rachel is said to weep: and moreover Mat. 2. 17.
when the children are slain in Bethlehem, she weeps again, Mat. 2. 17.

Isa. 53. 4.
Isa. 53. 4. Surely he has borne our greifes, was fulfilled in the sorrow that
fell on the person of the Lord as Mediator, as one in our room and stead; that
is one manner of fulfilling: but is not all.

Mat. 8. 17.
Mat. 8. 17. Its brought in as a ground of healing the sick and casting out of
evil spi its.

Psalm. 78. 2. Math. 13. 35.
Psalm. 78. 2. The Prophet Asaph is said to open his mouth in a Parable: but
it is applied to Christ, and his preaching, Mat. 13. 35.

Zach. 11. 12.
Zach. 11. 12. Speaking about the thirty pieces of Silver: it was true of
Zachary, and their ignoble dealing with him, as with a base labourer,
allotting so mean a price to a faithful Prophet; but fulfilled farther in that
thirty pieces for which Judas Math. 27. 9 Psalm. 22. 18.
sold his Master, Mat. 27. 9.

Psalm. 22. 18. They parted my garments amongst them: it possibly may be
verified in David. Omnia in Davidem convenire poss^nt, as Arias M^ntanus says;
David his destroyers being confident that he could not return, they fell upon
the spoil; but Joh. 19. 23.
it is fully performed in Christ, Joh. 19. 23.

Isa. 61. 1. He has sent me to preach liberty Isa. 61. 1.
to the captives, was made good in the person of the Prophet Isaiah, preaching
about their freedom from the Babylonish Captivity, though more fully in Christ,
Luke 4. 21
Luke 4. 21.

Psalm. 41. 9. My own familiar friend which Psalm. 41. 9.
eat bread at my Table. It Is true of David's Courtiers: performed also in Judas
against Christ, John 13. 14.

Joh. 13. 14.
Isa. 53. 1. Who has believed our report? Isa. 53. 1.
The speech relates to the Prophet in his time, but not only to the Prophet;
for it agrees to Christ as appears, John 12. 38. Joh. 12. 38.
I shall conclude this position with what I learned many years a go, from
transcribed Master Tempest Wood.
Notes of a precious servant of Christ now at rest.

The least degree of the performing a promise being manifested, the promise
therein may be truly said to be performed, although not in the highest extent
of it: Whereupon it is remarkable how in the Gospels, and Acts of the Apostles,
when any personal thing or individual act is mentioned, as that in Mat. 2. 17.
(the Mat. 2. 17.
place above named) about Rachel, the holy Ghost uses a word which signifies
accomplishment, (...), Then was fulfilled that which was spoken. But when
promises are mentioned, which have reference to the Church, as Acts 2. 16. then
Acts 2. 16.
its thus expressed, This is that which was spoken by the Prophet Joel, (...):
he does not say, it was fulfilled, but it was spoken: it had a true
performance, but not the accomplishment.

Prop. 5.
That under one person or thing named a whole series both of persons and things
is to be Under one expression they comprehend a whole series.

Romans 9. 7.


understood. See this plainly in the great promise, Romans 9. 7. In Isaac shall
thy seed be called. In the eight verse of the same Chapter, The children of the
promise are counted for the seed. When we read of the enemies of the Church,
which sometimes are called Horns, by them he means all the powers that are
pushing at Jesus Christ and his interest: The Vial on the Throne of the Beast
mentioned Rev. 16. 10. although it mean eminently the Rev. 16. 1.
City of Rome; yet withal it may take in all those places wherein the
superstitions of Antichrist, have been more especially exercised, as Bishops
Palaces, Cathedrals, Monasteries, Priories, Deanes and Chapters houses, and
such like places.

Prop. 6.
God performs his promises, in these latter days, in a way of proportion and
correspondency, with his former glorious workings They correspond with former
glorious workings.
for his people. Thus most expressly Hagg. 2. 5. its said, According as I
covenanted with you when you came out of Egypt, so my spirit remains among
you: where its plain that God engages himself to them now when they were
building of the Temple, Hag. 2. 5.
according to his dealing with them when they were to be delivered out of Egypt.
Thus in the Visions of the Prophet John, Antichrist is called Egypt; and their
waters are turned into blood, and that by the Rev. 11. 6.
witnesses, Rev. 11. 6. in correspondence with what God did by Moses, Exodus 7.
19.

Israel in Egypt cried Exodus 2. 23. and so do the souls under the Altar, Lord,
Lord, how long, holy and true, do thou not judge and revenge our blood, on
them that dwell on the earth? Rev. 6. 10.

He drowned the Egyptians in the red Sea, Exodus 14. 27. and now has his ways,
it may be Sea Fights, to drown his enemies, as it was in the years, 1588, and
1639, and at other times since: I shall conclude this position with that saying
of the Prophet, Micah, 7. 15. where God promises to his Church his goodness
Mic. 7. 15.
in these words: According to the days of thy coming out of the Land of Egypt
will ^ show unto him marvelous things. Prop. 7.


That the inflicting of judgment, on the adversaries of the Church, is
subordinate to Inflicting of judgments subordinate to Promises.
the performance of his promises to his people. The shaking vengeance on the
Nations, is but to make way for the good of Gods people. Gods creatures are
precious to him as he is their Creator; and surely he would never destroy them,
but in relation to a greater, farther and better good, then their destruction
can be evil. This is plain in Isa. 10. 12. The visiting of Isa. 10. 12.
the stout heart of the King of Assyria and the glory of his high looks, is in
a way of inflicting judgment on him but its brought in as subservient to the
performing of his whole work on Mount Sion: that was the maine thing driven at.
Prop. 8.


Christ coming is the time of fulfilling pro. and proph.
That the time of fulfilling prophesies and promises, and working great turns,
is at or before the coming of Christ. Thus in Hag. 2. 6. I will shake the
heaven, when is that? it follows immediately; The desire of all Nations shall
come:

The coming of Christ in the flesh, was eminently the fulfilling of many
prophesies and promises, as you may read in the constant course of the Gospel:
His coming then likewise produced great turns and changes, Mat. 2. 3. Herod
the King was troubled and all Jerusalem with him: (...). Herod and Jerusalem,
the King and all the people, are troubled. He troubles the chief Priests, and
Pharisees, and Counsels, John, 11. 47. what do we do? This man does many
Miracles. And when Christ shall come again, you shall have more turns. All the
promises are in him and for him; no marvel then if their performances, and his
appearance come together. The downfall of the Man of sin is the making good of
many promises, but that is said to be by the brigh^nesse of his coming. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. Then shall that wicked one be revealed, whom the Lord shall
consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of
his coming.

Chap. III. Showing the meaning, Doctrines and Method of Hag. 2. 6, 7.
Hag. 2. 6, 7. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Yet once, and it is a little while
and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea and the dry-land.

7. And I will shake all Nations, ^and the desire of all Nations shall come;
and I will fill this house with glory, says the Lord of Hosts.

Heb. 12. 26, 27. Whose voice then shook the earth: but now he has promised
saying, Yet once more I shake not the earth only, but also Heaven.

27. And this word yet once more, signifies the removing of things that are
shaken, as of things that are made, that those things which cannot be shaken
may remain.


HAving laid down these eight propositions in general, we shall now pitch down
on this Scripture to which all these propositions give light.

Here in these words of the Prophet Haggai, you have a prophecy by way of a
The (...) eight Proposals give light to Hag. 2. 6. 7.
promise; God foretells by his servant Haggai what shall come to pass; namely
great turns and changes, and withal engages about them, by way of a promise
that he will effect them, I will shake; and that is your first rule.

He calls the Church State under the Go^p^l by the name of a Temple and an
house, which is the language of the Old Testament, to speak out Gods way of
worship; but here, it has a farther extent, even unto Gospel Worship, and
administrations, and that is according to the second Prop.

Shaking of heaven and earth does not only mean the commotion in these
natural bodies, and the alterations therein; but also these words hold out, the
change in the great Political bodies of Church and State; and so according to
the third proposition are to be taken in the largest extent.

Again, observe this promise and prophecy of Haggai receives (according to
what is laid down in the fourth proposition) sundry degrees of fulfilling. It
was truly performed when Christ was born into the world; then Angels and Men,
Heaven and Earth were moved; but this is not all; for the Author to the Hebrews
tells us of another shaking at another coming of Christ when we shall receive a
Kingdom that cannot be moved, Heb. 12. 26. Besides when the Prophet Haggai
names the Temple and the House, he means all the frame of worship, and not
barely the Fabric and building that was reared up. When he names Zorobabel and
Joshua, he means not only those two particular persons, but all governors,
and deliverers of Gods people, in several places and ages are included, which
is the direction that the fifth proposition gives us.

Moreover the great and glorious alterations that God will make in these last
days, is here expressed by a phrase relating to Gods wonderful dealing with
his people Israel* we find Exodus 19. 18. Exodus 19. 18.
at the appearance of God on Mount Sinai, its said the wh^le mount quaked
greatly; and when God appears to make these turns, he is said by the Prophet
here to shake heaven and earth, which agrees fully with the sixth proposition.

The shaking of all Nations here, what does it mean else but the execution of
vengeance on the Nations? thus plainly in v. 21. 22. of this 2. Chap. where the
shaking of heaven and ear^h is repeated. v. 21. and expounded v. 22. by this
phrase, I will overthrow the throne of Kingdoms, and I will destroy the
strength of the Kingdoms of the Heathen; but for what end? v. 23. It was to
exalt Zorobabel to be as a Signet; it was to make way for his Churches good,
which was the lesson taught in the eight proposition.

Lastly, the time of these great turns is plainly expressed to be at the
coming of Christ: Christ is yet to come in the judgment of all, one way or
another, and all his comings produce notable changes, as the eight proposition
showed. And thus having brought down what was spoken in general, in the
propositions, to this particular prophecy of Haggai; I shall only add one
word about the coherence of these two verses, with the former part of the
Chapter, and then descend to the explication of the words.

The coherence.
It Is plain, v. 2. and 3. that Zorobabel, Joshua and the people were under
discouragement about building of the Temple: we build a Temple (say they) but
what is it? a poor mean frame: Solomon's Temple was a stately Edifice, but this
is nothing to that: were it not better for us to give over, then to go forward
with such a work? Now in the fourth and fifth verse, God calls upon them: 1. To
be strong; be strong, be strong. 2. To work and not give over. 3. To be
confident and not fear. Now the Arguments are three. 1. I am with you, v.
four. 2. My Spirit shall remain among you, v. five. 3. I will shake Heaven and
earth for you, and the desire of all Nations shall come and fill this house
with glory, v. 6. and 7.

So then these words are brought in as an argument to take off their fear, and
render them confident, to strengthen them in the work God called them unto:
Thus they cohere with the former words; let us now proceed to explication of
them: we shall begin with those words.

Thus says the Lord of Hosts. Says what?
Thus sayth] The Hebrew word (...) translated Says, it denotes in Scripture
phrase five things.

1. To speak.
1. To declare the mind by speaking. Dixit* 1. locu^us est: to express our
thoughts or motions of heart by words: so Genesis 20. 5. speaking of Sarah, she,
even Genesis 20. 5.
she her self said (...) he is my Brother, that is, she uttered so much in
speech or words that another might understand; and thus God spoke by his
Prophet.

2. To prophecy.
2. It Is put to hold out a speaking before hand what shall come to pass
afterward, Dixit 1. prophetavit. He said, that is, he prophesied; and a word so
spoken is a prophetical word: thus Genesis 41. 54. Genesis 41. 54.
the seven years of dearth began according as Joseph had said. (...) dixerat:
that is Said aforehand.
according as he had prophesied.

3. To meditate.
3. It signifies a speaking to ones self, a speaking in a way of thought, or
meditation. Dixit 1. cogitavit. He says, that is, he thought, he says in
himself: Our thoughts are our communication with our selves; when we are
serious in meditation of our own hearts, or ways, we are said to return to our
hearts, and to speak in our hearts: thus 2 Samuel 21. 16. ^ Sam 21. 16.
Goliath the Giant thought to kill David; the word is (...) et dicebat
percutere. He said he would kill him, that is, he spoke so to himself, it was
the language of his thoughts.

4. To command.
4. To say is to speak with authority, to speak by way of command: Dixit 1.
imperavit. He said, that is as much as he commanded; so Jonah 2. 11. The Lord
Jonah 2. 11.
spoke to the Fish, that is, he commanded it.

5. To promise.
5. And lastly, to speak is not barely to declare ones mind, to think, or to
command; but it holds out such a speaking wherein the speaker engages
himself; dixit, 1. promisit: he said, that is, he promised it, and so it is
taken here: Thus says the Lord of hosts, that is, Thus promises the Lord of
Hosts; that phrase viz. the Lord of Hosts; we shall not open here; only now
draw these 2. Observations.

That the Lord in all ages, dispenses himself Obser. 1.
to his people by way of a promise: so here.

That when his people are under discouragement Obser. 2.
and fear, he strengthens them by holding forth himself to be the Lord of
Hosts.

I will shake. I: (...). I Jehovah, who have my being of my self, and give
being to my word of promise: I, who have all creatures and times in my power
and disposal, I, even I, will shake. All refer this shaking to God, but some
refer this to God in the person of the Father, as Hierom. and G^o^g. Eden, and
so they make the meaning to be, I that am the Father of Jesus Christ, and in
him your Father, and the Father of mercies, I will shake the Heavens. But the
Author to the Hebrews refers it to Christ, and so I, that is, I that am
Emanuel, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who was dead, but am alive, and now
live for evermore, I, who am the brightness of my Fathers glory, and the
express image of his person, who have seven eyes and seven horns, all-seeing*
and all-working power; I that have made and hold up the pillars of the world, I
will shake.

The Author to the Hebrews adds an expression, showing that this shaking was
done suddenly, and with ease. Its but a word speaking, its but saving, Let
Heaven and Earth be shaken, and it shall be shaken; as once he said, Let there
be an Heaven and an earth, and it was so. Whose voice then shook the earth.

The word voice is applied to things Natural, as Rev. 6. 1. The voice of
Thunder. (...). Artificial, Mat 124. 31. The voice of a Trumpet, (...).
Rational, 2 Pet. 2 16. The voice of a Man, (...). Supernatural, as here, His
voice, (...).


His voice. That is, the voice of Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, whose
blood speaks better things then that of Abel; His voice, who speaks from
Heaven, His voice shook.

Will shake (...) Jun. translates it, Ego Shaking what?
commoturus sum, I am about to shake. Shaking signifies a violent Motion, a
Motion differing from the common Motion: 1. As when the wind is in the bowels
of the earth, and in its breaking forth makes the earth for to tremble. Terrae
motus, that is called shaking, Isa. 13. 13. The earth shall move out of his
place.

2. Or as the wind shakes the corn to and fro, or the fruit upon the trees,
sometimes this way, then the contrary way, which is not the natural motion of
the corn or fruit, but as its forced by the wind, Psalm 72. 16. His fruit
shall shake like Libanus.

3. Or as the motion of an Army, Isa. 30. 32. In battles of shaking will he
fight with it. This shaking in Heb. 12. is expressed by two words.

The first (...) proprie de sale vi ventorum agitato; it signifies properly to
shake as the Sea is shaken with a mighty wind, when the wind gets into the
bowels of the Sea.

The other word is (...), such a kind of shaking as tears and rends in pieces;
and so this phrase expresses tearing turns, and rending changes which shall
befall the Nations. So then shaking contains

1. A change and alteration.

2 Such as is accompanied with annihilation, or bringing of things to nothing.

3. Annihilation in a way to execute justice.

4. It denotes sometime also alteration from bad to good, from good to better.
Shaking in a way of mercy, or at least bringing good out of evil; So here its
shaking by way of a promise. Take hence these five Observations.

Obs. 1.
1. The nature of things here are liable to change. God only is immutable.

Obs. 2.
2. That the changes below are and may be Sudden, Violent, and Strange.


Obs. 3.
3. That yet they are righteous, and shall be gracious to Gods people.

Obs. 4.
4. That Jesus Christ himself has the highest hand in these changes.

Obs. 5.
5. That in these changes he shows himself the Lord of Hosts.

The Heaven and Earth. These four words, Heaven, Earth, Sea and Dry Land, are
taken two ways. Grammatically, Rhethorically.

1. Grammatically for such things in Nature as the letters of the words do
import, as the Earth for that part of the world which we tread on, and so the
like of the rest.

2. They are taken Rhetorically, when by a fine manner of speaking, an elegancy
of expression, they set forth some thing beside what they express in their
Grammatical sense: both ways agree to the text we are upon. Now observe in the
Rhetorical way there is a double acceptance.

1. By a Metonymie of the subject for the adjunct, Continentis pro contento,
when the thing containing is put for the thing contained. Heaven is put fo the
inhabitants of heaven, and so Earth, Sea and Dry Land, put for those that dwell
on the Earth, Sea, or Dry Land.

2. By a Metaphor or borrowed speech, because heaven is the highest, and in
comparison of that, earth is the lowest body; they are put to declare high and
low things: a little more to open these words, observe.

Heaven (...) signifies that part of the world which is opposite to the earth,
from (...) an adverbe of place (as some think) showing the distance of heaven,
as being most remote from the earth.

We read of the first, second and third heaven.

The first is called (...) or an expance, that which is nearest the Earth, and
turned round about it: thus we read of the windows of this heaven to be opened
when the rain fell, Genesis 8. of birds flying in this Heaven, Deuteronomy. 4.

The second Heaven is the place where the Stars are fixed, and so called the
starry heaven.

The third is the Seat of the blessed, Seeds Beatorum into which the Apostle
Paul was wrapped, 2 Cor. 12. 2.

Terra pedibus annima^^^m teritur.
And the Earth (...) that part of the world which is distinguished from heaven;
some derive it from (...) a word signifying to run, because beasts run upon it.
It Is the place where men dwell, Genesis 18. 18. sometime it signifies one Country
more then another, Genesis 41. 57. And all Countries came to Egypt because the
famine was sore in all Lands. Sometime it signifies a field; but here I take it
to denote a Continent, that part of the world that is distingusht from Seas and
Islands, the Maine-land.

The Sea (...) you have a plain description of that given by Moses, Genesis 1.
10. its the gathering together of the waters.

The dry Land (...). Arida the dry Land, as distinct from Heaven, Earth and
Seas: which I here take to be Islands, Lands in the midst of Sea; dry Land, yet
compassed about with water. From the words thus opened observe.

Obser. 1.
Jesus Christ will make great changes in the natural bodies of Heaven, Earth,
Sea and dry Land: This arises from the words taken Grammatically.

Obser. 2.
Jesus Christ will turn and change the inhabitants of Heaven and Earth and Sea
and dry Land: Even Angels and men; Men that dwell on the Continent, Islands and
Seas, and this arises from the Rhetorical Metonymie, whereby the thing
containing is put for the thing contained.

Obser. 3.
Jesus Christ will make great changes in the heavens and earth, in the high and
low things of Kingdoms and Peoples and Nations.

Having thus taken the words asunder, and given you the meaning of them, and
the observations from them, we will now put them together again, in this short
form following.

Hag. 2. 6, 7, 8. contains a prophetical promise, wherein observe The promise
is propounded* wherein consider 4 things. 1. The person promising The Lord, of
Hosts, (...)
2. The things promised, which are three 1. The shaking, twice repeated, set
out by its object, The heavens. The earth. The seas. The dry land. The nations.
All nations.
2. The coming of Christ, called the desire of Nations. All.

3. Of filling, set out by 1. What. This house. 2 With what, with Glory.


3. The persons to whom this promise is made Zorobabel Joshua All the people.
This is taken from v. 4.

4. The time of performance, and that is, a Set time, once. Short time, Yet a
little while. Time repeated, Yet once more.

The promise is confirmed to our faith, by the repetition of the first words,
Thus says the Lord, at the end of verse. 7.


CHAP. IIII. Shows how in the great turns of Ages God dispenses himself in
the way of a Promise: for
FIrst this holds out God as a Father. 2. This exalts the honor of Christ the
Son. 3. This honors God in the person of the Spirit. 4. This makes notably for
the security and improvement of Grace. 5. This confounds the men of the world.
6. This greatens our estate. Use of Instruction and Exhortation.

You have heard the meaning of these words (Thus says the Lord) that they hold
out a promise, and that the Lords saying is not a bare expressing of a thing to
be so or so; but an expression with an engagement of himself; its a saying by
way of a promise: Hence we shall begin with this observation.

Doctr.
That the Lord in the great turns and The Lord in changes dispenses himself
by the way of a promise.
changes of all Ages, dispenses himself by the way of promises.

Thus he did to Adam in Paradise: Do this and live; the like after his fall:
The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head.

It was a great turn when all the world was drowned; and then how does God
dispense himself? he makes a Covenant with Noah, Genesis 9. 13. I will set my bow
in Genesis 9. 13.
the clouds, and it shall be a token of Covenant between me and the Earth.

It was no small turn when Terah and others were grossly defiled by Idolatry,
then for God to call Abraham out; but how does he do it? by making a Covenant
with him, Genesis 17. 4. Behold my Covenant Genesis 17. 4.
is with thee, and thou shall be a father of many Nations.

We are not ignorant what variety of changes Jacob had experience of; but God
supports him by his promise, Genesis 28. 15. Behold I am with thee, and will keep
thee in all places whither thou go. Genesis 46. 1. Israel takes his journey for
Egypt, but v. 3. he has this viaticum, this provision by the way, I am the God
of thy Father; fear not to go down to Egypt, for I will make of thee a great
Nation: It was a great and mighty work to bring Israel out of Egypt, and behold
then, Exodus 34 27, 28. The Lord said to Moses; Write these words; for after the
tenor of these words have I made a covenant with thee.

Again, in the time of the Judges, Josh. 1. 5. and of Kingly power, 2 Chronicles.
1. 9. In the time of the captivity under the King of Babylon, Jer. 25. 11, 12.
the like when they came out of captivity, Hag. 1. 8. In all these times God
dispensed himself in way of a promise: So he does in Gospel Times; Acts 2. 39.
The promises are to you and to your children. 1 Timothy 4. 8. Godliness is
profitable for all things (and so in all conditions) and has the promise of
the life that now is, and that that is to come. The New Heavens and the New
earth do certainly holdout the greatest alterations that ever shall be; but
this is by promise, 2 Pet. 3. 13.

The demonstration of this we shall hold out in these six passages.

Reas. 1.
This promising way holds out God as a Father in his glorious excellency of
wisdom This holds out God as a Father.
and Immensity. All creatures are measured by the present time; but God in
promising, shows he has all times in his power; creatures have only the
(...), the present Now: but God is and was, and will be: Oh! the riches of his
unspeakable mercy: the present time is a short moment, God cannot express his
love to us in it sufficiently, nor are we in capacity to receive his love, and
therefore he takes the time to come, and puts it into the promise, yea he takes
eternity to do it in.

A promising way glorifies the power of God, Romans 4. 21. Abraham was fully
persuaded that what he had promised he was able also (...) to perform it: God
does not put you off with a promise because he is weak, but because he is able
to perform: Be not troubled because you have not present possession; for he is
faithful that promised, Heb. 10. 22.

Reas 2. Exalts the honor of Christ the Son.
This promising way exalts the honor of Jesus Christ; for all promises are
made to him first, therefore he is called The Covenant, Isa. 42. 6. The
promises center in him, and have firstly their performance in and to, and for
him, 2 Cor. 1. 20. In him yea, and in him Amen. We are creatures at too great a
distance from God; he cannot firstly and immediately deal with us, we are too
low for that dealing, but he deals with Christ. We are all promised as a seed
to him, Isa. 53. 10. to him is the everlasting Kingdom promised, and he waits
till his enemies become his footstool, Psalm. 110. 1. that is, his enemies shall
be so far from prevailing against him, as that they shall be (although they
intend not so) a means of making him ascend into his throne, as a man climbs
into the throne by the footstool; the spirit is first on Him, and from him on
us; God is first his Father, then ours, first his God then ours, John 20. 17. I
go to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God.

Reas. 3. Honor God in the person of he spirit.
This honors God, in the person of the spirit who is called, Ephesians. 1. 13.
The holy Spirit of promise; the reason is this; because all promises carry in
their nature, a real application of that good which the promise holds out. Now
applicationwork is proper unto God, in that person of the Spirit: God must have
honor in this person, as well as in the person of the Joel 2. 28.
Father, or Son: Therefore in the last days, the spirit shall be poured out
upon all flesh: This spirit shall appear to rule men more in Kingdoms and
Governments, in matters of Peace and War, then ever yet our eyes have seen.

This makes notably for the advantage Reas. 4. Makes for the advantage of Gods
people.
of Gods people; and that,

1. To render them in a secure estate: when our stock was in Adams hand, we
lost all; but now its in Christ's, and under a promise, its safe and secure,
Romans 4. 16. If our good estate did depend on any thing in Us, it could not but
be uncertain, because we are so; but being of promise, of grace in him, and
faith in us, it renders our state secure.

2. Promises from God draw forth performances from Us: praemiis ducimur, we are
led by rewards. 2. Cor. 7. 1. we must Cleanse, and cleanse thoroughly, not from
some, but all filthiness, not only of the flesh, but of the spirit; and all
on this 2 Cor. 7. 1.
ground, Having (...) these promises, we must not only be holy and in the fear
of God, but perfect holiness still upon this ground, Having these promises:
God will have it known, his people dare trust him, and fall to work upon a
promise, although they have little in hand. It is that which commends the
ingenuity of their obedience, that they work upon a promise. No marvel then if
God dispense himself in that way which is so improving to his childrens grace.

Reas. 5. confounds the men of the world.
5. This notably confounds the men of the world; Its foolish to flesh and blood
to live on a promise; they live by sense, and not by faith, and therefore are
carried on, and taken with present things. The whole Gospel is foolishness to
them; what are then the promises? which are the Gospel of the Gospel. This way
revolves things into the mere power, goodness and fidelity of God, which men
of the world are strangers to; this way of converse is too high for them; they
are brought in jeering at the promise, 2 Pet. 3. 4. Turn them to Corn and
Wine, O! they are good, they have some relish with their palates; but as for
the promises, they seem dull, dry, flat things to them: Oh foolish worldlings,
who are so full of the world, that they loath these honey combs, these great
and precious promises.

Reas. 6. greatens our estate.
6. Lastly, this greatens our estate, our reversions being more then all that
we have in present possession; yea it exceedingly hightens all that we do now
enjoy: when mercies come in a promise, they come dipped in the blood of Jesus,
they luster with the light of Gods countenance, thus the sleep of a righteous
man is better then that of other men; because there is something of a
love-token in it: He gives his beloved sleep, Psalm. 127. 2. God has general
ways whereby he dispenses himself as a faithful Creator; a Sun for all,
rain, clouds, winter, summer, seedtime and harvest for All: But still he
reserves his bosom to his own, he remembers his Covenant for them, and
besprinkles them with intimate loves. Yea in those favors which Gods people
enjoy in common with the world, there are sweet intermixtures of special love,
desirable interweavings of gracious favors.

Use 1. of Instruction.

Great turns have great wants.


In times of great turns, you will meet with great wants, want of counsel,
activity, fidelity: you had therefore need of a promise to recourse to. It may
be provisions may fall short, promises are rich storehouses: your dangers are
as many as your wants; where will you find a rock of ages, but in the
promises? Turning times are difficult times, (...): Be not troubled as if some
strange thing befell you, when you find wants, difficulties and necessities
arising: make not ^ad conclusions, give not all over for lost and gone; say
not, I have had these salvations and deliverances, but now I shall surely
perish. No, no, God reserveth much in his own hand, much in the promises; and
to him and them, and them in him must you look.

Consider how in all ages and great That God then withers the arm of flesh.
blasteth the white blosome of the creature, so that it cannot help; Its a
Promise, a Promise must do you good; that revolveth the work into Gods power,
grace and goodness. Go to the creatures you have loved, and been fond of, but
they will prove vain; The stout-hearted are spoiled, they have slept their
sleep, and all the men of Psalm. 76. 5.
might have not found their hand, Psalm. 76. 5. How little can men do, if they
have no hands? and as little, if they have hands and cannot find them. The
wise man shall not glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength,
nor the honorable man in his dignity, but God will be exalted in his goodness.

Have you not seen great houses without inhabitants, whole Towns and numerous
Families cut off, Honor in the dust, and wise counsels turned into
foolishness? Oh! then learn now, learn experimentally to see the creatures
vanity.

Take notice Gods ways are in the great deeps, and his footsteps are not
known: Gods ways are in the deep.
because he acts not according to our counsels, or according to former
praecedents, nor according to present advantages, as we do, but according to
his own gracious Will, according to his promise. Now God in his promise
reserves times, and methods, measures and instruments, in his own hand. He will
work now, not then or then, and not now; so much, and no more, by these, and
not by those; he will sill by emptying, build by destroying; we many times in
our thoughts, limit the holy One of Israel, and methodize his ways, when alas
we know them not: But Gods promise is as it were the limiting of himself; and
how glorious is that way, that does measure him that is unmeasurable, bound him
that is infinite? but it is because its a measure and bound of his own making;
and so much for the use of Instruction.

Use 2. To search the promises.
Now follows a word of Exhortation, To provoke you to search out the promises
that concern the present age and times we live in. Its the commendation of some
of the children of Issaker, That they had understanding of the times to know
what Israel ought to do, 1 Chronicles. 12. 32. Father Jacob, Genesis 49. 1. excit^s
his sons to attend to his prophesies on this account, That I may tell you what
shall be fall you in the last days. Isa. 2. 2. In the last days the mountain
of the Lords house shall be established on the top of the Mountains. Acts 2.
17. It shall come to pass in the last days (says God) that I will pour out
my spirit on all flesh, and your sons and daughters shall prophecy.

2. Pet. 3. 3. There shall come in the last days Scoffers: Is it not glorious
to behold what Gods people shall do to other people in the last days? Numb.
24. 5. Evil will befall in the last days, because you will do evil in the
sight of the Lord.

Ezekiel. 38. 16. Speaking of Gog, its prophesied, Thou shall come up against my
people of Israel as a cloud to cover the Land, it shall be in the last days.
By this means we come to converse with God under a Dan. 2. 28.
glorious title of Revealing secrets.

The Angel Gabriel thought it a work befitting him, Dan. 10. 14. I am come to
make thee understand what shall befall thy people in the latter days. Hos. 3.
5. They shall seek the Lord their God and David their King, and shall fear the
Lord and his goodness in the latter days. Is it not a thing desirable to be
conversing with the same Revelations that God gave to Christ, and Christ shows
unto his servants? even things that must shortly come to pass, Rev. 1. 1. Oh
that I might prevail with you to study the Revelation more; we run after
Palmisters, Figure-casters, Astrologers to know things to come, which they
cannot declare unto us, and in the mean season we neglect these precious
declarations of God which would sweetly teach us: Now as motives to persuade
you, consider,

Moti. 1. This renders you children of wisdom.
This renders you children of wisdom, wise to know the times: Gods promises
are the best conclusions; In them, we come to have notions of the times
according to Gods thoughts.

This shows a neern^sse of familiarity with God, Rev. 4. 1. Come hither (its a
friendly phrase) an^ I will show thee things that must be hereafter. Friends
unbosome secrets one to another; These secrets of the Lord are with them that
fear him: By thus conversing with these Revelations we come to be immediately
in the Spirit, Rev. 4. 2.

Mot. 2. Preserves against sin.
Its a blessed preservative against the infection of sin: Our minds are apt to
wanto^nesse, and giddiness. Oh! but how does the consideration of Jesus Christ
set forth in his seven eyes and seven horns, Rev. 5. 4. his providence, and
his power, cut off this wanton giddiness? Its a great evil to backslide in
heart. Oh! but eying these promises, keeps the mind intent on God: the mind
thus set, sweetly invoaks the heart, and holds it to a re-ingagement of better
behavior. Formality is one of the great evils that besets us, which is, when
we act on low grounds, common custom, and example, and with low spirits: Let
these promises dwell richly in you, and you will be higher. We are never worse
then when we are earthlyminded; now nothing is so proper to work off that, as
to be molded by these Mot. 3. Advances your faith, and love.
Gospel-prophesies and promises.

This is a way to advance your life of faith and love. God opens his bosom
secrets in dearest love in these promises; and this is mighty to cause a
rebound of love in your souls: He gives you great and precious promises, and
your faith receives them: Oh then! let your faith work by love, and love by
faith, and both be fixed on this blessed object of God in his promises: To live
by faith, is to have faith acted in our present lives, and that according to
the promises of the present age. To love is actually to close with God as the
chief and most suitable good, and this he appears to be in his promises.

Mot. 4. Conquers difficulties.
Behold here a proper course to Conquer difficulties, and discouragements: The
best of Saints have their ebbings and damps, their heart-divisions, and
heart-contractions. Turn, oh turn to the promises, and then it will be full
Sea with you; the light and heat there will easily expel your dumps and damps,
and at once unite and enlarge you.

Mot. 5. Makes us watchful and dutiful.
I am sure you would be watchful and dutiful; and I am sure also, that this
trading with promises will keep you waking and working. Shall I mind you how
apt you are to nod, to grow secure and careless? and is it not from hence that
you forget the promises of this latter age? did you weight them well, you would
find how much work lies on you, and Mot. 6. Promotes the praise of God.
lies undone.

Its a good thing to give thanks, to praise is pleasant and comely; and does
there not lie a sweet hidden virtue in Gospel-promises to promote this work?
The Revelations of these latter times by the Prophet John, how is it interwoven
with Saints praises, with Church-praises? Rev. 4. 8, 9, 10, 11. Thou art worthy
to receive glory and honor, Rev. 7. 12. Blessing, Glory, and Wisdom, and
Thanksgiving, and Honor, and Power, and Might, be unto our God for ever and
ever, Rev. 11. 17. We give thanks to thee Lord God Almighty, which art and wast
and art to come, because thou have taken to thee thy great power, and have
reigned, Rev. 15. 3, 4. They sing the song of Moses and of the Lamb, saying,
Great and marvelous are thy works Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy
ways O thou King of Saints: who shall not fear thee O Lord, and glorify thy
Name, Rev. 16. 5. Thou art righteous O Lord, who art and wast and shall be,
because thou have thus judged, Rev. 19. 1. Alleluja, Salvation, Glory and
Honor and Power unto the Lord our God; for true and righteous are his
judgments. To conclude then, you must be a praising people as well as a
praying people; converse more with God in his promises, and you cannot but be
praising of him.

CHAP. V. Shows that Christ being about to perform his promises, causes
alterations in the Natural bodies of Heaven and Earth, which is thus
demonstrated.
FIrst, Christ has given a being and constant course to Heaven and Earth. 2.
He maintains that being. 3. The creatures thus made are at his beck. 4. Its his
pleasure that sometime they should step aside from their ordinary constant
course. 5. Christ governs this turning aside. 6. These Turns carry with them
the nature of Signs. Four Reasons added and Uses.

I will shake the Heavens and the Earth, the Sea and the dry Land: These words
according as was laid down in Chapter three, being taken Grammatically and
properly, they afford this observation That, Doct. Christ works alterations in
the natural bodies of heaven and earth.


When Christ is about to perform his prophetical promises, he causes
alteration in the bodies and natural courses of Heaven, Earth, Sea and dry Land.

Heaven and Earth in their prime and litteral signification, hold out that
great frame that God in the beginning formed out of nothing. Now in this great
Fabric are the alterations we speak of. I should not have pitched on this
observation, but that I find the holy Ghost in all the eminent turns to make
some impression and mention this way. It was a great turn reduced all the
world to eight persons; but then you know the windows of Heaven were opened,
and the fountains of the great deep broken up, and the rain was upon the
Earth, Genesis 7. 12, 13.

To turn Israel out of Egyptian bondage was a great turn, and then the Red
Sea must be dried up, Exodus 14. 16.

At the giving of the Law, Exodus 20. 8. there are thundrings and lightnings and
the voice of a Trumpet, and the mountain smoking.

Isreal's preservation in the Wilderness was a whole continued series of
Turns, and then we read of a Pillar of cloud and a pillar of fire, Number. 14.
14. they had water out of the Rock followed them, 1 Cor. 10. 4. and Mannah
rained down, Exodus 16. 35.

So in the New Testament at the birth of Christ there is a Star which is callep
His, his Star in the East, Mat. 2. 2. At the death of Christ, Mat. 27. 51. The
earth quakes and rocks rend, and the graves were opened. At the sending of the
Spirit, Acts 2. 2. suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing
mighty wind: and Acts 4. 31. When they had prayed the place was shaken. When
Paul and Sylas must be delivered out of prison, Acts 16. 26. suddenly there
was a great Earthquake. Now to clear this observe,

Christ gives a being to all creatures.
1. Jesus Christ has given a being and a constant course of operation to
Heaven and Earth, Sea and dry Land. John 1. 3. All things were made by him, and
without him was not any thing made that was made. Prove. 30. 4. He ascends up to
Heaven and descends, he gathers the wind in his fist, he binds the waters in
a garment, and establishes all the ends of the Earth. Psalm. 104. 2. He covers
himself with light, and lays the beams of his chambers in the waters; He
makes clouds hit Chariots, and rides on the wings of the wind. Psalm. 19. 4,
5. He sets a Tabernacle for the Sun, and gives it a race to run.

Maintains what he has given
2. Jesus Christ does not only give them a being, but also maintains what he
has given: gives them a constant course, and maintains them in it; as men and
Saints have their constant work to do, so likewise have other creatures, and
Christ upholds them and their course too. Psalm. 75. 3. I bear up the pillars
of the earth. Heb. 1. 2, 3. By him are the worlds made, and he upholds all
things by the word of his power. Jer. 31. 35. He gives the Sun for a light by
day, and the ordinances of the M^on and Stars for a light by night, and
divides the Sea when the waves thereof roar: and to show their constancy of
operation. Jer. 33. 20. there is mention made of the Covenant of the day and
the Covenant of the night, which none can break.

They are at his beck.
3. These things thus made and maintained by him, are at his beck. He made
three days together without a Sun, Genesis 1. by reflecting the element of fire
downward (as some say) and made the nights by reversing it upward, Psalm. 136.
6. Whatsoever he pleased, that did he in heaven and earth, in the sea and in
the deep places: Heaven and Earth, Sea and deeps, are all at his pleasure. V.
7. He makes the vapor to ascend, and lightnings for the rain; he brings
the wind out of his Treasuries. Psalm. 147. 15. He sends his command forth, and
his word runs very swiftly. His word, his command is enough to make all run;
as he made all by his word, so by his word and will he governs all. Math. 8.
27. He rebukes the wind and the Sea, and they obey him: His rebuke and the
creatures obedience fall in together.

4. Its his pleasure sometime that they They sometime step aside from their
ordinary course.
should step aside from their ordinary course. The ordinary course of the Sun is
to be running of his race. But Josh. 10. 12. Sun, stand thou still in Gibeon,
and thou Moon in the valley of Ajalon. The ordinary course is for the heavens to
give down rain; but in Ahabs time 1 Kings 17. 1 there was neither dew nor
rain. The ordinary course for the earth it is to bring forth corn and grass
for the food of man and beast; but in Joseph's time, Genesis 41. 54. The dearth
was in all Lands.

Chirst guides those steppings.
5. That Jesus governs them in all these turnings aside; that is, he acts them,
and orders them to his ends and interests; and so there is a sweet harmony in
their excentrical motion. When the Sun stood still in Joshua's time, it was
that Israel might be avenged of the Amorites their enemies. The dearth was in
all Lands, that so Joseph might be exalted, and Israel provided for. It raines,
or raines not, that God might be honored in the word of his Prophet Elijah the
Tishbite.

When God takes away the power of burning from the fire, it was that his
servants the companions of Daniel should not be consumed, but walk in the
midst of the fire and have no hurt, Dan. 3. 25. God will not only show his
goodness to his people by the ordinary and common course of creatures, but
sometime he makes them step aside out of their common course, to answer their
prayers, and help them in their streights: and Now, in our days, though he
works not miracles, he works wonderful things, Miranda, though not Micacula.
Though he work not against the course of the creatures nature; yet he alters
it so, that it gives us cause to wonder: yea and withal in this way he brings
vengeance on his and his peoples enemies. It Is light in Goshen, when darkness
is on all the Land of Egypt. Isa. 24. 20. The Earth reels too and fro like a
Drunkard, and shall be removed like a Cottage; The transgression thereof shall
fall heavy upon it, and it shall fall and not rise again.

These turns have the nature of signs.
6. That these Turns in Heaven and Earth thus ordered by Christ, carry with
them the nature of signs.

Luke 21. 21. There shall be Signs in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the
Stars; and upon the earth distress of Nations and perplexity, the Sea and the
waves roaring.

Acts 2. 19 I will show wonders in heaven above (...), and signs, (...), in
the earth beneath, blood and fire and vapor of smoke. A Sign is that which
besides it self, introduces some other thing into the understanding; as when
you see smoke, your understanding does not terminate in the smoke, but rises
higher to think of some fire that causes that smoke: So when you see these
strange postures in these natural bodies, your mind rests not barely in the
contemplation of them, but your understanding looks on them as forerunners of
other things, that shall follow after.

Now among signs, some are Rememorative, Signs.
Demonstrative, Prognostical, Practical.

Rememorative.
Rememorative signs are such which call to mind things past, and so refresh
the memory; the Bow in the clouds tells us, God did destroy the world by water,
though he will do so no more.

Demonstrative.
Demonstrative signs are such which declare a thing present, as smoke is a
sign of present fire, fire then burning.

Prognostical.
Prognostical signs are such as foretell in general things to come. Thus God
may, and sometime does, by these changes in these natural great bodies,
signify and foretell, that there shall be great turns, and changes, in the
great bodies Politic of Kingdoms, and Commonwealths: but what these
particular turns shall be, and the several issues of them, the signs in
heaven and earth cannot foretell; for they are not practical signs.

Practical.
Practical signs are such as in their nature cause and produce those things
whereof they are signs: but such signs the heavens and earth are not; they do
not in their nature cause the turns of Nations, nor are the turns of Nations
their effects.

Now whether this position do contribute any favorable aspect to judicial
Astrology, that we shall show in the Appendix, joined to this Treatise, and
pass it by now: only resolve this Question.

Why does Christ when he intends great turns in States, make such changes in
Heaven and Earth?

I answer in four Reasons.

Reas. 1. Christ begins to take his power.
This is the beginning of Christ his taking to himself his great power, Rev.
11. 17. Christ has all power on earth, as well as in heaven; he is sovereigne
Lord of all creatures, as well as King of Saints. Col. 1. He is the First borne
of every creature, as well as head of the Church, and therefore he does thus
manifest himself. There be many forerunners before the King comes; reckon
these among the least and lowest of Christ's servants, yet surely what knees
they have they bend to him. They are ready with their motion, and conjunctions
to honor him, and in their language to tell you of his transcendent glory that
is following. They are obedient, and step aside out of their ordinary way to
let you know of their Lords drawing nigh. Christ could deal with Kingdoms and
Nations without these Signs: But since he has these creatures, he will make
use of them; yea and their extravagances shall do him good service. Men stop
their ears at the voice of the ordinary course of Heaven and Earth, and will
not hear; but when he turns their courses into Signs and wonders, Reas. 2.
Speaks to all the world.
then they shall hear.

By this means he speaks to all the World: when Christ himself speaks, it
must be with a mighty voice. We low creatures do but mutter and whisper, and
few there be that hear our voice; but when he speaks, heaven and earth, and
all the world shall hear him. When he speaks by the word of his Gospel, every
creature must hear, Mar. 16. 15. and his Apostles which were the Teachers, they
must have the gift of tongues, and be able to speak the language of every
Nation where they come, that so the Parthians, Medes and Elamites might hear
as well as the Jews. Their line is gone out into all the earth, Psalm. 19. 4.
Christ has another way of speaking to all the world, namely by signs in
heaven and earth; those that will not hear his Gospel, yet will listen to their
language. Signs have their voice, as well as men, Exodus 4. 8. If they will not
believe the voice of the first sign. Turks, Jews, Heathens, Profane
persons, which regard not the sound of the Gospel; yet will now be Auriti,
quick of hearing: as Christ in his preaching spoke, as one having authority; So
he speaks now, and commands attention. Prove. 18. 23. The poor uses
entreaties, and its the poverty of Christ's messengers that they come
beseeching, and entreating; but Christ himself speaks in a commanding way, to
let all men know, bad as well as good, that he is about his work, and his
great work. Earthly men mind the earth, speak of it, account it their own; and
Christ will meet them there, and speak from, and by the Earth to them.

Reas. 3. Creatures are not in that estate he intends.
This way of working Signs, minds us, that the creatures are not in that
state he intendes them; By this change upon them, he hints unto us their
re^^auration into the liberty of the sons of God, Romans 8. 21. In their
ordinary course while they serve those who do disservice to Christ, they
groan, Romans 8. 21. and to step out of this road to subserve Christ, it is a
forerunner Romans 8. 22. The creatures groaning opened.

Genesis 1. 26.


of their liberty. It Is plain God gave man dominion over the Fish of the Sea,
and over the Fowls of the Air, and over the Cattle, and over all the Earth,
Genesis 1. 26. To man, that is true; but to what man? to man in what condition? it
was not given to finful man, but to man after Gods Image and likeness, as it
is in the same verse; to man before his fall, to righteous man, to (...) to man
made upright, as it is Eccles. 7. 29. Upright, according to the rule of his
Creation; not to wicked and ungodly man; So that the prime end of all creatures
service, is directed to righteous man, to man after Gods Image and likeness:
But to serve wicked and unrighteous man, is beside their prime end, and
therefore according to their nature, they groan, that is, they are not
pleased, because they obtain not their first end; it is true they are not
intelligent, and so they know it not; but yet its against the first Law of
their creation: Its not fit they should know it; for then it would grieve them,
and they have not sinned* and so have not let in grief upon themselves. The
Mathematical Be, and the Artificial Spider, make their combs, and houses,
according to the rules of reason; yet they know not what they do: So those
creatures serve, but not according to their prime end, though they know it not;
yet God knows it, and will right it, and by using of them in this
extraordinary way, he tells us so, and would not suffer them thus to groan but
that he knows how to honor himself and restore them. Reas. 4. Christ draws
out spiritual actings.


By these Turns and appearances in natural bodies Christ knows how to draw
forth spiritual actings in his people: Let it thunder, or lighten, though his
people are assured of his love, and favor, and that they lie in his bosom;
yet they entertain him in that his voice with an awful fear and reverence;
that his mighty voice makes them in a holy way to tremble, and yet to trust.
When signs are in Heaven and Earth, Saints rest not in the admiration of what
they see, or hear, but search into the blessed word of truth, for the meaning
of those signs. Grace makes a servant to be divine in drudgery, and not to eat
and drink but to Gods glory: So likewise not to see or hear the signs in
heaven and earth, but to eye him that works in, and by them: If Heathens and
Strangers hear their voice, sure his own people and servants much more, and
more to purpose. Others wonder at what they know not; these know and wonder.
Others are afraid, and troubled, these fear and believe, believe and wait,
wait and pray.

Use 1. See Christ's excellency.
See hence the excellency of Christ: the Gospel glories to hold out that
excellency, and Saints glory to see the reflection of it in the Gospel; and
heaven and earth here glory to trumpet it out: View this excellency. 1. In that
he causes these alterations in Heaven and Earth, and that exalts him. Men
cannot make them, they cannot stop nor open the bottels of the clouds, or the
windows of heaven, but Christ can. They can neither raise nor cease the st^rme
and tempest, but Christ can. 2. This tells you; he that can do this, can do
more; he can make enemies become friends, and friends more friendly. He can
change counsels and decrees, yea the thoughts and frames of our hearts. Laban
came with a heart boy^ing in passion against Jacob, but God met him and
suffered him not to hurt him. Ravens are greedy fowls, and devour their prey,
and yet as greedy as they are, they must bring the prophet bread.

Its vain to oppose Christ.
Its a vain thing to set against Christ, Job* 9. 4. He is wise in heart and
mighty in strength; who has hardened himself against him and has prospered?
If heaven and earth cannot serve fully in their ordinary course, he will change
their course and serve himself by that change. Exodus 14. 25. He takes off the
Chariot wheels and makes them drive heavily; whereupon the Egyptians cry out,
Let us fly from the face of Israel, for the Lord fights for them: you are
surely much over matched, when you have heaven and earth, and the God of both
against you.

Its easy to believe promises of this life shall be performed.
Its no hard thing to believe that the this life should be performed, while we
remember what he does in Earth as well as Heaven: The meek shall inherit the
earth: and obedient ones shall eat the good things of the Land, Psalm. 37. 11.
Prove. 3. 16. Length of days are in Wisdoms right hand, and in her left hand
riches and honor. Say not your enemies are many, mighty, crafty and malicious,
and you are few, and weak, and how shall your tranquillity be? Remember,
Christ has this power to change their strength into weakness, and your Use 2.
of Exhortation. 1. Consider Christ in all the creatures.
weakness into strength.

Lastly, let it exhort you to these four things.

1. Consider Christ in all changes on the creatures; and this will make natural
Philosophy to become spiritual. Are there Ecclipses of the Sun, blazing Stars,
Meteors, unusual Winds and Storms, Hail, Snow, Thunder and Lightning? Then
let your souls mount up, in thoughts and fear of Christ; while Astrologers are
vexing their minds with strained applications of these things, here you are
taught whether to refer them; Remember Christ in the dry years we have had, in
the unusual high Tides, and such like Occurences.

Christ more then men; Fear before Christ.
when they are angry, you are troubled; when they frown, you fear; and is
there not more cause to fear him that overrules the constellations, turns
about the winds? Jer. 5. 22. Fear you not me says the Lord, and will ye not
tremble at my person who have placed the sand for the bound of the Sea?

Expect great things.
and the expectation of great things. A little faith will not suffice, when God
speaks and works; we must Romans 4.
be strong in faith if we will give glory to God, not considering the carnal
reasons, examples, customs and experiences, which may be produced and pressed:
but to go on in our persuasion, that God which has made Heaven and Earth,
will complete his work for his own and his Sons glory.

Praise Christ.
4. Surely Christ is to be exalted in

CHAP. VI. Shows the change and the ministration of Angels in these Turns:
Thus,
First Christ is head of Angels. 2. They must serve his Saints. 3. They serve
in destruction of their enemies. 4. They must have apparent honor for this
service. 5. They are in the visions, and so in the execution. 6. They have
Kingdome-worke. 7. They and Saints are joined together. 8. They are used in the
last, which are the best dispensations. 9. Christ must have his Angels as well
as the Dragon. Use of Instruction and Exhortation.

Concerning Heaven and Earth taken properly you heard in the former Chapter:
Look on heaven and earth now, as spoken by a figure, setting down the thing
containing for the thing contained, and so heaven containing the Angels, is put
for the Angels contained in heaven: but then the question will be, How are
these Heavens shaken? or plainly thus, How are these Angels in Heaven, said to
be changed?

Angels called Heavens.
Angels are called Heavens, because they dwell there, Caeli quia caelicol^,
Heavens because the inhabitants of heaven: thus Job. 15. 15.
Job 15. 15. The Heavens are not clean in his sight, that is, the Angels of
heaven are not clean: Not, that they have any sin to pollute them; but
weighing them with him who is the holy, holy, holy One, they can bear no
weight. Ne ipsi quidem caeli mundi sunt cum ipso collati, quantumvis a terrenis
istis faecibus immunes. Beza: The heavens, although free from earthly dregs,
are not clear, compared with him: His eyes are more pure then to behold any
iniquity; his holiness is himself, and so unmeasurable. The Angels though
holy, yet is their holiness by measure, their holiness is limited, they are
but creatures, though holy and heavenly creatures; and compared with that
infinite One, they are said not to be clean: Job 4. 18. Behold he put no trust
in his servants, and his Angels he charged with folly: Nullo modo conferenda
est illorum justitia cum justitia Dei quae modis omnibus infinita est. Their
righteousness is no way to be compared with his, which is altogether infinite:
and this it may be is hinted in those latter words, In his sight. They are
clean indeed in our sight, and we can find no impurity in them, but not so in
his sight: Mat. 6. 20. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven, that is,
by the Angels in heaven.

Now how these heavens, these Angels may be said to be shaken is the great
Question. How Angels are changed.


We speak here of good Angels, whom we look on as confirmed in their state by
Christ; and how then are they shaken?

Philip Melanchthon who was called Germaniae Luscinia, Germanies Nightingale,
Heaven shaken when Christ takes our nature.
referring this prophecy of Haggai to Christ his coming in the flesh, says,
Movit coelos, quia Deus assumpsit humanam Naturam: He shook the heavens
because God assumed humane nature; and there is a certain truth in that,
although the words carry more in them: It was a great shake of Heaven, when
Christ who was higher then the heavens, took our nature on him.

At Christ's birth.
Carthusian referrs it to the appearance of Angels at the birth of Christ:
Movet coelos quando cives coelestes apparuerunt hominibus concinnentes: When
the Multitude of the heavenly hosts appeared p^aysing God and saying, Glory to
God in (...) highest, Luke 2. 13, 14.

At Gospel preaching. 1 Pet. 1. 12.
that even the Angels were in at the preaching of the Gospel, 1 Pet. 1. 12.
which things (namely the things o* the G^^pel) the Angels desire to look into,
(...) from a word (...) incurvo me ut (...) which signifies, I bow down my
self that I may see, arguing an a^dency of affection, and the undergoing (as
it were) some difficulty to obtain a Vision. They admired and looked, and ^he
more they looked, the more they admired; like those that could not satisfy
themselves in what they liked and looked after.

New things to Angels changed when God reveals new things to them.
Angels, then in some regard they receive a change; for they then know that
which they knew not before, and in that reception of new Revelations may truly
be said to be under some mutation or change.

And who knows, but God may reveal new things to them concerning the great
works which he is about to do in the World? Angels know some things, and much
more then we, but not all: they know not so much but they may know more: Angels
may grow in knowledge, as well as men; and all growth is a change, a change
from a l^sse quantity Omnis locutio Dei ad angelos est illumi^atio.
to a greater. Angels are Gods servants; and his speaking to them, is his
illigh^ning of them to know his will, and knowing to do it.

Christ is said to shake the Angels in regard When they have new employment.
of that new employment he puts them to; It is true Angels have a perfection: et
quod perf^ctum est, non recipit mutationem in p^jus, says Drusius, and that
which is perfect receives not a change into a worse condition. So then though
we ascribe a change to Angels, we make not their condition worse; They ^ave a
stable being, and so continue in their wisdom, strength and happiness; bu^
yet are liable to change, in regard of their ministration, which may be applied
unto diverse things: Angeli sunt mutabiles quoad applicationem virtu^um ad
diversa: Aquin. when that virtuous efficacious power which is in Angels, is
applied to things that are diverse one from another, and such things as have
some opposition one against another in their nature; the Angels themselves are
said to be changed, because there is a change in the object, about which their
power is conversant; the object not being the same now, that formerly: as for
example.

It is a clear truth they were always ministering spirits for the good of those
who be heirs of salvation, Heb. 1. 14. But it has been the condition of these
heirs, to differ little from servants, to be here lost, afflicted, persecuted,
forsaken; and in these cases, in this their low condition, Angels have served
for their good: but surely their heavenly Father intends his sons and heirs
a better portion, a portion better then that of affliction and tribulation; and
that not in heaven only, but somewhat better upon earth: when as it is Rev.
21. 1, 2. The holy City the New Jerusalem shall be coming down from God out of
heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her husband, when the Tabernacle of God
shall be with men, and he shall be amongst them; then Joy, Peace, Truth and
Glory shall be unto them.

Now while Angels are ministering to these heirs, these Saints, thus changed in
their condition: May not the ministration and Angels in regard of it, be said
to be changed? Mutatio convenit Angelis in quantum ^de novo applicantur ad
aliquod ministerium: change agrees to Angels so far forth as they are applied
to some ministration anew.

It Is no derogation to good and holy Angels to attribute to them such a change
as a new ministration inferrs; When as the witnesses prophesied in sackcloth
all the time of Antichrist his 1260 days and were slain; I question not, but
the Angels were in all those days ministering spirits, for the good of these
prophesying, dying witnesses: but when these witnesses shall have a
resurrection, and ascension, and glory; The spirit of life from God enters into
them, Rev. 11. 11. They ascend up to heaven in a cloud, v. 12. Now I do as
little question but the Angels were ministering spirits for their good: but
being there was so vast a distance of the condition of these witnesses, and so
great a change, as from death to life, from slaughter to glory, from earth to
heaven: pardon me if I conceive the Angels in this their administration to be
shaken and changed. I shall say no more of this, but give you my farther
thoughts in this following Observation. Doct. Angels minister in these Turns.


Jesus Christ in the great Turning Providence of the latter Age employes the
ministration of Angels. It was so of Old, when Israel was delivered out of
Egypt, Exodus 23. 20. Behold I will send an Angel before thee to keep thee in
the way. The giving of the Law, was an eminent turn, but that was ordained by
Angels, Gal. 5. 19. In the time of the Judges an Angel appears to Gideon.
Judge. 6. 12. And again to Manoah, Judge. 13. 2. About Ahabs time when Israel
were become Idolatrous, and Ahaziah fell sick, 2 Kings 1. 3. The Angel of the
Lord spoke to Elijah. After the Captivity, when the Temple was to be built,
Zacharies prophesies are full of the apparitions of Angels, Zach. 1. 8. How
great was the turn when Christ was to be borne? and then Luke 1. 28. An Angel
salutes Mary: and it was no small turn when he came to suffer, and then you
find Angels ministering. In the prophesies of the time after Christ, all the
Visions are by Angels; when the Eastern and Western Empires are destroyed.
Rev. 8. 7, 8. and 9. 11. The Angels sound the Trumpets. When the last plagues
are to befall the Romish Antichrist, the Angels pour out the Vials: and when the
Bride, the Lambs Wife is to be seen, then an Angel must show it, Rev. 21. 9.
Now to clear this, observe.

For 1. Christ is head of Angels.
1. Jesus Christ God-man is head of Angels. Col. 1. 16. They were all made by
him, and for him; and so they are called Michael's Angels, Rev. 12. 7. they are
to serve and worship him, Heb. 1. 6. being all made subject to him, 1 Pet. 3.
22. They are his host, and he orders and commands them, Genesis 22. 1, 2. Christ
is the second Adam from heaven heavenly, and his host must be like himself, an
heavenly host. Luke 2. 13. A multitude of the heavenly host were praising God.
Christ has the great interest in Angels; they are, first for him, and then for
us. Angeli non sunt facti propter hominem principaliter, faith Aquinas: Angels
are not made for man principally: They are indeed made for us, but more for
Christ; for us subordinatly, for Christ principally, who must be ^i^st served.
When he was in his state of abasement, he said he could pray to the Father, and
he would send him more then Math. 26. 43.
twelve Legions of Angels; and hereafter when he shall come forth in state,
thousand thousands shall minister unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand
shall Dan. 7. 10.
stand before him: when he shall be revealed from heaven with the Angels of his
power, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. Mark the power that Angels have; its his power, and they
being so great a body, he must have preeminence above them.

Angels are to serve Christ, not in his Angels are to serve Christ in ^ members.
also. Heb. 1. 14. They are spirits, (...), immaterial substances, and
ministering spirits, (...), serving in a public way* sent forth as the
Apostles were sent forth, (...) by an immediate Commission from Christ, To
minister (...), Heb. 1. 14.
to be heavenly Deacons for their sakes who shall be heirs of salvation. Psalm.
Psalm. 91. 11.
91. 11. He shall give his Angels charge over thee; which is extendible to the
Members of Christ, as well as to Christ himself: Angels have charge of them,
from and under him. Psalm. 34. 7. The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about
them that fear him and delivers them. When Jacob is on his way, the Angels
of God met him, Genesis 32. 1. When Daniel is in the Lions Den, God sends his
Angel to shut the Lions mouths, Dan. 6. 12. When Peter is in prison, an Angel
delivers him, Acts 12. 8. and though Lazarus dye a beggar, yet shall he be
carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom, Luke 16. 22.

In destruction of enemies.
Saints in the destruction of their enemies. 2 Kings 19. 35. That night the
Angel smote in the Camp of the Assyrians 185000. And proud Herod, Acts 12. 32.
cannot escape the smiting of an Angel. God smote Sodom and Egypt by Angels:
Genesis 19. 3. and Exodus 12. 29. The Prophet John tells us of spiritual Egypt and
Sodom; and that they shall be destroyed: and who knows, but God may employ
these his servants in their destruction? Rev. 12. 7. Michael fights and his
Angels too; we are sure Antichrist shall be destroyed by the brightness of
Christ's coming; and surely when he shall come, he will come attended, and
without all doubt his attendance shall do their service to, and for him, for
him and his.

Angels are to have honor of their service.
demonstration and honor of, and for their service, to Christ and his World
then ever yet they have had. Angels are one of the highest ranks of creatures,
Psalm 103. 20. They are said to excel in strength, Psalm. 104. 4. To be spirits
and flames of fire: and undoubtedly they do, and have done a notable deal of
service for God. Psalm. 103. 21. They are said to do his pleasure, that which
is fully according to his will, and wherein he is delighted. Now how little
glory has God had from the creation, and administration of Angels? and again
how little glory have men returned to Angels? They are creatures in Gods hand,
whereby he does much for us; but how little do we own them? Now surely God
will find a time to glorify himself more, and a time wherein we Men shall
glorify Angels more; not in that excess and superstition that Papists do;
but according to his will and their workings.

Jesus Christ will have his providence Prophesies and Promises: Angels are in
the vision and so in the execution.
and therefore as Angels are still brought in in the Visions of John; so they
shall be drawn forth in the execution: and Angels sound the Trumpets, as you
heard, Rev. 8. cry; Babylon is fallen, fallen. Rev. 14. 8. pour out the Vials,
Rev. 16. that is, there is the ministration of Angels with that of the Saints;
Waldus, John Hus, Hierom of Prague, Wickliffe, Luther, Cal^in, and other
precious Saints and Martyrs cry Babylon down, and fill up the Vials; and do not
Angels too in their way? do they not join with them? Yes sure, and delight in
the work, because its Christ his work and will. Jesus Christ in setting up
his Kingdom among the Jews used Angels to speak, Heb. 2. 2. and in pulling
down Antichrists Kingdom, and setting up his own, he will use Angels again.

Angels have kingdom* work.
to them concerning Kingdoms, Dan. 10. 13. The Prince of the Kingdom of
Persia, is by Mr. Hugh Broughton expounded to be an Angel: Angels are the first
Princes in comparison of the Rulers of the earth (says he.) When whole Sodom
and Gomorrah must be destroyed, Genesis 19. ^. there be two Angels to do it. When
God has a Harvest, the Angels must be the Reapers and put in their Sickles.
When the Nation of the Assyrians is to be destroyed, it must be by an Angel.
When a National Pestilence is to come upon Israel, 2 Samuel 24. 16, 17. we read
of an Angel stretching out his hand: and truly when God has great and general
work to be done speedily, and together, I am apt to believe, that in such
workings he They shall be co^joyn'd with Saints hereafter; and so Now.
of Angels. Not that he needs them, or could not do without them, but because he
has made them, and bath them by him, he loves to make use of his own
workmanship.

Angels and Saints shall be joined together hereafter to make up the great
Congregation, and therefore Christ will join them in the work here. Heb. 12.
22, 23. The inumerable Company of Angels, and the general Church of the First
borne are joined together: Its Christ his method to begin things here, which he
will complete hereafter. Saints shall have Grace now, which shall be turned
into Glory hereafter: Great things are veiled now, which shall be unvailed
hereafter: Christ himself was here (...) in the form of a servant, but he
shall appear Lord of life and glory: Now we are the sons of God, 1 John 3. 2.
but it does not appear what we shall be. Now Saints and Angels are joined
together in the interest of Christ, which shall notably appear hereafter.

Christ being upon his greatest work uses his best servants.
Christ his last dispensations are his

1. His infinite Wisdom is working all the disorders of the world, to his own
glory; and so acts by such creatures as are the wisest and fullest of
understanding: we poor creatures act too much by sense, example and custom,
when Reason is against us: Angels not so.

2. Now he takes unto him his power, his great power, his ruling power, and so
brings in his servants, which have most strength and power in them, such as are
the Angels, Angeli moventur secundum totam vi^^ suam in id quod agunt; which
are moved according to their whole force, on that object on which they act.

3. He is now upon the more immediate administration of his Saints, and his
world, and therefore calls forth his servants which have the most immediate
being from him; Angeli sunt creati a Deo immediate.

4. Christ is now to show forth his unchangeablenesse; that although he have
suffered his Spouse to lie among the pots, and to be tossed from condition to
condition; yet he will carry her through all these tosses to a settled
unchangeable state, and so sets to work his servants that have the most
uncorruptible being.

Christ must have his Angels, as well as Satan has his.
Rev. 12. 9. which are cast out with him into the earth: turn to the seventh
verse of that Chapter, and you shall find Michael and his Angels fought
against the Dragon and his Angels. Heb. 1. 7. He made his Angels spirits: Satan
shall not do so much hurt by his servants, as Christ will do good by his: Satan
imitates Christ, and so has his Angels, as Christ has his; he follows him
not out of love, or liking to him, but knowing his wisdom and prevalency.
Christ and his Angels shall appear indeed, not only fighting, but casting
down: As Christ will Conquer by his Saints, so by his Angels also: Conquer he
must, not only in his own person, but in the person of all his servants, both
Angels and Saints.

Object.
You speak of Angels, and their Ministry: I but, little or nothing appears; how
does it appear they are working?

Sol. 1.
The operations of Angels are not immaginary but real, although not exposed to
sense; their actings were not so glorious if they should, fall under our senses.

2. Let us consider our weakness and sinfulness, and that will tell us, how
unfit we are for their appearance; they trembled of Old, when the Law was given
by them, and we would tremble if they should now appear; for Omnis apparentia
Angeli in principio est cum terrore, all appearance of Angels at first, is with
some terror.

3. But yet if you weigh things in a Sanctuary Balance, you will find such
actings and workings as faith can rise up unto, although sense cannot. And when
God will work more of his great works by them, then he will highthen our faith
to apprehend them more.

Use of Instruction. Use 1. Christ is far above Angels.
Does Christ in these great turns use the ministration of Angels? then surely
he himself is far above them: the Lord is above the servant, and he to whom
the administration is, is above them that minister: above them then he is, and
above them in these turns; for Heb. 1. 2. He is said to make the worlds,
(...), secula, the several ages of the world. Mr. Dixon in his Commentary on
the place, says, he callet^ it the worlds for the variety of times and ages,
and fleeces of the creatures one succeeding another. You wrong Jesus Christ if
you converse not with him in all these inferior motions: he is the primum
mobile, the first mover, and other things move after him.

The whole first Chapter to the Hebrews sets forth the excellency of Christ far
above that of Angels; which here I shall give you a brief account of.

Heb. 1. opened.
Take notice

How he gives the full due to Angels, the full due of their glory: Its granted
they are the sons of God, as Ad^m is said to be, Luke 3. 38. in that they had
their immediate being from him, and accordinly sang unto him and sh^uted for
joy. Job. 38. 7.

V. 4.
They have an excellent name, which implies an excellent nature: Names are put
to express the natures of things, and excellent names, to excellent things,
among which Angels are to be rank^d.

V. 6.
They are His Angels, of him, and for him, and therefore excellent. They are
spirits, having a simple unc^mpounded being, and therefore an excellent being:
They are as flames of fire, of lightning, that speedily execute his will,
ministering spirits as v. 14.

V. 4. (...).
But now Jesus Christ has by inheritance obtained a far more excellent name
then they: they are made very good, but he is made far better.

V. 2.
He is so a Son as they are not; a Son by way of eminency; he is a Son and
first b^gotten, which they are not. V. 6.


V. 2.
He is appointed heir of all things, which the Angels are not; but even they
are part of his possession, given to be his servants. V. 3.


He is the brightness of the Fathers glory; so are not Angels: Angels hold
forth much of God, but they are not the Character of his Person as Christ is:
They are used in the government of this world; but he upholds all things by the
word of his power. Truth it is, they do much service, and do it cheerfully and
vigorously; but they can never do that service that Christ does. He by himself
purged our sin, which is a work too great for them: he takes his place where
they cannot; they may stand about the Throne, and wait the pleasure of God;
but he sits down at the right hand of his glory. V. 8.


He is God, and they are but ^^eatures, and owe him for their being, v. 7. as
do the Heaven and Earth, v. 10. In regard 7. and 10.
of his humane nature, He has the oil of gladness above his fellows: and so
loves righteousness, and hates iniquity more then Angels.

V. 8.
He has a Throne, and that for ever; and its honor enough for Angels to wait
about it.

V. 13.
Many are the enemies of this Throne and Kingdom, but God will make them his
footstool. Thus you see Angels are but Ministers, although glorious Ministers:
Christ is more glorious then they.

Let me add one word more to exhort Use of Exhortation. 1. To behold these
works.
you.

1. To draw your eyes to behold these glorious works; Its a curious study to
search into Gods providence; he imprints much of himself upon them, and that
by his choice servants, his Angels.

2 Not to be discouraged.
2. Let no discouragement seize upon you as to the Times, Measures, Methods,
Instruments of these things. God has his own household servants, which he can
and will employ at his pleasure.

3. Rise in love.
3. And shall not this afford some elevation of your hearts in love to God,
when he does on your behalf, employ his best attendance?

4. Come forth to be fellow* servants with these Angels.
4. Lastly, let it mightily provoke all the servants of God, his precious
Worthies to come forth, and go on, in the service of these latter times: Its
no worse business you are called forth unto, then Christ puts his Angels
about. Oh! then let not your hands hang down, nor your knees be feeble. Study
what work is put into your hands, and do it with all your might. Are you
called to counsel, or to act? at home or abroad? by Sea or by Land? Oh! lift up
your heads, and rejoice, that God has counted you worthy to be under-powers in
these (...).
transactions: value it as your happiness to have been in his hand: Let not the
thoughts of danger, or difficulty discourage you; you are about Angels work,
and you should have Angels spirits; you have their help, and you shall have a
reward not inferior to their condition.

I should now according to the opening of the words, as we have spoken of the
inhabitants of heaven and their shaking; so proceed to show the shaking of the
Inhabitants of that part of the earth that is called a Continent; as also the
shaking of the inhabitants of the Sea, and the inhabitants of Islands; but
these things I shall not handle now, but hasten to what I intend in this Book.

CHAP. VII.
Opens the shake of Kings and Princes* because, 1. They make the great turns in
the Earth. 2. They pretend exemption from man's power. 3. Dealing with them is a
compendious way of dealing with the Nations. 4. Being decked with worldly
glory, they seem to be Christ's match. Uses of Instruction and Exhortation.

HEaven as you heard Chap. 3, denotes Heaven means h^gh things.
by a Metaphor the highest things. Thus when the Prophet Moses speaks of the
high walls of a City D^ut. 1. 28. He tells them of a City walled up to heaven:
It is the language of the Prophets, to compare a Kingdom to a World; and what
is highest in a Kingdom, to what is highest in the World. Satan is called, 2
Cor. 4. 4. The god of this World, and when he was in the highest of his
^ff^ctual working in the children of disobedience: when he wrought so in them,
that they exalted him as a God, by worshipping of him; when he had his
heathenish Priests, Altars, Sacrifices, Feast-dayes, in the time of the
Emperors: as Jehovah God had his among his people Israel; then is Satan said
to be in Heaven: because in so great hight in the World. Rev. 12. 7, 8. The
Rev. 12. 7, 8.
Dragon is said to be in heaven, in regard that he was exalted and observed as
a God: But when his Tempels, Idols and Altars were demolished; he is there, and
then said to be cast out of heaven. The heathenish Kings and Princes that were
most forward and shining in this hellish heaven, are called Stars.

Isa. 61. 15, 16.
Isa. 61. 15, 16. When God brings Israel out of Egypt, which he did by dividing
the red Sea, v. 15. when he makes them a people distinct and separate from the
Egyptians, none in-bodyed with them, he made them eminently his Sion and
people, v. 16. This his work is expressed by two phrases. Planting Heavens, and
laying the foundation of the Earth; that is, he will make them a Commonwealth,
a Kingdom, a World Politic.

Isa. 65. 17, 18.
Isa. 65. 17, 18. When Jehovah erects Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a
joy; which shall be in the latter age of the world; its said, 17. Behold I
create a new Heaven and a new Earth.

In like manner, when the high or low things of a Nation are destroyed; it is
expressed by the destruction of the high or low things of the World. Isa. 34.
4. speaking of the destruction of Jerusalem, he says, All the host of heaven
shall be disolved, Isa. 34. 4.
that is all those high things of Jerusalem shall be laid low; so the
destruction of Samaria, Hos. 10. 8. and so here I will shake the Heavens, that
is, I will s^ake the high things and persons of Kingdoms, Nations and
Commonwealths: Note then,

Doctr. Christ shakes Kings and Princes.
Jesus Christ will shake the Kings, Princes, Nobles and glorious ones of the
World, Isa. 34 5. When the sword comes down on the people of his curse to
judgment, its said The Heavens shall be rolled together like a scr^wle, that
is, the most high things or persons shall be contracted, confused, covered with
shame, discolored, scattered, consumed as a leaf from the tree. Daniel
speaking of the Tyrant Antiochus Epiphanes, and what he should do against the
people of Israel, Dan. 8. 10. its said, It waxed great against the host of
Heaven, and it cast some of the host and the Stars to the ground: So will
Christ do with the high and mighty ones of the Earth: He is the watcher and the
holy One that numbers and weighs Kingdoms, Dan. 4. 13. and 5. 26. They think
themselves exempt from man's scrutiny; are they therefore from Gods? They make
their nest in the Stars, and say in their hearts, Who shall pluck them down?
shall not Christ? Let us see what grounds conclude us into this principle, that
Christ will thus deal with them.

Reas. 1. Kings make great turns.
These are the men that make the turns on Earth; therefore Christ will shake
them. Let them be as Lucifer, sons of the morning, on the rising hand; yet he
will overturne them that make these turns. Isa. 14. 12, 13. Its spoken of
Babylon; How art thou cut down that did weaken the Nations?

Verse 16. Is this the man that made the Earth to tremble, that did shake
kingdoms? verse 17. That made the world as a Wilderness, and destroyed the
Cities thereof, that opened not the house of his prisoner? Take Isa. 14* 12. 13.
notice of five passages there,

1. They change governments, and Christ will change them; They shake the
Kingdoms, v. 16. and Christ will shake them.

2. They weaken the Nations, v. 12. and Christ will weaken them.

3. They destroy Cities and make the world as a Wilderness, v. 17. for their
lust and pleasure, and God will destroy them and leave their habitations
desolate.

4. They hold the people in a flavish fear; They v. 16. make the earth to
tremble. Christ will amaze and terrify them.

5. They did not let the prisoner loose homeward, v. 17. Christ will imprison
them at home, and make his people insult over them. Is this the man? or these
the Kings that made the earth to tremble? that did Tyrant it over my people,
that took them prisoners, and k^pt them prisoners? for their sakes I will arise.

Reas. 2. They seem exempt from man's power.
They pretend to be exempt from man's power. Mr. Hugh Broughton observes from
Nebuchadnezzar his golden Image, that Christ in profane eyes is a base stone,
and heathen Kings goodly metal. Who is the Lord? was Pharaohs proud question,
that I should obey his voice? and it was as wicked a conclusion of his, I know
not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go. What infectious acclamation was
that which flye-blowed Herod? Acts 12. 12. The vo^ce of God and not of man; and
is it not now grown into a position Qui summum in civitate imperium habet,
quicquid is fecerit impune ^sse. Whosoever has the supreme power, whatsoever
he does, is not to be punished. Now its most proper for Christ to deal with
them, to shake them thoroughly, whom men either dare not, cannot, or will not
meddle with.

Reas. 3. Dealing with them, is a way to deal with Nations.
Dealing with them, is a compendious way of dealing with the Nations they
relate unto; the ready way to shake Nations is to shake their Kings: They are
the Shepherds; and if you strike them, the sheep will be scattered: when God
was angry with Israel, the ready way was to move David against them, 2 Samuel 24.
1. Thou art worth ten thousand of us, 2 Samuel 18. 5. Kings are the light of
their people; the way to darken them, is to put out their light, Lam. 4. 20.
people breath much in their Kings; stop his breath, and you stop theirs.

Reas. 4. Kings seem to be Christ's match.
They are decked with all worldly pomp and glory; and therefore in the
judgment of flesh and blood, the fittest match for Christ. Eccl. 2. 8. I gat
me Silver and Gold, the peculiar Treasures of Kings. I gat me Men-singers and
Maid-singers, the delight of the sons of men. Psalm. 82. 6. Ye are Gods, and
all of you the children of the most high. Acts 25. 23. King Agrippa comes with
great pomp: and Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 5. 19. Whom he would he slew, and whom he
would he kept alive; whom he would he set up, or plucked down; their excellent
majesty dazles us poor low ones, Dan. 4. 36. But its not so with Christ who
comes against these Goliahs, these Champions, and Cheiftains of the world, and
tumbles them down.

Use 1. 1. There is a meanness in their majesty.
First, will Christ shake Kings and Princes? then let us see, a meanness in
their majesty, and lowness in their highness. They are above other men, but
under Christ; others account to them, and they must account to him. Sensual men
see nothing in them but pomp and power; but men that live by faith, and weigh
them in the balance of the Sanctuary, see Christ shaking of them, see them
falling down and Christ mounting up: Christ alone is Rex Catholicus, the
Catholic King, to whom that King that assumes that name, and all others must
be accomptable.

2. Management of particular places must be reckoned for.
2. Learn also that management of particular places and powers, must be
reckoned for: when Christ comes to shake them, he shakes them not considered
simply as Men; but as men in Office, as men dignified with place and power, as
Kings and Princes. Oh! how great will that day and work be, when the Emperor
must answer for his Provinces, and the extreme cruelty and oppression of the
Protestant party! what a hideous cry of blood in so many years War will be
heard against him, when Germanies tears and desolations shall be turned into a
vial of wrath upon him! How much has the King of Spain to answer for the blood
of Indians, and English in the West India? All his golden Mines will never be
so sweet, as the vengeance will be bitter. Let his cursed cruel Inquisition be
as precious to him as his right eye, yet God will pluck it out, God will cast
it down; He will no more bear with an Inquisition in Spain, then with an
High Commission Court in England. I wish that France and Savoy would consider
of their Massacres; and if they do not, all the world shall acknowledge Christ
his just shaking-devastations, in many years war, and other ways of vengeance
on them.

3. Will Christ account with Princes, and shake them? then surely meaner men
shall 3. Christ will surely account with meaner men.
not escape: Magistrates, Ministers, Counselors, Captains, Parents, Masters,
look about you; Christ is on his circuit, has began his Audit; look well to
your accounts: Princes are not too great, nor you too little for him to account
withal; he will deal punctually, he will not shuffle over things with you.
Hearken, he calls venite ad judicium, Come to judgment; what can you answer
for your times, and talents, your means and mercies, your deliverances and
salvations, your covenants and engagements? Are you yet more holy, heavenly,
watchful, faithful, fruitful? will your relations bless God for you, for your
counsel, instruction, reprehension, exhortations, prayers and examples? Can you
say you are free from the blood of your people, children, soldiers, and
servants? If they perish, is it on their own account? you having freed your
souls in the faithful discharge of your duty.

4. We may appeal to Christ.
4. In all oppression from powers its a just ground for people to appeal to
Christ, whose Office it is to supervise their actings, and to shake them, Exodus
2. 23. Israel sighed by reason of their bondage, and their cry came up to God:
we tread on worms, and go over where the hedge is lowest: Its no new thing
for might to oppress right; but if men cannot have right on earth, there is
none can hinder a man from looking to heaven; it was a notable appeal of David
from King Saul to Jehovah, 1 Samuel 24. 15. The Lord be judge and judge between
me and thee, and plead my cause and judge me on thee: its emphatical, that
thrice he repeats the word judge. The Lord be judge, and judge, between me and
thee: and judge me out of thy hand; How pathetically does the same David
address himself to God? Psalm. 35. 23. Stir up thy self and awake to my
judgment, unto my cause, my God and my Lord. Evigila and expergiscere, watch
and arise; and surely he will do so. I remember what Mr. Henry Burton a late
Martyr told me; that being in trouble before the highest powers, and having
appealed to the King, and finding no redress, he expressed himself thus:
Well, I appeal to the King of Kings: and so may we in like cases.

5. Judgments on Kings have characters of Christ on them.
Learn farther, that judicial proceedings against Princes, is stamped with
remarkable Characters of Christ on them: for he shakes them. Thus in the
prophesies of John, Revel. 6. The six Seals contain the several steps of
plaguing the heathenish Roman Empire.

Rev. 6. 2, 3, 4, 5. V. 2.
At the opening of the first Seal, v. 2. there appears a white Horse: Christ
riding on the word of truth, and going on Conquering and to Conquer heathenisme.

V. 3. and 4.
The second Seal and red Horse shows the bloody wars that Christ raises
against them. V. 5. and 6.


The third Seal and black Horse denotes scarcity of bread, by which Christ
afflicts them.

V. 7. and 8.
The fourth Seal and pale Horse includes wars, famine, plague, and all which
Christ brought in upon them.

V. 9.
Upon opening the fifth Seal you have the cry of the Saints under their
persecutions, which Christ hears attentively.

V. 12.
The sixth Seal utterly ruins the heathenish Empire, the great day of Christ
his wrath being come upon it; so that it was not able to stand.

Rev. 8. 2.
The opening of the seventh Seal presents you with a Vision of seven Angels
with seven Trumpets, and they relate Christ's his shaking and ruinating the
Empire while Christian; and no marvel, seeing it became Arrian and persecuting:
Totus Mundus Arrianus.

The four first Trumpets sound the fatal ruin of the Western Empire, when
Christ stirred up the Goths and Vandals in four incursions upon it.

The fifth and sixth Trumpet, which are two of the Vae Tubae, the woe Trumpets,
they sound out Christ his shaking of the Eastern Empire, in that he gives
passage to Mahomet and his company in the fifth Trumpet, and in the sixth
Trumpet to the Turks.

Rev. 16. 1.
We read in Rev. 16. 1. of seven Vials, which contain Christ his shaking the
Kingdom of Antichrist; for they are the last plagues on the Beast. Thus you
see eminent Characters of Christ his judging all his adversaries, even from
John's time to this very day, both his Heathenish and Antichristian enemies.

Use 1. of Exhortation.

To meditate on Christ and his shaking.


To those who are in high place of power: I beseech them to suffer a word of
exhortation, from one who daily prays for them. Oh! how good is it for men to
meditate on Christ and his shaking, on Christ and his accounting with them!
think not, because you have Sword and Counsel, Armies and Navies, that now your
mountain is so strong it shall never be moved. They once thought so who are
now shaken out; and the entertainment of such thoughts again, will be the ready
way to a repeated shaking: It Is true, God has blessed you with a series of good
successes, and by them turned others out of their seats, and placed you in; I
hope and heartily wish, that their sins, their crying sins, may never be
found among you; for if they be, Christ can raise up others to shake you out,
as he raised up you to shake others. The good God forbid, that ever that day
should arise among us: But rather of the riches of his mercy grant your
establishment, by Judgment and Righteousness; that so you may be called
repairers of our breaches, the restorers of paths to dwell in. Much of the
impetuous violence of the streams of wickedness would be dried up, by the due
consideration of Christ his coming to shake.

Princes are great Masters, and subjects are their servants; and Col. 4. 1.
Masters, give unto your servants that which is just and equal, knowing that ye
also have a Master in Heaven.

2. Give Christ the honor due to him.
Let all that know and fear God, give unto Christ the honor due unto his
Name; In that he shakes Kings and Princes, he is decked with glory, and sets up
his Throne for vengeance: Thus the Church does, Rev. 5. 12. Worthy is the Lamb
to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory
and blessing.

CHAP. VIII.
Shows, 1. That All power is in Christ. 2. Its his due upon taking our nature.
3. Though it be his due, yet is it given to him. 4. Though it be his due and
given him, yet he has little glory of it. 5. He will exalt himself in great
Turns to take up his glory by them. Uses of Instruction and Exhortation.

KIngs and Princes are the greatest persons; and the shaking of these tall
Cedars is one of the greatest works in the world, and that which notably holds
forth Jesus Christ. I shall therefore endeavor to open the shaking of these
earthly powers, both from the consideration, (...) Jesus Christ, and that both
1. As King of the World. 2. As King os Saints. Secondly of these great persons;
and that both in regard of 1. Themselves. 2. Their Relations; All which we
shall cast into several positions to be handled in the chapters following.

The consideration of Christ as King of the World, gives you a very fair
account of the turns in these latter Ages; which that you may the better
understand, we shall lead you on by twelve several Positions; all of them
contributing some thing to the right and religious understanding of these
turns: Now the first Position is this.

Pos. 1. All power is given to Christ.
All power is given to Christ in Heaven and Earth, Math. 28. 18. Dan. 2. 44.
The God of Heaven sets up Christ's Kingdom, and the Kingdom shall not be left
to other people; but it shall break in pieces and consume all those Kingdoms,
and it shall stand for ever. Christ's power it so resides in him, that it cannot
be translated: Its a conquering power, for it breaks in pieces and it enjoyes
the fruit of such conquests; for it stands for ever.

This we shall open in five passages.

1. All power is in Christ.
1. That all power is in Christ; it is in him as in the proper seat of it. He
is the first fountain of all power, and all the power in all the creatures
flows from him, their power is but a drop of his Ocean; the highest and best
kind of power dwells in him: He is the first borne of every creature. His
power is extensive to all creatures, and times; all creatures are either in
heaven or in earth; and his power reaches both. Col. 1. 16. By him were all
things created that were in Heaven and Earth, visible and invisible, whether
they be Thrones or Dominions or Principalities or Powers. And Jer. 10. 7. Who
would not fear thee Oh King of Nations? Psalm. 22. 28. The kingdom is the
Lords, and he is Governor among the Nations. All earthly powers have their
periods, their rise and fall, their beginning and ending: but its not so with
Christ's power; for Heb. 1. 8. Its spoken to him, Thy throne oh God is for ever
and ever.

2. His due upon the taking of our nature.
2. All power was Christ his due upon the taking of our nature: So much is
wrapped up upon the assumption of our flesh, that thereupon all created power
was to be under him. Suppose man had not fallen, nor Christ suffered; yet if he
take our nature to himself, upon this, all power in all creatures must be
under him: Heb. 2. 6. When he brings in the First begotten into the world, he
says, and let all the Angels of God worship him: Observe, he is called (...)
the First borne. Christ as taking our nature had a being in the counsel of God,
and was before any creature was: and by that priority and firstnesse of being,
he has a preeminence above all creatures whatsoever, Col. 1. 18. In all things
he must have the pereeminence. The first begotten under the Law had a
privilege above all his brethren; he had the rule and the double portion. So
has Christ, he has the rule of all creatures, he guides them to their end;
and indeed, they are all his portion, given unto him as the First begotten.
Again observe, the text mentions God the Fathers bringing Christ into the
world: which was, when at his exhibition in the flesh he manifested it to the
world, that he was his only begotten Son. And observe lastly, that upon this
taking of our flesh, the Angels which are the highest rank of creatures are
subject to him; nay with the highest subjection, namely that of adoration: now
if Angels the highest of creatures, surely all other creatures much more.

3. All power is rightly said to be given Christ.
3. That though this power were his due; yet it is rightly said to be given to
him, in that its a power falls on him as in our nature, not considered only as
second person: Now being thus in our nature, the Father is greater then he,
Joh. 14. 28. I go unto my Father, for my Father is greater then I: and he is
in that regard, less then the Father: The Father gives all to Christ, and
Christ returns all to the Father: Dare est dominium transfer. John 3. 35.
The Father loves the Son, and has given all things into his hand; giving is
a transferring out of love; and the Fathers love is so great, he cannot give
him less then all. v. 34. He give the spirit to him, but not by measure. Joh.
10. 39. God the Father gives all his elect chosen ones to Christ, and he gives
him work to do for them, Joh. 17. 4. I have finished the work which thou
gave me to do, Joh. 5. 26, 27. He has given to the Son to have life in
himself, v. 27. and he has given him authority to execute judgment also,
because he is the Son of Man. In regard of all creatures, He has power given
him over all flesh, Joh. 17. 2. The Government is laid upon his shoulders, and
he rules among the Nations, Dan. 4. 21.

4. Christ has had little glory of all his power.
4. Jesus Christ has had but little glory of all his power, Joh. 1. 11. He
came to his own, and his own received him not. How many are there in the world
that never heard of Jesus Christ? how many that are professed enemies against
him? and among all that bear his Name, how few live indeed by him? How many
thousands are there in the Synagogue of Antichrist, that although they bear
his Name, being called Christians, and make profession of him, yet in works
deny him? Look upon the great ones of the Earth, who have that power of his
derived unto them, that others have not; yet how great strangers are they unto
him? Nay look among those who pretend to Reformation, and to be adversaries to
all superstitions; yet how little do 5. Christ will exalt himself, so as Kings
shall confess his power.
they take notice of his power put forth in the World, or give him the praise of
it?

5. Christ will exalt himself in such great and various turns on Kings, as
shall extort acknowledgement from their consciences that he is above them, and
make them confess, This is the hand of Christ upon us, whose Vassals we are;
Our Crowns and Scepters are more his then ours; He, He, is the Lords
Anointed; All powers of earth are immediately and fully given to him, and not
to us. We poor worms struggle for this earth; but heaven and earth, and all
power are his, and we are but his underlings. Isa. 10. 12. I will punish the
fruit of the stout heart of the King of Assyria, and the glory of his high
looks. Let us conclude this with the confession of Nebuchadnezzer, Dan. 4. I
Nebuchadnezzar Dan. 4. 37.
extol the King of heaven, all whose words are truth, and his ways judgment,
and those that walk in pride he is able to abase.

Use of Instruction. See Gods love to Christ.
1. Take notice of the exceeding riches of Gods love to Christ, and in him to
us; He loves and gives, and gives no less then all; not some, but all power.
Power (...) rightful power, privileged power. Christ has the highest and the
sweetest Title, He has all by gift. The Father gives, and gives to him
immediately; nothing intervenes between the Father and Christ; In all his
giving to us, Christ comes between, he is the Mediator, (...), the middle
person: but in this gift to 2. The Father is fully satisfied that all is in him.
Christ, none comes between him and the Father.

2. Learn hence, the Father is fully satisfied in that he has laid all power
on Christ; he will never question Christ his Title, he is as he would have him
to be. All power would crack the creatures shoulders; Christ alone is able to
bear it: Men under a little power, how do they pride and pranke and wanton it!
But behold Jesus Christ altogether lovely, and lovely in his power. The power
is given him not only of heaven, or over the things in heaven: but its given
him in heaven: The power is the most glorious power, and its given him in the
most glorious place; for so the words may be read; not only all power in
heaven is given me; but all power is given me in heaven. Men receive their
Commissions here on the earth: Christ takes it in Heaven.

3. The pleasure of the Lord shall prosper.
3. Doubtless as it is Isa. 53. 10. The pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in
his hand, he wants nothing to effect it. He hooks the unruly Leviathans,
restrains the cruelty and oppression of their power, and turns their vanity to
his Fathers glory: power shall not always be in the hands of the wicked, the
Saints shall rule; for Christ is the greatest Saint.

4. Christ returns alI to the Father: He receives all power from him, and
shall return it all to him. 1 Cor. 15. 24. He delivers up the Kingdom to God,
even the Father. The Kingdom is Christ's power in the whole frame and body of
it; but that he delivers up to his Father: and for the present he will
sacrifice all the unjust powers of the earth to his Fathers justice, and cause
goodness to arise with greatness, and peace with power. Let me add one word
to exhort you.

Use 2. Exhort. 1. To invite to love Christ.
1. To flock about Christ in love, to come where the power is: and Lo here is
all power; were Christ powerless or weak, I would never invite you to him,
Heb. 7. 25. He is able, and able to save, and to save to the utmost: Oh why
hang you back, why linger so long? are you unwilling to be happy? do you love
your weakness, that you run not to his power? What is scattered elsewhere, is
centered here. Its a Christian art, rightly to abstract all earthly powers; all
are but ciphers till Christ put a figure to them: Every man is a friend to him
that gives gifts: Now who can give so much as he that has All? and is it not
our wisdom to have him to friend? Let me bespeake you, as Balak said to
Balaam, Number. 22. 37. Am not I able indeed to promote thee to honor? So is not
Christ able indeed to pay all thy debts, to heal all thy diseases, to protect
thee from dangers, and to enrich thee with fullest enjoyments? Oh! come, come,
stay no longer, let that which can command, invite you: namely his power.

2. To be at his disposal.
2. ^^me and welcome; but come with resolvednesse to be wholly at his
disposal: Ordinary and common observance will not suffice: All power does
challenge all love, and all subjection, from all hearts. Oh! let Christ have
all; bring your Lamb to him, for he is worthy: How little is your all to his?
your largest compass is in your thoughts and desires: Oh bring them to him,
let him be in all your thoughts, and the only desirable one to you. He
demands your hearts: you have his already; your hearts and therein your all:
what is heartlesse is nothing. Let your hearts then, and with your hearts your
fear, and hope, and faith and joy attend him.

3. Let wicked ones tremble.
3. Tremble you wicked ones, though the mighty of the earth. Against whom have
you exalted your selves? how will you deal with him that has all power? all
power to punish, as well as reward: your power is his, and he must not suffer
his power in your hands to be abused. Your mountains and your hills cannot
cover you from the power of his wrath; who makes Rivers of brimstone, and
everlasting burnings for you, and prepares Tophet of old.

4. Let the Earth be glad.

Psalm. 97. 1.


4. The Lord Reigns, let the earth be glad: Fear not your Summer, and
Winter, your Seed-time and Harvest, your Sun to shine, and rain and dews to
fall; your days and nights provisions, and protections; for all power is his;
and honor him to whom all power is given.

CHAP. IX.
Shows, Pos. 2. That Kings reign by Christ. 1. They are or are not by him. 2.
He blesses or blasteth them in Government. 3. What wisdom or power they have,
they cannot put forth without him. 4. Continuation and succession is from him.
5. Bad Kings as well as good, are from him. Uses for Instruction and
Exhortation.

CHrist has all power, as we showed in the former Chapter; and as he has all,
so he gives all: Its his glory to communicate; he has of the best, and he
gives of the best. All Kingly power is given to him, and he gives all power to
men: whence follows this second Position.

Pos. 2. Kings reign by Christ.
The Kings of the Earth, they reign by Christ; this is set down in so many
words. Pro. 8. 15. By me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice. v. 16. By me
Princes rule and Prove. 8: 16.
Nobles, even all the Judges of the earth. I observe three things from those
words. 1. That the several ranks of Governors are from him, both the supreme
and the subordinate Magistrates; not only Kings, but Princes also rule by him;
not only Kings and Princes, but Nobles and Judges. 2. I observe in the highest
act of power that Kings and Princes put forth, that therein they are but
Christ's Substitutes; To make Laws and Decrees, to decree that which is right
and for public good, is one of their highest and most noble acts of power;
but that they cannot do without him. I observe thirdly, That the particular
execution, as well as the decree, is from Christ to bring down this or that
Decree, or Law, to this or that person or case; the application of the Law to
those whom it does concern, even this is from Christ; for all the Judges of
the earth are by him: Judices sunt qui inter litigantes jus dicunt: Judges are
they that declare what is Law among those that are at variance; and these
Judges and their sentences are here referred to Christ: you will more fully
apprehend this Position by the five passages following.

For 1. They are, or are not, by him.
1. That Kings are, or are not by him: They have not only their being from him
as they are men, but as they are Kings, as they are Kingly men: he sets them
up, and then they are Kings; and pulls them down, and then they are as other
common men. 1 Samuel 15. 1. The Lord sent Samuel to anoint Saul to be King of
his people; there he is set up, there he is a King; but v. 23. because thou
have rejected the word of the Lord, He has also rejected thee from being King;
there he is pulled down. He gave the Kingdom, power, and strength and glory to
Nebuchadnezzar, made him King of Kings, Dan. 2. 3. But he un-kings him, yea
un-mans him too. Dan. 4. 25, 31, 32. Oh King Nebuchadnezzar, to thee it is
spoken, The Kingdom is departed from thee: there he is un-kinged, and v. 32.
They shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of
the field: there he is un-manned. He anointed Hazael King over Syria, and Jehu
over Israel, 1 King. 19. 15, 16. Yea all the Kingdoms of men are solely at his
disposal, and he gives them to whomsoever he will, Dan. 4. 32.

2. Christ blesses or blasteth in government.
2. He either blesses or blasteth men in the work of Government. Upon Him is
first, and rests the spirit of wisdom and understanding, of counsel and
might, to judge and reprove with all. Isa. 11. 2, 3. and Dan. 2. 21. He gives
wisdom to the wise, and knowledge to them that know understanding: and again,
Dan. 4. 16. Let his heart be changed from man's, and let a beasts heart be given
to him: When Saul was anointed King over Israel, 1 Samuel 10. v. 16. Its said of
him, Thou shall be turned into another man, and v. 9. God gave him another
heart. He does not say a new heart, a holy heart, but another heart; a heart
differing from the heart he had while he was a private person: then he minded
his fathers Asses, and family-occasions; but now he had another heart, a heart
for government, a heart for public affairs and their management. Jesus
Christ divides wisdom and folly among the Grandees of the world. Solomon was
the wisest Prince that ever was: But his son Rehoboam was not so, he was but
a little removed from a fool, Eccles. 10. 16. They are men, or children,
according as he makes them.

3. Kings cannot put forth their power without him.
3. What wisdom and power they have, they cannot put forth without him.
Sometime they appear stronger then men; another time weaker then children: Now
none so wise as they, and by and by none so foolish; and all according as
Christ enlarges or contracteth them: They assume power to make, or unmake, to
establish, or null Laws; but sure they are wofuly out, if they leave him out.
Grant they are the high ones, yet sure he is higher then they: we deny not but
they have an Image on them, that makes them better then other men; but still
they are but men, and he is better then they: Its his prerogative to be (...),
The Lawgiver, Jam. 4. 12. and he gives law to them, and they cannot without
him, lay law on their people. He is one, there is one Lawgiver, and the only
one, there is no more; They cannot make Laws without him, but he does without
them: Let their hearts meditate high and great things, yet their hearts are in
his hand, Prove. 21. 1. and he turns them as seems him good.

4. Continuation and succession is from him.
4. Their Continuation and succession is from him. 1. Sam. 15. 28. The Lord
has rent the Kingdom of Israel from thee this day, and has given it to a
neighbor of thine that is better then thou. This Solomon acknowledges, 1
King. 3. 7. Oh Lord my God, thou have made thy servant King instead of David my
father. How much of King*craft is laid out to settle and perpetuate governments
on heirs and successors? but how little can this pretend to, without Christ?
Dan. 5. 26, 27. He is the great Numberer, and Ponderer; Belshazzars Kingdom
was numbered and finished, he was weighed in the balance and found wanting.
This King David knew well, 2 Samuel 5. 12. He perceived (not that men so much,
nor that Joab or Abner) but that the Lord had established him King over Israel.
Hence is that conclusion from wise Daniel, Chap. 2. 21. He changes times and
seasons, he removes Kings, and sets up Kings.

Bad Kings as well as good, reign by Christ.
5. Bad Kings as well as good reign by Christ: Christ had in especial manner
the visible administration of the Kingdoms of Israel and Judah, and their
Kings were anointed by him; but how few good among them all? Now because this
may seem a hard saying, give me leave to open it in these six passages.

Good men may be bad Kings.
1. Good men may be bad Kings; their grace makes them good; but its their
gifts* and the acting of them fits them for their Kingship. David was a good
man, a man after Gods one heart; but when out of pride he numbered the people,
in that he was no good King; for it brought a plague upon them, 2 Samuel 24.
Hezekiah was a good man; but in vain ostentation, showing the Ambassadors of
the King of Babylon his Treasure, in that he was no good King, 2 King. 20. Asa
was a good man; but when he imprisoned the Seer, and oppressed some of the
people, in that he was no good King, 2 Chronicles. 16. 10.

2. The badnesse of Kings is not from Christ.
2. The badnesse of men, or of Kings, is not from Christ; though we say bad
Kings reign by him, yet we do not say, their badnesse is by him; we abhor the
thoughts of making him the author of sin, who is the holy One of God. 1. All
his Commandments are right, his Statutes pure, his Law perfect: there is not
the least hint there to warrant any wickedness: but still that which is
contrary is commanded: He commands no wickedness. 2. Its far from the heart of
Christ to work any wickedness in their hearts; you must father your sin
somewhere else; Christ will never own it; accuse, accuse, (as you have just
cause) your selves, your wicked corrupt natures, but you must acquit him. 3.
Neither does Christ stir up unto any wickedness; his spirit is a holy
spirit, and no inviting or encouraging men to sin comes from that spirit.

3. Yet he suffers them to be.
3. Though he is no cause of their badnesse, yet they could not be, and so not
be bad, but that he suffers it: If it were the absolute Decree of God that
there should be no bad men, nor Kings, sure there should be none* Its
impossible any thing should be so against his will; for then he were not happy
in himself, and so not God; But surely all grant its his will to suffer it, to
permit it to be; and is there not something more? though sin be evil; yet is it
not good that sin have a being? God would not so much as suffer sin in the
World, but that he knows how to produce good out of it; and may not he will the
production of good? and is it not to work like himself to bring good out of
evil? Genesis 50. 20. Ye thought evil against me (says Joseph to his Brethren
that sold him) but God meant it unto good, to save much people alive: and when
Joseph made known himself to his Brethren, Genesis 45. 5. he says, Be not
greived nor angry with your selves, that ye sold me hither; for God did send me
before you to preserve life.

4. Christ is righteous in thus suffering them.
4. That Christ shows himself to be righteous when Kings and Princes are
wicked; He does righteously punish sin with sin; Ephraim is given to Idols, let
him alone; and I will not punish your daughters when they commit whoredom, nor
your spouses when they commit Adultery. God may give places and power to wicked
men, and not grace; and then they will become more wicked, and fill up their
measure suddenly. God may be angry with a people for their sin, and so give
them a Hos. 13. 11.
King in his wrath, Hos. 13. 11. I gave them a King in mine anger. Gods anger is
his justice, whereby he burns against sin; and what he gives in justice, is
with respect to their sin: Now he gave them a King in his wrath; let that King
be never so vile, yet God that gave him is righteous, I and righteous in that
giving of him.

5. Christ ^s gracious, as well as righteous.
5. That Jesus Christ is gracious, as well as rightcous, and orders all the
badnesse of Kings for good, Acts 4. 27, 28. Herod and Pontius Pilate with the
Gentiles and people of Israel are gathered together against Christ, but its to
do what Gods hand and c^unsel had determined before to be done. Cyrus is a
Heathen King and knows not G^d, Isa. 45. 4. Yet for Jacob my servants sake, and
Israel mine elect, I have even called thee by thy name; and Isa. 44. ult. Cyrus
he is my shepherd and shall perform all my pleasure; saying to Jerusalem, thou
shall be built, and to the Temple, thy foundation shall be laid.

6. Christ reigns more in those who are good, then in those who are bad.
6. Though all Kings reign by Christ, yet Christ reigns much more in those
who are good, then in those who are bad: He puts his spirit into them that are
good, to make them good; he gives them the spirit of wisdom, counsel, and the
fear of the Lord. He lays his Law upon them, and draws them forth in
obedience to it. He stirs them up to what is good, and holds them on in that
goodness. He gave Solomon wisdom to go in and out before that great people;
and he wiseth Princes for their places, and makes their actings acceptable both
to God and men.

Use 1. For Instruction. Christ stamps a majesty on them.
1. Kings reign by Christ; It is not then so much their rich apparel, their
sumptuous Palaces, their Royal attendance, that instamps their Majesty on
them, as this, that they are Christ's creatures for this World; they bear his
Image of power and government on them, and that is their great Majesty: They
are his ordinance, Romans 13. reign by him; and this subjects and keeps men's
spirits under. Oh! thank Jesus Christ that you have no more insurrections,
against those in place and power; men's minds are it may be ready enough to
break out, but there is something of Christ stops them.

2. To rise against them, is to rise against Christ.
2. We cannot rise against government, but we rise against Christ: Alas! who
are they that be in power, but men like our selves, that we rise against them?
Nay but they have a Commission, which we have not; a resistance is not so much
to Romans 13. 2.
them, as God. Romans 13. 2. is and always was good Scripture; Whosoever
resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God; and they that resist shall
receive to themselves damnation or judgment; wherefore you must be subject,
not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake, v. 5.

3. Ascribe the good of government. to Christ.
3. Ascribe the good of government to Jesus Christ; All their wisdom, justice,
mercy and goodness, is extracted from him; when you eat of the fat, and drink
of the sweet, when you enjoy your houses and lands, your shops and ships, your
p^ace and plenty, exalt him for it. That you can lie down and rise up, and
walk abroad, its of his goodness and ingrave his Name on it, and return his
praise to him.

4 A ground of patience under bad Rulers.
4. Do bad as well as good reign by him? learn hence a ground of patience,
and contentation: Nothing calmes the heart so much as to revolve things on God
regularly. David says Psalm. 39. 9. I was dumb, and opened not my mouth, because
thou did it. When Aaron lost both his sons, that which made him hold his
peace, was, that God would be sanctified and glorified; God had done it, Lev.
10. 3. That which made Job not to charge God foolishly, and kept him from the
sin of impatience, it was, that the Lord had given and taken away; and the like
was that in old Eli, 1 Samuel 3. 18. when heavy things were denounced against
him, and his house, he said, It is the Lord, let him do whatever he please. 5.
Christ is more glorious then all Kings.


5. How glorious is that Christ by whom Kings reign? how poorly does all
their splendour resemble his glory? while they rule others, he rules them: Oh!
that we could see him; he is not only their governor, but their Maker; fall
down and adore before him. They must bring in an account of their government,
and you may appeal from them to him, as you heard before. He is most absolute,
and by his Decree things are and shall be to eternity. How does it greive
Princes to feel old age come upon them? to be subjected to aches, pains and
diseases, and that they and their honor must part, and lie in the dust? Oh!
then admire, and for ever praise him whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom,
and of whose government there is no end.

I shall conclude this Position with a word of exhortation to Princes, taken
out Use 1. of Exhortation.

Psalm. 2. 10. 1. To be wise.


of Psalm. 2. 10.

1. To be wise and understand by whom you reign: away with your contesting
against Christ, and fall in with his ends and interests; that will be your
wisdom indeed; a single portion of wisdom should not content you; you are to
study, and to rule; and a great deal of wisdom is required to a little rule:
you have many snares and temptations in your places, and you need abundance of
wisdom to guard you from those snares; you are to govern others, yea many
others, as well as your selves: Be wise now therefore O ye Kings.

2. To be instructed.
2. Be instructed ye Judges of the Earth: God has his word and his rod for
you, as well as others; and its wisdom to learn by both; Deuteronomy. 17. 19. you
must read to keep you humble, that your hearts be not lifted up above your
brethren; and if you hear not that voice of the word, behold a speaking rod,
and him that appointed it; Hear, hear, and learn, yea learn righteousness.

3. To fear.
3. Fear, fear before him: Its not below you O Kings; it will not argue a
pusillanimous spirit to fear God. Exodus 18. 21. Jethro's Justices were able
men, men able for government, yet fearing God. The less you are under the
fear of men, the more should you walk in the fear of God: This fear would
be a sweet bound to your power and will: and trust God to make others fear
you, while you reverence him.

4. To serve.
4. Serve with fear: Oh strange! must Kings serve? yea sure, its not so
strange as true: you are the Judges of the Earth, and therein his servants.
Many controversies will come before you, and you are to decide them according
to Law: encourage your selves in that thanklesse work of judging, that its
part of your service to Godward.

Prove. 29. 4. The King by judgment establishes the Land; but he that
receives gifts overthrows it. Let Jehosaphats counsel be acceptable to you,
2 Chronicles. 19. 6. Take heed what you do; for ye judge not for man, but for the
Lord, who is with you in the judgment.

You had need of good men about you, both in Court and Council: This was David's
resolution, Psalm. 101. 6, 7. My eyes shall be upon the faithful in the Land to
dwell with me; and he that walks in a perfect way shall serve me. It is
recorded of Ahaziah, 2 Chronicles. 22. 3. that he walked in the ways of the house
of Ahab; for his Mother a Daughter of Omri was his Counselor to do wickedly.

Kings must do right to others, they must relieve the oppressed; then surely
they themselves must be far from oppression. Ezekiel. 46. 18. The Prince shall not
take of the peoples inheritance by oppression, to thrust them out of their
possession. Your great service lies in this, to be a terror to evil works, 1
Pet. 2. 14. Prove. 20. 26.
an avenger to execute wrath on the wicked, to scatter them, and bring the
wheel upon them: but to encourage them that do well, that they may live a
peaceable and quiet life, in all godliness and honesty.

5. To rejoice with trembling.
5. Rejoice with trembling: You have your burdens, and so your joys, more then
others: You have your Gardens and Orchards, your Parkes and Pleasures, your
Musicks and Recreations; we envy you not in these; much comfort may you have in
them all; only take in this Caution, rejoice with trembling; you ar^ never so
apt to miscarry as in the highth of your joys. Job feared his sons when
Feasting, and you know whose brand it is to Feast without fear, Jude, v. 12.

6. To kiss the Son.
6. Lastly, Kiss the Son; kiss him with a kiss of love, Osculo dilectionis,
and that with all sincerity: kiss him with a kiss of honor and obedience,
Osculo subjectionis, as Samuel kissed Saul, 1 Samuel 10. 1. kiss him with a
kiss of confidence, as here in the Text, Blessed are all they that put their
trust in him. Kiss him with a kiss of Devotion, Osculo Devotionis; for he
alone is worthy of all love, subjection, faith, and worship.

CHAP. X.
Opens the 3. Pos. That setting up of Government and Governors is for the good
of the World. 1. In that it keeps men in Order. 2. In that it gives propriety.
3. It promotes increase of what we possess. 4. Brings in Peace. 5. It is set
up when God fitts some, and brings in others to consent. 6. This is for the
good of all ranks of men. 7. Good to them in their whole life. 8. That
Governors due it is to be honored. Uses.

YOu have heard, that Kings reign by Christ, and so are his creatures;
Government is of his making, its his Ordinance, and so as it is from him, is
good: None so good as Christ, and what he makes, that is also good; cannot be
bad: Pos. 3. Government is for the Worlds good. 1 Pet. 2. 13.
hence follows your third Position. That

The setting up of Government and Governors is notably for the good of the
World, Romans 13. 4. He is the Minister of God to (...).
thee for good. 1 Pet. 2. 13. its called man's creature, both because its an
Ordinance for man, for man as he is a reasonable creature; and Secondly, Its an
Ordinance wherein God acts and draws forth Reason to the highest acts and ends;
its that which is in especial manner for the good of man, of mankind; that will
farther appear in that,

1. Government is set up to keep the 1. It keeps the world in order.
World in order; order is Vniuscujusque rei debita coll^c^tio, the due setting
of things and persons in their proper place, and keeping them there. In an
Army, when every Commander is where the General appoints, and every Soldier in
that rank and file, where the Commander appoints, and accordingly moves, that
Army is said to be in order. Now Government does that to the World, that order
does to an Army. Men are apt to be out of their due place and station, and to
move unduely; now government rightens them. We read a sad Story, Judge. 17. 6.
There was no King in Israel, but every man did that which was right in his own
eyes; There was no King, but many Tyrants. Kings rule by law, Tyrants by will;
and so do all rule where there is no government; and then every man is a
Tyrant, his lust his law, nay a Devil, Homo homini demon; Anarchy is worse
then Tyranny; better a bad government then none at all, Ipsa quidem Tyrannis
est tolerabilis prae Anarchia, says Beza. Tyranny is tolerable, when weighed
with Anarchy: Now to take away this disorder, and to keep every man in his
place, is government set up; for it is the application of rules of reason to
things, times, and persons; It is an honest binding men to their good behavior.

Persons so kept, enjoy propriety.
2. Persons set and kept in order enjoy propriety: Without government all
things are common, and community makes a War of every man with every man; what
is common is mine as well as his, and his as well as mine; and therefore if
another enjoy that I like, if it cannot be divided, and I like and lack it, I
will fight for it with him, and so he with me: but government ends this War,
and makes what was common before, to be proper now; what belonged to all
before, to be peculiar to some now, and so prevents that War we now speak of:
it divides unto every man his inheritance, and maintains him in it. It was Gods
government that divided the Land of Canaan to the children of Israel, and gave
them every one their lot; or else there would have been as much fighting among
themselves about it, as there was to dispossess the Amorite, the Canaanite,
the Hivite, and the Perizzite. 3. Government promotes increase.


3. Government promotes the increase of what we properly have: Interest is that
which draws forth all men; they will not sow to have others reap, nor build
to have others possess and dwell there: But let it be their own, and then they
think no labor too much, no cost too great: what is every bodies, is no
bodies; and Commons we see are wasted, when enclosures which are worse ground,
are more improved. Government makes me call this, or that, my house, my land,
my state; and being mine, I like and love it, and do what I can to improve it.

4. Protects our peace.
4. Government protects your peace: Pax est tranquillitas ordinis. You heard of
order before, and now we tell you of the tranquillity of it, which is peace.
What dismal storms would arise in every Country, City, Town, and Family, about
every man's Land, Dwelling, Trading, Estate, if government were not? It keeps us
alive in our hous^s, and our houses 1 Timothy 2. 2.
furnished for our livelihood: A peaceable and a quiet life is the great end of
government; and if any break in upon you to disturb, and disquiet you, then
government interposeth to protect, and defend you.

5. The setting up of government is, when 5. When God fits some, and makes
others consenting.
God makes some men able, and willing, to manage public affairs; and draws
the spirits of others to consent and subject. As Jesus Christ ascended up into
heaven to give gifts unto men, for the edification of his body, Ephesians. 4. 12. So,
as King of the World, he is in heaven, and gives gifts unto men, for the
government of the world. Some men we see are so weak that they cannot manage
their own affairs with discretion; others are so strong that they can guide
their own, and the affairs of others too: but honos onus, Honor is a burden;
to care for others is a care with burden, and men love not to be burdened: It
is therefore the goodness of Christ, so to temper and propose things to men,
as to incline them to take such care and burdens on them. This thing is too
heavy for thee, thou art not able to perform it, said Jethro to Moses, Exodus
18. 18. And who is able to judge this thy so great a people! was Solomon's
expression. 1 Kings, 3. 9. but Christ makes men both able and willing for
government: But suppose they are never so able, and willing; how can they
govern, if they be not called to it? I, but the same Christ that makes men able
and willing to govern, makes others willing to choose, and subjecting to be
governed: and he causing both these sweetly to concur, sets up a Government.
I confess, I have wondered to see the subjection of Soldiers to their
Captains, of Seamen to their Boatswains, and that to blows and bill-bows; if
they should take head, its not their Captain or Master could withstand them:
and why do they not? truly its because Christ by his ordinance of government
aws their spirits.

6. This is notably for the good, not of 6. This is for the good of all ranks
of men.
some, but of all ranks of men: high and low, rich and poor, learned and
ignorant, good and bad. Government is of God, who is the chiefest good, and so
most communicative, most good to others; and therefore those who are employed
about this work, are called Dij Terrestres, Earthly Gods. I have said you are
Gods: It notably commends government to us, when it is so extensive in its
goodness. All men's good is so interwoven in it, that it cannot be obstructed,
but all men will suffer in that obstruction.

7. In their whole lives. (...).
7. Government is extensive not only to all men, but to all men in their whole
lives; and this I take from that passage in 1 Timothy 2. 2. That we may lead a
quiet life. Where I observe two things. First, that 1 Timothy 2. 2.
matter of life and death is wrapped up in government. And Secondly, that the
good of government is not only in some times and passages of life, to all
ranks of men; but in the whole course and series of passages in our whole
lives, and most eminently in the matters of highest concernment, as its there
added, in all godliness, and gravity; for so the word (...), translated
honesty, properly signifies: we have protection of our being from government,
that we might be much in godliness; and next to godliness, we must be grave,
carry our selves so, as may justly clame an esteem from those we converse
withal.

8. Honor due to governors.
8. There is certainly honor due to such who are set up for government. Romans
13. 1. They are the higher powers, (...) and v. 3. they are the Rulers, (...),
yea and fathers too, and therefore must be honored; God never intended them
their duty without their dignity: nor did he appoint a small portion of honor
for them; we owe respect one to another, and we mutually give and receive
honor one of another; but honor to Governors must be more; they must have
that and something more: as they are public persons, they must have public
honor, and as they are for good of all, so all must honor them. This is that
which we are commanded, Romans 13. 7. Render to all their dues; Honor to whom
Honor belongs. Honor is their due, and you wrong them if you give it not;
and you oblige them for your protection, when you give them their honor.

Use 1. for Instruct. 1. God is a faithful Creator.
1. Take notice hence that God is a faithful Creator, as well as a merciful
Redeemer. He has everlasting love to guide his chosen ones to eternal life;
and he has common love to govern the World. When you enjoy the sweet and good,
the peace and plenty of government, we deny not but you should look to these
that God makes use of to hand those good things by; but your thoughts are not
to rest on them, but to mount higher; own the instrument, but honor more the
prime efficient: are your Governors good? remember him that makes them so; do
you receive good under them? Oh! be sure to eye the hand whence it comes: God
extends the good of government to unreasonable creatures as well as unto you,
and to you the more in and by them. There is more improvement of the creatures,
both of Sea and Land where government is, then where its wanting: witness the
condition of our Brethren in New England compared with that of the Natives
there; who receive little of the good of creatures, which God gives our
precious Brethren to enjoy with abundant comfort.

2. Governors need w^ldome, and public spirits.
2. Governors need abundance of wisdom, and publicknesse of spirit; for they
are set up for the good of the World. The world was not made for them to pomp
and palace in, to hunt and progress in; but they are made for the world, and
should be for the good of it. Nothing is so cross to a spirit of government,
as a low selfish-spirit. Worthy and honorable Governors, you had need study
and pray, observe and pray, take counsel and pray; much, very much lies upon
you, even the good of all under your government; which the Lord bless you to
consider of and effect.

Use 2. Exhort.
Is government for the worlds good? then give me leave to exhort you to answer
the good you receive.

1 To esteem them highly.
1. By highly esteeming them that are over you in the Lord: they are for your
good, and you ought so to esteem them. 2 Samuel 18. 3. the people there cried
out, Thou art worth ten thousand of us. The Law required a man should reverence
his Mother, Lev. 19. 3. how much more those who are fathers of their country,
Patriae patres, Patriots indeed. How does the Church lament, Lam. 4. 2. The
breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the Lord was taken in their pitts; and
those are branded for sons of Belial that despised Saul, and brought him no
present. 1 Samuel 10. 27. They walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness
that despise government, 2 Pet. 2. 10.

2. Make honorable mention of them.
2. Make honorable mention of them: in the same place, they are reckoned
presumptuous and self-willed who fear not to speak evil of dignities. Exodus
22. 28. Thou shall not revile the gods, nor curse the Ruler of thy people. I
could heartily wish that men would not think their tongues their own, but cease
from this cursing, and reviling. When Joseph was Governor of Genesis 42. 10.
Egypt, his brethren call him Lord; and surely we should not speak slightly of
those from whence we expect our public good and protection: How unreasonable
is such railing? it only foames out your own discontent, and tends to boil up
an undue rage in them that hear you; it profits not them that be over you, but
rather exasperats them against you, and turns those thoughts that should be for
you, against you.

3. To speak to God for them.
3. Let me exhort you to speak to God for them. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. Its the
Apostles exhortation there; he well knew how backward we would be unto it, and
1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.
th erefore he says: I exhort and that with a (...), a first of all, and mark
his variety of expressions; Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving
of thanks, must be for all in authority, and all little enough; did you know
their duties and their difficulties, you would not cease praying for them, v.
2. Its for your good, that you may lead a quiet life; pray you more, and they
will rule better: It may be they had not miscarried so much, nor so often, if
you had helped them by your prayers. v. 3. This is good and acceptable in the
sight of God our Savior; and no marvel since they are those that he sets up
for the good of the World. Happly they are not so good as they should be,
neither are you: but be good in this, to pray to make them better. They were
bound to pray in Paul's time, when you might reckon so many Magistrates as there
were, so many were their enemies: and are we not more bound now, when our
Magistrates are our friends? God has not dealt so with other Nations, nor with
us in this Nation heretofore. Never was there a Magistracy that did openly and
professedly engage for the good of all that truly fear God, as now there is.
Oh! cover their infirmities in love, and pray for them; for they beg your
prayers. Cyrus inserts it into his Decree, Ezra 6. 10. that they might pray for
the life of the King: and I am confident that nothing would be more acceptable
then your fervent prayers: and let them never want them.

4. To submit to every ordinance of man.
4. Submit your selves to ever^ ordinance of man, for the Lords sake. All men
desire to rule, but few know how to submit: God sets them to order, and our
duty is to be under their ordering: It is possible some of their ordinances may
cross our particular interests, and our spirits; shall we therefore not
submit? it may be for a public good that they decree; and if they order so,
they do their duty, and our duty is to submit, though it be our particular
loss. If we would look up, and consider for whose sake we are to submit, it
would much relieve us: Its for the Lords sake; the Lord requires our submission
to them: for his sake submit: it may be your spirits rise when you think of the
men you are to submit too, and that the time was, that there was not so much
difference between them and you, and you little thought to be so at their
commands: I, but know, its to God more then to them; and I hope it will be no
hard thing to submit to him; to God.

5. To serve in person and purse.
5. Lastly, testify your thankfulness for the good you enjoy, by your service
both in person and purse, as occasion may call you: boggle not at the word
service, they serve you more then you serve them. The greek Proverb is true,
(...), there is one servant of the house, and that is the Master* their
government is but an honorable service; and will you not serve them that serve
you. Grumble not too much at public Taxes and Impositions; governments cannot
be carried on without them; they contribute what is more precious for your
safety, then you do for their government. Romans 13. 7. Render to all their
dues: Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom.

CHAP. XI.
Unfolds the fourth Position, That Governments are apt to change; wherein is
set down. 1. Governors change by death, or other ways. 2. Forms of Government
change. 3. People change. 4. Laws change. 5. Leagues and Trade change. 6.
Christ makes change by his judgments and providence. Uses.

WE should be too bad, if we did not acknowledge the good of Government; but
withal we should be too foolish if we rank not that good in its due place.
Governments are good, but still they are creatures; and all the goodness of
creatures is mutable. Hence this fourth Position.

Pos. 4. Government is apt to change.
Governments and Governors, being creatures of this world, are apt to change.
Governments are Gods Ordinance, and so shall stand, but stand as creatures, and
creatures of this world, and so as the World, changeable. Its the transcendent
property of Christ to be unchangeably good, creatures not so; and this will be
manifest many ways.

1. Governors change.
1. Governors change by death, or in their manners: They are men as well as
others; and so come under that Statute law, wherein all mon are appointed once
to die; Their breath is in their nostrils, and if God cast it out, all their
power on earth cannot retain it. Nay sometime by their luxury, riot, and
intemperance, they dig their own graves, and shorten their lives; nay sometime
they die while they live, either deposing themselves, or else being deposed by
others from their government, and so they outlive their pomp and power. Now
the change of Governors makes great change in governments; what troubles have
been in the vacancies of Princes, and what turmoile about Successors? but
suppose they live, yet they may change their manners: How good are many at
first, and how bad at latter end! 2 Chronicles. 24. 2. Joash did what was right in
the sight of the Lord all the days of Jehojadah; but verse. 17. and 18. when he
was dead he hearkened to the Princes of Judah, and left the house of the Lord.

2. Forms of government change.
2. Manners and Forms of government as well as persons are liable to changes;
Israel was first ruled by Judges, then Kings, then by Strangers. Rome, Roma
septicollis, seven-hilled Rome, more various in her government, then hills:
witness their Kings, Consuls, Dictators, Emperors, etc. How often does
Sovereign power change, from One to more, and from more to One again? and the
change happily not from what is unlawful, to that which is lawful; but from
what is less convenient, to what is more. I think not government by a King to
be unlawful, nor yet the government by a single person and a Parliament. We in
our days have seen much in this, therefore I shall add n o more.

3. People change.
3. People change in their Minds, Manners and Conditions. In all government,
there must be some to be ruled, as well as some to rule; and if either change,
it has a great influence in the government. The people are the body to be
governed, and you know its mobile vulgus, an unsettled, changeable body: How often
do they commend and cry up some for government, and by and by deny them? now,
none so worthy, so desirable; anon, none so unfit as they; Now, they fall down
and adore their wisdom, valor and success; and afterward rise up against
them, and would if they could, trample on them. 1 Kings 12. 1. All Israel come
to Sechem to make Rehoboam King, but a little after, v. 16. they say, What
portion have we in David? neither have we inheritance in the son of Iesse. To
your tents oh Israel; now see to thine own house David: And as they change in
their minds, so in their manners and condition; they grow worse and worse, in
gluttony, drunkenness, in pride, malice, uncleanness and revenge; yea they
may grow poorer, more idle, and so more needy.

4. Laws change.
4. Change of Governor, Governments and People, produces the change of Laws.
Governors look on the ^egislative power, as their highest; and therefore to
hold out their place, they make Acts and repeal them; they vote and unvote
again, ratify and null Ordinances, and that sometime upon grounds of reason.
The safety of the people is, and ought to be, the Supreme Law. Now when people
do thus change, it may be necessary to change the Laws, that so their safety
may be provided for.

5. Leagues and Trade change.
5. Nations change in their Leagues and Trade; They are in with one Nation, and
out with another, and sometime in and out with the same Nation. David he was
friends with Nahash the King of the children of Ammon; but when Nahash was
dead, 2 Samuel 10. Hanun the son of Nahash and David fall out. Rev. 18. 3. There
was a time when the Merchants waxed rich, but v. 11. the Merchants of the earth
shall weep and mourn over her, for no man buyeth their merchandise any more.
Trading is sometime sick, yea dead, and men complain they have nothing to do;
another time it grows quick, and they have great returns.

6. Christ changes them by his judgments on them.
6. Jesus Christ the King of Nations, he by his great judgments, of Sword,
Famine, and Plague of Pestilence, makes great changes: Governments are apt
enough to change of themselves; but how much more when Christ comes to deal
with them? Ezekiel. 14. 13. God breaks the staff of bread, and so cuts off man
and beast from it; or else, v. 17. He brings a Sword upon the Land, or sends
the Pestilence, v. 19. and pours out fury upon the Land in blood, to cut off
from it man and beast. What woeful alterations are there, and have there been in
Germany by these means? Cities laid waste, and become ruinous heaps by a
prevailing enemy; how many Families swept away with the plague, and the living
scarce able to bury the dead?

Use of Instruction. 1. Surely, less bodies will change.
1. If Governments; surely less bodies, such as are Towns, Villages, Families,
are not freed from such changes; how many Families have we seen up and down,
rise and fall! yea many great houses desolate, and contemptible ones exalted.
Oh that we were wise to make our Families little Churches, our dwellings
habitations of righteousness, and receptacles of poor distressed ones; it may
be the Lord might lengthen out our tranquillity, build us up, and not destroy
us.

2. See the creatures vanity.
2. Learn hence the vanity of the creature, and of all conditions here
beneath: why should we set our hearts on that that is not, or may soon prove
otherwise then now it is? Isa. 2. 22. Cease, oh cease from man whose breath is
in his nostrils; for wherein is he to be accounted of? It is better to trust in
the Lord, then to put any Psalm. 118. 8, 9.
confidence in man; It is better to trust in the Lord, then to put any
confidence in Princes. Let me now add a word of Exhortation.

Use 2. of Exhort. 1. To governors to look after true wisdom and
righteousness.
1. To those who have the Government upon their shoulders, to look after true
wisdom and righteousness as their establishment: that which goes to make up
pride and lust, will surely moulder; that which is wicked and oppressive will
down with a vengeance. Equity and sincerity are the best poyze and ballast for
your tumbling frames: your mountains are but weak, and your foundations
unsettled. Psalm. 73. 18. Surely thou did set them in slippery places, thou
castest them down to destruction. Is it not best for you to draw nigh to God,
the unchangeable One, to cry to him, to lift up your souls in secret, to draw
down that stability from heaven which cannot be found upon earth?

2. To be little in their own eyes.
2. How little and low should you be in your own eyes? think not your mountain
so strong, that you can never be moved, when as your government carries that in
the frame and make of it that is apt to change; you or your people, their
condition, or your condition may soon alter; your confederates may prove
enemies, and your trading pass to others; you stand now, but how soon may you
fall? others may fall and rise; but if you fall, how hardly will your rising
be? Men of low* condition cannot fall much; but dangerous is their state that
are in high place; Facilis descensus, descent is easy, but its hard to get up
again.

3. To have our Treasures in Heaven.
3. It may exhort us all, To have our treasures and hearts in Heaven. Sursum
Corda. Arise, arise, for this is not your rest. How readily should you take
leave of that that is going from you, and you cannot stay it? (...), Col. 3. 2.
Set your affections on things that are above, and not on things on the earth,
is the Apostles counsel; and if you will be following and seeking, he tells us
what it should be, 1 Cor. 14. 1. follow after Charity, and desire spirtual
gifts, that ye may edify one another.

4. Cast off quarrelling passions at these Turns.
4. Cast off those thoughts and passions as unreasonable, that storm and
quarrel at these alterations; Its your wisdom contentedly to submit to that
which your bustling cannot remedy. We read of one, who when it was told him
that his child was dead, answered, Scio me genuisse ^ortalem; I know I begat a
mortal. When sudden and great alterations present, cease to wonder; what is
rivetted in the nature and composition of things, will not out; sparks will up,
and stones will down, and so will Kingdoms.

5. Contend that the change may be for the better.
5. Lastly, let us all in the fear of God contend, that since governments are
apt to change, and alterations will be; Oh! contend that they may be for the
better. How desirable are the conversions of a State and Nation? from Pride to
Humility, from Vanity to Gravity, from Ungodliness to Holiness, from
Oppression to Releiving the poor; I, those would be happy Changes indeed, and
such as would conduce to our prosperity.

CHAP. XII.
Opens the fifth Pos. That Kings abuse their power; for, 1. They serve
themselves more then others. 2. They turn their power that should be for the
good, to the hurt of others. 3. It was against Christ in his person. 4. It is
against Christ in his interest. 5. Its given up to Christ's enemy. Uses.

WE have heard that Kings reign by Christ, and that Government is set up for
the good of men: But now we come to show the unhappy inversion of power againg
Christ, and of government against those for whose good it was intended. Hence
your fifth Position. Pos. 5. Kings abuse their Power. Genesis 10 10.


Kings and Princes have in all Ages grossly abused their power. The first King
we read of is Nimrod, Genesis 10. 10. His Kingdom began at Babel: but what was
he? v. 8. He was a mighty one, that's true; Kings are mighty ones, but where? in
the earth, and for the earth; for earthly and sensual things, v. 9. He was a
mighty one, but a mighty Hunter; not so much of beasts as of men. Saul was the
first King of Israel; and what he was we all know. Now that they have thus
abused their power, I shall show these five ways.

1. They serve themselves more then others.
1. They serve themselves more then others. Government and Governors you heard
was set up for others, and their good; and to turn it to one person, or
family, is a palpable abuse: How sad is it when their double portion of these
outward things which should en^ble them to be more useful and beneficial to
others, is employed and laid out mainly to gain friends and servants to their
own lusts and interrsts? Those who have been most popular, pretending love to
their Country, how wickedly have they interwoven their self-interests? when
they have good success in public enterprises, how do they sacrifice to their
own nets, applauding their own wisdom and power? You shall find them
sometimes affable and courteous; but is it not to inhaunce love and power to
themselves, by the repute of their wisdom, birth and eloquence? I^geniosi sed
nequam; facundi sed malo publico: witty, but wicked; eloquent, but to public
damage; and thus they abuse their power by their corrupt selfeseeking. 1 Samuel
8. 11. Its said, He will appoint for himself: He, that is Saul, and such as he
was, will appoint for themselves: But David who was after Gods own heart (in
government as well as othe^wayes) and those who be like David, they, they I
say, will not seek themselves but the good of others: and now (methinks) I
find my hope enlarged for those who sit at the stern of this Commonwealth,
that they being eminently and remarkably raised up by God, will seek the
honor of him who thus raised them.

2. They turn their power to the hurt of others.
2. They turn their power that should be for the good, to the hurt of others.
God never intended power to oppress; power to crush the weak and innocent,
but to help and relieve them: But I would daily observation and experience both
in this and former ages did not proclaim the miserable abuse of power. Read
over your Chronicles, and there you will find that made good which was spoken
by Cato Cens^rius: Reges omnes esse de genere bestiarum rapacium, All Kings are
akin to ravenous beasts, who prey and devour; they are great in power, and
powerful in oppression. 1 Samuel 8. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. They shall take your
Daughters, your Feilds, your Seed, your Servants, your Sheep; and what is this
3. The Powers were against Christ in his person.
taking, but unjust taking? and unjust taking is oppression, and oppression an
abuse of power.

3. The greatest powers were against Christ in his person, while he was upon
earth, Acts 4. 26. The Kings of the earth stand up, and the Rulers are gathered
togegether against the Lord, and against his Christ. No sooner was Christ born,
but Herod seeks his life, and he is feign to be carried into Egypt; when he
comes forth to preach, and work miracles, the Scribes and the Pharisees, and
the Rulers of the people set against him, call him Bell zebub the Prince of
Devils; and though he professed his Kingdom not to be of this world, but came
in a low emptied condition; yet he is held forth as an enemy to Caesar, Joh.
19. 12. If thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's friend; and so you know
how he was condemned and abused by Herod and Pontius Pilate. Thus was
government turned against him who set it up.

4. They have been enemies to Christ his people.
4. Kings and Princes have been bitter enemies against Christ's interest and
people. When Gods Israel was in Egypt, there arose a new King, Exodus 1. 11.
that set Taskmasters to afflict them with heavy burdens, that their souls
served with rigor. Burdens, Taxes, Masters, Hardship, Servitude, is the best
that Kings can afford the Israel of God. When they come into Canaan, Sihon King
of the Amorites, will not suffer them to pass through his border, but gathers
all his people to fight them: The Kings of Jerusalem, Hebron, Jarmuth, Lachish
and Eglon made war with the Gibeonits because they made peace with Israel.
Josh. 10. 3. It was Jeroboam the King, the son of Nebat that sinned, and made
Israel to sin, 1 Kings 14. 16. And against whom were all those bloody
persecutions under the Heathenish Emperors, but against the Christians, the
servants and worshippers of Christ? If any evil befell them, they make the
Christians the cause of it; and then, Christianos ad Leones, carry these
Christians to the Lions, let them devour them: it was enough to make a man
guilty if he were a Christian: Bonus vir Caius, sed Christianus; Caius was a
good man, but a Christian; and thus is power inverted against Christ and his
interest in his people.

5. They give up their power to the beast.
5. Kings and Princes give up their power to Christ's enemy; can there be a
greater abuse? Rev. 17. 17. The ten horns, the ten Kings of Europe, they agree
and give their kingdom to the Beast to receive laws from his lust, and to serve
his designs. Rev. 16. 14. The froggs which are the spirits of Devils, go
forth to the Kings of the earth; and Rev. 17. 2. The Kings of the earth commit
fornication and are drunk with Use of Instruction. 1. See the ground of the
turns upon Kingdoms.
the wine of the great whore: and thus you see power abused.

1. See here the foundation of turns and changes upon kingdoms and
governments; they are departed far from their right ends, become corrupt and
abominable, so that the Lord cannot ^uffer them. Are these the powers that I
set up (says God)? did I ever intend they should be against me and mine? did I
set them up to pride themselves in their lusts, and to oppress those that are
better then themselves? Surely no. I will now arise says the Lord, and
overturn, overturn, overturn them.

2. Kings little deserve the name of Holy.
2. See how little they deserve the name of Sacred Majesty, who were so profane
and mindel^sse of holy things, that keep up Religion not out of conscience, but
custom, not that God may have his homage and men Gods blessing; but out of
State Policy to keep men in awe; how gross flattery is it, both of dead and
living, to count their memory blessed, who were so crooked and cursed in their
courses?

3. Judge no cause by great followers.

Joh. 7 48, 49.


3. Judge not of men or causes to be good, by the greatness of them that own
them and follow them. When Christ was in the world, Joh. 7. 48. the question
was, Have any of the Rulers or Pharisees believed on him? any of your great
wise men? No, I warrant you, they know better, they are more wise then so: v.
49. but this people, this poor people, giddy people, nay cursed people that
know not the Law, Luke 23. 35. The Rulers derided him, and Luke 24. 20. Our
chief Priests and Rulers delivered him to be condemned to death, and to be
crucified. You must not make the great ones of the earth your example; for then
you will follow wickedness.

4. Learn the true value of earthly Powers.
4. Undeceive your selves about the true value of earthly powers: The Trappings
of power are not so good as we count for, because power it self may be so soon
and grossly abused: Grace, grace, is most desirable, which is proper and active
to correct these abuses, and cannot serve to these wicked inversions.

5. Let those that rule be circumspect.
5. Lastly, is it any undue inference, that seeing Kings have abused their
power, to call upon those who take their places on them, to be circumspect,
very circumspect? what has been, may be again; what has been abused, may be
abused: Mistake me not; I am far from bespattering those whom I am bound to
honor; surely Gods great deliverances, and his peoples blood, are fresh upon
their hearts, and will raise up a redoubled consideration in them how to honor
God and serve their present generation, in the management of public affairs.

CHAP. XIII.
Proceeds to the sixth Pos. which shows, That abuse of power tends to the
breaking of power; which is apparent. 1. When those in power indulge their
laziness. 2. When they take no account of Underofficers. 3. When they rule
by will. 4. When they look not after exc^^ution of good Laws. 5. But are
unjust. And 6. Sinfully conformable to neighbor Princes. 7. Undue enterposal
in the things of God. And 8. Persecute those who are good. Uses.

GOvernments you heard were apt to change; yea to change from good to bad, and
from bad to worse, and that brings in a breach. Sin and sorrow are inseparable
companions; if sin go before, sorrow will follow after. To be clothed with
power, is an honor; but to abuse power is a sin, and such a sin as will make
way for ruin, desolation, and destruction. Hence your sixth Position.

Pos. 6. Sins of Princes break their Power.
The sins of Princes whereby they abuse power, carry a tendency with them to
break their power. All their power is from Christ, and all sin is against him;
and surely he will never maintain his own power in a way against himself. As
Princes have power over other men, so they sin in that power; they sin as they
are men, and they sin as they are men in place, as Princes. Now their Princely
sins are those that break their Princely power; as thus.

As 1. A lazy spirit.
1. Indulging of a lazy spirit, tends to break their power. They gladly accept
of the honor, revenues and observance of their places; but transfer the care
to others. Corona curarum nidus, A Crown is a nest of cares; they love the
Crown, but will not undertake the care: They are too nice and delicate, they
must not miss their meals, their naps, their sports, no not for a public
good. No wonder then if God cause that to pass from them, which they so put
away from themselves; and make that over to others in the honor, which they
long before made over to them in the work and service.

2. Not accounting with their Ministers.
2. When Princes take no account of their Ministers, it tends to break power. I
know its impossible Princes should perform all their duties in their own
person: They have much lies upon themselves, and they have more to transfer
to others; Its a wasting sin to put off what is inherent in themselves; and it is
no less to transfer to others, and take no account of them. They must have
their Ministers; that's granted; but their Ministers must be accounted with, or
else all will fall: It keeps them in due awe and order, to think they must to
an audit, give account of their stewardship. Places and justice will be bought
and sold, public treasures exhausted, public negotiations slighted, and what
care they, when they know they shall be let alone? How unworthily may men
betray their trust, dishonor their Prince, and wrong the Nation, yea do it
boldly, when they know they shall go unexamined, and so unpunished? Princes
divest themselves of their highest power by this neglect; and its jus^ they
should fall short of the reverence they exp^ct in the hearts of those who are
under them.

3. When will is Law, Greg. in Moral.
3. When will is Law, then down goes rule: Non debet Princeps dominari sed
Ratio: The Prince that is the Prince in his will, should not bear sway, but
Reason: Government has no such enemy as self-willednesse; never do Princes
lose so much of their power as when they exalt their will against Law; they
think 4. Not executing good Laws.
they gain, but then they lose most.

4. Neglect of looking after the execution of good Laws, much infeebles their
power: Kings should be living laws, Reges vivae leges, their carriage so
regular, as to command imitation, and their care great to see good laws
executed: Execution makes good Laws alive; and good Laws well executed, makes
Kings live; for their power is advanced in their execution, and neglect herein
is fatal and ruinous to them.

5. Injustice.
5. Injustice tumbles down Chairs of State, Prove. 16. 12. The Throne is
established by righteousness: but Mic. 7. 3. Its doing evil with both hands
when the Prince asks and the Judge asks for a reward. When that is acted
which we read of 1 Samuel 8. 14. when the oppressed cry, and are not eased, when
might overcomes right, its a woeful victory, and such an one as they shall have
no cause to triumph in; for Christ will cause them to vomit up all their sweet
morsels, and to repent of their unjust dealings.

6. Sinful conformity to neighbor Nations.
6. Sinful conformity to neighbor Nations does no good. It displeased God and
his servant Samuel, when the people cried out Make us a King, 1 Samuel 8. 6. and
the great argument was, they would be like other Nations: So verse 6. Give us a
King to judge us; and verse 5. Make us a King to judge us, like all the
Nations. When we conform to their pride, their fashions, their excess, their
wantonness; will not this undermine us?

7. Undue interposal in the things of God.
7. Undue interposal in the things of God will pull down the powers of men. God
has reserved it for his own wisdom, power and holiness, to give the Law of
his worship; His tear is not to be taught by the precepts of men, or made good
by their powers: The pattern of the Tabernacle and Temple is to be fetched
from God alone; we are not tied to wait for men's commands to serve God; they
may make our services to be more safe in the practice, but not more righteous
in themselves. Gods command is a sufficient warrant, and its high presumption
for any to interpose therein, to corrupt or cross his service.

8. Persecution of the good and quiet.
8. Unjust persecution, and prosecution of the good and quiet of the Land
cracks authority. They are to be terror to evil doers, and then their
authority comes forth in the power of it; but they must not be terrors to
those that do well, nor strengthen the hands of the wicked, and sad those whom
God would not have sadded. This will never stablish any government. Christ's
interest is in his people; the best way for Princes to maintain their
interest, is, to fall in with Christ's interest. His people are his anointed
ones, and they must do them no harm. Zach. 12. 3. Jerusalem is a burdensome
stone; all that burden themselves with it, shall be cut in pieces, though all
the people of the world be gathered together against it.

Use 1. of Instruct.

See the cause of our turns.


1. See the cause of the great turns that have been among us: Former ages
cannot parallel our stories; you know how God has set up his Throne for
Judgment, and called the great and mighty ones to the bar, and cut them off.
And oh! that now these who yet remain would turn their eyes hither, and see
(though it be late first) see the true cause that cracked all former
greatness, and be humbled; confess their sins in their desolations; and if
they cannot see their fins as cross to God, let them abhor them as enemies to
their own State. Oh! that they would accept of this counsel, To break off
their sins by righteousness, and their iniquities by turning to the Lord, that
so (if possible) there may be a return of their tranquillity.

Use 2. of Admonition.
Suffer I beseech you yet once more a word of admonition; the Lord make it
precious healing balm to you.

1. Watch the heart in lawful things.
1. Watch over your hearts in lawful things, and with all keeping keep your
hearts therein. Its lawful surely to eat and drink; and for you to eat of the
fat and drink of the sweet, yea to feast your selves daily: But it is not lawful
to feed without fear, Jude 12. Eccles. 10. 16. Woe unto thee oh Land when thy
Princes eat in the morning. Its lawful to eat, but not to eat unseasonably;
Prove. 31. 4. Its not for Kings O Lemuel, its not for Kings to drink wine, or
Princes strong drink; least they drink and forget the law, and pervert the
judgment of any of the afflicted: its not for Kings so to drink as their
drinking shall make them light and frollick, so as to forget the law, the
afflicted and their cause. Math. 11. 8. They that wear soft clothing, (...),
wearing them daily, are in Kings houses: But we read withal, Zach. 1. 8. I will
punish the Princes of the Kings children, and all that are clothed with
strange apparel. If the softness of their apparel betoken a greater softness
of their temper, it is not their being in Kings houses shall save them from
punishment. Strange apparel: Jun. Indumento alienigenarum: apparel in imitation
of strangers, people of another Nation, when they frame themselves into the
garb of a Conquering people, whether Egyptian or Babylonian, and testify
their spirit by their habit: Omnes qui exoticis vestibus levitatem animi
prodebant. Drufius. Such who betrayed the levity of their minds, by their
fantastical apparel: Probabile est, says Calvin, Aulicos stulta affectatione
mutasse vestes: Its likely the Courtiers out of a foolish imitation changed
their garments. I would our Courtiers were not guilty of new*fangled fashions,
and garish garments, paintings and powderings, spots of beauty, and naked
breasts, opening their shop-windows as if their modesty were put to sail. You
may questionless, sometimes relaxe your mind from your serious and weighty
employments, and follow your Recreations and Pleasures: but take heed of being
lovers of pleasure; that will make you poor men, Prove. 21. 17. and to be,
(...), lovers of pleasures 2 Timothy 3. 4.
more then lovers of God, will render you worse then poor, even wicked men:
beware your pleasures be not your masters; for then you will serve diverse
lusts as well as pleasures. Tit. 3. 3. Malus si regat, servus est tot dominorum
quot vitiorum; One says, If an evil man rule, he is servant of so many Masters
as he has vices. Look on the pleasures of the flesh as the bane of your
spirits, and your Courtly pomp to be but so much pageantry: When Agrippa, Acts
25. 23. is said to come with great pomp, its in the Greek, (...), with a great
fancy; great pomp is no more. Worthy is the record of that great and good
Courtier Moses, Heb. 11. 25. who chose rather to suffer affliction with the
people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. 2. Beware of
self-love.


2. Beware of covetous self-love, the canker of public places. Exodus 18. 21.
The men there to be chosen Rulers, must be* hating* covetousness. When Samuel
would deter the people from a King, 1 Samuel 8. 11, 12. He pleads, He will take
your sons for himself, for his horsemen to run before his Chariots, to care his
ground, to reap his Harvest; its all His, His, His; wicked Princes pretend
public transactions and necessities, when the maine is to fill their own
Coffers; they spare neither their own children, nor strangers, bnt exact their
Customs from them, Math. 17. 25. But exceeding terrible is that of Jeremiah to
such, Jer. 17. 11. He that gets riches and not by right, shall leave them in
the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a fool.

3. Exalt not your selves unduely.
3. Exalt not your selves unduely, for that will bring you down, Prove. 16. 18.
Pride goes before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a full: proud
speeches, gestures, carriages, should be abhorred by you. Its one thing to keep
a due distance, another thing to be proud: Its one thing to maintain your
place, and another thing to be haughty. It was the fault of good Hezekiah, that
his heart was lifted up; I but it was his great commendation, that he humbled
himself for the pride of his heart. Be not wise in your own eyes, but give
ear to the wisdom of the Ancient, and the petitions of the poor.

4. Anger misbecomes you.
4. Anger and malice misbecome any wise man, much more a Prince. Irasuror
brevis est; Anger is a short madness, and malice is illwill continued, and
both should be banished from you. How famous was Moses for his government, and
yet the meekest man of all the earth? Perit judicium quando res transit in
affectum; you will lose your judgment when your affections are distempered,
Eccl. 7. 9. Anger rests in the bosom of fools; and folly should be far from
them that govern. How ill did Saul's anger become him, when he calls Jonathan
the son of a perverse rebellious woman? 1 Samuel 20. 30. and as little will it
become Princes now.

5. Forget not others kindness to you. 2 Chronicles. 24. 22.
5. Forget not the kindness of others to you, and your engagements and
promises to them. Rulers must be men of truth, Exodus 18. 2^. True in performing
their promises. Its a brand on King Joash that he remembered not the kindness
that Jehojada had done unto him, but slew his son Zechariah. Prove. 17. 7.
Excellent speech becomes not a fool, much less does lying lips a Prince.
Ingratitude, and unfaithfulness, is bad in any, but worse in a Prince, who
have wherewith to reward good service, but do not.

6. Look that followers prove not flatterers.
6. Look well that your Courtiers, and Counselors prove not flatterers: (...):
flatterers are Crows, Prove. 26. 28. A flattering mouth works ruin. How many
such mouths are about great ones, and how much do they work their ruin? 1
Kings 22. 12. All the Prophets prophesied saying, Go up to Ramoth Gilead and
prosper: but that prosperity was his death, v. 37. for the King died. Its the
unhappiness of great ones that they have few to speak truth to them; men
rather seek to please the humor of great men, or to serve themselves upon
them, then to speak plain and faithfully to them.

CHAP. XIV.
Unfolds the seventh Position, That Princes being wicked, people grow wicked
too; because. 1. The power and place of Princes, present wickedness under
another hue. 2. Then good Laws are not executed. 3. Then wickedness is
established by a Law. 4. Because then the Priests fall in. 5. People follow
examples of great ones. Uses.

ALI sin is of a spreading nature, and the sins of Princes are most spreading;
their sins undo their power (as you heard) I, and their people too, as appears
in the seventh Position.

Pos. 7. Wicked Prince, wicked people.
Princes being wicked, people grow wicked too, Prove. 29. 12. If a Ruler hearken
to lies, all his servants are wicked: he will not want those that will feed a
lying, proud, unclean humor in them. A wicked King makes a wicked Court, the
Court infects the City, and the City the Country, and one Country another. Sin
is an epidemical plague, and soon spreads the infection; and the strongest
infection is from the highest powers as appears, Because,

Reas. 1. Wickedness in Princes comes in another dress.
1. Wickedness in men of high place is misrepresented to the people; it comes
to them in another dress, and under another hue then indeed it has; people
are so foolish to conceit all well that great ones do. Joh. 7. 48. Do any of
the Rulers believe? they thought unbelief no sin, because the Rulers believed
not. Pride in Princes is looked on but as Stateliness; their Luxury, living
freely; their Wantonness, Court pleasure and merriment; and their Oppression,
their praerogative: What we would abominate coming from meaner persons, we fall
down and magnify in them. We read 2 Kings 3. 36. whatsoevor the King did,
pleased the people; and if he do wickedly, that will please them too; and they
are ready to fall in with their wickedness. Reas. 2. Good La^ are not ex^cuted.


2. Wicked Princes leave Gods Law unexecuted, and wickedness unpunished; and
this lays the rains on the neck of the peoples lusts; what are laws to them if
not executed? who would not be during in sin, when he can escape free?
Under-Magistrates move according to the nature and motion of the Supreme: If
his motion be irregular, theirs will prove excentrical; if the one sell places,
the other will sell justice: None look after Magistrates, and they as little
look to their unde -officers; and so, all wickedness has a free course.

Reas. 3. Wickedness is established as by a Law.

Psalm. 94. 20.


3. Because we find wickedness established then as by a law, and that opens
all the fountains of hellish deeps, and makes a deluge of sin to drown men in.
When wickedness gets the Throne, and mischeife is framed by a Law; then as it
is verse 21. woe be to the souls of the righteous, and the blood of the
innocent: Honor virtutis praemium: Honor should be the reward of virtue; but
when it is misplaced, and become the reward of villainy, not virtue; when
profanation of holy times, and things, shall be ushered in with his Majesty's
declaration and book of sports: now he is scarce a good subject reputed, that
is not a good dancer and sporter then. When roguish Stageplayers shall pass as
his Majesty's servants, who dares hinder the actings of their wickedness? and
will not people follow it faster then they can act? yes, and it may be, out act
them too? yes surely.

Reas. 4. Because of National Priests.
4. Because of the Priests of the Nation. It has still been in all times like
Prince, like Priest; Kings had their Bishops, Bishops their Chaplains,
Chaplains their Friends and acquaintance to cry up his sacred Majesty, his
blessed memory, and happy reign: when if sifted. we shall not find much truth
in any of their assertions. Ahab had his Prophets crying Go up to Ramoth
Gilead and prosper, when God neither commanded the going up, nor promised the
prosperity. Will it not promote ungodliness when the Leaders of the people
cause them to err, and commend such bad examples to them? like Prince and like
Priest, and Hos. 4. 9. like Priest, like people.

Reas. 5. People are led by example.
5. People are mightily led by example, and no example so potent as that of
great ones; men affect to please them, hoping they may by their greatness do
for them; or fearing if they conform not to them, it may prove their
prejudice. Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis, all the World is molded
by the example of their Kings: What shoales of Drunkards will wallow in their
mire, and reele in your streets, when the Prince loves bottels of Wine? Good
God! how will men stretch their wits to invent new oaths and curses, when the
Prince is a Blasphemer: wickedness seems to come off with a grace from these
Grandees; and how punctually will graceless ones follow their perverse ways?

Use 1. Rulers have much to answer for.
1. How much have sinful Rulers to answer for, not only their own sins, but
other men's also? how many sons of B^lial do they bring forth by their example,
and multiply guiltiness on their own accounts? Princes implead people for
faction, sedition, tumults and riots, and not without cause: But may not people
indite them for bad example, for setting the blurred coppies that they write
after? and may not Princes blame themselves for making the people first wicked
and then rebellious? Again see

2. Examples move much.
2. Examples move much, plus movent quam miracula, yea more then miracles.
Miracles are cause of present wonder; But are soon forgotten; examples are
repeated and daily before us: Example is a short way to good or evil: Oh! then
look about you, whoever you are, that are above others. Magistrates, Ministers,
Captains, Parents and Masters of Families; you of all others, should be burning
and shining lights, holding out the word of truth in your godly conversation to
your people and soldiers; Husbands, Parents, Masters, obseve your duty in your
dignity, and so deport your s^lves, as your Consorts, Children, Servants, may
see their 3. Wi^kednesse is in ^ur (...).
rule in your actions.

3. Take notice (People) what great wickedness is rooted and rivetted in you;
you could not take that impression from evil example without (as you do) if you
had not a body of sin within: oh thank your naughty hearts, for being so soon
tainted. Satan comes to our Savior and finds nothing in him, Joh. 14* 30. but
in us he finds a strong party for him. Indite your wicked, proud, passionate,
unclean, ungodly Natures, for your forwardness, too too great forwardness to
follow what is evil; the theives within open to those without, and both ^ob and
spoil.

4. Its just that we suffer from Princes.
4. Lastly, how just is it that you suffer from Princes, when you grow sinful
from them? can you be content to follow them in evil, and be discontented to
receive evil from them? little do you know how your following hardens and
encourages them in sin; they grow worse and worse, and you help to make them
so: no wonder if you find them bitter to you, when they find you wicked
against God.

CHAP. XV.
Opens the eight Position; namely, That abuse of Power and wickedness of
People, adapt to Civil War, as appears. 1. In that pride in Princes produces
pride in people. 2. Pride introduces Luxury. 3 Luxury poverty. 4. Poverty
discontent. 5. Discontent meditation on their pressures. 6. That meditation an
unwillingnesse to payments for public service. 7. They forsake their Trades.
8. They fear more then they feel. 9. Incendiaries augment their fear. 10.
These incendiaries have many followers. Use.

YOu have heard of Power abused, Chap. 12. and how the sins of Princes tend to
break that power, Chap. 13. and that when Princes are wicked, people prove so
also. Let us now see all these Pos. 8. Abuses in Princes and people, adapt to
Civil War.
joined together in this eighth Position.

That abuse of power in Princes, and wickedness in people, adapt to Civil War.
Rehoboams abuse of power caused the ten Tribes to rend from him; and the
wickedness of the Benjamites caused the people of Israel to war against them.

1. It does so with good men.
1. Abuse of power sticks much upon some serious and godly spirits; it did so
on our Worthies in that long Parliameut: Worthies I call them; for truly they
did worthily in their time: and we know how sensible they were of the Supreme
abused misled Power, how often they petitioned, how long they treated, and
treated, waited and waited, and at last were forced to defend themselves: In
which defense, God and their consciences, and we can testify, how tenderly
they proceeded, and how unwillingly they were drawn to act at last as they did.

It will not stand with the wisdom of some men to see the Laws (which are the
wisdom of our Ancestors put forth with power and Authority) to see them I say,
trampled upon, and foolish self-will exalted:

The courage of others cannot brook unjust commands over their persons and
demands of their estates. Some believe God has invested them and theirs with a
liberty which they cannot lightly part withal; but are tied to maintain.
Others conceive they are betrusted with public interest, and therefore dare
not but speak plainly, and act boldly.

Some fear they should offend, by ^infull silence and subjection.

Other fear they should be unfaithful to those in power to see them abuse it,
and not let them know it:

All are sensible of power abused, would feign have abused power rectified; but
if to the abuse of power, there be added perverseness, and supremacy of will,
cease to wonder if you meet with a disposition to war, yea the worse of wars,
a civil war.

These wise, courageous, conscientious Men, are leading men, and have many
followers; their good affection to their Country being so often tried and known,
obliges their countries hearts to them: How many have bin made wise by their
wisdoms, and instructed by them in principles of power and state, which they
never knew, and begin to be acquainted with the terriers and boundaryes of
prerogative and liberty?

Courage is not confined to leaders, but is that which is competible to those
under command, who share in it as well as they that lead them. Our great
Council found that if they d^rst lead, they should not, nor did not, want
followers, yea fighters too: I think never nation had such a Parliament, nor
Parliament such soldiers. It was our happiness, we had so many conscientious,
as well as courageous men: and surely as courage, so conscience prevailed with
many, yea exceeding many, both commanders and commanded: How glad were many
poor, precious souls, to see those whom they had chosen, to make laws for
them, to endeavor to keep a good couscience toward God and toward Men,
toward Authority and those under it! And sure it could not but rejoice the
hearts of those conscientious worthyes, to find so many to love and pray for
them night and day: let them look to their Conscience, in what they command*
for they still found a ready conscience in them to obey. How many days and
nights too, have bin spent on one side in council, on the other in fasting and
prayer! oh the frequent and fervent meetings and prayers, that we have had, and
now reap the answers of! what a mighty spirit of grace did God pour out on
Pastors and people, on Captains and soldiers; on Counsels and congregations,
that we may truly say, Never such a praying Parliament, a praying city, a
praying army, and a praying people as we have had; and all this occasioned by
abuse of power. See the height of Gods goodness, that can and does bring light
out of darkness, sweetness out of bitterness, and good out of evil: little
did those then in power intend to draw forth such a spirit of prayer; but
though they intended evil, God turned it to good: But all this while we 2. Its
so in bad men.
speak but of one party. Nullu^ bellum utrinque justum. No war, and so no civil
war can be just on both sides. Its the miserable fate of war, that besides all
the misery of it, there is unavoidably iniquity cleaving to one side, or other.
We have yet bin speaking of the better side; but let us look, and you will
find folly as well as wisdom, and wickednesie as well as conscience, nay
more, and in more, to adapt to civil war: for

1. Pride in Princes produces pride in people.
Pride in Princes produces pride in people: It inrageth their hearts, when
they see they are not owned as Brethren, but abused as slaves, 1 Kings 12. 13.
Rehoboam answers the people roughly: and verse. 16. the people return as bad an
answer, What portion have we in David? and what inheritance in the son of
Jesse? To your tents, O Israel. How do they grudge the unworthy flattering
Courtier, the engrossing of their princes love, which they should share in, and
not have all contracted and centred in a favorite? How did their stomach rise
to see vile persons preferred, and their betters slighted, and laid aside?

2. Pride brings in Luxury.
Pride introduces Luxury: when men's minds are high, then they think how to
live high, in their diet, apparel, pleasures, recreations, entertainments:
how well might many live if their minds were suited to their state, a low mind,
with a low state! How happily do many live, that never live to see a hundred
pound of their own together! but when Men aspire to be like those above them,
when their state will not bear it, it utterly breaks them.

3. Luxury begets poverty.
3. Luxury of people introduces poverty: He that loves pleasure, shall be a
poor man; and he that loves wine and oil, shall not be rich, Prove. 21. 17.
When men indulge their palates, gratify their appetites, exceed in pleasures,
gaming, apparel; poverty comes on them like an armed man.

4. Poverty discontent.
4. Poverty makes people discontented, and those most who have been rich, and
have made themselves poor: Now they think of what they had, but have not what
they had, but spent, and spent unreasonably: Now they would be glad of that
which they profusely lavished out to relieve their extremity; they cannot
work, and to beg they are ashamed; and thus they pine and whine in discontent.
5. Discontented people meditate on their pressures.


5. A discontented people meditate their pressurs beside their poverty; and
begin to think what has been done by such as themselves in former times; and
what? have they lost their English blood and spirits? and shall they betray
themselves and their posterity into slavery? for so they call due obedience.
No, no, never they; it shall never be said so of them: and presently in this
discontent conclude themselves strong enough in their multitude, how weak so
ever other ways.

6. Then payments for public use, are cried down.
6. All payments for public use (how necessary and reasonable so ever) are
decryed and op^osed: they conclude themselves oppressed, and not pitied;
burdened and not eased. 1 Kings 12. 18. Rehoboam sent Adoram who was over the
Tribute, and they stoned him with stones that he died. New Customs, Impost,
Leavies, Cesses, Taxes, and Excise, do much regret upon them; and were it not
for fear, would never be paid. Those that appear or speak for these payments,
they are strait way condemned as common adversaries of public Liberty, and
friends to Tyranny.

7. People grow weary of their Trades.
7. People grow lazy, and weary of their Trades, and now cry, away, away with
following their Arts, Callings, and Occupations, which peace had trained them
up to, and improved them in, and wherein God had blessed them, to maintain
themselves and their families: These they look upon now as poor and low ways;
and determine that its better be marching, loytering, plundering abroad, then
at home stitching, weaving, plowing, and such like.

8. They feel much want, and fear 8. They feel much; but fear more.
more; and that drives them on to a despair, and desperation to a sturdinesse
of spirit, and crossnesse of resolution; Pr^stat perire semel quam quotidie: If
the worst come to the worst, its better to perish once then daily: things are
bad now, and will be worse; we may complain, but we look for no redress;
better die then starve, once then ever, speedily then lingringly.

9. There be mauy Incendiaries.
9. There be many Incendiaries to augment their fears: All Ages and Countries
have bred such crafty ones, who love and live in troubled waters: Now is their
time to plot and plead, to tell those who are rich, that the State will pill
and poll them, so as to leave them poor enough. They persuade poor ones, that
they cannot be worse then they are; they have nothing to lose, and they may
gain something by changes; alterations will make them rich; they distill into
some men's minds, that Government is but some men's policy to keep themselves in
power, and others in fear; and why may not they be as able to rule others, as
others them?

10. These Incendiarys have many followers.
10. These Incendiaries have many followers; they meet with many that suck in
greedily their discourse, and are very credulous of their flattering whispers.
How much do these beutifews work up their disciples to a rage? and if they can
highten that rage into a tumult, and tumult to a farther mischief, they think
themselves gallant men, and they have acted their parts well enough. Now
ambitious men, who thought all this while that they have been unduely kept from
honor, pirk up themselves, as having a season to rise and head a discontented
multitude.

Now follows a use to Princes, to People, to All.

1. To Princes you are not strong in your Use 1. To Princes.
power, but in the good use of it; you are apt to cry out of the people that
they are factious, seditious, mutinous, and it may be they are so; but are you
free? are you guiltless? have not you tempted them thereto by your unjust
dealing? Pharaoh complains of the Israelites; You are idle, you are idle; but
never eased their burdens. When people are stubborn, refractory, giddy, and
disobedient toward you, may not you then recall your disobedience to Christ,
and injuries to them? and conclude, God is just, though the people be wicked
and unthankful? No marvel if they fall short in obeying, when you exceed in
commanding: what wonder if they pity and seek to help themselves, when their
shepherds do not pity them? You take it ill, and justly you may, that men
speak evil of you, and your government, and you call it Treason; but withal
examine, do not you Lord it over them, with a Sic volo, sic jubeo, volumus and
mandamus? We will and command; and it may be with more will then reason; do not
you give them just cause to complain?

2. To people.
2. A word to the people; You cry out of Wars, cruel Wars, the worst of Wars,
Wars in our own bowels: our Wives are husbandlesse, our Children fatherless,
our Fathers childelesse, our Houses desolate, our Estate wasted; Trading
decays, but Cesses increase; we have spent so much blood, and yet no peace: we
thought now and then, by this or that means, by Parliament, Council or Army,
we should have been settled; but we find we are far from it. Oh! the times!
hard times, evil times, never worse! But all this while, you forget that you
have made them so. Your wickedness, unthankfulness, pride, luxury, have set
the hearts of Governors against you, and set you one against another. James
tells us, Jam. 4. 1. Wars and fightings come from your lusts that war in your
members. How much, how exceeding much better were it (if you must be fighting)
to take up the ancient Christian weapons, of Prayer and Tears, to implead and
persecute your sins. Now follows a word to all.

Use 3. To all to admire God in his goodness.
Admire with all admiration the riches of Gods goodness; that though those who
have been in power have abused it, and themselves; and those under power, have
abused the powers they should be under, and their liberty too: That yet, yet,
God in much mercy has restrained so far the rage and actings of men, that we
have not daily insurrections: and that although there have been Armies formed
in Scotland, Ireland, England, he has subdued and scattered them; and while I
am now writing, behold many renewed and reboubled causes of admiration; that
though there have been (I wish I could not say among the Saints) a froward,
pettish, grumbling, discontented spirit, boiling over with unruly passions, and
some breaking forth into horrid riots, as in Salisbury: yet God has scattered
and suppressed them; Blessed, for ever blessed be his Name. Oh! that all, high
and low, Governors and governed, would follow after righteousness, and
judgment; That, that, would be the stability of their rule and peace; Fiat
justitia ne ruat Mundus: Let justice run down like a stream, and righteousness
like a mighty torrent; then shall our peace be abundant, and our prosperity be
increased: Who ever lost by doing well, or gained by evil doing? Gain is what
remains to a man, omni damno deducto, when all his loss is computed;
Righteousness may suffer for the present, but it will greatly advantage in the
end.

CHAP. XVI.
Opens the ninth Position, That Civil Wars cause fatal Turns; which appears
in that 1. Government is destroyed. 2. Laws are not heard. 3. Religion is
slain. 4. Learning and Trading are dead. 5. A rich people are made poor. 6. No
safety to any. 7. Plantations are nipt in the bud. 8. The victory is to be
lamented. Uses.

COncord and agreement is the health of a State; and when a State is in health,
their little, yea their least things grow, and grow prosperously: Concordia
parvae res cresunt; their little number and learning, their little estate and
traffic, yea their religion and good manners, all grow: But sedition is the
sickness that infeebles their strength, so that no person in his place can
well perform his duty; it pines away their comfort, and convulsions them into
an irregular motion: sedition does so much; I, but Civil War is a sickness
unto death, yea the death it self of a Commonwealth. Hence your ninth
Position.

Pos. 9. Civil wars cause ruinous Turns.
Civil Wars produce ruinous fatal Turns and changes. Farewell all public life,
activity and comfort, when Civil wars prevail. A State may live and live
gallantly in a war-faring condition, as in Holland; l, but it is the States of
the United Provinces; Their arrows must be tied together among themselves,
though headed to wound their adversaries. A Kingdom divided against it self
cannot stand. See this in these eight passages ensuing.

1. Government is then destroyed.
1. Civil war destroys government; That which you heard was set up by Christ,
and so much for the good of the World, is here taken away. We may justly take
up a bitter lamentation, to see the Magistrate and Officers of justice and
peace to be despised. Lam. 2. 6. In the indignation of his anger he has
despised the King: here, here, is that sad state of B^llum omnium contra omnes,
a war of all against all; as its spoken of Ishmael, Genesis 16. 12. His hand
against every man, and every man's hand against him; so here: but most
deplorable it is to see those who bear the sword of justice slighted, put
down, abused. The honor of Citizens and people, is collected into their
Magistrates, Judges, and Justices of the Peace; but here in Civil wars, it is
buried, laid in the dust.

2. Laws are then silent.
2. Equity and Laws, are not heard in Civil wars: Those Laws that guide men to
their edification and peace, are not regarded. Silent leges inter arma: The
Laws are silent when weapons speak. -- Barbarus Hostis
Vt fera plus valiant legibus arma facit.
The barbarous soldier makes weapons more prevail then Law: Let the law speak
never so much reason, peace and profit, yet they slight it: Now will and lust
is law, lawless law! We pity men in Bedlam, in their frensy fits, deprived of
reason, acting more like beasts then men: In Civil wars, insaniunt omnes, all
men are mad, cutting their own throats, slaying the life of all their comforts
at once. Laws are Gods wisdom, found and held out by men for our good: but how
little is God or man, their wisdom or our own good regarded here? Nothing but
oppression and unjustice, pillaging and plundering is looked after. Terras
Astraea reliquit. Judgment is turned away backward, and justice stands afar
off; for truth is fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter.

3. Religion is slain.
3. Civil wars slayes Religion and Devotion: Victa jacet pietas. You shall meet
with oaths, cursing, raging, railing, but no prayer; they fight and destroy,
but call not upon God.

-- Fugere pudor, verumque, fidesque,
In quorum subiere locum, fraudesque, dolique,
Insidiaeque, and vis, and Amor sceleratus habendi.
Modesty, truth and faithfulness, are fled away, and cozenage and deceit are
come in their place. Let the faithful servants of Christ cry aloud, and not
spare; tell them again and again of their sins and transgressions; yet who
believes their report? Let me allude to that in Lam. 2. 6. They violently take
away the Tabernacle, and destroy the places of the Assembly, and cause the
solemn Feasts and Sabbaths to be forgotten in Sion, and no remembrance of any
thing but of their Abominations.

4. Learning and Trading fall.
4. Down fall Learning and Trading, which maintain the glory of a Nation: alas
they are now quite dead. Study of Tongues and Arts, Philosophy, Divinity, the
Secrets of Nature, the Mysteries of the Gospel, are now laid aside. The Methods
of training up Children to be serviceable in Church or State, are undervalued.
How extensive is this evil, that reaches the child unborn, who has cause to
curse it, in that it shall want good education? Men now had rather have bare
shops, then shops well furnished; their shops empty, rather then full for an
enemy: The Husbandman will not plow, when he has not hopes to reap; or sow
those feilds which he thinks Horse or Foot will trample or eat up.

-- Non ullus aratro
Dignus honor, squallent abductis arva colonis,
Et curvae rigidum falces conflantur in ensem.
There is now no respect to the Plough; the feilds lie fallow, because the
husbandmen are taken away, and crooked sickles are turned into cruel swords.
Merchants are now embargoed, they cannot receive their returns, because they
are surprised by the way; and they are unwilling to send forth, least they
should add to their surprizers.

5. It makes a rich people poor.
5. Civil wars make a rich people poor, and a strong people weak: Divitiae
sanguis reipublicae. Riches are the blood of the Commonwealth; but these wars
strick so in that vein, that the Commonwealth even bleeds to death. Trading
being stopped, hinders the coming in of wealth; and Soldiers will take care to
ease you of what you have: Its not any good cause, but money that many fight
for. Soldiers of fortune, or rather without fortune, would not care if both
sides were beaten and undone; so they might have to swill and pipe, to hunt and
whore withal. Mistake me not, I abhor to reflect on honest Commanders or
soldiers: I believe our Nation can produce the most and best of them in the
World; and which is a wonder, soldiers being used to take away what is
precious; God has engaged us to that rank of men for all the precious things
we do enjoy: But yet we know all are not so; and that many Families can speak
by sad experience.

6. No safety to any.
6. No safety to any in war: Nulla salus bello; so much is that great Law
inverted, that now Destruction populi suprema Lex; Not the safety, but the
destruction of the people, is the great Law. Their work and business is to
slay and burn, pluck up and pull down, ruin and destroy. How many Countries,
Towns, Villages, Families and Persons, have we known desolate and without
inhabitant? How many stately Edifices, the seats of Noble Families, have we
seen levelled with the ground, and the owners know them no more? Behold the
justice of an avenging God; do not some of the members of the greatest Family
that was in our Nation, wander like Vagabonds, from one Country to another,
being burdensome where ever they become? and enjoy nothing of all that their
Ancestors possessed, but possessed their wickedness. How many of both sides
complain that they are undone; some by their enemies, others by their friends?
I know my self where a good Gentleman suffered more in one night, by some of
his own party, then some of his neighbors paid in some years Cesses.

7. Plantations are nipt in the bud.
7. Good Plantations which are the children of the Commonwealth, that swarm
out from them and hive in a foreign Country, how are they nipt in the bud, by
Civil wars? They are gone from you, but so as they cannot live well without
you. Methinks I hear those many thousands of precious souls in New England
complain, that they are forced to go too like the Natives, almost naked, and
all because they cannot have clothes from their friends, who were wont to send
to their refreshment; and now they here need what formerly they spared them.
Hark, hark, the cry of Virginia, Barbados and other places, who say; God is
good to us in giving us Commodities, but we have no Market for them; your wars
obstruct our returns. If you will not regard the cry among your selves, yet let
the cry of many thousands of us, so many leagues off, ring a peale in your
ears. Oh for Gods sake, for truth sake, for yonr enemies sake, agree agree:
Will you at once destroy your selves, and kill us at this distance? The Lord
awaken your hearts, and soften them to a speedy settled composure.

8. Victories of civil wars, are much to be lamented.
8. Lastly, even the victories of Civil wars are much to be lamented. In other
victories men use to ride in Triumph; but sad, sad is the Triumph here; whom
have you overcome? not strangers or foreigners, but your Brethren; such whom
formerly you lived and rejoiced with, bought and sold with; nay it may be
fasted and prayed with; and now these you have cut off. How little did the
Children of Israel Triumph Judge. 21. 6? They repented them for Benjamin their
Brother, and said, There is a Tribe cut off from Israel this day; so true is
that saying, In bellis civilibus nihil miserius quamipsa Victoria. In Civil
wars nothing more miserable then the Victory it self.

Use 1. Admire Gods goodness.
1. Learn hence to admire the exceeding goodness of Gods gracious providence,
that we who have been so many years under such severe wars, are yet a Nation;
after so many seiges, pitched battles, daily fightings and skirmishes, in one,
in another County, nay almost in all Counties of the Nation: and in one Nation
after another; In Ireland, Scotland and England, by Sea and by Land, that we
are yet a live Nation; and a Nation enjoying much more Peace, Plenty, and
Liberty too, I say more then other Nations; liberty of person, state, and which
is most of all, of Conscience: Oh blessed, for ever blessed be our gracious
God, that although we have had this woeful division, as yet he has not given us
up to the desolation; to a wilderness state as the word (...) signifies, Math.
12. 25. Erect monuments of his mercy, and let your children know how great
things God has done in your days, for them and you.

2. Consider how much we are engaged to those now in power.
2. Consider how much you are engaged to those in present power, by whose care
and counsel, as instruments in Gods hand, it comes to pass that these wars
break not forth again. We that live on the Sea Coast observe, that though the
wind be laid, and the storm over, yet there is an unquietness in the waves
for some time after a storm. God that rides on the heavens for our help, and
in his excellency on the sky, has calmed our storm: yet alas! how many
spirits still boil unduely? how ready are men to renew another Civil war? and
are we not beholding to their wisdom and power, that prevents such sad
returns? Oh be still, be still; let not God hear your murmurings, and
repinings, and sad not those whom God makes means of your safety and
preservation.

3. Look on some inconveneinces as eligible.
3. We should look on some inconveniences as eligible, when they be in a way to
prevent what is fatally ruinous. It Is true, Excise is heavy, and Taxes
burdensome; but is not Civil war worse? Its impossible to conceive the
management of public affairs without public expense; and is it not great
weakness to grumble at that which is so just and necessary? But it may be you
complain you are over-cessed, dealt unequally withal; suppose that; but is that
so bad as to have all taken, and nothing left you? I, but this was not so in
former times; nay it is worse now, then it was then; we grumbled at a little
Ship Money, at Court and Conduct-money; alas that is but a flea-biting to what
we feel now. But do you not feel enough? but would you feel more? who
brought you into this condition? had not your selves the greatest hand in it?
and will you complain for what your selves have brought on your selves? It
would refresh the hearts of those in place to find you in such a condition of
safety, as that these charges might be spared; but till that time come, they
should not be faithful to you, to take them off; nor will you do your selves
right, except you bear them.

4. Promote not civil war.
4. It should be far from us to begin, promote, or abet any Civil war: It shows
the highth of the wickedness of our quarrelsome spirits, that rather then you
will not be fighting, you will devour one another: Saevis inter se convenit
Vrsis, feirce Bears agree among themselves. Far be it from you, to make or
take up causes of breaches among your selves; doubt not, you will find more
then enough abroad: why will you sad the heart of your friends, and rejoice
your enemies? Oh tell it not in Gath, and publish it not in the streets of
Askalon, lest those that hate you hear it and rejoice. Surely the divisions of
Ruben cause great thoughts of heart. How good and pleasant were it for Brethren
to dwell together in unity! that would be as the precious diffused ointment, a
refreshing dew, which has a commanding blessing, yea life in it. What?

What evil have good and wholesome Laws done you, that you take a course to
break them? is that the requital for all the provision and protection you have
had by them? will you pluck up your fences and lay your enclosures common?

Magistrates, as well as Ministers, are called Shepherds, and both watch over
you; one for your spiritual, the other for your civil good: and will you damp
and discourage them? will you tempt them to fling off all? or if they hold
their charge, must it be with a burdened mind?

Call to mind your Religion, your Religion: is that nothing to you? can you
think to have a religious being, when its in dispute, whether you shall have a
being or no? can you find your Oratories in the Camp? or your Christian,
sweet Christian meetings in their courts of Guard? Will the swearing and
cursing there, teach you to pray and praise? Can ambition, lust, impudence,
coveteousnesse, luxury, revenge, cruelty, envy, violation of covenants, fear,
sorrow, please you? Is not the voice of your sweet singer of Israel better then
the roaring of Canons, and beating of Drums, and sounds of Trumpets? is not the
still voice of the Bridegroom more pleasant, then Arm, Arm, Horse, Horse,
away, away* they come, they come; fall on, fall on?

How do you like your thin Markets and Shops, and your Ships to be laid up? and
the tidings that your Vessels abroad came within sight of land, and yet were
surprised, or sunk by the enemy, and so never came home? Should it not greive
you to be made poor, to make your enemies rich? that Shops and Ships, Chests
and Bags, should be emptied for them that will never give you thanks? But why
do I mention these things? What is estate to life, and the loss of your goods
to the continual fear and sorrow that you were in night and day? When you are
at home, every knock at your door renews your fears, that others are come to
take away that which the former company left.

Dear loving Wives, have you forgot the fears you were in for your careful
Husbands? Parents; surely you will remember your sorrows for your sons, of
whose death you daily expected tidings; and the fear for your daughters is not
yet off: you feared least they should be abused to the lust of a wicked
villain. I should offer violence to your ingenuous resolutions to urge more
arguments; you are sufficiently instructed in the evil of these wars; I only
beseech you to remember what you have seen and felt.

And now, one word to you who are the Saints of the most High: You have a God
to go unto, a Throne of grace open; he that is King of the World, and Lord of
peace and war, is your Savior: oh to your weapons, you prayers and tears,
that peace and truth may be in your days, and in your childrens after you. Oh
let not your hearts be at a distance one from another, or from this praying
work. Beset the Throne of grace, ring a peale of prayers in the ears of the
Almighty; lay hold upon him, and wrestle with him, give him not over till you
prevail; Its of great concernment what you come to him for; its his interest
as well as yours; its not the good of some, but the good of all you come for.
Oh then make haste, make haste, prostrate your selves humbly before him; for
you will God accept, and your voice will be pleasant, and your countenance
comely before him.

CHAP. XVII.
Handles the tenth Position, That Neighbor Princes fall off from us, or come
forth against us when we are imbroyled in Civil Wars: This is explained in
showing, 1. That God has bounded all Nations. 2. Confederacy is needful for a
Nation. 3. Its of great concernment with whom you confederate. 4. Islanders
have more liberty therein then others. 5. We may break with our confederates.
6. They may break from us. 7. They may be destroyed. 8. We may break at home,
though we have peace abroad. 9. Our distractions tempt our confederates to fall
from us. 10. And opportunes our enemies to invade upon us. Uses.

CIvil Wars do not only cause turnings, but overturnings, and of that which is
nearest and dearest amongst us. It sets the father against the son, and son
against the father, one brother and friend against another; but that is not
all, it extends likewise to incite Neighbor Nations against us; and this leads
us to consider the tenth Position,

Pos. 10. Neighbors fall from or upon us.
That Neighbor Princes fall off from us, or come forth against us, when we are
imbroyled in Civil wars. We cannot open the many and wasting evils which attend
Civil wars; one and not the least, is the unfaithfulness of Neighbor Nations:
which that you may the better conceive, we shall thus explain.

1. God has bounded Nations.

Acts17. 26.


1. That God has bounded and limited Nations in their territories, as well as
particular persons in their posses^ions. Acts 17. 26. God who has made of one
blood all Nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and has
determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation. Out
of which place I observe four things.

1. That God makes Nations of men as well as men; that is, that he continues
so many Families and Persons together as make a Nation.

2. Hemakes them to dwell on the face of the earth; that is, makes them to
reside, work and continue in one place, and not to be shifting and wandering up
and down: Habitare est plus quam morari: To ^well is more then to stay in a
place; for its to stay so as to lay forth a man's self in a settled constant way.

3. That he appoints their dwelling; that is, that Nation for this place, and
another Nation for another place, and a third Nation for another place: this is
plain from Deuteronomy. 2. 5. Meddle not with the children of Esau; for I will not
give you of their Land; no not so much as a footbreath, because I have given
Mount Seir unto Esau for a possession.

4. God bounds their habitations; hitherto they must come and no farther; thus
much they must have and no more. The children of Israel must have so much and
no more; and the children of Esau, so much and no more: and what Israel has,
Esau must not meddle with; and what Esau has, Israel must not meddle with: and
thus one Nation borders on another, and one Island is near another.

2. Confederacy is needful for a Nation.
2. Confederacy is as needful for a Nation or Kingdom, as for a Family or
person: Vae Soli: woe to him that is alone, is extendible to a Nation; woe to a
Nation that is alone. Tire and Sidon was nourished by Herod's Country, Acts 12.
20. and therefore they conclude a Peace with him. As in Gods dealing with men,
he has given some of his gifts to all men; all to none; So in Countries, God
gives to one that which another wants. Thus Spain has Wine and Fruits;
England Wool and Cloth; that so there may be mutnal intercourse between Nation
and Nation. Thus their was a League between Solomon and Hiram, 1 Kings 5. 12.
and between Asa King of Judah, and Ben-hadad King of Syria, 1 Kings 15. 8, 9.

3. Its of great concernment what, and with whom confederacy is made.
3. Its of great concernment what, and with whom confederacy is concluded.
Judge. 2. 2. Ye shall make no League with the inhabitants of this land; ye shall
throw down their Altars: The Psalmist gives the reason, Psalm. 106. 35. They
were mingled among the Heathen, and learned their works. God likes not league
with Idolaters; and why should we? But if wisdom and necessities of State urge
a Peace for a season; yet why, oh why, should the subjects of this Nation,
while they are conversant about their lawful occasions, be liable to that
bloody cursed Inquisition? they are hindered to declare what God has taught
them of his truth, and exposed to exceeding cruel dealing. It is one of the
plots of Antichrist to continue their Subjects in superstitious darkness, and
to shut out all light they can. I am confident that God will pluck it down,
although all the craft and interest of Jesuits be put forth to maintain it.

4. Islands have more liberty in choice of their confederacy.
4. Islands have more liberty of choice as to their confederates then they that
live in a Continent: They are immediately bounded by the Sea, others by
Frontier Towns. It may be God has separated us in this Island of Great
Brit^aine from all the World, Toto divisos orb^ Britannos, that so we of this
Nation might not be unduely fettered by confederacy, but act more freely for
him. I find in ^ambden that Regnum Angliae, Regnum Dei: the Kingdom of
England is called Gods Kingdom; because none seem to care for it but God. And
does God take care for us? Surely we should then care for him, and his
interest, and we need not care or fear what men can do against us.

^ We may (...) with (...).
5. Its possible we may have cause to break with those with whom we have been
confederate, as we did with Scotland; and this will produce great change. How
near were we and the Scots in League? We were Brethren that covenanted, fasted,
and prayed together, engaged and fought together: but if they will be our
Lords, which were our friends; if they endeavonr to bear rule over our Land,
and Consciences too; and if we cannot bow down and let them tread upon us, they
will then by an Army seek to force it. Wonder not if we endeavor to defend our
selves; and so break from them.

6. Its possible some may break unjustly ^.
from us, as our Brethren of Scotland did, and not they alone, but others also:
The Lord forgive our Brethren of Holland, and lay not their unkind dealing to
their charge. They gained mnch by our losses; many of our ships which should
have come to our Ports, were consigned to theirs: but this contents them not,
they thought to have been our Masters. I shall never forget their vaunting
appearance in Dover Road; and withal Gods goodness in lowing and scattering of
them then and there.

7. Those with whom you are in league may be devoured by their adversaries, 7.
Our (...) adve^sari^^.
and then so much of your hedge is broken. I wish our friends so well, that I
would never have them fall out among themselves, and so make themselves a prey
to their adversaries: But such a thing may be; and if it should, would it not
produce new Counsels and Actions, new Turns and Changes among us?

8. Its possible notwithstanding all your Unitings and Leagues abroad, you may
8. (...) ^e (...)
be disjoynt at home. We had peace with France, Spain, and Holland, when we had
War in England: and how little could their interposition effect our agreement?
Nay our Union remotely did occasion our dissension, while those in power
plotted to be like those with whom they were in league, to be as absolute over
us, as they over their Subjects: did not their actings to this end produce
their Tyranny, and our Misery? Little may we expect (...) strangers, when we
are not wise for our own good: is peace good abroad? and is it not better at
home? and yet how little had we of that better peace?

9. This disjunction tempts your confederates to shake you off.
9. This distraction tempts your friends to shake you off: Nullus ad amissas
ibit Amicus opes: When wealth is gone, friends are gone too. Now danger is at
the door of our neighbors, Damnum immane. They think it possible a prevailing
party among us may turn against them, and it concerns them to look to that;
how ever it brings them to a Neutrality, and that increases and lengtheneth
our divisions, as we found in the temper of the Dutch, before the last War and
Peace. There is not only danger likely, but there is lucrum cessans, a stop of
the hope of gain: our neighbors rightly judge, that they can expect little
help from us, so long as our troubles among our selves continue: our own
condition gives us so full an employment for our selves, that we cannot attend
their interest and their good.

10. It opportunes them to become your enemies.
10. Lastly, it opportunes your confederates to become your enemies: Accipe dum
dolet, take your fee while the patient is sick, is the Physicians maxim; it
will come shorter and more heavily afterward. Simeon and Levi came on the
Sechem^es when they were sore; and when you are weak, your confederates will
strengthen themselves; they hope for a party within you, when you fall out
among your selves; they expect not only your weakness, but their own
strength by it: Divide et impera; your divisions will make them reign. Me
thinks I hear them cry, On, On, take, pursue, for they are divided; and
sometimes God gives one Nation a Commission against another, Isa. 7. 18. I will
hiss for the fly of Egypt, and for the be that is in the land of Assyria.
God can as easily destroy a Nation as a person; He needs but hiss, and the
Fly and the Be come. God may have a controversy against you, and plead it
out with you by your enemies. Peace and War are not made so much on earth by
Kin^s and Councils, as by God in Heaven.

Use 1. See how little hope or help in men.
1. Let us see how little hope or help there is in men. You associate with
neighbor Nations, and expect help and friendship from them; but no sooner are
we fallen out among our selves, but they keep at a distance from us: send to
them, and you shall have crafty, dilatory answers; the truth is, they are
waiting which party will get the better, that (if they join with any) they may
join with the strongest side. It may be you expect Men, or Money, or
Ammunition from them; but a few fair words is the most you shall get. These
prove like Jobs friends, like winter brooks, or land floods, Job 6. 15. which
overflow when you have no need; but when the time waxes warms they vanish:
when its hot, they are consumed out of their place. Thus much Rabshekah could
tell, Isa. 36. 6. Egypt was a broken staff, and a reed, which if a man lean
on, will run into his hand: And the Lord himself says, Isa. 30. 3. The
strength of Pharaoh shall be your shame, and the trust in the shadow of Egypt
your confusion; and this we find verified, v. 5. They were all ashamed of a
people that could not profit, nor be an help, but be a shame, and also a
reproach.

2. See what wickedness is incident to 2. See the wickedness incident to
Nations.
Nations, as well as to particular persons; to wit, to prey upon you when you
are in misery, and to raise themselves out of your ruins. Job. 6. 14. To him
that is afflicted pity should be showed from his friend: and is not the same
pity due much more to an afflicted Nation, from the friends and confederates
thereof? I but, men have forsaken the fear of the Almighty. Did men consider
what notice God takes, how those whom he afflicts are dealt withal, they durst
not serve themselves on them; They durst not be like flesh-flies sucking the
blood of their neighbors. Zach. 1. 15. is a notable place to this purpose: I
am sore displeased with the Heathen that be at ease; for I was but a little
displeased, and they helped forward the affliction. Deuteronomy. 25. 17, 18. The
Prophet Moses bids Israel, Remember what Amaleke did to thee by the way, when
ye were come forth out of Egypt, how he met thee by the way, and smote the
hindmost of thee, even all that were feeble behind thee; when thou wast faint
and weary, and feared not God. I wish some amongst our dear Brethren of
Holland, (to whom I have been engaged, and whom I really love and honor) would
consider, whether something of the spirit of Tyrus (who parallels them most of
any Nation in Scripture) be not, or has not been found among some of them.
Isa. 23. 18. Their Merchants are Princes, and their Traffiquers the honorable
of the earth: Consider I say, whether some of Tyrus spirit have not stirrid too
much in some amongst you: of whom its said, Ezekiel. 26. 2. Tyrus has said
against Jerusalem, Ah she is broken that was the gates of the people: Fracta
est Vrbs portis populosissima; She is turned unto me; her Trade and Traffic
shall come to me; I shall be replenished now she is laid waste.

3. An argument against Civil war.
3. Take hence a fresh argument against your Civil war, in that it blasteth all
the help, comfort, counsel which you expect from your friends and allies. You
shall by those Wars be left alone, to wrestle and tug it out with your own
misery. It is a sad complaint we read of, Psalm. 38. 11. My lovers and my
friends stand aloof from my sore, and my kinsman stand afar off. I would feign
persuade my self we have smarted so much, and have not only been scorched,
but burnt in the fire, that we shall for ever dread it: But how is it that we
hear, see, and experience the rising of rage, and the undue heartboyling
almost everywhere, in every man! Will you bare your selves for your neighbors
lashes? will you invite them to your own ruin? will you gratify a malicious
spirit in them? Look into France, how nigh was the conclusion of peace between
them and us? and has not hopes of divisions interrupted it? Oh! at length,
unite your hearts, hands, persons and prayers, that your neighbor Nations may
be glad to sue for, and continue agreement with you.

4. Its a curious work to manage public affairs.
4. Learn hence that it is a curious work to manage public affairs in time of
Civil War. They have many knotty, intricate occasions at home, and they must
look narrowly unto them; but withal they must look abroad too; prevention of
trouble from them abroad is as well to be minded, as easing of it at home. A
desperate adversary will not stick to call in any to their assistance: and
rather then they will not obtain their revengful ends, they will invite and
welcome one to destroy you, although themselves sink in that destruction. Had
not they need of wisdom to close with some that they may do good to the
public, and with others that they may do no harm? to confirm peace with
some, to break it with others? All Nations employ their wisest heads in their
greatest transactions; and I know none greater then what presents in Civil
distractions, which call for the strength of wisdom.

5. Admir^ God in his providence.
5. Lastly, fall down before the glorious and gracious God, admire and adore
him for his providence and protections over you. Behold he has busied the
neighbor Princes at home, so that they could not intend to fall on you. God
set France against Spain, and Spain against France, that neither of them might
be against England: Neither France nor Spain intended to contribute to your
welfare. We are not ignorant how little good will they bear us, and how they
would rejoice at our haltings: and should not we bless God who has preserved
us, and walk in the fear of the Lord because of these adversaries?

CHAP. XVIII.
Opens the eleventh Position, viz. Hard dealings of neighbor Nations produce
foreign Wars, which arise 1. From the pride and lust of the ruling men in
Neighbor Nations. 2. From their desire to be great alone. 3. They draw many
followers after them. 4. They reckon our distractions their season. 5. Those
who are hardly dealt withal, are very sensible of such dealing. 6. Resolve to
deal with others, as they thought to have dealt with them. Uses.

EVils come on us as Jobs messengers; the first had scarce spoke, but the
second came, and so the third: or like Circles in the water, after a stone is
thrown into it; they come one upon another. It is a sad evil to have Wars at
home, and its an addition to that evil to have them abroad too; yet this has
been our condition which the eleventh Position will unfold.

Pos. 11. Unjust dealings cause foreign wars.
Unkind and unjust dealings of Neighbor Nations toward a people harraced by
Civil war, produce foreign War. It was so of old between Israel and Amaleke
Exodus 17. 8. when Israel were falling out among themselves, chiding at Massah
and Meribah, then came Amaleke and fought with Israel. Now a long time after
this, its one of the prime works that the first King of Israel must fall upon;
and he is commissionated from heaven to it, namely to fight with Amalek, 1 Samuel
15. 3. I remember what Amalek did to Israel, how he laid wait for him in the
way when he came up from Egypt. Now go and smite Amalek, and utterly dest^oy
all that they have. We of this Nation were coming out of Egypt Civil and
Spiritual; we wanted not those who dealt unkindly with us then; and what
followed but a bloody foreign War? to give you an account of this, Observe.

1. The pride and lust of ruling men, cause unjust dealings.
1. The pride and lust of some ruling men caused those unkind and unjust
dealings. When great men are led aside by sqint-eyedaims, and corrupt hopes of
advantage; when they are unduely biassed by their marriage, alliance, and
corrupt interest, it lays a foundation of suffering for their neighbors. Some
ruling men of neighbor Nations would be great, and they care not How, although
war involves all persons, persons of all ranks, and conditions, into the evil
and sufferings of it; yet the beginnings of it are from a few persons, and
those the greatest, but not always the best. They conjecture and contrive great,
and it may be, wicked things for themselves; and others must act them: They
would be higher, or greater; and to make way for that, others must fall and
sink.

2. Men desire to be great alone.
2. Those who are great, are desirous to be so alone: they are loath others
should rise up to greatness by them; liberty is sweet to them, but they would
have others continue in their chains. Holland knows the good and sweet of
Liberty; but if England aspire to that condition, her great ones there will be
angry. Excuse my seeming uncharitable thought, if I fear a spirit of envy or
malice reigned too much among foreign powers, together with a Politic fear
that we might grow too great for them. Pharaoh feared the multiplying of
Israel, least they should fight against them, Exodus 7. 10. Malice is the worst
of passions, and war the worst of conditions; and surely the one proceeds from
the other; private quarrels from the malice of low ones; but the malice of
great ones rises up to a War.

3. Great Leaders obtain many followers.
3. These great (though evil) Leaders soon obtain many followers. They pretend
the good of many, and many are deceived by them; what with fear and flattery,
they engage all under them; and what was in a few heads before, lies upon many
hands now. The followers now speak the language of their first movers; On, On,
the day is ours; we are strong, and they are weak; Advance, advance, they will
retreat; what sometime Hamor said, Genesis 35. 23. Shall not their cattle and
their substance, and every beast of theirs be ours? So, shall not their Ships,
their Merchandise, their Trading be ours? and thus they are driven on, and it
may be to their own ruin. D^lirant Reges, plectuntur Achivi. Rulers mistake,
and the people suffer for it: But now both join together, Rulers and ruled
express the same language; Down with them, down with them, even to the ground:
Let us divert their Trade, surprise their Merchants, stop their goings out and
returns, and in the end we shall have their habitations in possession.

4. Our distraction is their season.
4. They conclude that they have a fit season for their rage to break forth in:
they would not thus imbarke, but that they think they have a fair wind: they
call to mind, that many among us are made desolate, and they can do nothing;
many are sullen, and they will do no more then they are forced unto; many would
act but cannot, many can, but will not. Some are afraid among us (say they) and
they will act but little, others are desperate, and they will act too much. In
fine, they reckon we are all disorderly, and people broken, whose foundations
are destroyed; whereupon they hearten one another, Sit no longer still, up and
be doing, up and be fighting, and you shall prevail.

5. An oppressed people are very sensible.
5. A people under pressures, though they cannot at present help themselves;
yet are exceeding sensible of hard usage. God and good men are mindful of what
is acted to those who are in low estate; they meditate what kindness they have
done, and what unkindnesse they receive; what good turns they have done them,
which were never requited; and what wrongs they have received, which they never
deserved. It makes them recall the time when their now enemies were low enough,
and then they were releived by our help. Now we that helped are low, and those
who were helped by us press us down lower. Oh ingratitude! there is sure a God
in heaven that will do right, and we wait his time; yea he is and has been
gracious.

6. They resolve to retaliate.
6. Those who have been pressed, resolve (if ever they recover) to do to them,
what they intended to others. We are not so dead and buried, but we hope to
rise again; and then expect your own measure, full, heaped, pressed down, and
running over. You would have destroyed us if you could; can you think it too
much if we have your thoughts? Nay, you were not a long while changed in your
mind; can you think it unreasonable for us to defend our selves? Judge. 8. 6.
The Princes of Succoth would not give bread unto Gideon's Army; but what answer
makes he verse 7? When the Lord has delivered Zeba and Zalmunna into my hand,
I will tear your flesh with the thorns of the Wilderness. It is foretold to
to be the complexion of the last times, Luke 21. 9. Ye shall hear of Wars, and
Commotions; Nation shall rise against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom,
which we have seen verified in our times. Use 1. See the spreading nature of
sin.


1. Does unjust dealing of Nations, etc. Behold here the spreading nature of
sin, it infects Nations as well as particular persons, it mingles with State
affairs, yea the concernments of many States, and perplexeth them all. Sin is
as extensive in the sorrow it brings, as in the defilement: National sin and
injustice brings in National War; and that is plague enough.

2. A Nation is liable to trouble upon tr^^b
2. One and the same Nation may be liable to trouble upon trouble, as well as a
particular person. The Position tells us of Foreign as well as Civil Wars,
and one following the other, on the same people. A people harrased with Civil
war, and not free from Foreign: How humble should Nations be who are thus at
Gods mercy? how great is that God that has Treasures of vengeance to spend
upon Nations, as well as upon particular persons.? If our Civil wars purge us
not, reform us not, occasion not our return to God; he can follow it with a
Foreign War; and when we think our war at home is past, and cry peace, peace,
suddenly he can send an Alarm of war from a neigbour Nation. Oh that men
would learn to fear the Lord for his greatness, and stand in awe of his
judgments.

3. War is an appeal to God.
3. Learn here that Foreign war is an appeal to God; nay all war is no
less in its nature; we are not fit judges, for we are parties; nor are our
neighbors fit judges, for they are parties as well as we. Our warfare is the
strong pleading of the cause on both sides; the deciding of the cause, by being
Conquerers or conquered, is only in Gods hand: How serious should men be in
matters of War, when God is thus appealed unto in it?

4. See here Gods goodness.
4. I cannot but here mind you of Gods fatherly goodness. It was his
goodness as you heard to keep us a people alive in our Civil war; and it is no
less his goodness that after our Civil war, when we were weak and tired, and
then had Foreign War fall upon us, that that did not utterly ruin and
destroy us. Praise the Lord oh my soul, and forget not all his benefits, who
redeemeth thy life from destruction, Psalm. 103. 24.

CHAP. XIX.
Concludes with Pos. 12. That Christ will deal severely with the Rulers of the
Earth, 1. Because they are in Covenant with their people. 2. That Christ may
appear no respecter of persons. 3. That his wisdom may out shine their
king-craft. 4. That Satan may be overcome in the World. Uses.

CIvil and Foreign Wars have brought us to a low estate, pressed us very
sore, we cannot help our selves, and others will not help us; a world of
iniquity and misery is incumbent on us by our wars at home and abroad, and the
hand of the Rulers of the earth has been deep in all this; is there none to
look after them? yes sure; consult with the last Position and that will tell
you.

Pos. 12. Christ deals in severity with Kings.
Jesus Christ will deal in severity with the Rulers of the Earth. 1 Chronicles. 16.
21, 22. He suffered none to do his people wrong, but reproved Kings for their
sakes. Psalm. 76. 11, 12. He loses their loins, and strickes them through,
cuts off their spirits and casts contempt on Princes. Job. 12. 21. He profanes
their glory, and spoils all their excellency, and lays their honor in the
dust.

Isa. 20 23.
Isa. 20. 23. He brings the Princes to nothing, he makes the Judges of the
earth as vanity: they seemed the most stable beings on earth, having all that
flesh and blood could contribute to maintain them, but he brings them to
nothing.

Isa. 3. 14. The Lord will enter into judgment with the Ancient of his people,
and the Princes thereof; for ye have eaten up the Vineyard, the spoil of the
poor is in your houses.

Jer. 34. 21. Zedechiah King of Judah, and the Princes, will I give into the
hands of their enemies, and into the hand of them that shall seek their life,
and into the hand of the King of Babylons Army.

Isa. 41. 25. I have raised one from the North, and he shall come upon Princes,
as upon Mortar, and as the Potter treads clay.

Rev. 19. 17, 18. The fowls of Heaven are gathered unto the supper of the
great God, that they may eat the flesh of Kings, and the flesh of Captains.
This his dealing manifests him to be King of the World, and the Author of the
great Turns and Changes here beneath. Dan. 2. 20, 21. Blessed be the Name of
God for ever, for Wisdom and Counsel are his, and he changes the times, and
the seasons; He removes Kings, and sets up Kings. See the Reasons for this
dealing of Christ.

Reas. 1. They break covenant with their people.
1. Kings are in covenant with their people, and their great Trustees. 2 Kings
11. 17. Jehoiadah made a Covenant with the King and the people: But how little
they keep their covenants, experience sadly tells us. They covenant to
maintain wholesome Laws, and the just Rights and Liberties of the Subject; but
how little are either regarded by them afterward? They covenant to make the
safety of the people, and not the fulfilling of their wills the greatest Law;
but how little is that minded? when the least income of their interest shall
endanger public good, when they are in competition. Now Jesus Christ he is The
Amen, the true and faithful witness, and hates all unfaithfulness; they think
they may play fast and loose; they see none to put their bonds in suite; I, but
Christ in that case, will enter an action against them, and Reas. 2. Christ
appears no respecter of persons.
cast them, and make them pay all costs and charges.

2. Now in this his severe dealing with earthly Rulers, Christ appears no
respecter of persons. Job. 39. 14. He accepts not the persons of Princes, nor
regards the rich more then the poor: he is as exact in government, as he is
in teaching. Luke 20. 21. Thou teach rightly, and acceptest no man's person:
and 1 Pet. 1. 17. He judges every man according to his works, (...), without
respect of persons. He values not those gingles and trappings of power,
greatness, and honor: Righteousness with him shall be owned in the least and
lowest; but wickedness shall not be spared in the greatest.

Reas. 3. Christ his wisdom exceeds their king-craft.
3. By this dealing Christ makes his Wisdom to outshine their King-craft and
carnal Policy. Isa. 11. 2. The spirit of wisdom, understanding, and counsel
rests on Christ; not only is in him, but in him as the proper place of them,
they rest in him. Rulers have all the advantage of breeding, and example to
make them subtle, they have all that the strongest wits can present them with:
Their interest makes them serious, their malice quick-sighted, and their
experience settled in their way: This is their business, they make it their
(...).
^^rke to mind and follow it. Psalm. 2. 2. ^he Kings of the earth set themselves
(...) ^^^^unt, Simul faciunt stare, they make it stand together. Vires omnes
and studia and conatus conferunt in Dominum, says Vatablus. They employ all
their forces, studies, and endeavors, against the Lord: The people, they rage
and imagine a vain thing; they are led by passion, and fantasy, which things
are soon gone; but your Kings and Princes proceed more sollidly; The Rulers
take counsel together, but for all this solid working, you know what follows,
verse 4. He that sits in the heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have them
in derision.

Reas. 4. Christ is to overcome Satan in his own Territories.
4. Christ is to overcome Satan in his own Territories (as he counts them) Not
only shall Christ overcome him in spiritual regiment, over the souls and
consciences of men; but Christ must drive him out of the World also, out of his
hold in the Earth. Rev. 11. 15. The Kingdoms of this world are become the
Kingdoms of our Lord and his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever.
Satan in 2 Cor. 4. 4. is styled the God of this world; but Christ must ungod
him. 1 Cor. 15. 24, 25. He must put down all rule and authority and power: and
surely Satan's rule shall not stand, but he will pull it down.

Use 1. See the sinfulness of Kings, in Christ his dealing with them.
1. Read the sinfullnesse of Kings, through Christ his severity: surely they
must be out of measure sinful whom Christ thus brings his wheel upon. God
knows, I am no enemy to Governors, nor Governments, nor to that by way of a
King; yet I think Kings are and have been the worst rank of men in the World.
Read your own Chronicles, and you will find you may write all your good Kings
in a small Ring. Corruption optimi pessima: The corruption of the best, is
worst; Kings should be best, and they have the best of Power, Pleasure and
Revenues; Vid. Chap. 10. and 11.
but how woefully is all corrupted? and so much Christ his dealing with them
tells you, and you should learn it thence.

2. See his impartial holiness.
2. See the impartial and unspotted holiness and righteousness of Jesus
Christ: He will not spare sin where ever he finds it; He has vials full of
wrath to pour out, when they fill up their measures of sin: When they ripen
their sins to the harvest, he will command his Angel to put in the sickle.
Christ can suffer them in their wickedness, and yet have no defilement to
himself: Laesa patientia fit furor. Patience abused turns into rage; he will
abundantly recompense his patience and longsuffering with the amazing
strictness of his just proceedings!

3. Learn to what to refer our present providence.
3. See what to expect, and to what to refer the providence of our present
age. Is it not a shaking thought to recall how the talest Cedar that grew
amongst us, who was green and spread his branches far, is felled to the
ground: The greatest Family among us laid waste, and the posterity that
expected succession, into the riches and honors of their Forefathers, are
little better then Noble Vagabounds? I meddle not with the proceedings in that
case, but sure I am, In all God is just. God has begun in England, but he will
not end there. I dare not presume to set down times, measures, means, and
modes of things, which the Father has reserved in his own hand; only this I
say, wait but a while, and it may be you shall see The Incestuous house of
Austria, the Emperor, King of Spain, France, and the rest of the ten Kings of
Europe, which have given their power to the Beast, to come tumbling down; and
if they fall, surely many more will fall with them; their Creatures, and their
Followers, their Courtiers, and their Flatterers cannot stand, but must come
down, and with them many more. I persuade my self, that those whom God has
set now in power over us do seriously weigh, what Christ has done and will do,
how he is yesterday and to day, the same for ever, for ever; just and jealous
against all wickedness and ungodliness, and that this does and will work upon
their hearts, and cause them to be humble before God, and much in prayer; to be
watchful over themselves and theirs, and others, and to study to do the work of
Christ put into their hands, not negligently, but faithfully, not to please
men, but Christ.

CHAP. XX. Concludes with showing, How the twelve Positions formerly handled
instruct us in our Turns and Changes.
WE have opened twelve Positions, and diverse things in them. I shall conclude
with a very breife instruction, teaching us what we may learn from every one
of those Positions concerning our present Turns.

How the Positions formerly handled conclude about our present Turns and
Changes.
Pos. 1. All power is in Christ; power to raise or depresse Kingdoms and
Nations as well as particular persons; and its little less then blasphemy to
exclude him from our Turns: If they be for good, he is the Author and preserver
of them. If we have Plenty after scarcity, Liberty after bondage, Peace after
war: Oh thank him, him I say for those blessed changes: But what if we
experience the contrary, darkness instead of Light, fear instead of Safety,
evil instead of Good* yet in these evils Christ is to be owned. Isa. 45. 7. I
form light and create darkness, I make peace and create evil, I the Lord do
all these things: and Amos 3. 6. Shall there be evil in the City and I the Lord
have not done it? Christ then has his work in City or National good or evil.

Pos. 2. All the Kings of the earth reign by Christ. Kings are the greatest
persons of the earth, and cause the greatest Turns and Changes, either to good
or evil. How is our fear and sorrow turned into hope and joy, when righteous
men are exalted to government? and what mourning when wicked ones? Prove. 29. 2.
How much of the increase of wickedness is abated, by their power, care, and
example? and what great cause have Saints to bless God, when he makes Rulers
nursing fathers, and to rule for him as they rule by him?

Pos. 3. Government is set up for the good of the World, and nothing causes
more considerable changes then that does: it reduces lawless ones to a rule;
rules and boundeth excessive desires and actions; brings in trade and wealth,
improvement of creatures, and increase of peace.

Pos. 4. Government in the frame of it is apt to change, and does not that
reach us? Government is a comprehensive word, relating to Princes and people;
and so all change when Governments change; Laws, Places, Offices, Rewards,
Times, and Persons, all change.

Pos. 5. Kings and Princes have abused their power; that is a sad change, a
change of what should be best, to worst, of power to abuse of it: of Kings to
Tyrants, of Princes to Oppressors.

Pos. 6. Sins of Princes tend to break their power. Here is change upon change:
Change of Manners by sin, and change of Wholnesse and Soundness to a breach.
Power cannot break but many things break with it, and many things cannot break
but it makes great alteration

Pos. 7. Princes being wicked, people grow wicked too; a woeful change indeed,
and much to be lamented; Princes that should rule, become slaves, and that to
the worst of masters, their own Lusts; people that should be under command, to
become unruly, and unruly by them that should better order them.

Pos. 8. Abuse of power and wickedness of people adapt to Civil War. Those in
power complain of the people, and the people of them in power; and we have just
cause to complain of both. Its a sad case, that turns the soul to a
weariness of the good it does possess, and to a loathing its own peace.

Pos. 9. Civil Wars cause fatal Turns. They turn, and overturne; all Turns
are in the bowels of that one: our many years sad experience has taught us; we
were full, but soon emptied, we were high, but brought low; we were in safety,
but soon rapt into fear. Oh that our hearts might turn after all these Turns
upon us.

Pos. 10. We fall out one with another, and our neighbors fall out with us
both. How do they laugh at us, and seek to raise themselves out of our ruins?
Is it not hard when those you thought would help you, at best are Neuters,
stand still and look on? Truly, we may thank our selves, for putting them on
that temptation. Had we kept together,

Pos. 11. They would have been as formerly: But now they are in arms, their
War-ships rigged and manned, and now the Seas must be as bloody by a Foreign
War, as our Land had been by a Civil: Dreadful Turns and Changes when both land
and sea are bloody; And surely Christ

Pos. 12. will inquire after all that blood, whose blood, how much blood, for
what cause, by whom, in what manner, and when it was shed. The Judge of All
shall appear in his righteous judgment, and then woe be to the wicked, crafty,
cruel, great ones of the World.

CHAP. XXI.
Shows the Turns that befall Nations from the consideration and working of
Christ as King of Saints, in 12. Sections. 1. Jesus Christ is King of Saints.
2. He has this honor upon his sufferings. 3. He puts forth his power as King
of the World for his Saints, over whom he is King in a special manner. 4. He
must have more visible glory in this World. 5. All governments will prove
bitter, that Christ may be embraced as sweet. 6. Christ pours out a mighty
spirit of prayer on his people, which he will answer. 7. He shall have a
willing people in the day of his power. 8. Some of the Kings shall be among
that willing people. 9. Christ having great works to do, will notably stir up
the spirits of Princes and people. 10. The great work of the last days shall
be to exalt holiness and righteousness. 11. Saints shall have Conquests over
their adversaries. 12. These Turns shall be by degrees.

WE have seen Christ on the Throne, and the World under his feet, and what he
works as being Lord paramount of the earth: Let us now raise our thoughts and
hearts unto a farther consideration, and behold the Turns of the World from
Christ, as King of Saints; and that your thoughts may be more collected, I
shall represent you in this Chap. with twelve Sections.

Sect. I.
1. Jesus Christ is King of Saints.
Jesus Christ is King of Saints, as well as King of the World. God the Father
glories in this, that he has set him his King upon his holy hill, Psalm. 2. 6.
Let the Kings set against him, and seek to break his cords; all their power and
malice cannot in the least unsetle him. Psalm. 110. 4. He swears and will not
repent. God the Father is fully satisfied in the great glory put on Christ, so
as he will never have a recoyling thought concerning it. Its the blessed burden
of the Song of Moses and the Lamb, Rev. 15. 3. Just and true are thy ways oh
thou King of Saints. And let wise and holy Daniel tell you what work this
makes, Dan. 2. 44. His Kingdom shall break in pieces and consume all these
Kingdoms, and it shall be for ever.

Sect. II.
2. He is so upon his sufferings.
Jesus Christ has this high honor of being King of Saints upon his
sufferings. The 22. Psalm is a Psalm of Christ and his sufferings, as appears
from v. 1. to 22. The meek shall eat and be satisfied, and the Kingdoms of the
Nations shall worship; yea the fat ones upon earth, v. 25. shall eat and
worship: and the ground you have, v. 28. The Kingdom is the Lords, and he is
Governor among the Nations.

Phil. 2. 7, 8, 9. He made himself of no reputation (though he were in the
form of God) yet, he took on him the form of a servant; thus he humbled
himself, but God highly exalted him: and upon this follows, a Name above every
Name, the bowing of every knee to him, and the confession of every tongue, That
he is Lord. It is a proper honor due unto him from these his sufferings, that
is, such an honor as had not accrewed to him if he had not suffered.

Jesus Christ had experience of many Turns in his sufferings; Now his glory
shall correspond with his sufferings, and not be in one strain or stream, but
in diverse Turns and alterations.

Sect. III.
3. He puts forth his power as King of the World, for his people to whom he is
King of Saints.
Jesus Christ puts forth His power he has as King of the Nations, for his
people to whom he is King of Saints. 1 Chronicles. 16. 20, 21. When they went from
Nation to Nation, from one Kingdom to another People; He suffered no man to do
them wrong, yea he reproved Kings for their sakes. He must be King of the
World, that he may be their King, that in their wanderings he might help them;
and if Kings oppose them, he as King of Kings will reprove them. Rev. Rev. 12.
16.
12. 16. The earth helps the woman: The world helps the Church. Christ makes
the Goths and Vandales break the Arrian faction, by which the Dragon sought to
carry away the Church. Isa. 43. 14. Thus says the Lord your Redeemer, For your
Isa. 43. 14.
sakes I have sent to Babylon, and have brought down all their Nobles.

Jehovah, considered as the Redeemer, and holy One of Israel, puts forth his
power as he is King of Nations, and makes it subservient to that power he has
as he is the Redeemer of his people. He sends to Babylon and brings down all
their Nobles: there he appears King of Kings, but its for their sakes, for
Isreal's sake: there he appears the holy One, and their Redeemer, the Redeemer
of his holy ones.

Sect. IV.
4. Christ shall have more glory in this World.
Jesus Christ shall have more visible glory in this world then ever hitherto he
has had, the glory of this relation, of being King of Saints. His Subjects
appear in this world as Saints; they here shine as lights in a dark world, and
the world hates them because they are Saints, holy ones; because by their
holiness they convince and condemn the world: and do they appear for Christ,
and will not Christ appear for them? They appear for him visibly upon earth
before men; and Christ will take to himself his great power; and Dan. 7. 22.
Time shall come when the Saints shall possess the Kingdom. He had a
government over Israel, so as he had not over other Nations, and the Nations
knew it. Exodus 14. 25. Let us flee (say the Egyptians) from the face of Israel,
for the Lord fights for them. Deuteronomy. 32. 31. Their Rock is not as our Rock,
even our enemies themselves being judges: And surely Christ shall again appear
to have the government of Saints, and Saints shall know it more, and their
enemies too, when he shall be revealed from heaven to take vengeance on them
that know not God: and 2 These. 1. 10. shall come to be glorified in his Saints,
and admired in all them that believe. Thus Rev. 15. when Christ sends his last
plagues, in which are filled up the the wrath of God on his Churches enemies,
then is Christ honored, v. 3. as King of Saints.

Sect. V.
5. All Governments have their bitterness, that Christ's Government may be
rendered desirable.
Bitterness does and shall mingle with all Governments among all Nations, that
so Christ's Government may be rendered sweet. Look on Governments by single
Persons, or by Councils, in Kingdoms or in Commonwealths; look on this or
that form of Government whatsoever it be, you will find so much weakness and
wickedness, so much corruption, self-seeking, and undue exaltation of
themselves breaking forth, as that men will be weary of it. To maintain their
pride, you will find men apt to oppress; to maintain their oppression, you
will find them dextrous either to strain or new coin Laws; and so far from
removing heavy burdens, that they will lay more on. Observe, observe narrowly,
and you will meet with such undue biassings in them that rule, to their
friends, kindred, relations and interests, that due deserving worth cannot
mount to preferment: Look on the right or left hand, you will find no helper:
oh how welcome will Christ be in such a conjunction of affairs? When he was to
be borne into the world, he stayed till men had made void his Law, till the
Pharisees by their glosses and traditions had made the word of God of no
effect: and when he shall come to take the Kingdom to himself, is shall be
when men have corrupted, and so inbittered all rule and government. Israel must
be under hard Taskmasters that make them serve with rigor, before Moses and
Aaron can be hearkened unto. Rev. 17. 13, 14. The ten Horns, that is, the ten
Kings of Europe, give their power and strength to the Beast, and make war with
the Lamb; that is the condition of Governors before Christ come: But the Lamb
shall come and overcome them, for he is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and
they that are with him, as called, and chosen, and faithful.

Sect. VI.
6. Christ pours on his people a spirit of prayer.
Christ pours out on his people a mighty spirit of prayer which he in his
government as King of Saints, returns a full answer to. The prayers of Saints
are Christ his spirit breathing in si^hts and groans, and making a voice of
supplication. Now surely he understands his own voice in them, and will hear
his own spirit: When God rejected Saul, Samuel is commanded not to pray for
him, 1 Samuel 16. 10. Its a sad thing, when those in authority fall out of Saints
prayers, or when Saints pray against them, not for them. 1 Timothy 2. 2. We must
pray for Kings, and all that be in authority; and surely it is fatal and
ominous when Gods people justly indite Princes, and plead as Ananias against
Saul, Act. 9. 13. Lord, I have heard by many of this man, how much evil he has
done to thy Saints. When the souls under the Altar cry, Rev. 6. 10. then v.
12. Behold a great Earthquake: little do you conceive what great Changes Saints
prayers make. Rev. 5. 8. The four living creatures, and the four and twenty
Elders, which is the resemblance of a Gospel Church; the four living creatures
representing the Officers, and the four and twenty Elders the Brethren of the
Congregation: now these are said, to have golden vials full of odors, which are
the prayers of Saints. Now these via^^ of prayers fill the vials of wrath, Rev.
15. 1. God assumes it as his high prerogative to break the arrows that fly,
and Psalm. 76. 3.
wound afar off; to break the shield that should defend, the sword that wounds
near at hand: He breaks Arrows, Shield, Sword, Battle, All; But where? Its in
Salem, in Sion, where Judah knew God, and Israel greatened his Name; Its there,
there, where his people cry to him, Psalm. 76. 3.

Sect. VII.
7. Christ shall have, a willing people.
Jesus Christ shall have a willing people in the day of his power, Psalm. 110.
3. Oh! strange what a Turn will that be: oh how backward are men now, and to
nothing more backward then to holiness, and holy things, when they come forth
in their beauty. I, but Jesus Christ shall have the day of it, and it shall be
the day of his power, the day wherein his power shall be gloriously manifested,
and subjected unto. Isa. 49. 19, 20, 21. The land shall be too narrow, by
reason of the inhabitants. The children shall say, the place is too strait for
us: give place to us, that we may dwell; yea the Church shall say in regard of
the numerous addition of Members: who has begotten me these? seeing I have
lost my children, who has brought up these? Behold I was left alone.

That is a remarkable Prophecy and Promise in Ezekiel. 36. 37, 38. I will
increase them with men like a flock, as the holy flock, as the fl^ck of
Jerusalem in her solemn Feasts: So shall thy waste Cities be filled with
flocks of men, and they shall know that I am the Lord.

Sect. VIII.
8. Some Kings shall be among this willing people.
Some of the Kings of the Earth shall be among this willing people. Oh
wonderful! wonderful! Kings to become subjects, to be among the people, and the
willing people, whom aforetime they most hated; that is strange, that those who
were the greatest enemies, should now become friends; that those who have done
so much against Christ, shall now be active for him. God had of old his David,
Hezekiah, Jehosaphat, Asa, and Josiah, good and godly Kings, and he will have
some like them again; outward pomps and pleasures shall be no let to his call
and working on them, and by them.

Isa. 49. 7. Thus says the Lord the Redeemer of Israel, and his holy One;
Kings shall see and arise, Princes also shall worship because of the Lord that
is faithful, and the holy One of Israel, and he shall choose thee.

Isa. 30. 21. Their Nobles shall be of themselves, and their Governors shall
proceed from the midst of them; He will restore their Judges as at the first,
and their Counselors as at the beginning; afterward thou shall be called the
City of righteousness, the faithful City.

Isa. 49. 23. Kings shall be thy Nursing fathers, and Queens or Princesses thy
Nursing mothers. Those who have been the persecutors, shall be the preservers;
the destroyers shall prove nourishers; those that did mind nothing but their
pride, and pleasure, they shall now mind the Church and her interest; They
that made the people of God bow down till they passed over them, they shall
come, and bow down to the Church with their faces toward the earth.

Isa. 60. 16. The Prophet there speaking of the state of the Jewish Church,
after their general conversion to Christ, promises: Thou shall also suck the
milk of the Gentiles; that now accursed people of the Jews shall become
blessed; they are still beloved for their father sake, v. 10. They shall suck
the breasts of Kings; none have been and are so squeezed in all parts of the
World where they are scattered, as the poor Jews are; who, although they enjoy
an Old Testament blessing, and become rich where they live; yet then those who
rule over them use them as we do a sponge that is full, wring it dry: So are
they dealt withal; but now those that sucked from them, shall give suck to
them; yea, the sons of strangers shall build up thy walls, and their Kings
shall minister unto thee; for in my wrath I smote thee, but in my favor have I
mercy on thee.

Sect. IX.
9. Christ shall mightily stir up his people to be active.
That Christ having great works to do in the last days, he will mightily stir
up the spirits of Princes and People. When Templework was in hand, when the
solemn and public worship of God was to be set up, Hagg. 1. 14. God stirs up
the spirit of Zorobabel Governor of Judah, and the spirit of Jehoshuah the
high Priest, and the spirit of all the remnant of the people: Mark, its
particularly set down, the spirit, the spirit, the spirit. God had particular
work for the Governor, the high Priest, and the people; and therefore in
particular he stirs up their spirits; oh sweet and blessed work, and blessed
spirits! Zorobabel, Joshua, People, all are stirred, and stirred in spirit, and
all work: Zorobabel does not disdain the work, nor scorn the people; The
people are not cross to Zorobabel, but all sweetly agree.

It was a great work to establish the Kingdom in David's hand, and then 1 Chronicles. 12. 18. The spirit clothed Amasa, and he said, Thine are we David, and
on thy side thou son of Jesse, Peace, peace be to thy helpers, for thy God
helps thee. Christ has Temples now in Gospel Times, as well as formerly; and
there is a great deal of Temple-work, of Church-work to be done now, as well
as then; and God will stir up the spirits of Governors, Pastors, and People,
now, as well as then, and they shall work, and the work shall prosper in their
hand. God the Father has now the Kingdom of David, the Kingdom of his Son
Jesus Christ to set up, and it must be strengthened in his hand. God will now
cloth many like Amasa, with his spirit, that shall come forth to the help of
the Lord against the mighty.

Sect. X.
10. Righteousness shall be exalted in Kingdoms.
The great work of the latter days shall be to exalt holiness and
righteousness, in Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

Ezekiel. 37. 23. They shall not defile themselves any more with their Idols, nor
with their detestable things, nor with any of their transgressions: But I will
save them out of all their dwelling places, wherein they have sinned, and will
cleanse them; so shall they be my people, and I will be their God. This blessed
Covenant shall be made good, both to Jews and Gentiles. Joel 3. 17. So shall ye
know that I am the Lord your God, dwelling in Sion my holy mountain; Then
shall Jerusalem be holy, and there shall no strangers pass through her any
more. These Promises have not received their full accomplishment; I say, their
full accomplishment; but remain yet to be fulfilled according to what was laid
down in the second Chapter; The holiness and purging spok^n of in these
Promises, shall not be the portion of Jerusalem only* she alone is not to
obtain this holiness and righteousness, and others left out: But it shall be
the portion of other people, the Gentiles also according to the Prophecy of
John in Rev. 22. 3. There shall be no more Curse; then surely there will not be
that that causes the curse, which is sin: so far as the curse shall not be,
sin shall not be: But the Throne of God, and the Lamb shall be in it. Now the
Thrones of men and of the Beast, the Thrones of profaneness and Idolatry, are
set up; but it shall not be so then, but his servants shall serve him. Now they
serve their own lusts, and the wills of men too much; but then they shall serve
the Lamb Christ; and how, and wherein? Psalm. 45. 6. The Scepter of his Kingdom
is a right Scepter, v. 7. Thou love righteousness, and hate wickedness;
and as Christ loves and hates, so shall his servants then eminently; they shall
have his mind and heart. 2 Pet. 3. 13. We according to his promise, look for
new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness. When the new
heavens and the new earth shall be righteousness, then shall be no stranger
there, but a home dweller; it shall abide there as in the proper seat of it.

Sect. XI.
11. Saints shall have Conquests over their enemies.
Saints shall have notable conquests over their adversaries.

Nnmb. 24. 17, 18. The Star out of Jacob, and the Scepter that shall rise out
of Israel, shall smite the corners of Moab: Edom shall be a possession, and
Israel shall do valiantly; out of Jacob shall come he that shall have dominion,
and shall destroy him that remains of the City. The names of Moab and Edom
and the City, hold out the enemies of the Church; Israel and Jacob, are to be
referred to the Israel of God in the Gospel, and his people now, as well as
then: and pardon me, if I conceive our late domestic Wars and Triumphant
Victories to look this way.

Joel 3. 19. Egypt and Edom shall be a desolation for the violence against the
children of Judah, because they have shed innocent blood in the land. Egypt and
Edom comprehend the enemies of Gods people now, as well as formerly; and
precious in the sight of the Lord is the blood of his Saints. Tremble and be
horribly afraid, France, Spain, Savoy, Germany, England, yea all Nations, on
whom lies the heavy guilt of Saints blood; he that has a bottle for their
tears, will certainly account for their blood; and who knows but he may now be
upon his Circuit, and beginning to repay and to require blood for blood?

Obad. v. 18. The house of Jacob shall be a fire, and the house of Joseph a
flame, and the house of Esau for stuble, and they shall kindle in them, and
there shall not be any remaining of the house of Esau, for the Lord has spoken
it.

Psalm. 149. 6, 7, 8, 9. The praises of God shall be in the mouths of Saints,
and a twoedged sword in their hands to execute on them the judgment written;
To execute vengeance on the Heathen, and punishment on the people; To bind
their Kings in chains, and their Nobles in links of Iron: This honor have all
his Saints: and this ruin shall all his adversaries have.

Hag. 2. 22. I will overthrow the Throne of Kingdoms, and I will destroy the
strength of the Kingdoms of the Heathen, and I will overthrow the Charriots,
and those that ride in them; and the horses and their riders shall come down
every one by the sword of his Brother.

Sect. XII.
12. These things shall be by degrees.
This Holiness and Righteousness, these glorious Conquests, and these great
Changes shall not be all at once, but be brought on by degrees.

Thus Moses carries Israel through the Wilderness, but Joshua brings them into
Canaan; Moses must not do all, nor Joshua: both have their proper works: David
provides for the Temple, but Solomon he must build it.

Deuteronomy. 7. 22. I will put out these Nations before thee by little and little,
thou may not consume them at once. God works and performs his promises now
in proportion to what he did formerly; and as it was by degrees then, so now,
though its possible God may make more haste; God builds up his people as he
destroys his enemies, and that is by degrees.

By the seven Seals he destroys Heathenish Rome, Rev. 6. By the seven Vials
successively the Antichristian Romish party, Rev. 17. So by degrees he will
raise his Church.

CHAP. XXII. Contains the Uses of the former Doctrine, namely, That Christ is
King of Saints.
HAving declared Christ in the former twelve Sections to be King of Saints:
Give me leave now, to add a word of application, and that 1. By way of an
inviting Instruction. 1. Use of Instruction.
2. By way of Exhortation.


The inviting Instruction you shall find in these three passages, discovering
1. Christ's excellency. 2. The properties of his Kingdom. 3. The glory of his
Saints.


1. To show you Christ's excellency, in that he is King of Saints: None so
glorious, and therefore none so desirable as Jesus Christ, Rev. 15. 3. where he
has that high and mighty Title of King of Saints ascribed to him; he is also
called Lord God Almighty, whose works are great and marvelous, and his ways
just and true. Now to elevate your thoughts to his Excellency, let me set
before you these four things. 1. His right and Title. 2. His Qualifications. 3.
His Administrations. 4. His Communications.


1. Christ's Title.
1. His ^ight and Title, which you shall find the justest and highest Title:
He is no usurper of his Kingdom; for he has it by a fivefold right. 1. Of
Election. 2. Of Donation. 3. Of Birth. 4. Of Purchase. 5. Of Conquest.

1. By Election.
1. His right is by Election; for He is chosen to it by God the Father, Isa.
42. 1. Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delights.
Gods everlasting love is on him, and on him for the great work and service of
the Mediatorship; he has passed by all in Heaven and Earth, and laid it only
on his shoulders. Psalm. 2. 6. He has set his King on his holy hill: set him
(...) from (...) which signifies to pour out; I have anointed and set him by
my eternal counsel and decree: yea the Father has passed it with an oath,
Psalm. 110. His swearing is to be extended not only to his Priestly, but also
to his Kingly Office; so that he will never repent of his choice; His right is
then by the best Election.

2. By Donation.
2. He has right by Donation, and that is a right with the highest love: All
power is given to him, Math. 18. in heaven and in earth: Ask of me, and I will
give thee Psalm. 2. 8.
the Heathen: His Kingdom is all of love. The Father loves, and gives him the
Kingdom; The Son loves the Father, and us, and gives himself to us, with
command to love him, and one another: he calls us his little flock, and assures
us, It is the Fathers good pleasure to give us the Kingdom also.

3. By Birth.
3. He has his right by Birth; it is his Birthright; So he is (...), the
Firstborn of every creature, Col. 1. 16. and v. 18. (...), the Firstborn
from the dead. Psalm. 2. 7. Thou art my Son; and then follows the inheritance
and possession, v. 8. I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and
the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. Inheritance is the portion
of a Son, and his inheritance has present possession with it, although his
father live for ever.

4. By Purchase.
4. Christ has his right by Purchase; He lays down a considerable price for
his Kingdom. Isa. 53. 10. He makes his soul an offering for sin, and then
follows: He shall see his seed and prolong his days; that is, having poured
out his soul, his blood, as a drink offering to his Father, he shall prolong
the days of his Kingdom, and the good pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in
his hand.

5. By Conquest.
5. Lastly, his Conquest gives it him: 1 Cor. 15. 25. He must reign and put
all his enemies under his feet, he must reign, and his enemies must be
destroyed: yea he destroys that which destroys all, namely Death: he then
lives, and reigns, reigns and conquers, and justly reigns, because he justly
conquers. Equity is surely attractive, and none has more of that then Christ,
and therefore unto him should we look.

2. Christ's qualifications greatest*
2. Christ has not only right, but the most incomprehensible qualification
for his Government. Here on earth many have right, who have not wisdom to
rule: Christ has superlatively all right, and all qualification; He is the
wisdom Col. 2. 9.
and power of God. 1 Cor. 1. 24. In him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead
bodily; All Col. 2. 3.
treasures of knowledge are hid in him; His anointing is with oil of gladness
above his Psalm. 45. 7.
fellows: He has the spirit, but not by measure, and that spirit resting on
him, Isa. 11. 2. all which show the person of Christ to be most heavenly, and
that with which we should most be taken.

3. Christ's administrations highest.
3. Christ's Administrations are the highest and purest: Rev. 15. 3. His ways
are just and true: Psalm. 85. 10. Here mercy and truth meet together;
righteousness and peace kiss each other. He is most absolute, accountable to
none but his Father. He rules by will, and justly too* because, his will is a
Law: what is Tyranny in the Creature, is Equity in Christ. His exalting his
will to be our Law, is righteous in him, and good to us; for Men to do so, is
to entrench on his prerogative, and render themselves obnoxious to his
vindictive power. He makes the Subjects he rules over. Psalm. 149. 2. Let Israel
rejoice in him that made him, Let the children of Zion be joyful in their
King: Their King is their Maker; and therefore requires the most observance
from them. 2 Cor. 10. 5. Every thonght is to be under a happy captivity to the
obedience of Christ. Let Tyrants be never so crafty and cruel, they may
restrain the body, and gag the tongues of men, but they cannot reach their
thoughts: But Christ lays his dominion there, leaves us not one thought to be
at our own disposal, but requires all to come under him.

It is for the poor low governments here to be tied to Time and Place; Christ
rules over all, all persons and things always: He makes all, and preserves
what he has made, and orders righteously that which he has preserved. He has
gladium justitiae, the sword of Justice, by which he cuts up vice, and defends
his own people: and he has gladium belli, the sword of War, to destroy his
incorrigible enemies: Let them gather together, he will scatter them; let them
make their nests in the Stars, yet thence he will pluck them down; Let them
lay their plots deep, and magnify Joel 2. 20, 21.
themselves to do great things: yet he will turn their wisdom into
foolishness, and their plots to the advance of his own 4. Christ his
communications are largest.
designs.

4. Christ's Communications are the largest, 1 John 5. 20. He has given us
understanding to know him that is true. Men may propound something for your
knowledge, but they cannot give the understanding: but Christ triumphs in this;
to give wisdom to the simple, and knowledge to them that have no
understanding. Phil. 1. 29. Unto you its given, on the behalf of Christ, not
only to believe, but also to suffer for his sake.

Acts 5. 31. God has exalted him to be a Prince and a Savior, to give
repentance to Israel and remission of sin. When he left the World he bequeaths
no worse legacy to his Disciples, then what himself had enjoyed, Joh. 14. 27.
Peace he leaves with them, yea his peace to relieve their troubled and fearful
hearts.

Ephesians. 4. 8. and 1^. When he ascends up on high, he led captivity captive, and
gave gifts unto men: Verse 12. He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, some
Evangelists, some Pastors, and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for
the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ.

2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. To all that love his appearance, and that have fought the good
fight, and kept the faith; he as a righteous Lord and Judge, has laid up, and
will give a Crown of righteousness. Now sum up all: to give knowledge and
faith, and so all other graces; to give repentance and remission of sins, grace
and gifts, gifts to men, and those men to his Church, and hereafter a Crown of
righteousness: What are, if these are not large Communications? Every man is a
friend to him that gives gifts; and shall not the consideration of Christ his
bountiful giing, make us desirously longing after that Title of true honor, to
be called his friends?

Properties of Christ's Kingdom.
We have seen King Jesus upon the Throne, and his Throne all glorious; we have
seen his Right, his Qualifications, Administrations, and Communications: Let us
now in the second place, veiw the Properties of his Kingdom.

1. It is spiritual.
1. His Kingdom is spiritual, Romans 14. 17 Not in meat and drink, but
righteousness and peace and joy in the holy Ghost. Princes may bear rule over
men's persons and estates; but Jesus Christ over men's consciences: He imprints
his Law upon them, and gives them power to reflect both on that Law, and their
own ways by it; he accuses or excuses, lets terror or peace into the
conscience, as seems good to him.

His Commands and Promises carry a blessed spiritualnesse with them, and so do
his Rewards. When you serve him, it must be in spirit and truth; when you pray,
it must be in the spirit, Jude v. 20. and when you hear, it must be what the
spirit says to the Churches, Rev. 3. 6.

If you take on you to preach, it must not be with the entising words of man's
wisdom, but in demonstration of the spirit, and with power, Col. 2. 4. and if
you sing, it must be spiritual Songs, making melody with grace in the heart to
the Lord, Col. 3 16. In a word, you are as lively stones built up, a spiritual
house, an holy priesthood to offer up spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God by
Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 5. and verse 9. Ye are a chosen generation, a royal
priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, that ye should show forth the
praises of him that has called you out of darkness into his mavelous light.
I beseech you therefore Brethren by the mercyes of God, that ye present your
bodies a lively Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable
service, Romans 12. 1.

2. Its Universal.
2. His Kingdom is Universal over all Saints in all places and ages: He is
yesterday and to day and the same for ever; he ruled Israel of old, and he
rules his people now; his administration was unto them outward and visible; and
shall it not be so again in the latter days? Amos 2. 9, 10, 11. I destroyed
the Amorite before them, I brought them up from the land of Egypt, and led them
forty years through the Wilderness to possess the land of the Amorits; and I
raised up of your sons for Prophets, and of your young men for Nazarites, says
the Lord. He brought up, he led, he destroyed, he raised, he did all then, and
will do all hereafter. Rev. 11. 15. The Kingdoms of the world are become the
Kingdoms of our Lord and his Christ: not now one Kingdom or Nation, as then;
not this or that Kingdom, and no more: but the Kingdoms of the world are
become his, he shall not always be crowded into a corner of the world, but as
it is v. 1. 7. He shall take unto himself his great power, and reign and
reward his servants the Prophets, and the Saints that fear his Name, both
small and great, here, and there, and everywhere.

3. Its Eternal.
3. Thy Throne oh God is for ever, and ever, Heb. 1. 8. the heavens perish and
wax old as a garment, and as a vesture shall thou fold them up, and they shall
be changed: but thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail. His Kingdom
then is Eternal. Dan. 2. 44. The God of heaven has set up a Kingdom which
shall never be destroyed, and the Kingdom shall not be left to other people;
but it shall break in pieces, and consume all these Kingdoms, and it shall
stand for ever: It shall not be destroyed by any adverse power, nor shall it
decay of it self, but it shall break all adverse power, and it shall stand for
ever; and as it is an eternal Kingdom, so it determines men to an eternal
state. Rev. 1. 18. I live for evermore, Amen; and have the keys of Hell and
Death; wherefore, Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill
the soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in
hell, Math. 10. 28.

4. Brings in perfect peace.
4. Lastly, his Kingdom brings in perfect peace and liberty. Isa. 9. 6. He is
the everlasting father and Prince of peace. Isa. 24. 23. The Lord shall reign
in mount Sion, and in Jerusalem before the Ancients gloriously: not only
reign in heaven, but in Sion, and that gloriously. Isa. 25. 8. He shall
swallow up Death in Victory, and the Lord will wipe away tears from all faces,
and the rebuke of the people shall he take away from all the earth; for the
Lord has spoken it. Death, tears, rebuke, shall be taken away; what safety
and happiness must then follow? Isa. 52. 13. Behold my servant shall dwell
confidently, he shall be exalted and extolled, and be very high.

Isa. 60. 19. 20. The Sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither for
brightness shall the Moon give light unto thee; but the Lord shall be unto
thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory, and the days of thy mourning
shall be ended.

Rev. 21. 4. There shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neiiher
shall there be any more pain; for the former things are passed away.

3. The excellency of Saints.
3. The third and last thing that we learn from hence that Christ is King of
Saints, is the excellency of his Subjects, and the glory of his holy ones.

1. They shall be more Saints.
1. Christ is King, and the holy One of God, and his Saints shall be more
Saints, shall appear to be his holy ones; Sanctity shall be more exalted in
them, then ever yet our eyes have seen.

Joel. 3. 17. Then shall Jerusalem be holy, and there shall no strangers pass
through her any more.

Zach. 14. 20. In that day shall there be upon the bells of the horses Holiness
to the Lord, yea every pot in Jerusalem and Judah shall be holiness to the
Lord of Hosts; and there shall be no more the Canaanite in the house of the
Lord of Hosts.

2. Saints shall live safely.
2. They shall live in safety, Isa. 60. 18. Violence shall no more be heard in
thy Land, wasting nor destruction within thy borders: but thou shall call thy
walls salvation, and thy gates praise.

Joel 2. 18. In that day will I make a covenant for them with the beasts of the
field, and with the fowls of heaven, and I will break the Bow and the Battle
ou^ of the earth, and will make them to lie down safely.

3. Their enemies shall be ruined.
3. Saints enemies shall be brought to ruin, Zach. 10. 11. The pride of
Assyria shall be brought down, and the Scepter of Egypt shall depart away. It
is usual to express the enemies of the Church by the names of the old grand
enemies, Assyria and Egypt, and you see what shall become of them, they shall
be brought down and depart away.

Isa. 14. 2. The house of Israel shall possess strangers in the land of the
Lord for servants and for handmaids, and they shall take them captive whose
captives they were, and they shall rule over their oppressors.

Rev. 20. 7, 8, 9. Satan shall go out to deceive the Nations which are in the
four quarters of the Earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle:
But fire shall come down from God out of heaven and devour them. The Lord will
create upon every dwelling place of mount Sion, and upon their assemblies, a
cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night; for upon
all the glory shall be a defense. Isa. 4. 5. Happy are the people that be in
such a case, yea, blessed are the people whose God is the Lord.

2. Use of Exhortation.
2. Now follows a word of Exhortation to provoke Saints to their duty. All
that Saints are, and have, must be to, and for Christ: their gifts and graces,
their offices, ordinances and discipline; they are from him, and should be for
him. Can you ever serve a better Lord? or be subjects to a better King? give me
leave then to call upon you,

1. To know him.
1. To know him, to entertain him in all your thoughts; your apprehensions and
notions can never be raised so high, and truly innobled, as when He is the
object: mount your m^ditations to the highest, you will meet with that in him
which will surpass all your thoughts. How gladly should you follow those
Gospel-straines that make the death and resurrection of Christ the Topic
places for Faiths Logic; heads of arguments for the new creature to reason
from, Col. 3. 1. Its eternal life to know him: Joh. 17. 3. and therefore set
this down as a conclusion in your mind, with that blessed Apostle, who
determined to know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2. 2.

2. To fear him.
2. Learn hence to fear him: Rev. 15. 3, 4. Oh King of Saints, who would not
fear thee oh Lord, and glorify thy Name? The greatness and goodness of
Christ call for a reverential frame in our hearts. How thoughtful and
considerate should we be, least by our poor and low, and unbeseeming carriage
he might fall short of his glory? Oh the highth and depth of his Wisdom,
Power, Mercy, and Justice, who is King of Saints! and yet how few do honor
him? It falls on Saints; a work it is, that lies on their hands, to give him
the glory due to his Name; and ashamed should they be to be found so backward
in this work.

3. Trust in him.
3. Repose your trust in him: 2 Samuel 22. 2, 3. He that is your King, is your
Rock and Fortress, and Deliverer, your Shield, horn of Salvation, high Tower,
your Refuge, your Savior, that saves you from violence; therefore trust in
him. Psalm. 20. 7. Some trust in Chariots, and some in Horses; but we will
remember the Name of the Lord our God.

I will not trust in my Bow, neither shall my Sword save, says David, Psalm.
44. 6. How great is the goodness laid up for them that trust in him, before the
sons of men? Psalm. 31. 19. None of them shall be desolate.

Psalm. 34. 22. Trust in the Lord and do good; so shall thou dwell in the land,
and verily thou shall be fed; and he shall bring thy ways to pass, Psalm. 37.
3, and 5.

4. Embrace him with love.
4. Embrace him with the highest love, oh ye Saints; for the Lord preserves
the faithful, and plenteously rewards the proud doer. He is the chiefest
good, most suitable, and most communicative, and therefore common love will not
suffice; it must be a Jonathans love, 2 Samuel 16. wonderful, and passing the
love of women. The Church compares the power of her love to the power a disease
has, that masters the body, which all the tossing and tumbling cannot shake
off. Cant. 2. 5. Stay me with Flaggons, and comfort me with Apples, for I am
sick of love.

Remember your King is your Husband, and you must tender him the love of your
espousals. Jer. 2. 2. He draws us with bands of love, and cords of a man. Hos.
11. 4. and our love to him must be constraining, carrying you up hill and
against (...).
the crowd, 2 Cor. 5. 14.

5. We must be like him.
5. We must by like to him; Holy as he is holy: it should be like Prince and
like people; he the King of Saints commanding, and they Saints obeying. We must
consider him, who though he were Sions King, yet came in all meekness, and
has left us this command, Learn of me, for I am lowly and meek, and ye shall
find rest unto your souls, Mat. 11. 29.

It is written of him, Heb. 10. 7. Lo I come to do thy will oh my God: And
surely we should be as ready in our proportion to do his will, as he was the
Fathers; He came to his Crown by the cross; and though he were the Captain of
our salvation, yet was he made perfect through sufferings; and if we will be
his Disciples, we must deny our selves, take up the cross and follow him: we
must choose as Moses did, to suffer affliction with the people of God, and count
it greater riches then the treasures of Egypt, Heb. 11. 24, 25.

6. We must glorify him.
6. He is our King, and we must glorify him. Kings stand much upon their
honor, but none so much as Christ: This the Psalmist well knew when he indicted
a Song of loves to praise him with a ready heart and tongue, Psalm. 45. 1. Psalm.
45. 1.


He tells us of his beauty, and that he is fairer then the children of men; his
lips are not ^ipped with grace, but grace is poured into his lips: well may we
fall to bless him whom God has blessed, and blessed for ever, v. 2. He is not
only fair, but valiant; not only gracious, but mighty, V. 3. 4.
yea mighty with glory and majesty, v. 3. A rare Majesty, v. 4. Truth a
horseback; Majesty illustrious with meekness and righteousness; they that
praise him, glorify him; and they that glorify him, order their conversation
aright. You must not barely speak his praise, but live out his praise, and show
your selves to be his disciples indeed, by bringing forth much fruit.

7. Christ must be obeyed in his Laws.
7. Lastly, The King of Saints must not want his obedient subjects; obedience
is the performance of what is commanded; and those commands are wrapped up in
the Law. I have lately read of some Laws of Nature, which I conceive might be
handled in a Gospel-way: I shall endeavor therefore to bring Scripture Light
to them, and leave them upon your consciences to be observed.

1. Peace is to be sought.
1. The first of them is this, That peace is to be sought. Romans 12. 18. If it
be possible, and as much as in you lies, have peace with all men; there is an,
(...), if it be possible, and a (...), as much as lies in you, live peaceably:
(...), still be peacing of it. How ill does wrath, malice, envy, contention,
fighting, and brawling become a man? and it worse becomes a Saint, a man of
holiness, Heb. 12. 14. Follow peace with all men, (...), persecute peace; do
that with a good and raised affection by the good spirit of God, which wicked
men do against you by a wicked spirit; When they persecute you by a spirit of
malice, they are boiled up to a hight; so should you be, and move with all your
strength after peace: He adds a word more that makes the rule complete; follow
peace and holiness. No peace says my God to the wicked, or with wickedness:
Abeat pax illa, etc. away with that peace which defiles your conscience, and
breaks your peace with God. But follow peace and holiness, holy peace, and
peaceful holiness, which will render Church and State happy.

2. Stand to your Covenants.
2. Stand to your Covenants, is a second law of Nature in that Author, and its
a law of grace too.

I will be your God, I will write my Law in their inward parts; I will give
them an heart of flesh: this is Gods Covenant, and he remembers his Covenant
for his people, Psalm. 106. 45.

And to be his people, to walk in his ways and not depart from him, That is
our Covenant. God is faithful in his, and it concerns us to be so in our
Covenants. The Church humbly and holily boasts of this, Psalm. 44. 17. that
although she had met with hard measure, yet she had not dealt falsely in the
Covenant; her heart was not turned backward, nor her steps declined from his
way. We have often made and renewed our Covenants in the days of our sorrow
and sickness, our fear and trouble; the Lord grant we have not broken as often
as made them. We promise to become new men, to turn over a new leaf, to watch
more against the beginnings and occasions of sin, to oppose our special
corruptions, to be more in secret prayer and meditation: but how soon do we
forget our Covenants, and return to our former mire and vomit, proving as bad
as ever before; as worldly and sensual as ever, as unclean as ever, as formal
and hypocritical as ever before?

Its a brand on the strange woman, Prove. 2. 17. She forsakes the guide of her
youth, and forgeteth the Covenant of her God. The Lord grant it be not true in
us, and that we like men transgress not the Covenant, Hos. 6. 7.

3. You must be thankful.
3. Its a great Law of Nature and grace too, that we should be thankful; If so
to men, much more to God. Romans 1. 21. The Heathens glorified not God as God,
neither were thankful, but became vain in their imagination, and their foolish
heart was darkened. God forbid, that Christians should become heathenish, become
unthankful; Ingratum si dixeris, dixeris omnia, you accumulate evil on the head
of him whom you call unthankful. Those who have the peace of God ruling in
their hearts, and are called into one body, must be thankful, Col. 3. 15. But
of this I spoke before.

4. We must serve one another.
4. I pass on to the fourth Law, which is, That we must serve one another; and
this we find enjoined by that blessed Apostle Gal. 5. 13. Use not liberty for
an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another Saints are creatures
framed for Society as well as men, and they have Saint-like love and Saint-like
service, by which they are to build up one another, Romans 15. 2. Those who are
strong are to bear with the infirmities of the weak, and not to please
themselves; But let every one of us please his neighbor for his good to
edification. Is another burdened? he must not bear his burden alone, but we
must bear a part with him, and so fulfill the Law of Christ, Gal. 6. 2. A
proud and vaunting spirit should be far from us, that will make us domineere
and not fear; we should condescend to low things, to a service for the good of
another; and his necessity of our help, should have (as it were) the force of a
command, and make us ambitious to bring in our help. How sweet are those
Corporations and Churches, in their Communions, that most practice this
service? Nor is there any cause why men should conceive themselves debased by
this way of servitude; for you serve another no more then he serves you; and
you may need him, as well as he you.

5. We must be merciful and forgive.
5. The next Law that challenges our obedience, is, That we must be merciful,
and forgive one another. That Law takes it for granted, that we are liable to
misery, and to wrong one another; and to guide you in these cases, commands you
mercifulness and forgiveness. Luke 6. 36. Be you merciful, as your heavenly
Father is merciful* a glorious pattern, no mercy like that of a fathers, no
fathers mercy like that of Gods; and yet this is that copy we are to write
after, to be merciful as he is. Col. 3. 12. Put you on as the elect of God,
holy and beloved, bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of minds, (...),
Viscerd miseri^ordiae, bowels, that is, mercy from an inward disposition, and
tender affection; and such merciful ones are pronounced blessed, and are
promised mercy, Math. 5. 7.

And as you must be thus pitying the misery of another, so you must be
forgiving too. Ephesians. 4. 32. Be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted,
forgiving one another, as God for Christ's sake forgave you. The same blessed
pattern again is proposed for forgiveness, as was to mercifulness: Another
can never offend you, as you have offended God; we owe him more then ten
thousand talents, and have nothing to pay, and he freely forgives us all, and
delights to forgive; and should not we go and do so also? It is inserted by our
Savior in his Doctrine of prayer, Math. 6. 12. Forgive us our debts, as we
forgive our debtors. If ever you knew the misery that the debt of sin brings on
you, you would be full of breathings after forgiveness, and no^ be quiet till
you had it on your bosom: Consider well that you oblige your selves to forgive
others, when you beg forgiveness for your selves; And if you ask how often you
must forgive? Math. 18. 12. our Savior makes answer; I say not unto thee until
seven times, but until seventy times seven.

6. Reproach not one another.
6. The sixth Law takes care about our names, and is this, Reproach not one
another. Disgrace is a bitter death, it slayes a man's honor and repute. The
Apostle bids Titus put men in mind, Tit. 3. 2. to speak evil of no man: (...),
to blaspheme no man. Unjust reproach is a kind of blasphemy, it speaks ill of
what is good in men, and so of what belongs Which is when men*
to God in them. There be eight ways by which worthy and reverend writers lay
this down; four of which respect evil, and four respect good. 1. Imponens. 2.
Augens. 3. Manifestans. 4. In mala vertens.

1. accuse fasly.
1. When men accuse us falsely, then they reproach us. This mightily afflicts an
honest heart; and the reason is, because he looks on Christ as intrested in his
name, and he is really troubled to think Christ should suffer. Of this you have
the complaint of the sweet Singer of Israel, Psalm. 35. 11. False witness did
rise up, they laid to my charge things I knew not; and this you should be far
from us.

2. Disclose causlesly.
2. When we causlesly disclose a fault that is secret. God in his riches of
mercy, not only covers our sins in his love, when he forgives them, but hides
them from men also: should men know all our faults, we should never live by
them in quiet: yet some faults one or two may know; but when they divulge what
they know, when its neither for the good of the offender, nor warning of
others, this is detraction, and evil communication, which the Apostle tells us
corrupts good manners.

3. Aggravating unduely.
3. Suppose thy Brother sin, and his sin be open and know; yet when you
aggravate that sin beyond measure, aggravate it more then a greater sin in your
selves; when you meditate how to render him odious and hated, rather then
reformed and amended, yea though his soul be humbled, you continue to hold sin
and guilt upon him; is not this to reproach him?

4. Blaming the intention.
4. What mean you to blame the Intention of any man, when you cannot blame the
Action? Surely in this case we go beyond our line, and make our selves We
repreach about good.
judges of evil thoughts, and render our selves condemned for want of love and
Christian affection.

Again, we may indirectly reproach another when we deal unduely with the good
of another: Qui negat, aut tacuit, minuit, laudatque remiss.

1. When we deny it.
1. When we deny that good that is in them. God is bountiful in giving of his
grace, and our duty it is to own his grace in others as well as in our selves;
now when we deny it, what do we but offer injury to God, and to those who have
his grace? to God who gave, and to them who have received it; we make by
denying, as if he had not given, nor they received such grace from him.

2. Hiding the grace of others.
2. When we hide or cloud another gifts or graces. Its the due of grace to be
transparent, that those that have it may be honored, and God in them, and
others may be exampled: but when we draw a mist over it, and seek to darken
that which shines, we discover our selves too much unlike the children of light.

3. When we lessen them.
3. Gifts and graces are ofttimes so great, and so drawn out into action by
Gods providence, that they cannot be hid. Now to go about to lessen them in the
esteem of others, to render those graces low and weak which indeed are high
and mighty; This I say, is a most unworthy and unchristian practice. Thus they
dealt with our Savior; they could not deny but that a great miracle was
wrought, but they envyed him the honor of doing of it; and therefore they say,
He casts out Devils by Beelzebub the prince of Devils: But I hope God will
teach us to abhor this devilish spirit.

4. By coldly commending.
4. When God causes his grace given to others to shine, we are not only to
praise him for it, but to praise his grace in them, and to praise them in whom
God has planted this grace; and our commendation should be according to the
truth and highth of grace, with highest commendations. Now when the luster of
another gifts or grace is such, that it draws forth praise from us, and we
cannot but represent it as worthy: yet when we praise it poorly with but's, and
stopps, with ifs, and ands, with disparaging circumlocutions; God and wise men,
cannot but accuse us of reproaching in such a faint praising.

7. Law against pride
7. A seventh Law of Nature is against Pride, against all undue exalting of our
selves, attributing too much to, and vaunting our selves. Now see how much the
Gospel-Doctrine is an enemy to this pride: It tells you that pride of life is
in the world, and not of the Father, 1 John 2. 26. That God scatters the
proud from the imaginations of their hearts, Luke 1. 51. Be ye therefore
clothed with humility; for God resists the proud, and gives grace to the
humble; humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, and he shall
exalt you in due time, 1 Pet. 5. 5, 6.

8. Law to be just.
8. To be just, to give every one their due, and not to respect persons in
judgment, is surely a loud speaking Law, highly commanded and commended in
the Gospel. Romans 13. 7. Render therefore to all their dues; Tribute to whom
tribute, honor to whom honor is due. I wonder how those, who from their
practice have procured the name of Quakers, can pretend so much to justice, as
indeed they do, and yet deny honor to those in authority. Respect is their due
as well as obedience; reverent deportment, toward and before them, as well as
performing their commands: and if they say they must not gratify the flesh, in
giving Titles to men; I may more truly say, they gratify their own flesh by
not giving of them. 9. Deal well with the means of your peace.


9. It follows, as that conclusion which cannot be denied, That we must deal
well with them who are the means of our peace: Supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and giving of thanks, must be for those that are in authority, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. and why? because they are means of our quiet and peaceable
living.

The Elders that rule well, that labor in word and doctrine, must be accounted
worthy of double honor, 1 Timothy 5. 17. We must obey and submit our selves to
them; for they watch for our souls, as they that must give account, Heb. 13, 17.

10. Enemies must be opposed.
10. Its a general conclusion that enemies must be opposed. There be some
enemies are like the Amalekites, with whom we must never make peace; we must
give our old man with its affections and lusts no quarter, we must mortify and
crucify them.

Ephesians. 6. 12. You must wrestle against principalities and powers, the rulers of
the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places:
Therefore be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. V. 10. Put on
the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand, and withstand in the
evil day. V. 11. and 13. Stand therefore with your loins girt about with
truth, having on the brestplate of righteousness, the shield of faith, the
helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit.

There be other enemies which we must pity, and pray for, do good to them
although they deal ill with us. Math. 5. 44. Love your enemies, and do good to
them that hate you, is a sweet Gospel-straine, and of a high nature; and there
be many more such precious passages, which you shall not meet with in the
Naturalists; some of them we shall gather together and now set before you.

Joh. 3. 5.
You are borne again of the spirit, 1 Pet. 1. 3. you have union with Jesus
Christ who is a spiritual living Principle, and has life in himself as the
Father has* and hence flows your spiritnal activity and joy, your lively hope
by the resurrection 1 Pet. 1. 3.
of Christ from the dead. The best the world can brag of, is but a dead hope;
but your hope is lively; and the liveliness of your hope arises from a life
after death, a resurrection; yea from the resurrection of Christ, and so from
his life and death. You are in Christ as branches in the Vine, and members in
the head; one with him, as husband and wife are one flesh, nay as he is one
with the Father.

2 Cor. 5. 17.
Now 2 Cor. 5. 17. as many as are in Christ must be new creatures; not new in
some outward circumstances, but in their whole frame; not new from ontward
restraint, and present occurrences that mould them; but new from a new inward
disposition: and so old thoughts, indulging of sense and appetite, unrulinesse
and unreasonablnesse of passion, unduenesse of aims and ends; all these old
things must pass away, and all become new.

2 Pet. 1. 4.
You are partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. He does not say you are
partakers of Nature, for that is common to all creatures; nor of a reasonable
nature, for that is common to all men: But a Divine Nature, which is as far
above the reasonable, as the reasonable Nature is above the brutish; its such a
Nature as arises from the great and precious Promises that are given to us,
and by which, world, lust, and corruption, are escaped.

Ephesians. 2. 10.
You are Gods workmanship, Ephesians. 2. 10. Those upon whom God leaves and
manifests his special power and grace; you are a created workmanship
answerable to that work which called light out of darkness, and created in
Christ, as well as by him; and therefore you must answer Gods great ordination,
by being dedicate unto good works and walking in them; your motion must be
progression, and your progress must be continued.

Col. 1. 9.
Your minds must be filled with the knowledge of his will, Col. 1. 9. The
manifestation of his mind must be imprinted on yours; his word is his will
revealed, and his will is that which we must know, yea know so, as that there
must be no deficiency: you must be filled with it, you must not only be
rational, but wise, not only understanding, but spiritual, yea filled with all
wisdom and spiritual understanding.

Ephesians. 1. 17.
Ephesians. 1. 17. makes mention of the spirit of wisdom and revelation: Of wisdom,
raising you to exalt the best good as your highest end, and directing you to
the aptest means for obtaining that good, and what your natural power cannot
reach unto, he reveals; and therefore it concerns you, not only to have (...)
but (...), knowledge, but the acknowment of his will; knowledge upon knowledge,
experimental approving knowledge.

V. 18.
Your understanding must be enlightened, v. 18. light upon light, spiritual upon
natural light, and then you are searching into, not the nicetyes and
curiosities of knowledge, but to know his call and the hope of it, his calling
you out of darkness into marvelous light, and laying up a Crown of glory for
your hope; you have the exceeding greatness of his power working you to
believe, and the glorious riches of the inheritance in the Saints, and all for
you to know.

Romans 12. 2.
You must be transformed by the renewing of your mind, Romans 12. 2.
Transformation and renovation must go together to make up this Christian
metamorphosis; and then you will not be quarrelling and snarling at the word,
as if it were a hard saying not to be borne; but then you will prove the will
of God to be good and perfect, and it will be exceeding acceptable to you.

Ephesians. 3. 19.
You must know the love of God which passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 19. A strange
paradoxe to know that which passes knowledge, and yet its most true and most
sweet; for its a filling knowledge, a knowledge with a fulness, yea the
fullest fulness; for it is with all the fulness of God.

Ephesians. 6. 24.
Your hearts must be abounding in sincerity of love to Jesus Christ, his truth
and all Saints* They are under the Anathema maranatha that love not the Lord
Jesus Christ; and the power and deceitfulness of Satan works in them that
receive not the love of the truth; loving is more then liking; its a deliberate
act of will, closing with a suitable good. Christ and his truth, his ways* and
his Saints, are most suitable and agreeable to us, when we are in love with him.

Math. 5. 6.
Your desires must not be faint and weak; but hungrings and thirstings, and
that after righteousness; strong desires for the apprehension of the
excellency of the object, and necessity of enjoying: desires from an inward
sense of want, and unsatisfied without the enjoyment of what is desired; and
yet are you truly blessed in your desire after those things.

Acts 9. 31.
You must be walking in the fear of the Lord, and comforts of the holy Ghost,
Act. 9. 31. Happy is the man that fears always, that is in the actual
apprehension of Gods greatness and goodness, and so is troubled left his
carriage should not answer them both. Holy comforts do not make men idle or
wanton, but walking, and fearing, walking in the comforts of the holy Ghost;
and if sorrows and mournings overtake them, they have comforts in them; for its
godly sorrow causing repentance never to be repented of.

Acts 16. 31.
The great duty of your heart is to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ that you
may be saved; to see him in the excellency of his person, and that he is able
to save to the uttermost; and that he is the only one, there being no other
name given whereby you can be saved; saved from sin and wrath, from guilt and
power; hence you lean, rest, and stay on him, roll your selves into his
arms, and if you perish resolve to perish there: and so believing in hope
against hope, are strong in faith, and give Romans 4. 18, 20.
glory to God, Romans 4. 18. and 20. and this faith must purifi^ your hearts; so
that when others are transported with unruly passions, you must be showing
forth all meekness, kindness, and gentleness.

Phil. 4. 4.
You must rejoice in the Lord allway, Phil. 4. 4. Your faith gives a sweet
enjoyment of Christ, and that enjoyment does enlarge your heart with joy unsp
eakable and full of glory, which make up that peace that passes all
understanding. It is no light or loose joy, but that which guards the heart and
mind from the assaults and insults of sin and Satan, and make up that new name
that none can read but he that has it.

Ephesians. 4. 29.
Your mouths must correspond with your hearts, and no corrupt communication is
to proceed out of your mouth: our mouths are made instruments to communicate
our thoughts; but this communication must not be corrupt in us, or tending in
the least to corrupt others; it must be good, not corrupt, but useful and
profitable, good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace unto the
hearers: grace in you may draw forth grace in them, good communication in you
may promote good communication in them.

Ephesians. 4. 4.
No foolish talking nor jesting which are not convenient; that (...), which is
a virtue with Aristotle, is set down by the Apostle as a thing not convenient.
Talking is then foolish when it promotes not the fear of God, and the good
ends we should prosecute: and mark how the Apostle joins jesting with foolish
talking. I dare appeal to your experience that when you have garbled your
jesting, you have met with a mixture of too much folly and vanity in your
mirth. Giving of thanks should be the language of Saints on earth, as it is of
Saints and Angels in heaven, and then are your tongues your glory; and
therefore its brought in with a sed potius, but rather giving of thanks.

Col. 4. 6.
Let your speech be gracious, always seasoned with salt, Col. 4. 6. Mark how
God comes to regulate your speech: It must be gracious; that is, (as you heard)
minister grace to the hearers, and it must not be so for a fit, or a spurt, but
always. There are two notable arguments set down to bridle your tongue. First
that when your speech does not minister grace to the hearers, you grieve the
Spirit of God, Ephesians. 4. 29, and 30. and how sad should that fall upon us to
grieve him, by whom we are sealed unto the day of redemption? And a second
argument is in this sixth verse, that you may know how to answer every man. Men
will be apt to object against you, and to object against you from your own
words; and you cannot be in a capacity to answer them, except your speech be
gracious. It peirceth a godly tender soul to hear the swearing and cursing,
the blasphemy and railing, that your Streets swarm withal; to have their ears
buffered with unclean, rotten, filthy communications: But by how much you
find the sinfullnesse and carelessnesse of most men, the more ought you to
bridle your tongues, and aspire to that perfection, not to offend in that
unruly member, Jam. 3. 2. 1. 26, 27.
and so show forth that your Religion is not in vain.

Jam. 1. 22.
You must not only be good speakers, but doers of that which is good; you must
be hearers, but not only hearers, but doers also: but mark what you must be
doers of; not your own will, or the lusts of men, but doers of the word; not
praters, but practitioners; and there is a strong argument added, that you may
be blessed in your deed, not only after but in your deed. Holiness carries
happiness along with it, Romans 6. 22. they have their fruit unto holiness, and
the end everlasting life; they have their fruit now, and hereafter too; now in
holiness, herafter in life everlasting.

You must deny your selves, Matthew. 16. 24. Mat. 16. 24.
you must undo as well as do, deny as well as grant; deny your own carnal
reasonings, affections, experience, and conversation.

Tit. 2. 12. You must deny not some, but all ungodliness; all beginnings,
thoughts, occasions, means, signs, and measures of ungodliness; and though
the world should make large proffers to you of pleasure, or profit, yet you
must deny your worldly lust, your lust and desire after those worldly things,
and Moses*like refuse the pleasures of sin which are but for a season; and
account suffering affliction with the people of God greater riches then the
treasures of Egypt; and as Moses saw him by faith that was invisible, so you
must deny ungodliness and worldly lusts upon a ground of faith and hope: for
so it follows, looking for the blessed hope. The blessedness hoped for being
duly looked on by an eye of faith, is the ready way to deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts.

How contemptible will the world seem to us when we consider the glorious
appearance of the Great God and our Savior Jesus Christ! Oh then look on
Christ as appearing, and on his appearing as glorious; look on Jesus Christ as
the Great God, and the Great God as your Savior, and then you will abominate
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and say to them, Get you hence, what have I any
more to do with you? V. 14. Christ gave himself that he Tit. 2. 14.
might redeem us from all iniquity. How free and full is that gift! who is
able to express the greatness of it? He gave himself, laid aside his own glory
and excellency, and though he were God, equal with the Father, was content to
be in the form of a servant; and though he were the Lord of glory, to become of
no reputation: and why all this? to redeem us from all iniquity. Its much
according to the heart of Christ, that you and your iniquity should be parted,
and that sin should have no more dominion over you; that you should no more be
to your own lust, or to the lusts of men, but a peculiar people to himself,
living soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world; and not only
working what is good, but continually zealous of good works, working good,
although evil oppose you.

Being Saints, the Promises are yours, and you are the dearly beloved ones;
and 2 Cor. 7. 1.
therefore, 2 Cor. 7. 1. You must cleanse your selves from all filthiness of
flesh and spirit. The love of God and the Promises, are all so cleansing: Gods
love cannot endure to see the spots in his Spouse; and therefore stricks at all
filthiness, filthiness of flesh and filthiness of spirit: observe its
cleansing, not only forbearing your lust for a while, but taking away the
defilement of it. How ever men may conceit of their sins, they come to pollute
and defile them. Now its the employment of a Saint to be purging, and purging
upon spiritual grounds, upon the ground of having the Promises, and being the
dearly beloved ones. The being of a Saint lies in holiness; no holiness,
and no Saint; and a Saints duty it is, to be serious and constant in the
perfecting of holiness, and that in the fear of God.

You must be obedient, Phil. 2. 12. and Phil. 2. 12.
work out your salvation with fear and trembling. V. 13. Do all things
without murmuring. V. 14. That you may be the sons of God. V. 15. that is, that
you may appear to be the sons of God, Blameless: (...).
not only free from fault, but as he said of Caesar's wife, Oportet uxorem
Caesaris non modo a culpa liberam esse, sed a suspitione culpae: you must be
free from the very suspicion of fault; not only abstaining from evil, but all
appearance of evil: You (...).
must be harmless, or else you cannot be blameless; if you be fighting and
quarrelling, snarling, and wrangling, you are as the men of the world, and not
as the sons of God. How ready will those men be to reproach you without a
cause? but if you give a cause, oh then what vaunting and triumphing is there!
whereas it lies on you to walk so, as to put to silence the carpings of
malicious men. (...).
You are in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, in the midst of a
dark world, and God has made you as so many Stars, to have light and to give
light. Oh let not any league with any sinful lust darken your souls: If the
light in you be darkness, how great is that darkness?

Joh. 5. 35.
You must like John, be burning and shining lights; not only have the light of
grace within you to guide you to happiness, but this light must be burning,
and shining, in clearness of knowledge, and warmness of affection, so as to
help others when they are in the dark, and that your zeal may provoke very
may.

You must hold out the word of life; you Phil. 2. 15.
have not only the word of light, but the word of life within you, which to you
is a quickening word, dividing asunder between the joints and marrow; and this
word of light and life, this living word you are to hold out; for your light
must Math. 5. 16.
shine before men, that they may see your good works: before men; most men are
in darkness, and sit in darkness; carnal sensual men cannot receive the
things of God: and yet God requires such a shining in you, that these men,
these blind men, may some way see; and here again observe, it must be good
works, and good works with light; not barely good words, or good profession,
that will convince them; you may talk long enough, and these men will never
see any good, unless you work it frequently and constantly.

You must glorify your Father which is in heaven, and they by you. It was
Christ his work upon earth, and its yours; and he finished that work, and so
should you. Joh. 17. Herein is my Father glorified that Joh. 15. 8.
you bring forth much fruit, so shall ye be my Disciples. You must be abounding,
and 1 Cor. 15. 58.
abounding always in the work of the Lord, knowing your labor is not in vain;
filled with Phil. 1. 11. 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7.
the fruits of righteousness which are by Christ to the glory of the Father;
giving all diligence, and adding to your faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge,
to knowledge temperance, and to temperance patience, to patience godliness,
and to godliness brotherly-kindnesse, and to brotherly-kindnesse love: These
things must be in you, and abound in you, that ye may not be barren or
unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. You have been the
servants of sin long enough; now Romans 6. 17.
it concerns you to obey from the heart the form of Doctrine into which you
were delivered.

It lies upon you to raise common things by holy ends, and to turn outward
objects into spiritual converse. If you do but eat and drink, walk or work, 1
Cor. 10. 31.
work or recreate, what ever ye do in word or deed, it must be all to the glory
of God, in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, giving thanks to God the Father
by him. Eating Col. 3. 17.
and drinking are but natural actions; but they must have Gods glory as their
end. Nature may teach you to give thanks; but its the Gospel that teaches you
in your thanksgiving to haverecourse to God the Father in the Name of the Lord
Jesus.

The meanness of your condition must not hinder the raisednesse of you
holiness. Suppose you are servants, the Gospel teaches you how to make your
service to become divine. Col. 3. 22. Servants, Col. 3. 22. 23.
obey in all things your Masters, not with eye-service as men-pleasers, but in
singleness of heart fearing God: and whatever you do, do it heartily as to the
Lord, and not to men, knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive a reward; for
ye serve the Lord Christ.

You must obey your Masters, but so as you must declare you are fearing God,
while you are obeying them; you must render them service, but not eye-service.
God requires the heart for himself, and when he requires your respect to
another, he requires your heart thereto. How unlike is your complemental
expression, of saying, Your servant, your humble servant Sir, to the
singleness of heart here mentioned? You must please men, and yet not be
men-pleasers, but please God in the pleasing of them; you must do, and do
heartily, but as to the Lord, and not to men; and there is good reason for it;
for of him you must receive the reward, for ye serve the Lord Christ: he tells
you of serving men, and serving Christ, yea serving Christ in serving men; and
thus you greaten little, and highten low things.

You should be persons of a raised manner of behavior, in all actions, states,
and conditions, in all holy conversation and godliness: But most of all when
you come to worship God, who will be sanctified in his nigh ones, and glorified
before Levit. 10. 3.
all the people, Levit. 10. 3. To worship God is to be near to him; you are
then under a promise of his special presence: But then he will be sanctified;
either you must sanctify him, or he will sanctify himself; he must be
sanctified, either in and by you, in the holiness of your hearts, or upon you
in the execution of his just judgments. You must not think to content your
selves with pretense to worship God alone in your Closet or Family; but you
must worship him also before all the people; and that is a glorifying him.

Joh. 4. 24.
You must worship the Father, Joh. 4. 24. but it must be in spirit and truth.
Gospel Worship has less outward pomp and ceremony then that under the Law;
and therefore it must have more of plainness and purity; else God should be a
loser.

Ephesians. 6. 18.
You must pray always, Ephesians. 6. 18. with all manner of prayer and supplication,
not prate but pray; repetition of words in form of confessions or petition, are
not prayer; your praying must be in the spirit; your spirits in prayer must be
drawn forth and acted by Gods spirit, your affections must be spiritual, or you
cannot pray; it may be babbling and howling, but praying it is not unless it be
in the spirit; your heads may work, and your lips may move, but its no prayer
if the heart lie still: the voice of words is not the voice of prayer, but the
sighs and groans that cannot be uttered, Romans 8. 26, 27. You must lift up your
souls in prayer, lay hold on the strength of the Almighty and wrestle with him,
not letting him alone until he bless you.

Jesus Christ has set up and set open a Ephesians. 3. 12.
Throne of grace, and given us a boldness of access, Ephesians. 3. 12. You must come
in his Name with confidence: Ask and you shall bave, seek and you shall
find, knock and it shall be opened to you.

You must watch and pray, yea watch Ephesians. 6. 18.
unto prayer with all perseverance and joy, Ephesians. 6. 18. You lose many sweet
praying opportunities by not watching your season: you lose the acting and
improvement of many graces, and obtaining of many precious comforts, and sweet
returns, by not persevering in prayer. Far be it from you to pray as a task,
or as a work which you are soon weary of, and glad when it is over; but you
must persevere in prayer, and pray with joy, and joy to pray.

You must attend at the posts of Wisdoms door, Prove, 8. 34. Laying aside all
malice, 1. Pet. 2. 1. 2.
and all guile, and hypocrisies, and envyes, and all evil speakings; as new
born babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that you may grow thereby:
(...), the sincere milk, the form of wholesome words, not sugared with the
wisdom of words, but coming in the demonstration of the spirit and with power.
That word desire, and desire as new born babes, out of a spiritual instinct,
and inward inclination, so as not to be satisfied without you taste the
sweetness of it, desire it in the sincerity of it, and with the sincerity of
desire, that ye may grow thereby. Accretio est mutatio minoris quantitatis in
majorem, usque ad terminum praefinitum a natura: Growth is the change of a
less quantity and degree of grace into a greater; when you pass from your
little knowledge, faith, and love, to a greater measure, then you grow. God
has given his word for to strengthen as well as to beget us, and the sincere
word is the word that makes you grow, and that word for that end, should have
our strong first born desires.

Act. 17. 11.
The noble Bereans, Acts 17. 11. received the word with all readiness of
mind, and searched the Scriptures daily whether those things were so. And it
will be no less nobleness in you to receive and search, to receive with
readiness and retain with gladness the word of truth. This will argue the
honesty and goodness of your hearts, Luke 8. 15. thus to hear Luke 8. 15.
and keep, and bring ^orth fruit with patience. You must like Mary ponder
Christ's sayings in your hearts, giving more earnest Heb. 2. 1.
heed to the things which you have heard, lest at any time you should let them
slip. Heb. 2. 1.

Coming to the Lords Table you must examine your selves, and so eat of that
bread and drink of that cup, which is no less th en the Communion of the body
and blood of the Lord; and thus judging your selves, you are discerning the
Lords body, and are not condemned with the world: you being thus entertained in
Christ's bosom as guests at his Table, you must not forget your poor Brethren
that be in want. Heb. 13. 16.
This communicating is doing good, and a Gospel Sacrifice wherewith God is well
pleased; it is extensive to all, but especially to those who are of the
household of faith.

The blessed Gospel teaches us not only to do, but suffer. This is a special
Phil. 1. 29.
gift, Phil. 1. 29. To you its given on the behalf of Christ, not only to
believe but suffer. Suffering makes way for patience, and patience must not
only work, but Jam. 1. 4.
have a perfect work, Jam. 1. 4. You must Romans 5. 3.
not only be patient, but glory in tribulation, knowing that our patience
works experience, and experience hope. What although men should revile you,
and say all manner of evil against you? let it Math. 5. 11. 12.
be falslely and for Christ's sake, and then rejoice and be exceeding glad, for
great is your reward in heaven, who are now Col. 1. 11.
strengthened with all might* according to his glorious power unto all patience
and long-suffering with joyfullnesse; So that if you suffer as Christians for
Christ's cause, and with the spirit of Christ, you should not be ashamed, but
glorify God on that 1 Pet. 4. 16.
behalf; counting your selves happy to be reproached for the Name of Christ;
for the spirit of glory and of God rests upon you.

Here follows the Appendix mentioned in the Fifth Chapter of this Book.
IT was laid down in the fifth Chapter,

That when Christ works great changes in Kingdoms and Commonwealths, he
shows signs in the heaven above, and in the earth beneath; and that
occasioned this Question,

Quest. Whether those signs in heaven which Christ shows, do not favor or
countenance Astrological Predictions?

Ans. To which I answer negatively. Those Signs that Christ shows, do not in
the least favor their Predictions.

Now that you may more fully take in the compass and meaning of this answer,
we shall first show you what we grant concerning the Stars, and then what we
deny.

Now we grant these five things.

1. That the Stars have a powerful ruling 1. Stars have a ruling excellency.
excellency by their light, heat, and motion. They are not like the paints in a
Chamber, which we look on, but they work not on us. The seat and station of the
Stars tell us that they are not placed there to disgrace the Heavens; but that
they have that in their being which answers so high a place, and work to their
ends. So Job 38. 31. Can thou bind the sweet influences of the Pleiades?
Stars have their influences; that is, their virtue, and power extended to
others.

Psalm. 8. 3. When I consider the Heavens the work of thy fingers, the Moon and
the Stars which thou have ordained. The Stars then are Gods Ordinances,
creatures ordained by him, and by him for us to consider of.

Luke 21. 26. The powers of heaven shall be shaken. The powers of heaven,
(...), are sure such as are not weak, but strong in their operation;
therefore, Psalm. 136. 9. The Moon and the Stars are said to rule the night.

2. Stars work alteration in the Air.
2. We grant that the Stars by their light, heat, and motion, do work great
alteration in the Air, the first heaven, as being nearest to it; God has
placed the creatures near one another, that they might act conjoynedly. The
clearness or cloudinesse of the Air may relate to the Stars; the Stars also
are considerable in the moisture, or dryness of the Air. If the wind be Aer
motus, the Air moved; I know not but that motion may some what relate to the
virtue of the Stars.

3. Stars affect diversely the compound bodies.
3. We deny not but that the Stars having this power over the Air, they do by
the air diversely affect compound bodies that breath in this air. This our
experience teaches us; In fair weather we are more Frollick, our spirits are
up, we are more apt to sing, to move cheerfully, our fantasies are more busy,
and our motion more pleasant; whereas in thick foggy weather, our brains are
clouded, and we are heavy and dull of Action.

Heat, cold, moisture, and dryness, are the four principal qualities of
compounded bodies; and surely the temperature of the Air works much on these,
as is observable when we are sick.

4. Stars are for Times and Seasons.
4. Scripture speaks plainly, That they are for times and for seasons, for
days and for years, Genesis 1. 14. The lights in the firmament are to divide the
day from the night, and to be for seasons, for days and years. Seasons are such
times as are proper and peculiar to some actions and bodies; He appoints the
Moon for seasons, and the Sun knows his going down, Psalm. 104. 19. Seasons
are such portions of time, as if a man come forth to act in, he shall find an
advantage to his work from the time; which advantage he will miss if he go not
forth then. Thus in sowing, the growth and fruit depends not only on the
commiting of the seed to the ground, but committing it to the ground in a
certain time, which is therefore called sowing Season: sow before or after
that time, and your labor will not thrive; and this shows the goodness of
that promise, Genesis 8. 22. While the earth remains, Seed-time and Harvest, and
Cold and Heat, Summer and Winter, Day and Night, shall not cease. Thus learned
Mr. Aynsworth explaines Job 9. 9. concerning the four Seasons of the year:
Which makes Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiades, and the Chambers of the South:
Arcturus arises in September, and begins Autumn; Orion arises in
December, and begins Winter; Pleiades arises in the Spring; and the
Chambers of the South he interprets of the Southern Stars, which are for the
most part hidden from us, as in Chambers; but some arise so as in Summer, as
the Dog Star.

5. There may be some e present predictions.
5. We readily yield that there may be some present Predictions about weather,
and things contemperating therewith; such as Mariners, Physicians, and
Husbandmen make: of which we read, Luke 12. 54, 55. When ye see a cloud rise
out of the West, straitway you say, there comes a shower, and it is so: and
when you see the South wind blow, you say there will be heat, and it comes to
pass. Mariners at Sea have many useful signs of wind or storm to follow,
and so accordingly prepare to avoid the danger. Physicians by the temper of the
Air, and the body of the Patient, foretell what intension or remission of the
fit there may be.

Husbandmen (whose labor casts them to be much abroad) are not unskillful
concerning the Seasons, and so accordingly to order their Cattle. But these are
vastly different from those things which men presume to answer from the Stars,
although the Stars be altogether silent concerning them: As about Marriage,
Trade, Health, or Sickness, manner of Living and Dying. The confident
conclusions about these things, are the dark visions of men's wicked hearts,
which the Stars give no light unto.

Thus ye see what we grant. 1. That Stars have a ruling power. 2. Make great
alterations in the Air; and so, 3. On compound bodies. 4. They make times and
seasons. And 5. That men may from the present consideration, make predictions
of times and seasons from them.

That which we deny, we shall lay down in two Propositions.

1. The Stars have no power over the Reason 1. Stars have no power over the
Reason or Will.
or will of men to necessitate or enforce them to this or that way or object.

Stars cannot act immediately on the mind to present this or that thing to its
consideration or apprehension.

They cannot fix or tie down the mind to Meditation.

They cannot suggest that which is for argumentation.

They cannot make the conclusions which the mind shall assent unto, or cause
that assent.

They cannot directly incline the will to this or that good, to pass by this,
and pitch upon that, or suspend from either.

Angels are creatures in their make and being more excellent then the Stars,
acting by reason and will as we do, and so are nearer to us: yet they have no
such power over us: How much less the Stars? We say secondly,

2. Men can not from Stars make Predictions about contingent
2. That no man can pretend rightly to foretell from the Stars things that in
their production depend on the will of man, or are otherwise contingent: And
that the pretenses to such Predictions, and undertakings therein, are frivolous
and impious, as may appear by these seven Arguments.

Arg. 1. Its derogatory to Gods providence.
1. Such a way of prediction is derogatory to Gods prerogative, who only knows
all things in himself, and not from without himself as we do; he knows all
things, and all the circumstances of things, not by discourse or succession as
we do, but altogether and at once, past, present, and to come.

Its a high presumption for any creature to presume to know those things which
God has hidden. Now God has hidden all contingent things from us: The reason
is, because our knowledge of things is by their causes: Scire est per causas
rem cognoscere. To know, is to unstand a thing by its causes; but contingent
things to come have not now their determination in their causes; (...) non
habent in causa sua determinationem: Things contingent are more undetermined
then other future things. Contingentia vera est indeterminata potentialitas ad
plura: True contingency is an undetermined Things contingent what
potentiality to more things. There be two things in Contingency.

1. It makes a thing liable to this or that way, this or that hand, this or
that being; it has a possibility to this or that.

2. That this possibility is not determined to this so as not to that, or to
that so as not to this; and so no man knows where, or when it will fall: That
is Gods prerogative thus to know contingencies.

Agr. 2. From Gods word.
2. This manner of prediction is diametrically opposite to the word of God.
Hear the voice of the third Command, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord
thy God in vain. Now Astrological Predictions do take his Name in vain. Gods
creatures are his works, and so his Name, because they make him known, as a
name does the thing whereof it is a name, when they are applied to that end
that he has set out for them. But now Astrology in these Predictions is a
gross abuse of the Heavens and the Stars; for they wrest them to serve their
wicked lusts and fantasies, boastings, and covetousness. God never appointed
them to foretell such things as they would make them speak about, as will
farther appear in the next reason.

Levit. 19. 26. Ye shall use no inchauntments, or observe times: It is so much
against his will, that when the holy Ghost would set out something notably
cross to him, its said to be as witchcraft, 1 Samuel 15. 23. But I know they
will deny their Predictions to be witchcraft; but if they be not from natural
causes, or from divine revelation, I know not what else to refer them to.

Deuteronomy. 18. 9, 10. Thou shall not learn to do after the abominations of those
Nations; There shall not be found among you one that uses Divination, or an
observer of times. Take notice.

1. They are an abomination to the Lord.

2. They are such abominations as the Nations used.

3. Such as for which God drove them out. Its remarkable, the vilest of Men and
Nations, and the bitterest enemies of the Church, are branded with this sin.

Pharaoh King of Egypt, Exodus 7. 11. Pharaoh called the Wise men and the
Sorcerers. Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, Ezekiel. 21. 21. The King of Babylon
stood at the parting of the way, at the head of the two ways to use
divination. Isa. 2. 6. Thou have forsaken thy people because they are
Southsayers like the Philistines. Now Egyptians, Babylonians, and Philistines,
were the noted enemies of Gods Israel. God will be a swift witness against
such, Mal. 3. 5. He forsook his people the house of Jacob because they were
Southsayers. Ezk. 13. 9. My hand shall be upon them that divine lies, they
shall not be in the assembly of my people. Isa. 41. 25. God frustrateth the
tokens of liars, and makes Diviners mad.

Arg. 3. from the nature of the Stars.
3. We shall reason from the Nature of the Stars.

The fixed Stars are not to be numbered, Genesis 15. 5. Its the speech of God to
Abraham, Tell the Stars if thou be able to number them: that is, he was not
able to number them; and as their numbers, so their virtues are not known.
There may be as many contrary aspects which men know not, as which they pretend
to know; and the unknown contrary aspects may hinder the aspects they know.

Mathematicians say the Heavens are whirled about with so rapid and swift a
motion, that in a small moment of time, the state of the stars is changed from
the diverse stations, whereof the Predictions are.

Now, how can they declare that, when it is uncertain in what temperament the
Stars be?

Beside the virtue of the Stars is mingled together in the subject whereon they
work: They do not work singly and apart on the subjects; as for example;
Jupiter does not work alone without Mars, nor Mars without Jupiter, but all
the Stars put forth their force and virtue together: Sol, Luna, Mercury, and
the rest work together on the Air, and so on compound bodies, and so they are
common causes; that is, their causing power is such as is not proper and
peculiar to one constellation, so as other Stars and constellations do not
share in it; but what they put forth its common to other Stars together with
them, and so these Stars with these Stars; and it being so, how can they
ascribe this or that consequent to one Star so as not to another, since they
all caused together the effect?

Astrologers make the Stars particular causes, causing particular effects, or
else they can foretell nothing by them.

Surely the Stars groan to be thus abused, to be diverted from the end they
were appointed to; and put under this bondage to serve the fantasies of men,
and not those proper ends assigned them by God.

Argu. 4. From the Nature of Art.
4. We reason from the Nature of Art: Ars est sapientia Dei in Creaturis
refracta: Art is the wisdom of God refracted in the creatures. All wisdom and
knowledge is incomprehensively centered and meeting in God, but there it is too
high for our reach; but its severed and broken in the creatures, that so we may
understand it in them.

I deny not but there is an Art of the Stars, which Art God has made, and its
a beam of his wisdom shining on them, which is called Astronomy; that is, the
Law of the Stars, or that rule that God has subjected the Stars unto, and our
reason finds out. But that is not the wisdom of God whereby he knows and
foretells things to come; that wisdom, that foreknowledge, that foreknowing
wisdom God never placed in the Stars, nor shall we ever find it there.

All Art is that which by our meditation, arguing, observation, and experience,
we take up out of the Creature whereof it is an Art; as in the Art of Music:
no man makes the Art of Music, that is a creature of Gods making: only men
find out and discover what God has made; as namely, God has made this or
that proportion in sounds which cause Harmony, men have not made these
proportions; men indeed find them out to be there where God has put them:
Omnis applicatio rationis rectae ad aliquid factibile pertinet ad artem, says
Aquinas: that is, All the application of right Reason unto any thing that is to
be done pertains to Art; so the application of our right reason unto sounds,
finds out God wisdom there, and belongs to the Art of it.

Study, yea study again and again the nature of the Stars, you shall never
find any such prognosticative virtue placed in the Stars.

Parents disciplinarum sunt Experientia and Inductio. Experience and
Induction, are the Parents of Arts. Experience is the gathering of many
observations, and applying them to certain proper uses: But if men gather true
observations, and apply them rightly, they shall never make up their
predictions, but that which shall come forth far different from them.

Induction is the gathering together of many experiences: Now if they can make
no experience, they cannot make Argu. 5. From that part of Astrology that
concerns weather.
Inductions which is out of many experiences; and if neither experience, nor
induction, then no Art.

5. We argue from that part of Astrology concerning Predictions about
alteration of the Air, about fair or foul weather. How grossly are they
mistaken there, and how is that contradicted and condemned by our daily
experience? So that I am more then three quarters persuaded, that if one take
an Almanac calculated for this present year, 1655. and where it is written
fair weather, write foul, and where its written foul, write fair; where its
written storms, write calm; and your writing, as to the event and success,
shall fall out as right as that which was first calculated. Part of the reason
that induces me into this opinion is this.

Much, yea very much of weather depends upon the wind: Now who knows twelve
months before, where the wind will be twelve months after? nay who knows this
day, where the wind will be to morrow?

God has not left the winds in the keeping of the Stars; but he holds them in
his fist, and rides upon the wings of them, Psalm. 104. 3.

Millions of men live and trade in the great deeps, they have their several
ways; some Eastward, some Westward, some outward, some homeward bound: God
knows all their ways and occasions, and who stands in most need of wind and
weather, and he serves all their turns in his season; and so turns wind and
weather as he thinks good, without acquainting the Stars with it.

Now if they mistake so woefully in this one thing, which seems to be most
within their Sphere: and if God have so ordered it, that although Mariners,
Physicians, and Husbandmen, can by the present face and posture of the sky,
tell somewhat of wind and weather ensuing, but they are limited that they
cannot do this fourteen days before; nor then when they do it, any farther
then by a likely conjecture. How can we imagine Astrologers should take upon
them rightly the foretelling of things contingent many years after?

Arg. 6. from the excellent frame of Man.
6. These Predictions are derogatory to that excellent frame that God has made
man in.

Its the nobleness of his make, that where he acts like himself, acts as a
man, he acts by wit and will: He is agens consilio, such an Agent as acts by
Counsel; that is, by dictate and principle of Reason and will; and these two
are locked up from the powers of all creatures, that they cannot act on them
immediately; and so from the power of the Stars. I mean, that it is in the
Nature of Man, when these creatures have done their uttermost, yet for him to
rise up, and act contrary to all their actings.

I know Astrologers use frequently this saying; -- Sapiens dominabitur Astris:
A wise man shall bear rule over the Stars. Yet how unduely and imperiously do
they incroach upon the Queen and Castle of the soul? I mean the will of man,
and prescribe wicked Laws for hope and fear: Alas, how many, too many are
inslaved by them?

These Astrologers make their nests above the Stars, and Lord it over their
weak disciples, assuming more right over them then the Stars have; for many
times they take away their rest, and weaken the quiet of their mind by their
daily expectation of such successes as they presumptuously speak of, and shall
never come to pass.

For shame, for shame, let us redeem our selves from this Captivity. God has
not subjected your reason and will to Angels; then surely not to Stars or
Star-gazers: Angelus non potest aliquam formam imprimere in imaginatione nisi
mediante sensu extrinseco, nec potest voluntatem nostram mutare: Aquin. An
Angel cannot imprint any form upon our imagination, but by the interposition
and mediation of the sense, which is outward, neither can an Angel change our
will. Let us blush to attribute that to Stars and men, that Angels have not.

Argu. 7. From the nature of Contingent things.
7. The last argument we shall name taken from the nature of things contingent:
Now there we have this rule, Futurorum Contingentium non est determinata
veritas; that is, the Truth of future contingent things is not determined; and
yet how peremptorily do they conclude concerning these things? As about
marrying a wife, about what kind of life or employment this or that man shall
be of; whether he shall dye by war, or by water; that in such a year of his
life he shall be sick, that he shall be dear to Princes, and such like. Now
these are things that are undetermined; that is, they may fall out this or that
way: how can they have any knowledge of them? Contingens dicitur quod aliter
esse potest. A thing is said to be contingent, that might have been otherwise
then it is; that although in time it come to pass in this or that shape; yet
as to the causes producing, it might as well have been in another shape.

God retains the determination of these things in his own will, and therefore
he knows them, but men cannot.

Things are said to be contingent inwardly, or outwardly.


The actings of the will of man, make that contingency that is called inward:
Outward contingency arises from some outward help or impediment: Now that God
has removed these acts of the will from the Stars, we heard before; and no
less removed are the helps or hindrances that do fall out in the producing
of particular effects, to which the Stars can give you no light, but leave you
in the dark.

But do not many things they speak Obj. What they foretell comes to pass.
of come to pass and fall out as they foretell? and does not this mightily
commend their way? You say that Experience is the mother of Arts, and they have
many experiences; and how will you, or can you answer them?

I answer diverse ways.

Sol. 1. They have not so many experiences.
1. I deny that they have so many experiences as they brag of; Somewhat that
seems to favor their proceedings, may be taken notice of by those who affect
and admire such a way; and no marvel then, if it be commended far beyond what
it was; for the commendations follow the affection of the commender, and not
always the nature of the thing commended. And what if men to spread their lies
farther will print them, must they be true because they are in print? And what
if some things reported be of some antiquity, will that make them authenticke?
They have not so much to brag of as they pretend; for mauy things are said to
come to pass that did not.

2. They come not from any causing virtue in the Stars.
2. Suppose such and such things do come to pass, its not from any causing
virtue in the Stars: If you could hear their voice, you would have them
disclaming of their influences to such effects. They come to pass, it is true;
but are there no other causes then the Stars? are there not other things that
are nearer to which they may be ascribed? surely there are.

3. They may have their doubtful terms applied to some events.
3. Blind men sometime hit the white, and dreams sometime suit with what after
falls out: and so many Astrologers among many falsehoods, speak something that
may prove true; and no marvel, seeing their Predictions are like the dubious
answers of the Oracles, which may admit a diverse sense, and speak in general
terms, which credulous men apply as they think fit.

4. The coming to pass is the strongest argument against them; It comes to
pass, but not by any thing in the nature of the Stars foretelling it, nor by
any Art, nor by any revelation from God. Then may you not justly fear, that
such discoveries arise from him who is the enemy of God, and your souls? the
liar, and the father of lies, the prince of darkness and of the power of the
air, who works effectually in the children of disobedience: and were you not
much better to want such Predictions, then take them up by such a hand?

5. It may come to pass in vengeance.
5. It may come to pass in a way of Judicial vengeance; your minds are set
upon lies and vanities, and God may answer you according to the visions of your
own heart. Ezekiel. 14. 4. Every man that puts the stumbling block of his
iniquity before his face, and comes to the Prophet; I the Lord will answer him
that comes according to the multitude of his Idols. If God answer him that
comes to his Prophet according to the iniquity of his heart; How much more will
he answer them that come to Astrologers, Satan's Prophets, according to their
iniquity?

2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. Antichrist comes after the working of Satan, with all power
and signs and lying wonders. Now verse. 10. Because they receive not the truth
in love, Verse 11. God sends them strong delusions that they should believe a
lie: or it may be God comes to try you.

Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3. See how the case is there stated. If there arise a Prophet
that gives thee a sign or a wonder, and the sign or the wonder come to
pass, whereof he spoke unto thee, saying, let us go after other Gods; Thou
shall not hearken to the words of that Prophet or dreamer of dreams; for the
Lord your God proves you, whether you love the Lord your God with all your
Heart and with all your Soul.

A word of Application.

Use 1. To professors of the Mathematics.
1. To those who are professors and teachers of the Mathematickes. I have one
word to you; and would to God it might find acceptance with you. I honor all
Art; if not too much, I am sure enough: and I hate not that pleasing and
profitable study of the Mathematics, although I confess my self no
proficient therein. I would humbly entreat you to keep to what is Art, and the
wisdom of God in the creature, and that will render you wise, not Cunning men.
Surely Piety is the best Policy, and the fear of the Lord, the beginning of
wisdom. I appeal to your own consciences: should you not tremble when in your
Predictions you aspire to what i^ proper to God, and not communicable to man?

Its enough for our narrow compass, and to keep us humble, to recall a little
of what is past* and to know ^ot very much of what is present before us, but
least of all what is to come.

The Apostle Paul would not have the Corinthians should think 1. Cor. 4. 6.
above what is written (...)* Be not angry with me if I wish you so well, that I
would not have you to think, or write above what God has written in his word
or works.

There be some things in all Arts that God hides from men, as Sympathys and
Antipathies in natural Philosophy, the returns of Agues by set fits in
Medicinal practice; and in your own way, the cause of the ebbings and flowings
of the Sea: You are not infallible in what you think you know: you are apt
enough to err as you are men; Humanum est errare; but how much more apt if you
proceed by erroneous principles and doctrines?

Is it nothing to you that God has stirred up the spirits and pens of those
who are godly and wise to appear against your way? I should much suspect my
self to be in the way of Balaam, when I should meet with so many Angels,
(Ministers, Messengers, of God) coming against me. You may mistake, and so
mispeake, as that Divination may easily turn into a lie, Isa. 44. ^5. and God
may blast that reason into madness that is so abused: and then how sad will
your case be, when you must be ranked with those who are without, whose
property is described* to be such who love and make a lie, Rev. 22. 15.

Oh remember how unduely and nnworthily you have perplexed, and rejoiced the
hearts of people: you have put them in fear where no fear was, and rejoiced
them when you had no good ground for it. You have raised up hopes in them like
spiders webbs, which a little time has easily swept away; and you have driven
many to despair, when God gave no cause for such desperation.

How infectious have your principles and practices been? How many have been
misled by you? Think on your Scholars whom you have trained up to follow your
steps; if you walk awry, how can they walk right? Does it not, or may it not
pity your heart to see so many, young, ingenious, hopeful Gentlemen, to be
corrupted by you? It may be God may give you repentance, which I heartily wish;
but they may be hardened in their vanity, and never return; and will not that
fall sad on you, when you shall remember that you have a generation in the pit
beneath, whom your false teaching and corrupt example has begotten?

You cannot be so inobservant in your own way, but you do know that God from
heaven does bear witness against your weather-wisdome; making that prove
fair that you foretell to be foul, and foul to be fair. Now if you are so much
out in that which is lowest in your way; may you not much more mistake in
higher pretenses?

Surely since you are so confident of things to come, which yet God and Nature
has not actually determined, you might be more bold to call up things past; if
you can tell a person what shall befall him, you may as well tell what has
befallen him. Why do you not bend your thoughts that way, and not this? is it
not because it would not be so taking with men, and withal it would decry your
skill?

Remember, and forget not, you must give account of your ways and works;
think seriously of it: Will your proceedings be owned by Christ another day?
will he say to you, Euge bone serve, Well done thou good and faithful servant?
thou have been faithful in thy Predictions, I will make thee Lord of ten
Cities; enter into thy Masters joy.

Will he not rather accuse you for abusing your selves and others? for
mispending your parts and pains, and snarling at those who reproved you? Your
sins are great, but not unpardonable: Oh that God would give you repentance
unto life, like those we read of in Acts 19. 19. Many believed, and among
those, Many that used curious Arts, brought their Books together and burned
them before all men. If you will style your dealings Arts; others, and rightly
too, will call them Curious: Now there was cause enough to burn their Books
then: May there not be as much in your Books now? I shall add no more, only
leave it to God and your consciences; and descend to give a word to your
disciples.

Use to those who are learners of Astrology.
I cannot but from my soul pity you, to see your youth and ingenuity so
dangerously entangled. Astrological Predictions are fine cobwebs to catch young
wits. Give ear to a plain word.

Its possible you may meet with something that is and may be called Art: But is
there nothing else? is there not something far worse? No evil was ever so
audacious at first, as to appear unmasked, and in its own colors; the worst
of things sometimes put on the best of names and pretenses. I should be too
impudent in writing against what is Art, and so Gods wisdom in the creature;
and you would be too negligent and gross, if you espouse men's fantasies and
wickedness for Art, for Gods wisdom in the creature.

All men desire to know, and those that know something, desire to know more:
Scienti^ non habet inimicum nisi ignorantem. I blame not your desire of
knowledge, but wish you to go on in it, and that your desires may end in
attainment: but take heed what, and how you know. All knowledge of excellent
objects innobles the mind, Excellens objectum intellectum perficit. I beseech
you weigh, whether such principles as you are taught and have sucked in, will
make your mind one jot better, and not rather much worse.

I know they insinuate not barely by pretending to augment your knowledge, but
knowledge in relation to your practice; of something to be done by you, and
that hereafter; nay of what God will do by you, and to you; and these
considerations are taking and snaring.

To pretend* to advance knowledge only, without practice would be vain
speculation: to know only what concerns other men, would seem a
busibodinesse; to tell you what is past is but to recall what you had some
knowledge of before; but to tell you what is to come, and to come from God,
this takes much with you.

But (dear hearts) be not deceived: How came the spirit of God to them, that
they can reveal so much to you? They go, but God sent them not; and they
declare, but what? the visions of their own heart.

I am not ignorant that there is somewhat of singularity by which they
ingraciate themselves; men affect to be and do something more then others: to
be as all men are, to know as all men know, is but a common being and
knowledge; but to be of higher strains and extract, to be of more accomplished
perfection is that which men strive for, and they pretend to bring you unto.

Bona verba: These are good words indeed; but look well to it, lest while you
aim to be higher then other men, you fall not beneath the lowest Christians;
and while you strive to know what you should not, you grow ignorant of what you
should.

The knowledge of God and a man's self, are the greatest Sciences, and they
make fair to instruct you in both, but lead you aright in neither. The Word,
the Gospel, the Word of truth, will give you the knowledge of God and your
selves, which they and the Stars can never do.

It Is true, they maintain their way in a kind of majesty with great, sounding,
strange words: As the Luminary of the time, the Sun angular posited in this or
that house; the Moon in this or that Sextile, to Mercury Lord of his ascendant,
and such like terms. But how weak is it to be carried away with words, and
sad to be worded into wickedness?

Against figure-casting.
Above all, give me leave to warn you of casting your own Nativities, or the
Nativities of others, or suffering others to cast them for you: And here take
1. Its hard to know the momeut of Birth.
notice of these six things. First,

1. They must know the moment in which you were borne; and who can readily tell
them that? I am sure you your selves cannot remember it; and truly I think
your mother and the good women then present were so busy about you and her,
that they did not tell the clock: but suppose some heard it stricke; it may be
the clock was wrong set, might go an hour too fast, or too slow. How will, or
can you know the direct time? and the heavens change in a moment, what work
can you make 2. They make an Image of heaven in a table, and houses for the
Stars.
of it?

2. They make an Image of the Heaven in a Table and the houses for the Stars:
but what if these houses and tables are creatures of their own brain, and
never of Gods making? what sorry creatures will they prove, and the workings
upon them as sorry as they?

The twelve Houses are made of the feigned Signs of a supposed Zodiac. Now
what work can you make of things feigned and supposed? May we not conclude
safely that what is 3. They pretend to show in what houses the Stars are.
wrought upon such suppositions is little better then something feigned or
supposed?

3. They undertake to show you what houses the Stars were in when you were
borne; as what house Jupiter, Sol, and Venus, were in, which they account the
best Planets; Saturn, and Mars, the worst; Mercury and Luna, varying according
to the places they reside in, and such like stuff. That there be places and
motions of the Stars I question not: but as for these Houses and the Stars
being at such a moment in this house, or at another moment in that house; I do
more then suppose, He shall not be damned that believes no such matter.

4. To tell you who reigned when you were born.
4. They pretend to tell you who reigned when you entered into the world. It is
more then ever they can prove, that there is such a Monarchical virtue and
order in the Stars; that is, that this, or that particular Star has its virtue
and influence apart from other Stars; that it rules and has power which the
other Stars have not, and puts forth this power in a way of rule, without them,
and distinct from them.

And it would be as hard to give a reason why the constellation at the time of
the birth must be calculated and not as well the constellation at the time of
the conception, or while it was an Embrio.

I confess I am altogether in the dark, and I think you have not much light
with you, so much as to show me why you should not calculate Conceptions as
well as Nativities, or the state of a child in the womb, as well as the birth
of it.

5. What aspect the other planets have.
5. They pretend to tell you in what degree, and with what aspect the other
Planets did temper or inflame.

You must blame my ignorance if I apprehend it very hard to understand the
particular influence of the Stars, much more the degrees of that influence. I
know not how to understand one Star regent and another subservient: my faith
tells me they work together and at once, in common, according to that nature
and motion that God has given to them.

6. But to pretend to read from them, 6. Hence pretend to strange Predictions.
from the Heavens, Houses, Planets, Aspects, Influences, and the like, what is
decreed concerning you, as that the Stars incline a man to atcheive great
preferment, declare a fit capacity to this or that thing, promise a smatterring
of it; discover whether a man shall attain the thing desired, or the like.
This I say is to me unlikely and ungodly: which that it may appear to you,
weigh the arguments before alleged.

What although they tell you of good things? I beseech you abuse not your faith
to believe them; It will be your happiness if God bestow* such and such good
things on you; but you shall never come the more to enjoy them; because of the
Stars or their Predictions; and you do but abuse them and abuse your selves,
and your blessings to take them up from their hand.

Suppose they tell you of something cross and darkely spoken; let not that
affright you: let me speak to you as our Savior to his disciples, Joh. 14. 1.
You believe in God, believe also in Christ: Men or their messages you are not
obliged to believe; nor will it ever be charged on you as a sin of infidelity,
to give no assent to these their Astrological Predictions.

FINIS.

