Strange and Terrible NEVVES FROM THE NORTH. CONCERNING The Northern great
Storm arose in those parts, to the great amazement of all the Inhabitants
within the Realm of England, and the great slaughter of diverse poor harmless
Creatures.

WITH, An exact Relation of the late Fight, and the manner of obtaining the
Victory by the Royalists Party, and the full particulars thereof.

ALSO, Another Fight in the West of England, betwixt the Parliaments Forces,
and the Rebels in South Wales, and the gallant success and proceedings of the
Forces commanded by Colonel Horton, Colonel Lewis, Captain Jones, Captain
Read. and Captain Griffith.


London, Printed for R. G. and are to be sold near Temple-Barre, 1648.

A DECLARATION OF The Royalists in the West of England, and other parts of the
Kingdom. Wherein is declared their present Resolution touching the Kings
Majesty, and both Houses of Parliament.
SIR,
HAving occasion to send you a Letter by a friend of mine that came to London
about business, I will give you a touch of the affairs in these parts for the
present, and and you a more full relation by the Post. Col. Poyer and Col.
Powell are joined, and have declared for the King; they are now in the field,
and upon their Guard. Sir Richard Pierce is very active in raising of Forces to
assist Poyer, who has lately mustered the county of Pembroke in his own name
at Colby Moor, where a party of the Inhabitants seemed to comply. The 11. of
April he mustered in Carmarthen shire, and the 12. at Lanbadern in Cardigan
shire, but now he is quite spoiled of this sp^rt, for Colonel Horton is marched
against him, being assisted by 200. Horse and Dragoons out of Brecknock shire;
as also by Col. Lewis, Capt. Jones, capt. Read, capt. Griffiths Troop of
Dragoons, Thomas Lloyd Esquire High Sheriff of Cardigan shire, with the rest of the
Commissioners for that county, and others, who are joined into a Body, and
consist of above 30 Companies of Horse and Foot, gallantly armed, and prepared
to fight; they are even entering upon service, and before you receive this, here
will be something of consequence done; for news came this evening which
certify they were upon engagement, and that they have had a skirmish already;
but the success is variously reported: some affirm one thing, some another,
according as their fancy leads them, but it is whispered, Poyers Forces are all
ran away to their Hold: this is all I can impart to you for the present, when
occasion serves, I shall remember you; in the mean time,

I remain yours, T. Davis.
Carmarthen 13. April 1648.

An exact Relation of the late Fight in the North.
SIR,
Here has of late been a rising in these parts, but quelled almost as soon as
undertaken; it was occasioned by a Black-coat, who preached here, whose
doctrine being not altogether right, the soldiers found fault with it, and
offered to foyl him at his own weapons; this was agreed to, and the time and
place for dispute appointed; but in stead of convicting them, he assaulted
them, and with certain Farmers, anp a few rustical fellows, he fell upon the
Soldiers, and beat them out of the Town; but all is quiet now, and the chief
Actors apprehended and taken, and are to answer it before a Council of War.

Sandhill April 15. 1648.

(...) By Letters from the North intelligence was received of a strange
accident, or rather a miracle, which happened in those parts. Also a Gent. who
was an eyewitness, and saw the same, did testify, both by word of mouth, and
under his hand writing, does affirm that at Shereborn in Yorkshire, on the 24.
day of this last March, in the afternoon, arose a great storm, beginning first
with Rain, which was powered down in great abundance; aftes which instantly
succeeded a mighty shower of Hayl being powered down with such an extraordinary
force and violence, that it brake mrny glass windows, killed Geese, Ducks, and
other such feeble creatures as wanted shelter. After the hail was over, their
issued out of the Air a great shower of wheat; so that in some places it
covered the gronud, and it was in all respects like unto the commou wheat
whereof bread is made, both for color and form, but that it was something of a
more sad or dark color then our ordinary wheat. It has been likewise
testified by others, and affirmed, that the poor people gathered up some of it,
and made bread thereof, which they eat, and found it in operation like unto
other ordinary bread, that bread was something for color and taste like unto
bread made of Rye. The forementioned haile-stones were of a very great
bigness, many of them being as big as small Wal-nuts, or Nutmegs, and some
bigger; also this hail was so hard, that some carried them 4 or 5 miles in
their pockets to show, and yet they were not melted. The people in those parts
which saw it are very much amazed at it; some think it to be a sign of a
famine; others think it to be a sign that Bread-corn, or Wheat, or Rye, or the
like, in Harvest shall be destroyed, by some extraordinary storm of Hail or
Rain, or some such accident, but none can assuredly tell what it
prognosticates; but surely, such strange and unusual things, are signs of some
great alterations.

At Edinburgh the expectation of the malignants are great, and reports
variable, but little concluded on: only we hear that they are resolved, that an
army shall be sent into England, and although many will not be persuaded to
believe it, yet it may now more easily be gathered, that such a thing is
intended, and will speedily be effected, if not prevented; for the Scots army
draws Southward, and many of them are ordered to be quartered near the Borders,
the Lord Belcarouse Troop have taken up their quarters within five miles of
Berwick, having order so to do. Many other Troops have quarters assigned them
in the South of Scotland, and especialy in the Towns and Villages nrer
adjoining to England; also from other parts of Scotland we perceive the Scots
Forces to creep Southward, but they are wary, and do it by little and little,
the better to avoid suspicion, but if their intents are, as is suspected,
England may chance to frustrate their designs, and the Scots after all their
juggling be deceived of their expectations.

The Parliament of Scotland have given answer to the English Commissioners
papers, but it is said to be very unsatisfactory. and that they refer the
substance of all to their own Commissioners who are coming into England, of
whom the Lord Lee is one to treat with the Parliament, and have Propositions
and instructions given them, to treat about settling Religion according to the
Covenant for the King his removal to one of his houses, and a personal treaty
with him; as also for disbanding the Army, and other Propositions that I have
not as yet; the certainty of the difference between the Clergy and state is as
great as ever, they will by no means consent to the raising of men, although
listing in diverse parts of this Kingdom; it is supposed 'twill be speedily
effected; and because many of the Commanders of the standing Forces of this
Kingdom do not concur with them in this design, those Forces are to be
disbanded, and the Earl of Calender is to be General of their new Model;
insomuch, that the Cavees and English Fugitives grow very high, treating ruin
and destruction to the Parliament and their Adherents.

But indeed, some days there are great hopes of an agreement, and other days
the distance is so far, as scarce any man shall know how near they are to have
an Army: many English men are at Edinburgh, and they do daily increase.
Another great ship came to Leeth Rode on Friday night last; what she is, is not
yet known, but a flying Report of the Prince being in her, but no certainty.
Some Irish Rebels are come into some of the Scots Islands, and the Marq. of
Argyles Regiment are directed, with some others, to march toward them. This is
all, I earnestly request a correspondency weekly, and where I shall direct my
Letter unto you, that I may take the occasion to subscribe my self.

Your obliged servant, R. S.
Barwick 16 April, 1648.

SIR,
Since the writing hereof we hear that the Parliament of Scotland have given an
answer to our Commissioners papers, but it is said to be very unsatisfactory,
and that they refer the substance of all to their own Commissioners which are
coming into England to treat with the Parliament.

IN the Marq. of Argyles Country, there is risen up in Arms one commonly
called Kolkittok, which has caused some of the Forces that l^y in the South of
Scotland to march Northward for the suppression of them, all the Officers in
the standing Army of Scotland except Lieutenant General Middleton) have
petitioned to the Parliament, and presented these Proposals, viz. 1. That they
will be pleased to consult with the Ministers of the Kirk, in relation to their
proceedings touching the Kingdom of England.

2. That they will be pleased not to engage in a War against their Brethren of
England, unless the Kirk of Scotland do concur therein.

His Excellency Genesis Leven, and the rest of the Officers of the Standing army,
have declared their unwillingnesse to engage in a war against the Kingdom of
England, Parliament, and army. Sir, I am

yours, etc.

Sir, Since my last, we have received further intelligence from South Wales,
that Col. Horton, and Col. Lewis with their Forces have straightened the enemies
quarters, and forced them to a narrower distance, but not without some blows;
for, as it is said, they have had a very hot skirmish, and resolutely
maintained by both parties, upon several charges and conflicts; and after some
dispute Poyers party retreated, our men pursues; some are wounded, but no great
hurt done. This was done by Parties, the main Bodies are not yet engaged. By
the next you shall hear further, from

Your most affectionate friend, T. D.
Carmarthen 15. April 1648. Imprimatur

G. M.




FINIS.

