Short Meditations on, with a brief Description of the Life and Death of
Oliver Cromwell.
Written by J. D. Durnovariae.
SEtlement in a Kingdom whose Foundations are out of order, is as truly
desirable, as a Propitious Harbor to the Mariners that have been long wearied
with the furious Rage of Tempestious winds, and the proud swelling waves of a
troubled Sea. To none [except it be to him qui vivitur ex raptu] arguments
needs be used, when the land of his nativity groans under the burden of
unnatural war, and the heavy loads of Tyrannical oppression, to make use of
this short prayer, Da pacem Domine, pacem te poscimus omnes. Whence that
general fire of Contention which lately broke forth in these, before that time,
most happy and glorious kingdoms took its first fuel: I shall forbear now to
enquire into, the flames thereof being kindled ever I hardly attained ad etate^
virilem; but this is evident, that the force thereof was no sooner blown up,
but it found sufficient matter to feed on, and its violence could not be stopped
until the wise disposer of all things heard the Cry of the Captives, and let
the oppressed go free; causing the wrath of man to turn to his praise, but
restraining the remainder thereof.

Prosperity and Success in unwarrantable actions, naturally heightens up the
depraved Spirits of men to more unlawful attempts; yet still there is a guilt
that stings the Conscience, and a fear that possesses the spirits of those,
who are thus animated to make a progress, a malo ad pejus, least one time or
other vindictive justice should draw them before the bar of its Tribunal, which
to prevent, they consult with Gateline, and make this their Oracle. The ills
that we have done cannot be safe without attempting greater.

Simulatae Sanctitas duplex iniquitas. To make religion a Cloak for Villainy,
has been a practice, that has had too long footing in the world, and it is
too usual, Quod bonum pretenditur cum malum intenditur. Ahab proclaims a Fast
before he kills, enters and takes possession. Absalom when he aspires the Crown,
pretends the good of the people. Judas that betrayed his Master, and was a
Thief, repines at the costly Ointment bestowed on our Savior, under color of
taking care for the poor. But the dogs lick the blood of Ahab: Absalom in his
Rebellion is staid under an Oak, by the beautiful Ornament of his Head, till
by the hands of Joab he receives a just recompense of his Rebellion: Judas
hangs himself. And divine Justice that not often suffers such vildenesse to go
unpunished, will at length bring every secret thing to light, and heap
vengeance on such painted sepulchers according to the evil of their doings.

To establish iniquity by a law, is to make Justice the mother of Injustice,
and Violence the daughter of that which should be sacred: Legu^ quaedam
veneranda potestas! Words may well be wanting to express the horrid impiety of
those who having broken the laws, make a law for their own impunity in their
most detestable actions, allowing themselves to give to other reason for their
enormities but this, Sic volo sic jubeo scat pro ratione volantas. when there
was no king in Israel, every man did what was right in his own eyes, and the
legallity of every man's action was by him judged according to the prompt of his
own will, and then as Tot homines tot sententiae, so many men as there were, so
many laws there wore for every man to govern himself by, which jarring against
the common utility and peace, what confusion it brought forth, what strange and
unheard of impieties it fostered, Sacred Writ has left us a sufficient Record;
Lust then was taken for law, non hospes ab hospite tutus, and men were grown to
that impudence, as without the least remorse in public view to commit these
very acts which nature abhors, yea, to justify the offenders, and so far to
engage for their immunity as to hazard the perpetual ruin of a famous tribe.

The Devil often transforms himself into an Angel of light, Christians had need
be wise as Serpents, Latet anguis in herba; the biting Serpent lies under the
sweetest herbs, and the most prevailing temptations under the most seeming
appearances of piety, whereby Dovelike innocence may be for a time misled,
Humanum esterrare be^^uinum immo diaboli^um perseverare. Mists may for a time
darken the sight, but when they are once removed, there is none so blind as he
that can but will not see.

Justice may seem to have slow feet, but yet it has leaden hands, and because
vengeance is not speedily executed on the evil doer, he thinks he may still go
on and prosper, judging his actions by the present event, yet sooner or later
vengeance will overtake him, Licet pede lenta, sed pede certa, and my prayer is
involved in that of the Poet. -- careat successibus opto
Quisquis ab eventu facta notanda putat.


Ambition carries men beyond all bounds, yet no man ordinarily steps but by
degrees into the height he desires, and that he may in time accomplish his
intended end, for a time, he conceals his intentioned purposes, till an
opportune season profer, that he may safely land himself on that Harbor,
toward which he has been long sailing in the ship of his affectation; he that
used policy with his Ambition, is not much unlike the Water-man that looks one
way, but rows another. Sometimes that is actived by subtilty, which could never
have been obtained by force, and very often it is seen, that he that is
underminde in policy will make use of force to procure what he desires, not
caring how he attain it, so as he have it per fas aut nefas: What though
kingdoms be subverted, Commonwealths confounded, Cities be destroyed, and
Countries wasted, this sticks not on the Ambitious man's heart, the Crown is
that this Nimrod is hunting after.

He that Hunts but for Recreation, is so intent on his sport, that he cares
not, he fears not; though he break down the fences, it troubles him not, though
his poor neighbors corn be trod down with the swift motion of his pranderfed
galopers, he is no way moved at it, though the turnings and windings of his
yelping kennel make a threshing in the corn ere it come to be cut, what is that
to him? Gates, Bars, or Styles keeps him not in, he leaps them all over, and he
accounts both hills and ditches to be as level ground, and venters to leap,
where at another time he scarce dust to craule. The course ended or the game
gotten, his carreres are stopped; and after some short pause had, he bethinks
himself of the injury he has done, and finds more trouble for that than
content in the purchase obtained; what are the hideous Correres of an ambitious
spirit: when once he has seated himself in that to which God and Nature never
designed him, but he stepped into by Violence and Rapine! Then he cries out a
Kingdom for a quiet spirit, Oh the Crown for a good Conscience; the one I have
parted with all, but I shall never enjoy it again: the other I would part
withal, it is aburden to me now; It is not honos but Onus; I have it indeed,
but it vexes me, it torments me, horrors in the night affright me; but hinc
illae lachrymae, to those that are under his tyranny, then he arms himself with
fury, and more feirce Resolutions, taking the Council of Reaboams wild ones,
concluding to make his little finger, heavier then the loins of any of his
Predecessors.

Not to rake up the ashes of the late extinguished flame, and by Chemistry or
other art, to find out their original to our intended purpose, it shall
suffice to give you this short account; that the fiery-headed and fiery faced
Oliver, whose face was the Index of his mind, before these unhappy
distractions, having as to the generallity of the kingdom lived obscurely, in
the sadly to be lamented late Domestique Wars, got into some command, and by
degrees obtained to be Lieutenant General of the Parliaments Army; at which
time his ambitious spirit put him upon consultation, how he having but one step
to be head of the Army, might in short time become head of the Kingdom, to
which afterward he arrives, though with the casting of the whole kingdom into
confusion; being animated to make his progress therein by his often prosperous
successes in the wars, endearing himself into the hearts of his soldiers,
pretending to them Religion and Reformation, when nothing less was intended,
whereby he so far ingratiated himself into their affections, that being backed
with their power, none scarce durst say to him what do thou.

The first apparent essay he makes to his reign was when an happy conclusion of
all misunderstandings between the King and his Parliament, was very likely to
have been, Then did his Ambition by the assistance of Pride, discard the
Members, whose real intentions, and endeavors then were for obtaining a firm
and lasting peace; having removed them, as the first obstacle that stood in his
way, and left none other, but such as were of his own faction, or Phanatiques,
or low spirited persons; he beats on them for Justice against our most Gracious
Sovereign [whose sacred memory must be Glorious to eternity, maugre the malice
of his most in placable adversaries] making then Justice the mother of
Injustice, and these that had no power to administer an Oath, contrary to their
own Oaths of Allegiance, to make an Act for trial of their dread Lord, O
Scelus infandum! oh that blood thirsty ambition! here the bounds were broken;
here was Iniquity established by a law: Oh the cursed effect of that pernicious
act. It brought an Innocent Prince to the Butcherly block. It extinguished his
life, and darkened the glory of England. Oh where were then our spirits, what
became of the English valor, that we could endure that miscreant with the
assistance of his guards thus to violate the faith of Subjects: and not to
rescue so pious a Prince from such bloody Vilains, surely a spirit of Cowardice
or slumber did then overwhelm us.

This unparalleld Regicidium being acted, he then forces an Act for taking
away Kingly Government, thereby intending the perpetual disinhersion of his
most gracious Majesty that now is (whom God long preserve;) yet one obstacle
more stood in his way to be removed, he must uncommissionate his General, this
was not long effecting, but the Generalissimo ship soon procured to be
conferred on him, then had he liberty and opportunity, like Caesar, from a
General to be made an Emperor, which by taking all Authority from them, that
gave him Commission, he thought the best way to accomplish; yet acts
politiquely, not willing his design should be forthwith publicly known. But
after their Dissolution conveens a few to sit as a Parliament, who in a few
months resign, and gratify him for their short command, with the Title of a
Protector; and now he reigns as Dominus fac totum. But had Zimrie peace who
slew his master; his hasty motions, his furious and sometime ghastly looks,
well showed the horror of his affrighted Conscience, whilst he tyrannized,
the three Kingdoms satisfied not his humor, but he aspires after others, as
if he would have given this for his motto, non sufficit Orbis. To tell of his
inhumanity in his rule would ask a Volume, and it is conceived that at his
death, his most execrable treasons so affrighted his spirits, that his heart
within him died first, when in others, the heart is Primum moriens and ultimum
vivens. And in his deathbed, certainly Saul was amongst the Prophets, for then
he fortells, that in few months, his ashes should be trampled upon. It might
have fared better with him, had he understood the intent of that omen, which
befell him upon his first marching in arms out of Cambridge, wherein his Horse
threw him directly under the Gallows. But the Corpse of him whose aspiring
mind, could never be satisfied, has now no other Tomb but a Turf under
Tyburn, and no other Trophie but the Situation of the common place of
Execution circumfering him. So let all the Kings Enemies perish O God.

After his death, what labors were there for a Settlement, his way, that way
was tried, and every stone was turned, England groaning under more Changes of
Governments, than there are changes of the Moon in one year, but could find no
rest.

The Needle toutcht with the loadstone, turn it to what point you will, yet
will it never be at rest till it come to the North point; England having for
above five hundred years enjoyed the happy blessings of the prudent and
gracious Government of our most Sacred Kings most Royal Progenitors, in all
those Changes it lately suffered could never be settled, until God out of his
infinite goodness miraculously restored our most Gracious Sovereign to the
peaceable possession of his lawful and undoubted Right in his Imperial Crown
and Dignities, Giving him to fit upon the Throne of his Fathers, where God
grant he may ever be established in Peace and Happiness, and that his Subjects
may render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, Tribute to whom Tribute is
due, Honor to whom Honor is due; Obedience, Loyalty and Allegiance to him
that of right it appertains, that they may still fear God and the King, and
not meddle with them that are subject to change: Let shame cover the heads and
faces of all his Adversaries, but let his Crown flourish; Let the Girdle of
Righteousness be about his Loins, let Prosperity be in all his Palaces, let
Divine Mercy compass him about, let Angels be his Guard, let him be clothed
with Salvation, and let all his Subjects continually pray, GOD SAVE THE KING.

London, Printed by T. M. for Robert Clavel at the Stagshead in St. Paul's
Church Yard, 1661.


