A Seasonable DISCOURSE Written by Mr. John Dury UPON The earnest requests of
many, briefly showing these Particulars 1. What the Grounds and Method of our
Reformation ought to be in Religion and Learning. 2. How even in these times of
distraction, the Work may be advanced.
By the knowledge of Oriental tongues and Jewish Mysteries. By an Agency for
advancement of Universal Learning. Published, By SAMUEL HARTLIB.

April 24. 1649.
Imprimatur

Joseph Caryl.



LONDON, Printed for R. Woodnothe, at the Star under Peter's Church in
Corne-hill. 1649.

An Extract out of the Humble Addresses of the free and Well-affected People,
and Inhabitants of the County and City of LINCOLN. To his Excellency the L.
Fairfax, and his General Council of War. Inserted into the PERFECT DIURNALL.
Numb. 296. page 2372.
THat some Public Schools for the better education and principling of youth in
virtue and justice, would soberly be considered of and fettled, that so by not
leaving them loose to themselves, and their careless Parents (the Laws being
deficient to instruct them well when Children, though not to punish them for it
when men) they may not remain liable, to be scourged for the faults of their
natural and civil Parents rather then their own, as they now do. Besides
that, according to the structure this Generation propounds to build for the
next, it may not again incline to fall by its own weight, through negligence
of timely preparing fit materials to support and confirm it.

A DISCOURSE OF REFORMATION.
We are upon the design of a Public Reformation, herein every body is one
way or other, if not engaged yet concerned, some more some less, some in a
private; some in a Public way. This work has been long in hand, many stones
have been moved about it, much dust is raised in it; and to the outward
appearance after all attempts, we are further from our purpose then at the
beginning; For their is more visible opposition, and less inclination to a
settlement then ever; so that we must expect (if God in mercy does not prevent
it) that the Public profession of Religion (the Sun shine of our soul) will
be turned into darkness, and the outward Government of the State (the Moon
which shines upon our civil conversation) will be changed into blood.

We shall not here look backward, to enquire into the causes which have
obstructed our hopeful proceedings; for that may beget more, and not cure any
of our distempers; but we shall rather look forward, and after some grounds of
Counsels, which either now, or hereafter (when ever God shall make it
seasonable) may give to the Master Builders occasion, to lay the foundations of
their building more deeply, and build thereupon more solidly then is ordinarily
intended, or at lest they may become happily in their hand some help toward
their work, by preventing or rectifying some of the causes of our chief
diseases; which originally proceed from Ignorance, and from self-seeking
partiality.

The Ignorance is of the true aim; and rules of proceeding toward an
effectual Reformation.

The Partiality and self-seeking is about the use of the means whereby that
aim is to be prosecuted.

Now then, that something toward the removal of these evils, by the
suggestion of some positive and unquestionable principles, may be offeted, in
brief to the unpartiall Lovers of Truth and Righteousness, we shall endeavor to
open the matter of these two Questions.

The first, What is meant by the Public good? The second, How the Public good
ought to be advanced?
And this we shall do (God willing) in a few propositions, to the end that such
as shall be pleased to examine seriously, and lay to heart conscionably the
sense thereof, may have occasion (if they will enlarge their thoughts thereon)
to draw by their own judgments some satisfactory conclusions; which may set
forward the designs of that Reformation which should be endeavored, and
whereunto we shall herein contribute some of our best wishes.

Of the first Question. What a Public Good is?
1. No man can be said truly to aim at, or to prosecute a Public good. except
he understand the true principles of that which is good in it self and to us,
and of that which is publicly so, and then also except he proceed answerably
thereunto.

2. The true principle of that which is good in it self and to us, can be no
thing else, but the known purpose of Gods will toward mankind: because none is
good in himself save God alone; and toward us nothing is found good,
acceptable and perfect, but what is according to his will. Romans 12.2.

3. The purpose of his will toward mankind is this; that Man should be with
God, to enjoy him, and have communion with him in all things, which is now and
for ever all his happiness.

4. To bring this purpose to pass, God has appointed means whereby he does
offer himself unto Man, and whereby Man is fitted to come unto him.

5. This means is, The Grace which brings salvation in Jesus Christ, which
God has made appear to all men; that they should deny ungodliness and worldy
lusts, and live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world.

6. The fitting of Man to come unto God by this Grace is, when Faith is
begotten in him by the acknowledgment of the truth which is after godliness; and
when godliness is effectually perfected in him, by the spirit of Regeneration in
the life of Love and holiness.

7. If therefore a Man do attain to that which the good will of God has
appointed for him, and whereby he is fitted to have communion with God, then he
is partaker of that which is good indeed; but if he does not attain to this,
nothing can be good unto him, because he does miss of his chief and only end,
and of the means thereof; without which he cannot be happy in any thing.

8. This then is that which is to be counted good, in a direct and proper
sense; and every thing else is good, as it is reducible hereunto, and not
otherwise. And thus much of that which is the Principle of Good.

9. The true Principle of that which is publicly good, is nothing else but the
right way of Common Nature; whereby Man being more excellent then other
Creatures, is obliged to do all things as Man, and for Mankind; For every thing
is to act suitable to its own nature and kind.

10. The way wherein Common Nature has set Man, is that he should lead, rule,
and employ all things to their common ends, and not that he should be lead,
ruled, or employed by them in any thing.

11. The way whereby Man is enabled to do all things as Man is reason. and
whereby he may do all for Mankind is society; For by that alone Man is Man, and
by this only, all things are made useful unto all men.

12. Reason is in man the faculty of his mind, by which he is enabled to know
and judge to order and direct himself, his own actions, and all other things
belonging to his own or their being, toward the ends and uses, for which God
has fitted both him and them, to the enjoyment of the happiness whereof he and
they are capable.

13. Society in Man, is upon the interest which one man has in another as he
is rational, a freedom to join in endeavors, and to partake with, and to
communicate unto him all things to a Common Good.

The ground then of humane society is Reason, the way of it is freedom of
Action according to Reason, and the end, both of society and reason is the
common enjoyment of good things.

If a man therefore do set himself in the way of humanity above other things of
the world, to use them freely as common Servants, that they may be rationally
employed toward the attainment of that which is the good of all; then he does
indeed aim at that which is publicly good. But if he does not set himself in
this way, although his actions be never so specious, his pretenses never so
fair, and his works materially never so complete; yet his aim is only at
himself, and when he shall be called to give an account of that Stewardship
wherein the public good has been entrusted unto him: he will be found
unfaithful in his trust, a cheater of himself in that which is good, and a
robber of others in that which is public.

From all which this is to be inferred, that as no man without piety and the
right use of reason can be happy; so no humane society without the advancement
of these two unto the Members thereof, can enjoy that which is either truly
good, or truly public. For as out of the way of godliness there can be no
enjoyment of God unto happiness: So out of the way of right Reason there can be
no common interest unto a public good.

Moreover, we may find by experience, that the way of piety begets grace, and
the use of Reason Industry, as in one man, so in a whole Nation; but if the
means to propagate grace inwardly, and stir up Industry outwardly should be
neglected in a Nation, how can any public good be hoped for therein? we must
conclude therefore, that as in reference to God, grace, and in reference to
man, Industry, are the two hands, whereby every one for himself does receive
the blessings of all eternal and temporal prosperity: So piety toward God,
and the use of right Reason amongst men, are the effectual moving faculties,
whereby these hands are stretched out and set a working both to God and men,
for the good of a public Society.

Of the second Question. How the public good ought to be advanced?
1. SEeing we have found by the foregoing disquiry, that piety and the right
use of reason, are the undoubted Fountains of all that is to be accounted
publicly good, instead of this second general Question.

How the public good ought to be advanced? We may state it more particularly
thus.

How true Religion and Learning ought to be advanced?

For the means to advance piety, is to propagate the truth of Religion, and
the means to make men rational, is to advance the truth of Learning.

To prosecute then the point in hand, we must enquire concerning these two
Subjects, the which is most material to be advanced, and the way how it may
either be advanced or prepared toward an advancement at this time?

2. The advancement of Religion does depend upon the integrity of the
Ministerial Function, and this upon 3. Requisites in the Ministers.

1. Their sufficient qualification for their Charges. 2. Their painfulnesse in
their Charges. 3. Their orderly behavior about the works of their Charges.
For if Ministers be able and well fitted for their work; if they be willing
and diligent, to employ that sitnesse and ability, and if they walk together
united in that employment, and do nothing unbeseeming the same; nothing as to
men will be wanting toward the propagation of godliness, and where God has
given all things requisite to produce an effect; we are to suppose he will not
deny a blessing to the production thereof.

The sufficient qualification of Ministers, is the gift of Gods spirit in them;
which men are to take notice of in the choice and designation of persons to the
Ministry in a twofold respect; the one in reference to Doctrine, the other to
Practice.

Their qualification in respect of Doctrine has two parts. The ability of
knowledge and of utterance. Their qualification in respect of Practice has
also two parts. The one relates themselves, which is their walking with God:
The other the flock which is their ability to watch over others to lead them
unto God.

And although all these qualifications must be in every Minister in some
competent measure; nor can he be counted fit for the Ministry, who is utterly
destitute of any one of them: yet because God has distinguished the Doctrinall
gifts very much in their nature from the Practical, and has made their
application and usefulness (though inseparably joined in the Church, and alike
important to the edification of the whole, yet) much distant in respect of
their particular Objects: therefore in the complete administration of the whole
Charge; there is one Pastoral, and another Doctorall part of the employment.

And because it is seldom found that men are equally gifted for both parts of
the employment alike; and most commonly God does fit one more eminently for the
one, and another for the other part of the Charge: therefore in a numerous
flock especially, each part of the employment ought to have a particular Agent;
who should attend that part of the Ministry for which God has more eminently
gifted him: yet both the Pastor and the Doctor should be but as one man in
respect of the whole work toward the Church.

5. The Introduction then of a Lecturer (as he has been called) in opposition
to the Pastor; or of a Pastor in opposition to a Lecturer, (which sometime has
been much endeavored) is one of the greatest disturbances of public
edification which can befall unto a Congregation.

6. The pains which both Pastor and Doctor should take jointly as being at
once in the same employment and Ministry, is to labor in the word and prayer,
as well in private as in public.

7. The pains which the Pastor should take more distinctly (from which neither
the Doctor is to be wholly exempt) is to visit the flock in health and in
sickness, to observe their ways, to admonish to exhort, and to comfort them
as occasion is offered, and the pains which the Doctor should take more
distinctly (from which neither the Pastor is wholly to be exempt) is to
catechize the ignorant, to add and increase knowledge to those that have
understanding by way of Conference, to handle matters of controversy, to
resolve doubts, and to convince the gainsayers.

8. The orderlinesse of their ways in their employment is, no less requisite
unto Public edification; then either the fitness of their qualification, or
their painfulnesse, and because our present Ministry has been chiefly wanting
in this; some one way, some another, therefore the confusions which threaten
our ruin are become remediless: Nay and the more Ministers are able and
painful, the more they are hurtful and pernicious to the building up of their
flocks, and destructive to the advancement of Religion it self, if they stand
by themselves. and walk without any co-ordination of endeavors toward their
brethren, or neglecting the care of mutual unity, run into parties and
divisions; therefore if it should so fall out (which God forbid) that the
Ministers cannot be brought upon spiritual grounds proper to their charge, to
concur and correspond with each other in some orderly courses, it is to be
wished that by the Overseers of the public good. (Antistites Publici ordinis
and justitiae) would by their authority under God, obleige them thereunto. For
the Magistrate is accountable unto God, of all the public ways of men,
committed to their charge: and if any shall walk in public contrary to the
rules of common Nature, and the principles of common Reason, without control,
he shall answer for it unto God.

9. To remedy the disorderlinesse of those that are in the Ministetiall
Function, or pretend unto it. Four things from whence chiefly the disorders
arise, must be looked into, and settled by some wholesome constitutions.

The first, is the way of their entrance upon their places.

The second, the way of their maintenance in their places.

The third, is the way of their employment about their works.

And the fourth and last, is the ground of their relation, and way of their
behavior toward their neighbor workmen. In all these the want of a settled
rule taken clearly from the word; the neglect of professing that, wherein there
is a known rule; and of practicing that wherein there is an agreement about it:
the affectation of an unlimitted liberty to do all without a rule; and the
natural disposition of men to be in a faction, and to act by a rule of
contrariety for a party, have as so many roots of bitterness sprung up into
the fruits of this disorderlinesse.

10. Concerning the calling, the maintenance, and the employment of Ministers
to and in their charges; there is some ground of settlement to be found in the
word; but concerning their spiritual relation, and outward behavior suitable
thereunto; how far humane authority should intermeddle in the settlement of the
first, and regulating of the second; and in cases of misbehaviour and offenses
either taken or given, how a competent Judicature to remove the same, is to be
erected? Is the whole point of our difficulty. Yet these obstructions of a
settlement are not to be counted invincible if the president of public order
in humane affairs would on Gods behalf, appoint some to be controulers of the
licentiousness of men's spirits in breaking the public peace, that is to say,
if the Magistrate could find out men free from partiality; and would authorize
them with sufficient instruction and limitations (lest they should abuse their
power) to be a Committee to take away scandales, and to punish the Authors
thereof; such namely as by railing accusations, shameful calumnies, injurious
practices, and disorderly disputations both in press and pulpit blow the
coals of our distempers; and overthrow the very Fundamentalls of Christianity:
If (I say) the Magistrate would fettle such a Committee for the removing of
such scandalls by shaming the Authors thereof, it would certainly by giving a
check unto the spirit of malice, become at least a healthful preparative unto
a further course of Reformation.

Thus we have seen that which is most material to be advanced in the
profession of Religion to make men godly, let us also take notice in brief of
that which is material for the advancement of true Learning to make men
rational.

Although men by nature have a reasoning faculty, yet it is by education and
exercise, that they become Masters of their reason to make right use of it. As
then in that which concerns Religion, the Ministerial Function restored to its
integrity, is the chief outward means to advance Piety toward God; so in that
which concerns Learning the Paedagogicall or Scholasticall Function rightly
ordered, will be the chief outward means, to perfect the use of right reason
amongst men.

3. The Scholasticall Function next unto that of the Ministry, and of the
Magistracy, is most of all necessary for the public good, and the care of it
to see it well ordered, is no less the concernment of the Ministry for the
planting of piety then of the Magistracy for the planting of Morality; the
seed which is first sown will grow up soonest, and hardly be ever rooted up.
Quo semel est imbuta recens, servabit odorem festa diu.

4. The end of Scholasticall education, is to fit every one for the industry
and employment in the society of men, whereunto by reason of his birth, he may
have a right, or by reason of his natural parts he may by others be called, or
of his own accord lawfully apply himself.

5. According to the difference of men in respect of their birth or natural
parts, and in respect of the employments whereunto they ought to be cultinated
and made industriously rational: a fourefold distinction either of Schools,
or of degrees of teaching and educating the younger sort is to be allowed and
intended. First, there ought to be a vulgar or plebean school. Secondly, a
school for the Gentry and Nobility whereunto also the most Gentile spirits of
the vulgar ought to be received. Thirdly, a school of the Masters of humane
and natural perfections. Fourthly, a school of the Prophets, who are employed
about divine and super-naturall perfections. And the reason of this distinction
of schools is to be taken from the nature of humane employments in all
societies, which respect either the body or the soul; in respect of the body
the work of all men is either servile or commanding, and in respect of the
soul, all the employment thereof, is either about humane or divine services.
Seeing then the vulgar sort of men for the most part are borne to serve the
common wealth in bodily matters; and the gentry and Nobility are borne to have
some command about these matters, therefore as their industry will have
different ends and objects: so their rational parts by their education should
be differently cultinated. Again, seeing a man lives not by the body alone, but
chiefly by the soul, which is the proper seat of reason, and seeing the soul
has a twofold capacity, the one to apprehend natural, the other supernatural
perfections; both which ought to be taught amongst men, therefore the education
of those that may be made fit to teach others these perfections, is a principle
concenment of the society of mankind. Whence, the two last degrees of schools,
are differenced from the two former in this mainly, that in these men are
taught and educated to teach and educate others, and in those men are only
taught what they are to know and practice by themselves.

6. From this distinction of schools, or degrees of education, we may gather
this conclusion, tending to advance the public good of a Reformation of
learning; that if the two last sorts of schools, wherein the education of
those who are to teach others humane and divine knowledge, can be rightly
ordered and constituted in this our age, the other two former in the next
generation may be wholly rectified, and when those are effectually reformed
then in one age more the body of the Nation will find (by Gods blessing) the
fruit of these endeavors.

The schools then which should breed reformed Schoolmasters, (that is, such
masters of Arts, which shall be able in a reformed way to teach all humane and
divine sciences) will be the corner stone of this building. But to erect these
Schools we shall find a threefold difficulty. The first will be to find out
and show uncontrouleablely what the reformed way is, of teaching humane and
divine sciences, then when this way is found, the second difficulty will be, to
find Schoolmasters which shall be willing to undertake the teaching by that
way. Thirdly supposing that some will be found, The last difficulty will be,
how to propagate this way toward all by such public encouragements and
demonstrations of the usefulness thereof, as will take with every one.

8. The Remedies to overcome these difficulties must in part be these.

First, All must be made senbsile of the absolute necessity of a Reformation
in the way of schooling: and of the hurtfulnesse of the present way thereof, in
that it is very destructive unto all Piety and right Reason.

Secondly, the State should be engaged to own affectionately the design of
reforming Schools upon this ground, because the Reformation thereof, is the
seed-plot of all other Reformations, in the Church, in the offices of
Judicature, and of other public trust, throughout the Common wealth; for it is
evident, that seeing almost all the corruptions which are practiced in all
these places (for which this Land does now mourn) are brought into them
originally through the want of good education in piety and sound learning and
the strength of natural wickedness not broken, but rather confirmed by evil
habits in the very Schools. Seeing (I say) this is so, it is evident that
without the reformation of the ways of education in the schools, it will be
impossible to bring any other reformation to any settlement or progress in the
whole Commonwealth; or leave the hopes thereof unto posterity, because partly
the old corruptions and follies, partly worser, will daily spring up amongst
men as long as they are not radically rectified, which can no where be done by
humane industry, but in the schools.

Thirdly, the necessary Reformation of schools, must be set forth
demonstratively in three points. First, in the reformation of the Scholars
manners, and the inspection to be taken of them in that regard. Secondly, in
the reformation of the Arts and Sciences, which are to be taught them. And
thirdly, in the reformation of the way of teaching the same.

The manners of Schoollars, is the chief of al other things to be looked into;
the way therefore to exercise them in Piety, in Justice, in Temperance, in
Faithfulness, Truth and Diligence, is to be settled, and the inspection over
them in these things so regulated, that no faults, how wittily soever, and
cunningly carried or covered; should be connived at, without a just search
thereinto for discovery, censure, and punishment. For if there be no course
taken to root up the impiety, the folly, the injuriousnesse, violence, excess,
falsehood, untruth, and laziness, which is in the disposition of every child,
he will not only grow strong therein, but bold, to infect and provoke others
thereunto; by which means he may bring not only his own soul unto damnation,
but even spread the infection throughout a whole nation. For the danger of
suffering one to become a prostitute Whore, mentioned Levit. 19.29. is the same
proportionally in all other sins, if they be not speedily prevented: One root
of bitterness will defile many. Heb, 12.15.

Fourthly, the Arts and Sciences must be reformed in the ends and uses, in the
rules and precepts, and in the method and order thereof. As for the ends and
uses of all Arts and Sciences, they must be measured out, and subordinate by
two rules. The first is, that of godliness. The second, is the common relief
of mankind from outward miseries. For what Art or Science soever, does not
advantage mankind, either to bring him nearer unto God in his soul, or to free
him from the bondage of corruption in his body; is not at all to be
entertained, because at the best it is but a diversion of the mind from a
profitable object to some vain delight; which indisposeth always the soul to
be conversant with things more seriously delightful.

Fifthly, The Rules and Precepts of all Arts and Science, must be made
demonstrably true, and wholly such, proper to the ends of the Science whereunto
they belong, and are to be delivered, and primarily homogeneall to the
universal matter thereof, and as such in clear terms they ought to be
delivered.

Sixthly, The method and order of Arts and Sciences must be observed in two
respects. First, In the respect which one Art and Science has to another, and
in this regard they are to follow each other, according to the subordination of
their ends and right uses in reason. Secondly, In respect of the frame of every
Art and Science within it self, as to the Rules and Precepts thereof; wherein
should appear such a dependence of the matter of each Science upon the end
thereof, that all the causes whereby that end is made attaineable in that
matter should gradually be manifested.

Seventhly, The reformed way of teaching those Arts and Sciences thus
rectified; besides other properties, it must have these.

1. Things necessary and universal must be first taught universally; and then
things severally useful and profitable to the several ends of education in
the Arts and Sciences sub-servient thereunto: where a maine rule is to be
observed, that superfluities be avoided. Sapientia prima est stultitia caruisse.

Secondly, Every thing must be taught upon some fore-knowne Ground, as a
consequence thereof: the fore-known Grounds of all Rational Matters, are
outward sense and fancy; and the foreknown Grounds of Divine Matters are
Conscience, and the sense or experience of ones own thoughts in reference to
God.

Thirdly, Every thing whereof the ground is fore-known must be taught, first
practically, and then Theoretically; Practically that is by an imitable example
of that which is practicable therein, held forth by him that teaches to the
fancy of him that is taught: and then Theoretically, the same thing is to be
delivered unto his judgment: that is, he is to be taught the Rule and Reason
of that practice, to let him see how, and why it answers the end wherefore it
is done.

Fourthly, The Principles of Piety should be taught before the Principles of
Reason in Practical matters; and in Theoreticall the Rules of Rational
Truths, should preceed the Rules of Religious Truths; for Divine Truths
presuppose right Reason, and exalt it to Objects above sense and fancy, so then
the will is first to be wrought unto the affections and duties of Piety, and
then the understanding to the rules and exercises of Reason. These two then,
must gradually and hand in hand be led unto perfections, because the will is a
knowing, and the understanding a willing faculty, and both are the subjects of
reason in their proper ways.

Fifthly, The application of Natural Principles, and Reasonings unto
spiritual Objects, is a root of great confusion in Sciences; but if the
distinction of natural and spiritual be duly kept, and the true Harmnony of
the one to the other, with the proportion of reasoning answerable thereunto be
observed, that will set us again aright. Therefore, as we are to be taught how
spiritual things are to be discerned spiritually, and natural things
naturally, each in his distinct, sphere and way of knowledge according to his
kind: so we are not to be left ignorant of the harmonicall corespondency which
is between them, and the use of Reason therein. By which Rule, Schoole-Divinity
being examined, will be found very light in the Balance of the Sanctuary, and
in like manner, much of that controversall Divinity, which is handled
Scholastically in these our days.

6. The whole way of teaching must be made free, ingenious, and delightful; So
then the mercinary way, whereunto Schoolmasters are forced, to betake
themselves for want of a competent livelihood, ought to be remedied by some
laudable provision, and rewards for industry: and on the other side, the
servile and blockish way of training up Scholars for fear of punishment, to
get certain lessons by rote, must be changed into a way of emulation and
judgment.

Other Remedies to these difficulties, together with a more destinct deduction
of the ways of Reformation might be offered, if either these times were
seasonable for particular undertakings in this kind, or if some special Patron
were found, who would out of true love to Piety and Learning, without the
vanity of outward interests, countinance and support such enterprises.

But seeing we see little or no hopes of any such assistance, therefore we think
it nor wisdom, to prostitute those Proposals without all appearance of
success; yet because on the other hand we ought not, we dare not, even in
these times altogether despare of all favorable providence; therefore we are
bound still to maintain some hopes, that in an age pretending so much to a
Reformation, all assistance will not be wanting, at least so much as will
further some such preparative endeavors, as may very well stand with the
distractions of the times, and may serve to open a door to more effectual
proceedings hereafter; therefore again we shall persist to offer, chiefly to
those who are in Supreme authority, and have means for Public uses in their
hands; the consideration of two expedients, which may prove by Gods blessing
even in this age, not only a hopeful, but an extraordinary succesfull
introduction to a future progress in these times.

The one is for the advancement of knowledge in the Oriental tongues, and
Jewish Mysteries.

The other is for an Agency toward the advancement of Universal Learning.

The first will be subordinate unto the means of setting forward Piety, the
second unto the ways of rationallity; The former will open a door to many
spiritual Graces, the latter to many temporal industries, as well as
spiritual Graces; for this latter is comprehensive of all Objects of Piety,
also as they are matters of Learning.

Of the Oriental Languages. The Mysteries of Jewish Learning.
COncerning the Oriental Languages, and the writings of Jewish Mysteries,
which are found therein; this is their prerogative before all other Tongues and
Writings of the World. That the first Oracles of God were uttered therein; that
the fundamental Principles of all true Worship and Religion toward God, were
first made known, by them to the world, that the rules of Justice, Judgment,
and Prudency in occonomicall and civil Government amongst men, were first
expressed in them, and that the History of the original of all Nations, was
never truly recorded but only by them; for it is unquestionably true, that at
first all these things have been peculiar to the Jews, and from them by
degrees were propagated unto the rest of the Nations. Therefore no doubt much
respect is justly due unto those Languages; and if their hidden treasures were
opened, it is most certain, that a great addition of Wisdom would thereby
redound unto the rest of the world. For although there were no more to be
expected from thence, but a more distinct knowledge of the ancient ways of God
toward the first Inhabitants of the world, and a more perfect insight in those
Religious and Judicial Statutes which he gave unto his own people, (of which
we are much in the dark) and for which the other Nations did judge the
Izralites a wise and understanding people, Deuteronomy. 4.6
) yet that alone should be a sufficient motive to cause us earnestly to affect
this study, because that which Christ does use as an Argument to quicken his
Disciples attention and diligence, to understand the hidden. Wisdom of his
Parables, should in this case be a motive to cause us to desire the knowledge
of that which has been of old. He says, that he who is instructed unto the
Kingdom of Heaven, should be as a man who is a House-holder, Mat. 13.52.
who brings out of his Treasures things new and old.

Although then we have the best and the new things of God, (wherein we that
were last, are become first) yet we are not rightly fitted for his Kingdom,
till we get into our Treasures, the old also which we want. It is true indeed,
that the new alone may fit us sufficiently for salvation in things privately
for our selves necessary; but yet we are then but half instructed for the
advancement of the Kingdom to the world, if we have not the old also.

Therefore although the intrinsicall worth, and due esteem of the original
knowledge of ancient and hidden Truths, which without those Languages cannot be
attained, should suffice to encourage us unto this endeavor: yet this other
inducement which concerns the Kingdom of God, should have a stronger influence
upon us, and will no doubt enforce this to the full, if it be rightly
apprehended; for we shall find upon due consideration, that the new store of
the Kingdom, which we have in our Treasury, is to be counted but an imperfect
provision, so long as the old is not brought in also, and that the imperfection
thereof (as to the building up of Christ's Kingdom) is herein, viz. 1. That it
is defective in virtue by it self alone, to propagate the knowledge of the
Messiah unto the apprehension of those Nations, who are accustomed unto that
which has been of old.

2. That the full confirmation of the Testimony of Jesus, even to our selves
that are Gentiles, shall not be completed in a public and Church way
uncontrolably to the conviction of all, till both the Old and the New be
brought forth together, to evidence the same truth in all ages of the world; if
therefore either the propagation of the Gospel effectually unto others, or the
full confirmation of it to our selves (which are the great concernments that
Christians have upon earth) should have any influence upon our desires, then it
will follow that we ought to endeavor the propagation of the knowledge of
those tongues; which will discover unto us the writings which contain the old
Provision and Store of the House of God, which are the true ancient Mysteries
of the Jewish Learning, and whereby we shall be enabled, to discover unto them
the writings which contain the New Provision, and Store of the House of God,
which God has betrusted us withal in latter times to dispense unto others.

For first, how is it possible to have communication with those Nations in any
thing without the knowledge of their Languages. And Secondly, How can their be
any effectual or rational dealing with the Jews more especially in matter of
Religion, except we have a true and full in-sight in their ancient, and they in
our modern Learning? Now that we are really obliged, faithfully to endeavor,
to have some communication and dealings with them in matters of Religion, will
evidently appear, if we reflect conscionably upon the glory of God, which
cannot otherwise be savingly manifested, Phil. 2. Mark 16.15. Isa. 48. Jer.
56.2 Rev. 18.
but in the face of Jesus Christ upon the state of their poor souls, who are
our elder brethren in the Faith, as concerning the election for the Fathers
sake: and upon the discharge of our duty whereunto God has called us in the
holy profession; which is to hold forth unto the world the word of life, to
declare the testimony of Jesus unto all creatures, and to publish even to the
end of the earth, the destruction of the spiritual Babylon as well as of the
temporal, and Redemption of all Israel from their captivity. Romans 11.26. and
15.11. If (I say) we reflect conscionably upon these Motives, and consider the
opportunities which God does put into our hands, to advance this endeavor, we
shall find our selves highly obliged, to have some dealings with the Eastern
Nations, and chiefly with the Jews that are amongst men for the advancement of
Christianity; because it is manifest to all, that we have dealings with them in
other things, even a free Commerce and Trade for worldly Commodities amongst
them all: and if we can make our addresses unto all of them in worldly things,
how unanswerable will it be before God, if we should not intend at all to make
any application toward any of them in spiritual things, which things both
they may receive from us and we from them, with inestimable profit unto both,
through the manifestation of Christ his glory in his Kingdom. For the benefit
of the Trade will be reciprocal, at least very much for our advantage, by the
confirmation of that Truth whereof God has made us partakers above them; and
according to the promises made of old unto them, seeing not only a clearer
understanding of the things delivered by the spirit in the old Testament, will
be granted by this means; but also many of the Mysteries of the new Testament,
and chiefly that of the desire of all Nations, the Messiah, will be opened more
fully to us by them, and by us unto them: because it is evidently found of late
by some that have traded, with their most ancient Rabbinicall writers, (men
with them of unquestionable credit) that they speak plainly from the words of
Moses and the Prophets, the same Truths which are revealed unto us by the
Apostles and Evangelists; whereby they do give, not only unto us a manuduction
to understand (for the strengthening of our Faith) the harmony of the Old and
New Testament more fully; but they also lay a ground of conviction for those of
their own Nation, to be dealt withal by us more effectually, for the
Demonstration of the Truth, when we shall be able to back it with the Authority
of their own Teachers, whom they dare nor contradict.

There be some who have already gained much by this Trade, and if some real
course were taken to settle it amongst us, by bringing their Authors to be
Printed, and translated, and in Public view this truth would be made out unto
all; that the Christian Religion does teach nothing, but that Truth nakedly,
which of old was darkly spoken of, and believed by the chief Doctors of the
Jews themselves, and from the beginning by Moses and the Prophets.

This usefulnes of the Oriental languages, and of the Jewish Rabinicall
writings, has moved many in the reformed Churches abroad, to apply themselves
of late unto the study thereof, with much diligence and industry; the example
therefore of others, together with the like inclination in any here, raised
upon the forenamed considerations, does give us an encouragement to hope well
of the success of this desire. If then the countenance of Authority may be
obtained, with maintenance to carry on the design, which by private
Contribution has been set up at London house, according to the Petition signed
by the hands of many Ministers, and others of the City well-affected, to the
advancement of Learning and Piety: we would humbly move, that the settlement
which shall be made, may be so considerable as to deserve the name of a
College, for the propagating of Orientiall Languages and Learning; that is,
that out of the reserve which is kept for the advancement of Religion and
Learning, such an allowance may be made, as will maintain some Professors, and
Students whose employment should be,

1. To uphold Publicly a constant weekly Lecture in these Languages. 2. To
attend the private instructions also, of such as shall desire the same. 3. To
publish (a Printing Press being erected which they should set a work and
over-see) and translate such Manuscripts as shall be found most useful, for
the propagating of the Truth amongst those Nations, and acquainting us with
their Learning. 4. To advance the Printing of the new Testament into those
Languages at easy rates, to be made Common amongst the Orientals and chiefly
the Jews. 5. To endeavor to facilitate the learning of those Tongues, by the
abridgment of Grammatical intricasies, and the natural harmony which is found
between them. 6. To translate also some of our Treatises into these Languages,
to be imparted unto them for their conversion to the Truth.
Toward these employments, if the State would be pleased to allow but one
thousand pounds a year, and appoint Fee-offies in trust, who should be
overseers of the College, and have power to receive the voluntary
Contributions, as shall be given toward the advancement of these designs from
time to time, (to maintain the charges of Printing, to buy in Manuscripts, and
procure a Library of Oriental Books and to send Agents abroad, that they may
trade in a Religious way with them) If (I say) such an allowance were made for
such enployments and Fee-offies appointed; it is very evident that the glory of
God thereby be very much advanced, the honor of this Nation greatly upheld,
and the real intentions of Parliament, to propagate Religion, and Learning
manifested to their praise, in this and after Ages.

If such a foundation were laid, and by the Countenance of Authority the work
owned; then all those that have been hitherto so forward, and well wishers to
this design here would be encouraged to enlarge themselves, when they should
see that the enterprise would come to some perfection. Others from abroad will
be drawn to a concurrence and communication in those endeavors; the work might
be carried on by a Correspondencie; and the Honor of the whole success would
be due to those that shall lay the Foundation, whereupon others may add to the
building. The diligence and zeal of the Romish Condare in their College de
Propaganda Fidem should stir us up to emulation, to do our duty in a better
cause: for their College is contrived only to maintain and educate Seminaries,
to disturb the peace of the reformed Churches, and propagate their own
Superstition; but this should be to advance unto all, the means of Piety and
Learning which are concealed; and to uphold the fundamentalls of Christianity,
which are to be set up above humane Interests and particular Controversies;
wherein the design will be so much the more subservient unto Piety, by how
much it will aim only at the propagation and confirmation of things
Necessary, and indifferently profitable unto all, which in the passionate fits
of particular disputes, are for the most part laid aside and disregarded, to
the great prejudice of the truth of Christianity; and the overthrow of Common
edification. Therefore if by the prosecution of those things which may convict
the Jews of the truth of Christianity; Christians themselves might get
occasion to consider their common Interest, and therein be drawn to profess a
nearer Union then hitherto they have thought upon, this would be a collateral
happiness, which may possibly flow from this undertaking additionally. And we
may promise to our selves some such accidental success because in good works
of a public nature, which have an universal influence upon the whole
substance of Religion; Revel. 22.2.
all the advantages cannot be overseen at once: They are like the trees of
Paradise, which bear twelve manner of fruits, and yield their fruit
differently every month.

Of an Agencie for Advancement of Universal Learning.
BY Universal Learning is meant a general insight and observation of all the
Objects and Faculties of Reason, and of the Ways to bring the same to
perfection by helping all men's Reasonings as they are communicable and
teachable unto others.

By an Agency to advance this kind of Learning is meant an Employment amongst
men, whereof the Scope and Aim should be to discover to the Public, and
propose in particular to every one as occasion shall be offered, all the
advantages which are found and can be imparted unto all or any, for the
improvement both of Reason it self, and of particular Men's gifts toward a
Common Good.

This Agency is properly a Negotiation with the Society and Nature of Man, to
take notice thereof in Reference to that Good, which may be found therein in a
Public or Private way; that Addresses may be had from one to another, to the
end that the Defects of the one being supplied by the other; The Rational ways
of Humane Communications may redound, as to the mutual content of Particulars,
so to the Common Good of all Mankind.

That such an Agency may be set afoot, and ought to be intended for a Public
Good is evident, because there is nothing more suitable unto the Nature of
Humane Society to make it complete, then such a kind of employment about those
Objects which are properly Humane. We see that in all kinds of Societies there
be several Agencies relating thereunto, and no Commonwealth can subsist
without some of them; but these are all for particular Interests, which seldom
are attein'd without some particular prejudice unto others, if not to the
General disadvantage of all. For from thence all our strife in the world is
begotten between States and States, and between one Corporation and another in
the same State: Now if we believe that there is any such thing as the Nature of
Man, wherein he differs from beasts; or that there should be any Society
between Man and Man upon the Grounds of a Common Interest; or that the ways of
Reason, and the Communication thereof may be useful unto a Society of Men, and
are worth the looking after, then it cannot be possibly doubted off, by any
which is Rational, that is a Man, whether any such Agency may be set afoot and
ought to be intended amongst Men, for the Public Good of their Society? The
wild beasts of the Forest, and fishes of the Sea, every one preys for himself;
and the strongest devoures the weakest; so are the brutish men of the world to
be counted worse then they; who having forgotten the true Interest of Humanity,
make none other use of their neernesse to others, of others sociable
inclinations toward them and of their own wit and strength, but to prey upon
their. Neighbors, to domineer over them, and devour them for their private
ends. The tamer and more docile Creatures made to serve man, join in herds and
flocks, where all are as one; and one is as all; in respect of that which is
useful unto them. To teach Man who is the Leader, and made to rule all
Creatures in all their Societies; to lead and rule himself by the sociablenesse
of his disposition, to find the contentment of all his desires and advantages,
rather in a Common then in a particular way. The wise State of Venice, the most
Ancient and best settled republican Society of the World; has amongst many
other excellent Constitutions, this for one, that whosoever does show unto that
State any thing that may advance the Public Good; shall receive a reward
answerable to that which he does offer: by this means the Aim of a Common Good
is upheld in the spirits of men; and Industry for the public, (as it is a
virtue; is encouraged and rewarded as it ought to be) by the Public it self.
Whether there be any where else, in any Kingdom or State such like
Constitutions I know not, sure I am in this place hitherto; Universal
endeavors and the thoughts of a public Good free from partiality; have been
looked upon by many; and those also in public places rather as ridiculous
whimsies and projects, then matters worth any encouragement; but seeing we are
now about a Reformation of our Ways, and necessitated to think upon the public
Good, even for our preservation from utter ruin and confusion; and seeing some
such thing as the Advancement of Learning has been oftener, and in a more
public Way, at least mentioned in this Nation of late, then in former times,
partly by the publication of those excellent Works of the Lord Verulam which at
such a matter; partly by some reflection which the Honorable House of Commons
has made that way, for the setting of a Gentleman apart for such a use
(although hitherto it has been wholly fruitless; and the party designed for
the service left destitute of helps, yet) I say, seeing these things are so,
and chiefly seeing there is a Reserve of Means purposely kept to be employed
for the Advancement of Religion and Learning, and we are informed that an
Ordinance is drawing up for the effectual disposal thereof toward those
ends; seeing (I say again) these things are so, we ought not to despair of
some good issue at last; and therefore in reference to the Advancement of this
Design, which does seem already to be owned and countenanced by Authority; I
hope it will be counted no presumption, if a Motion should be made to make it
more effectual, then perhaps otherwise it is likely to prove, in case the
Motion which men have ordinarily of that which is called Learning, and of the
Advancement thereof be not rectified. We shall then (as concerned in the
Public, use our rational freedom to suggest thus much. That except the
bounds of Learning be extended beyond the Universities; and be understood
equal to the bounds of Schools, and to the care of Education, incumbent to a
well Regulated Society of Men; And except the bounds of Schools be made as
large as the borders of Rationality in Mankind; we shall come very far short
of that Aim, which should be meant by the Advancement of Learning.

It is far from me to lessen the honor due to the Universities; I rather study
to increase the same; by making many Schools subordinate unto them, and
subservient unto their eminent ends; but I would not have that counted an
honor due unto them, that they alone should Monopolize all the Means of
Learning, as if without the Formalities and Constitutions of old settled in
them; there could be no truth of Learning, or right use of Reason advanced to
attain to Humane or Divine Sciences elsewhere. I say, I would not have that to
be counted their Honor, which is a Real prejudice to the whole Commonwealth,
and Society of Mankind: therefore let no Art nor Science want his own
Professor, or Lecturer in the Universitie, nor either of the Universities want
any of those Professors? Let none of those Professors want any encouragements,
which may enable them to live comfortably, and proceed cheerfully and
industriously to perfect the tasks of their profession; Let (I say) all be done
in this kind that may be desired, and nothing that may advance Industry
neglected; but yet let not this be counted all, that is either Useful or
Necessary to be done, for it will be found useful and necessary that the
Foundations and first Principles of Learning be rightly laid in other Schools,
which are to prepare Scholars for the Universities; for if this be not
intended with carfulness, the public Lectures of the Universities will
hardly ever bring any thing to perfection; because the superstructures which
they are to labor in, toward their Scholars; will find no bottom to
support them; and therefore will moulderaway without any benefit to the
public. But my purpose is not now to enlarge upon this subject; or to make out
what the particular Co^stitutions of Schools ought to be; that may be done at
another time more seasonably; all that I would intimate at this time is this,
that some provisions will be necessary for inferior Schools as well as for the
Professorships of the Universities, and that for the completing of both the
superior and inferior Schools, toward the ends for which they are to be
constituted; a public Agencie for Universal Learning will be; if not even
necessary, yet so extraordinarily useful, that without it there will be little
life and advancement toward any perfection in all the other Constitutions. For
without some effectual provocations, and grounds of virtuous emulations, men's
spirits (chiefly when they are well provided for outwardly and fear no want)
grow flat and sluggish, they settle on their lees, and degenerate quickly. Nor
is this all, why such an Agency is requisite; there is another thing of no
less, if not of greater importance then this, whereunto it will serve; and
that is the proper end thereof, which is upon the discovery of Defects in
public or private ways of Learning of what kind soever; to intend a supply
thereof, either by a free communication of such advantages as are found useful
to that effect; or by an inquiry and search into the Means by which they may
be found out if they be universally wanting. And again, upon the discovery of
perfections attained unto, or probably attainable in any kind, and any where,
amongst the Learned at home or abroad; to spread and divulge the same to all
such as can any way improve them to a public Good; or advantage their own
Meditations by them. So that he being a General Inspector of Men's Spirits, an
Observer of their parts, an Overseer of their ways in Learning, is to
negotiate. for them and with them upon all occasions, concerning every thing;
which is desirable toward the propagation of Divine or Humane Sciences. His
trade is then to animate the Professors of all Arts and Sciences, by a
Correspondency with all that are of any note, to waken them by one another unto
all Industry, and to gather up the fruits thereof, to be applied unto all the
Schools for the Advancement of Learning therein. How necessary this will be at
the first constitution of Reformed Schools; and how unvaluably profitable, it
will be at the progress of the Reformation thereof; may be evident to all,
that will consider, That the chief cause of our distractions and most
lamentable-disorders in Learning is this; that there is no Concurrence in any
common Aim, nor in any Rules which lead thereunto amongst the Professors of
the same kind of Learning; which makes every one of them walk by themselves
differently; solitarily: and without that help which their communications
about the conquering of common difficulties would yield unto them: And this
does fall out, because none does solicit a Common Interest amongst them, or
gives them occasion to be engaged thereunto. For it is evident that men of
themselves otherwise are not averse from Communications; because when the
opportunity thereof is offered unto them, we see it is embraced with joy; but
they are unacquainted one with another, and a Centrall Object of Concurrence is
wanting, which might make them meet one with another: This Center then should
be this Agencie, which should be employed to discern in every kind the
several Abilities of Men and their Undertakings to acquaint them with other
men's endeavors of the like abilities, laboring in the same subjects, either
the same or a different way, that by mutual acquaintance and Conference their
thoughts may be ripened, they may perfect, rectify and benefit one another,
and beat out the hidden paths of Truth, which in due time seasonably may be
published for the benefit of all. This Agency will not only impregnate the
Spirits of fruitful men with Conceptions, but will be as a Midwife to bring
them to birth; and when they have brought them forth, it will address them
unto the public uses whereunto they may be most serviceable for the
Advancement of Learning. In a word briefly. What ever Necessity or use there
may be of a General Solicitor in any public Affairs, for the good of any
Society; that same necessity and use is here to be found in this Agency for
the Commonwealth of Learning in general, and more especially for the
Reformation and Constitution of Schools: and except they who shall be appointed
by the State to intend the Advancement of Learning have such an Instrument and
Agent at hand, who shall be able to impart unto them from all hands, that
representation of matters which shall conduce unto their Aim; their
proceedings will be exceeding imperfect, lame and defective; but if one be set
thus apart. to become the Center of all such Communications as shall conduce to
their design; from time to time, and all men of parts be drawn to contribute
and suggest what they have gained by Meditation, Observation and Experience to
be useful toward the Advancement thereof, they may hope for a complete
establishment of those ways of Learning, which will make this Nation not only
happy within it self in one Age or two, but a Blessing unto others, and a
Praise unto Posterity.

And to bring all this succesfully to pass, These things are to be desired in
this Agencie.

1 THat the Agent already designed by the Parliament, and long ago exercised
in this way, and known to the chief men of parts at home and abroad, be
speedily provided for with a competent subsistence for himself and family,
that he may attend this work without distraction, and with some allowance to
defray the charges of his ordinary, and extraordinary Negotiation, of which he
shall be accountable to the joint Overseers of the whole business. 2 That some
Trustees be appointed, Men of public spirits, of Universal parts and
learning, of credit with all sides, who should together with and by the Agent,
super-intend the universal course, and the Advancement of Learning, that
whilst the Committee which is appointed for the disposal of the reserve, for
the maintenance of Religion and Learning; shall be making the distribution of
settled Salaries for Ministers, Professors and Schoolmasters throughout the
Kingdom, in places most convenient, These Trustees may have 500 or 1000 lib.
put into their hands as a yearly allowance from the State, toward the
advancement of the ways of Learning in general, to be disposed of by them in
a more universal way, as the occasions shall be offered unto them,
advantagiously to be employed. 3 These Trustees should have power to receive
voluntary Contributions and Legacies, which may be made from time to time by
the wel-willers to the Means of Universal Learning; to see the same employed
toward the ends for which they shall be contributed. 4 Those Trustees should
make a particular and exact description both of the Universal Objects of
Learning, about which they should be conversant, and also of the ways of their
Consultations, Cares, deliberation, and intendencie over the same, and of the
managing of the Means betrusted unto them, which should not be made common to
every body, but only communicated to all that are in places of Authority, that
they may be satisfied in the usefulness of their employment. 5 To these
Trustees, the common Agent, as one of them, should be subservient, and they
should be his Co-adjutors; so that he should be obliged to make them acquainted
with all his Negotiations, and upon mature deliberations follow their
directions in the prosecution thereof. 6 They should be Authorized by the
Supreme Power of the Kingdom, to over-see all the Schools, to consider all the
Schoolmasters, and their lives and abilities, and to furnish them with helps as
they shall see expedient for the rectifying of their ways of Teaching and
Educating. 7 They should have a regular correspondencie with men of eminent and
public parts in foreign places by the means of their Agent, to discover by
them, and gain from them, all the feats of Learning which from time to time
spring up amongst them, that being found useful, they may be set afoot amongst
us, and accommodated unto our more profitable ways. 8 To this effect a learned
Secretary, one or more, for Latin, and other Vulgar Languages should be
entertained, to be under the direction of the Agent, according to the advice of
the Trustees, and some Clerks and Transcribers are to be had, which are skilled
to write in more Languages then one. 9 The Hospital entertainment of
Traveling Learned Strangers, by whose means Intelligence may be gotten of
things elsewhere most considerable, is to be allowed as an extraordinary charge
unto the Agent, who is to gain their acquaintance. 10 They should have a
peculiar Press for Printing of things to be distributed and communicated to
the Schools and Universities, or universally to the chief learned men of the
Land, to possess them with those things which may season their spirits with
thoughts of a Public concernment.
Other things subordinate unto these Ends, without which the Agencie cannot be
effectual, and which are matters of cost and charge are to be wholly referred
unto the Trustees, that the Means betrusted unto them may be bestowed to the
best Uses, which the opportunities of times, places, and persons do afford.

Many excellent feats of Learning in Men, and in Manuscripts lie dead and
buried in oblivion, and cannot be brought to any perfection for want of some
patronage, but by the judgment of the Trustees, and their faithfulness to
their Universal Aims, and the diligence of their Agent, who is to bring all
unto their hands, and by their advice to publish and communicate what is
useful, this public evil may be remedied, and a way opened for the
encouragement of Virtue and Industry, in the best and most eminently useful
Objects of Divine and Humane Knowledge.

FINIS.

