PSALM OS THEI^OS, Or a Divine PSALM OR, SONG, Wherein Predestination is
maintained, yet the honor of JEHOVAH preserved and vindicated: And to that
eternal SONG the holy Scripture dedicated,

By JOHN DAVIS.

Whereunto is annexed an Elogie upon the Patron, With certain Divine Epigrams
to whom the Author presented some of his Books.

So then at this present time also there is a remnant according to the election
of grace,

Romans 11. 5. What shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness with God? God
forbid,

Romans 9. 14. LONDON, Printed, andare to be sold by Humphrey Moseley, at the
Princes Arms in Paul's Churchyard, and by Andrew Kemb, at S. Margarets Hill in
Southwark, 1652.

Upon the title of this little Book, namely, a Psalm.
PSalms though now of late with us some men deem,
As foolish, yet their worths deserve esteem.
King David thus exhorts well to sing,
Psalm. 149.
Let S'ons children be joyful in their King.
Israel he exhorts all along,
To praise, to sing unto the Lord a (...)
Song.
At singing Psalms let none presume to rail;
For from the heart through th'month it dothprevail,
Like Gol'ahs sword; for it is aweapon strong
To conquer, though to reason weak, a song,
Search Godsword, see that place that Irehearse,
2 Chronicles. twentieth Chapter 22 Verse,
Jehos'phat consult's with those in his days,
And appointed singers to th'Lord, to praise
The beauty of holiness, and to say,
Before the army, Gods mercy is for aye:
And when that they began to praise, to sing
To God on high, their Jer. 10. 10.
everlasting King;
The purpose of their foes he did prevent,
Against Ammons children God set ambushment;
For they were smitten, and each other smote.
(...)
Hallelujah was not in mouth nor c throat.
To speak the worth, the force, the fame, the glory
Of singing, give me leave to sing this story:
The Protestants within a The singing of the Protestants at Mountaban in
France, defeated their enemies.
Town in France
Besieged, still at the time they did advance
To fight rheir enemies, they would go out,
Singing of Psalms or Songs, which to the rout
Or company of their besiegers grew
So terrible, though but the voice of few,
That ere the gates were open, they could hear
Their singing voice, and run away for fear.
Now let men cease to say, to sing is vain,
Since holy Writ, and story thwarts it plain.
John Davis.

To his Meditation.
THy meaning here (o Muse) I pray dilate,
Can thou the Lord preserve, or vindicate*
Is not Jehovah all-sufficient,
In and of himself? pray, what have thou meant
By these thy words? I answer, some do strive
In this our age to rob, bereave, deprive
God of his titles, they think it no shame,
To say he mocks poor souls, now can you blame
Me thus to speak, since errors out of date?
To Gods dispraise are fash'ons now of late;
The foes to truth say in Predestination,
The Lord is guilty of Equivocation,
Which I deny in all my foll'wing pages,
Concording with Gods Word and learned Sages.
Yet not this 'lone, but many errors more
Have landed here of late on the English shore,
Which I oppose according to my gift:
And if by this I chance to give a lift,
And displace this error, un'versall grace,
Together with Freewill, which creeps apace
Into our faith of late; I shall do more
In these few lines, than many heretofore
In greater Volumes; 'cause I understand
The hearts of all men are within Gods hand,
To be turned by whom, and when he please:
I have a hope, that this may do it with ease.
I Am satisfied (o Mufe) with this thou say,
It Is well thou speak thy mind ere thou decay'st.
Go forth with speed, and power against thy foes,
Fear none of them, thy Patron will oppose
Them all, thou have likewise some friends that will,
While they can speak, defend thine honest quill.
While truth thou love, and falsehood do disdain,
Thy near and faithful friend I shall remain.
John Davis.

Imprimatur,

John Downame.

To the truly Noble, that eternal Song of Divine inspiration, the Deuteronomy. 31. 19.
administration of righteousness: the sacred Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, JOHN DAVIS wishes all preservation and glory in this age and in
that to come.
WHen I had finished this little Book according to custom, I began to study a
Patron, I propounded in my thoughts diverse men and that of no ordinary rank and
quality, they were great men, and according to appearance good men, for I made
it no small part of my study to choose such men that loved truth, that so they
might the better protect it, but when I considered with my self, that no
mortal man was infallible, and that the greatest, and best men in the World
have but a time here, and that time 1* Cor. 7. 29.
short, and that the strongest and ablest man has not an irresistible power of
himself to withstand the opposition made by multitudes of false spirits: I was
discouraged to confirm any of those which were in my thoughts for a Patron:
then I began to propound my self unto my self, because I am best able to
interpret my own meaning, and if occasion serve, to be my own Advocate, and so
patronize, and protect this little Book from the violence of this our age,
which loves novelty rather than truth, that which is new than that which is
true, but then considering, if I should accept of my self, it would be
something an undervaluing or slighting those worthy Gentlemen that were in my
thoughts, and an esteeming of my self, above my self: as if none were so wise
as my self, which is mere folly, whereupon I was almost in the mind of sending
this forth into the malicious World, amongst all its enemies without a Patron,
but at last the Lord put into my head and heart to think upon your incomparable
The Scriptures, the Books of the Old and New Testament.
selves, whom I have made choice of, for your fidelity, ability and perpetuity:
if I had concluded on any other, though for the present it might have been
patronized and defended, but alas! in a short time, it would have been left
Fatherless, Patronlesse and so become a poor distressed, despised and
rejected little one; but oh! I could not have chosen the like: you are an
immortal 1 Pet. 1. 23.
seed, a Patron that will remain from generation to generation: you are founded
Psalm. 119. 152
for ever. Man shall pass, nay heaven shall pass, and earth shall pass, but
you will never pass Matthew. 24. 35.
away. I may well compare Epistles Dedicatory to Funeral Sermons, wherein men
use to commend and praise the party deceased beyond their deserts, and truly
had I concluded upon any man, for my Patron of this little work, I must have
flattered him, or else in stead of protection, I might have expected
correction: but for your parts, you will not only deserve what I shall say, but
even excel the best language that I am able to speak concerning you: and it is
better so, for I had rather be defective in my Patrons commendations, than my
Patron defective indeserts.

But now most complete Patron, I humbly beg your care of this my little one,
when other Patrons nare dead; when I my self am deceased you will be alive, to
succor and maintain this issue of my mind, which I conceive with submission
is so concording with yours. Parents that have many children, sons and
daughters, have a more private regard of their sons, because they bear up and
continue their names, and amongst their sons they have a greater affection to
protect, defend and preserve from danger and violence even him that most
resembles the father in person and quality: Noble friends, this, even this, is
the seed of your Loins, it is your son, it bears up your Deuteronomy. 13. 16.
names, therefore I need not question your tender regard of it, but forasmuch
as it resembles and favors you, do but favor it, and in so doing you will
favor me, who while I can speak, will speak for you, and while I have a being
cannot but be

An admirer of all your Excellencies, John Davis.

(...), Or a Divine Psalm, or Song: Wherein Predestination is maintained yet
the honor of JEHOVAH preserved and vindicated.
WE see through the perspective glass
Of Scripture, that what comes to pass
In time, is decreed, foreordained by
The Ephesians. 1. 11.
will of God, from all Eternity.
Through this perspective lo we see,
Some 1 Timothy 5. 21. Matthew. 25. 41.
fore-ordain'd, by Gods decree
Unto eternal Romans 9. 22, 23.
Life, Romans 8. 28, 29* 30.
and death. Those designed
To Life, are only saved, as in his word I find.

Do commonly demand in any case,
How God can hence excused be
From collusion, and deceit, if he
Will none convert nor save, but those
Whom from Eternity he chose,
Seeing he offers grace to all
In his Gospel, preached to great and small?

Take this, being next unto my hand,
That though the preaching of the Gospel be
Alike communicable unto all, we see,
Yet the saving comfort, is for none:
But snch, who are elected, them alone,
Unlike the Jam. 2. 10, 11
law, which binds alike all men,
It Is not on all entailed, I speak it ore again.
Hence the elect are styled Abraham's seed,
Hence faith in Christ for them is sole decreed,
Hence the voice of Christ is come peculiar
Unto the John 10. 3.
sheep of Christ particular,
From hence the holy Spirit does affect,
To term true faith, the Titus 1. 1.
faith of Gods elect,
As being proper, yea peculiar to none
But to the Saint, which is his chosen one.
Secondly, observe, that albeit,
Pastors are to preach the Gospel, yet
It Is not with intent to convert all
Which hear it, but such that God will call
Home, by that means, his dear respected,
The lesser number, long ago elected.
The Apostle Paul did preach, yea endure
All things, but not for all, I am sure.
I 2 Timothy 2. 10. (...),
suffer all things, the Spirit by him spoke
But not for all, but for the Ephesians. 4. 11.
chosen sake.
God has e Apostles, Pastors, Prophets too,
Yea 'vangelists, but what are these to do?
They are not given for alls conversion,
No, but for the elect, the Ephesians. 4. 12. (...).
Saints perfection.
All Gospel-Preachers, thus are termed
By holy Scripture, it is confirmed,
They Are only sent as instruments to gather
The Elect from the four winds or corners rather.
Thirdly, note, that though the Gospel thus
Be preached by grace to every one of us;
Yet it is not heavens intent to save
Every one of us, that heard it have;
But only such that with love receive it,
Or such alone, that do Gal. 3. 22.
believe it.
This proved by that of Christ's Commission
To his Apostles, when he made apparition
To them, and bid them in the world go teach,
And the Gospel to all creatures preach:
He that believes and is baptized,
He shall be saved and dearly prized:
But who believes not, except he mend,
Tell him, already he is condemned.
Now none believes nor gains true saving faith,
But Gods Acts 13. 48. (...).
elect alone, the Scripture says.
If this be granted then to me,

That the Gospel-graces are for none
But for the Elect, reserved; for them alone,
Then take, with you this observation,
That there is no contradiction
'Twixt the secret and revealed will
Of God, that can both save and kill,
And that the holy God equivocates
With none although he dedicates
His Gospel to all, to every Nation,
Though not effectually unto salvation,
As some object who are Arminius sons
Or else some mad, at least some frantic ones:
For none that understands well,
Will tax the Holy One of Israel,
With what he will nor cannot do;
It Is truth, God has his cannots too,
He cannot Titus 1. 2.
lie, he cannot change, nor die;
He neither will nor can himself deny.
For how can he that is all Hab. 1. 13.
purity
Approve, much less commit iniquity?
Wherefore (from hence) with me conclude,
He cannot mock, deceive, delude.

That the Lord does seriously exhort
Reprobates themselves to believe, repent,
Though 'twas nere his abs'lute intent
To work faith in their hearts, then so if that
They cannot have (I mean the reprobate)
Power of themselves for to believe,
God may be said, for to deceive;
Because he does exhort them to
That (without him) they cannot do.

If God, that knows each heart of us,
Should immediately from heaven tell
The reprobates, they are for hell
Ordained, without rdemption,
Or that he would not cause contrition
In them, yet exhort particularly
Such, to resent effectually,
There were some show of mockery
In God, who is fidelity.
But here it is otherwise, I dare
Presume and cannot but declare:
For though the Lord does often entreat
Unto repent the reprobate,
Who 're cast off in his secret will;
He not deludes I speak it still;
Because the Lord does not invite
Immediately the reprobate to light,
I mean immediately from heaven,
But mediately, by Ministers, it is given
To preach the Gospel, so that when
They preach, they speak unto all men;
Because they cannot say, Acts 1. 24.
this is rejected
Or this, my hearer is elected:
For what they know, it is but in part,
It Is God alone that knows 2 Chronicles 6 30
the heart:
To every man the truth they show,
As to the elect, for ought they know.
Again, because the reprobate,
Whom the great God does often entreat,
Exhort, and tender Gospel Grace,
Knows not his own Eccl. 9. 1. (...)
estate, or case,
Whether he is for heaven or hell
Destined, ordained, they cannot tell,
Since he was nere made partaker
Of the privy Counsel of his Maker;
But only what he does reveal
Within his Word, which does conceal,
Not determine or denominate
This or that man a reprobate;
So that, for any thing they know
Their life's a day of grace, and so
There is none that can truly say,
I Am a reprobate or castaway;
'Cause to each self, there is possibility
And more there is a probability
Of b'ing saved since they cannot know
Whether they are rejected yea, or no.

What men he has rejected, those
Cannot repent, because he has
Withheld from them his grace of faith;
Now God must needs equivocate,
Though unknown to each reprobate.

That God deludes them, how can any other
That prosecutes this strange objection charge,
The just, and righteous God, with couzenage?
What are they turned Gods? that they
Can thus unlock; disclose, display,
This hidden veiled mystery,
That none within the World epsy;
Since Romans 11. 33.
that Gods ways without all doubt
Are Psalm* 77. 19. (...)
a ships way, past finding out?
Surel', if there be no reprobates,
Can say that God equivocates
With any, with them, while h'exhorted
Them to believe, and be converted,
And yet withholds the grace, whereby
They should upon his Son rely;
Because th*are cannot truly know,
Whether they reprobates or no:
Then surely he that does maintain
This mystical, or rather vain
Objection, must give ore for shame,
Thus basely the great God to blame,
Till of himself he is able to trace
The just God in fault, and in his own case
Only, and not on others thus to declaim
Before themselves in any wise complain
Of Gods dealing with them, who do not vent
A word (perchance) against unchanged intent.
Thus more, be pleased to give me leave,
God does not reprobates deceive,
In offering grace to them by
The Gospel in its Ministry;
Though he resolves not to give
The faith by which the just do live;
Because the reprobates I will maintain
By the Gospel preached to them do gain:

That which becomes a present stay
To their drooping souls, which would sink
Into despair, should they not drink
Of the Gospels spring; possibility
They have, and more, a probability
Of true conversion, which none under heaven
Have, but such to whom the Gospel's given.

Of God which to the World he distributes,
They know the nature, sufferings and merits
Of Jesus Christ, and who (by him) inherits
The Kingdom, they know it is such alone
That has a Ezekiel. 36. 26.
soft, not a heart of stone.
Now are not these unmatched rare
Privileges, beyond compare?
Except saving knowledge, what does excel?
To speak truly, I cannot tell,
Which as before, for ought they know
They may obtain, e're hence they go.
Now who can say the Lord does hardly deal
With reprobates? I dare appeal
Unto themselves, who cannot but
Thus speak: Jehovah does not shut
All his favors up, from the reprobate,
But this is true, that I relate.

Those outward blessings, which do pertain
Thereto, whereof they have a share
As Job 21. 7, to 17.
great as such, who chosen are:
The Gospel commonly with it does bring
Peace, plenty, with each outward thing,
It always brings Romans 15. 29.
blessings great, and many,
Of which reprobates drink, as deep as any;
Therefore it is not altogether vain
To the reprobates, as some would maintain.

Called by the Gospel, yet it is not denied
But many moral virtues thence they gain,
Withal the Restraining grace.
grace of God, which does restrain
Their running headlong to the excess
Of vice, of sin, and wickedness.
The Word of God becomes so prevalent,
In their souls to whom it is sent,
That it makes them to act and do
Many things for God, yea and to
Go far, in the practice of religion
That they seem almost without suspicion
To be the elect of God, the sheep
Of Jesus Christ, which John 10. 28. (...)*
he will keep;
Therefore it comes into my mind again,
Though the Gospel does not save, it is not vain
It Is by the Gospel reprobates enjoy
Communion with elect, which does employ
My Muse again, this to maintain,
The Gospel preached is not To the Reprobate.
vain:
Because the profit, and blessing's not small,
TO have fellowship with the best of all
Mankind: to enjoy the society
Of Gods elect, who practice piety:
Because the Scripture often relates
That God has often blessed reprobates
For the only sake of his elect
That live with them, in due respect.
Read what great blessings God did yield
To Joseph's masters house, and field
For Joseph's Genesis 39. 5.
sake, it is on record
In The Book of truth, his written word.

Luke 12. 46, 47
The condemnation of the reprobates,
Because it leaves them all as I suppose
Without excuse, so they gain not but lose.

It Is 2 Pet. 2. 20, 21.
better for some, they had nere knew
The Word, the Gospel, yea, for only they
That go on in a rebellious way
Without restraint: but as for such
Who are reclaimed by it much,
They gain, obtein as shall appear
By what I say and write down here,
Though It does their condemnation By adding to the greatness.
aggravate
Yet know withal 't does extenuate
The same, another way: by detracting
The number of their sins, which they 're acting
While here they live, who would have added
Sin to sin: as if they were n'ere cladded
Therewith, notable to abstain,
Did not the Gospel-check restrain,
So, that observe, they gain more by the last
Than by the first they lose, for all your have.
How'ere I dare affirm the very knowledge
Of the Gospel, is such a privilege,
And blessing of it self, that those who are
Ingenious reprobates, would not care
With the Gospel to undergo (in fine)
A greater punishment, than lesser sine.
But some perchance will answer thus, and say
Although I am in haste, yet I can stay
To ask another question once again,

To none, but God's elect, why is it then
Preached so generally to all men?
If it were truly 'ffectuall to none
But the elect, it should be preached to them 'lone.

In these reasons before you laid,
The Gospel is generally propounded:

They are, or Mat. 13. 24.
mingled with each other, as
The weeds, and tares are with the corn and grass,
Or as the dust, the chafe with wheat is found,
Or as the stones are with the solid ground.
Now as the Mat* 5. 45.
rain does oft-times fall upon
The tares, the weeds, and stones, as well as on
The wheat, the fertile soil, the grass;
Not 'cause it principally was
Intended to them, but for that
They Are intermixed with the wheat,
So the Gospels pleasant showers fall upon
The reprobated, the rejected one,
(Whom holy Scripture does compare
To rocks, to stones, to weeds, to tare,)
Not, no not to save, (as some sect
Do prate,) but 'cause with Gods elect
They Are mixed, who are in Scripture found
Compared Mat. 13.
to wheat, to mellow ground:
For whose effect'all calling, it was meant
For whose change, conversion only sent.

Because Ministers know not infallibly
The reprobates from the elect,
If they could know, who would reject
The Gospel, they would then deny unto
Such to preach, but alas they know not who
Are chosen, loved, who are 2 Timothy 2. 19, 20, 21. Acts 1. 24, 25.
elected,
Nor who are reprobated, rejected,
Therefore it is they preach to all,
That so the elected they may call.

To all, to every one of us:
Not to his chosen only heavens heir,
That so no souls might grieve, 1 Timothy 2. 4. 1 Pet. 1. 13.
despo^d, despair
Of Gods rich mercies, which they would,
If God, his elect number should
Select, pick out and separate
From the wicked, or the reprobate,
And let his Word be preached to none
But his elect to them alone.
Yea needs must then each reprobate
Despair, run in some desperate
Course or way, knowing so full well,
He is designed and marked for hell:
But while the Gospel's preached to all,
It keeps the reprobates, they fall
Not into the pit, the gulf despair:
For Gospel-way's though dark are fair.

God's love in Christ all men might know:
The more the Gospel's preached, the more
Are wrought upon to love, adore
Their God, for every dispensation
Vouchsaf't, for 'lected man's salvation.
Gal. 6. 16.
rule to all, a square
To live thereby as holy Writ declare,
And requires the same obed'ence respect
From all, the reprobated, or elect:
Like Princes Laws that do command, exact
Respect from all, not to rebel in fact;
If the Gospel that is to all a law,
Should not be preached to all, to order, awe
All men's spirits, the reprobated then
Would seem to be a kind of lawless men,
Exempt from Gods command, set free
From the just Gospels penalty;
Which would not only blemish and obscure
The latitude of holy Writ, but sure
It would much likewise darken and deprive
The Gospels Christ.
Author, of his prerog'tive,
To whom all men, as to a King, a head
Subjected are, as in his word In Scriptura sacra. Isa. 45, 23 Romans 14. 10.
Ephesians. 1. 21, 22
I read.
Reason 6. Romans 9. 16.
Sixthly min'sters to all, the Gospel preach,
That so they may the world instruct and teach:
No soul whatever is converted, saved
By the outward letter, or 1 Cor. 3. 5.
man's will depraved:
If so, all Gospel-hearers equally
Should be converted, saved thereby;
'Cause the disposit'on of one and all
Mankind is just the same, since Adam's fall;
But some thus teach, salvat'on 's of none,
But in the free dispose of God alone,
Who works grace, how, where and when
He will, yet not within all men,
But whom he will, according to his grace
In diverse manners, d'grees, in any place.
Seventhly, to teach to fear, and tremble

And to wait on him, and wholly to depend
Upon his grace, which none can comprehend,
Since every 1 Cor. 4. 7.
Change in men's hearts indeed
Does not from man, but God alone proceed.

Been called by the Gospel, in it is ministry:
Not in themselves to glory, brag or boast,
Nor outward letter, but to the Lord of Host
Alone to tender glory, laud, and praise
That has vouchsafed them from death to raise,
And has not done to others, in their race
So much, though enjoy the same word of grace.

Romans 2. 11.
Scripture says, persons God does not respect:
This is his written word, how is it then,
By the Gospel he saves some, and not all men?

Is very great, as great as Gods own name
(Jehovah) is he not Cr'ator, a God?
May not parents spare one son, use a rod
To the other, although that they have bin
Joint committers of the same fault or sin?
This is the only argument or ground
Expressed in holy Writ, that e're I found,
God loves because he loves, he will save:
For this reason, 'cause Romans 9. 15. Exodus 33. 19.
mercy he will have.
He will punish this man, the other kill;
And all this he will do because he will,
Certainly if we did consider, weigh
That we are in his hand like Jer. 18. 6.
Potters clay,
Or did we not in heart like fools deny
Gods right over us, his Sovereignty,
As we are his creatures, that he may frame
Us how he please for the glory of his name,
None would dare the Lord to interrogate
Why some he saves, and others reprobate?
Do not Gardners in their ground for their mind
Root up one tree, prune others of that kind?
Do not Nobles and Gentlemen pull down
One house, let others stand for their renown?
Do they not ruin Orchards, Gardens, Parks?
Do they not kill sometimes stags, sometimes larks?
Do they not kill this buck, this fowl, this hare?
And the other of their own pleasure spare?
Does a frail, weak, uncertain mortal man
Take on him, that without control he can
Do what he please, with goods that are well
Unto the world of right to be his own?
And shall we then, whose own we are, deny known
To God that privilege, that liberty?
No, let no man presume to tax or blame
The Lord, but rather magnify his name:
We see that earthly Kings do now and then
Dispense, disf'vours as well as Love on men,
Displacing that subject, advancing this
Ester 6. to 9.
Upon no other grounds, but that it is
Their Eccles. 8. 4. (...)
pleasure, yet none presumes to say to
Their Sovereign, Sir, what is that you do?
And shall not the sole Cr'ator of all things,
Heavens Monarch, the T m. 6. 15. (...).
Sovereign of Kings
Have so much honor to love or to kill?
On no other grounds but his royal will,
Shall we choose this man for a favorite,
And others disrespect, reject, and slight?
And shall not God according to his name
Bound by no desert of man do the same?
Yes, he will, for this is without dispute,
God will not be mocked, nor lose one attribute.
Look no further, but in this Commonwealth,
Does he not bestow riches, honor, health,
On whom it pleases him, and whom he will,
Does he not here Psalm. 75. 7.
pull down, destroy and kill?
Does not he act those things which none can let,
Though some at him do vex, repine and fret?
If now you grant, what here I do rehearse
That God does what he please in our Un'verse:
Shall we not then allow him to elect
Whom he please? also whom he will reject?
Surely if man did but seriously
Consider the Lord his propriety
In us, for his pleasure he did ordain
And make us, not for any profit, Job 22. 2, 3.
gain,
Since of himself, he is omnipotent,
And wants not, being Job 41. 11.
all-sufficient:
Unto whose pleasure let frail finite man,
Submit himself and all his; for what can
A finite creature, wicked, frail and base
Deserve, merit at J'hova's throne of grace?
If God should say (these words) to us, Go hence
Into the lowest Hell, without ref'rence
To our sins at all, let none answer why
He deals so, but, it is his will, reply.
The Paul. Romans 9. 3. (...).
Apostle for his brethrens good, did burst
Into this language, would I were accursed,
From Jesus Christ: and what now shall not we,
Though condemned, satisfied, contented be?
Shall man be angry to endure a rod
For the only will and pleasure of his God?
But if we look on man, in Adam lost;
Who dare contend with the great Lord of host?
Who might all men, mankind in pieces tear,
Being lost in Adam before they were;
By nature are we not thus termed well
Strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel?
Again, does not my faithful patron call
Us sinners all, since that of Adams fall?
That we have broken all his laws, kept none
Of Gods commands, but to all evil prone?
And if any man dare this same deny,
Our very conscience in our face will fly:
Now will any for strangers condescend
So low as for a friend, a bosom friend?
And that all creatures are not sinners worse?
Does not sin deserve an eternal curse?
Yet is it so, that God some men does save,
O admire this love! at grace do not rave,
But rather love, and on this meditate,
How the great God at first did man create?
Man was at first the best, the chief of all
The creatures made, but lost it by a fall,
He had engraven on him heavens Holiness and righteousness.
feature,
But by this fall, became the meanest creature.
O wretch man! could nothing content or suit
With thy desire, but the forbidden fruit?
O! 'Twas folly, shame, even too much haste
As soon as made; thus for our pleasant taste,
To lose a paradise, how? pleasant? no, I see
By this 'twas bitter in the Superlative.
third degree;
For which man's a servant, yet worst of all
He fell from the tree int' eternal thrall,
From which does God so good as to redeem
Some men: Oh have this love in high esteem!
Does God this man unto salvation choose,
Yet another as deep engaged refuse?
Lo, here it is manifested in thy sight,
That the love of the Lord is infinite;
Does he save some this or that, and damn the rest?
Lo, here is mercy and justice plain expressed;
Does he not bring all out of their first state?
Bless him that some he does compassionate.
Do not injustice on the Lord retort,
But bless and praise his Name, and fear him for it*
Has God made choice of thee, and not another?
Oh! the praises of thy heart do not smother,
But sing aloud unto the God of grace
Eternal thanks, for his indulgent face
Toward thee, who have deserved as many,
And as great punishments for sin, as any.
If thou far'st well, do not of God complain,
That other souls have not what you obtain.
Again, on the other side, what has he
Chosen other men, and rejected thee?
Do not rail and malign, but do confess
It is Gods justice for thy wickedness,
His will, is not to be opposed, withstood,
Let not thine eye be ill, 'cause he is good:
Wish none co^de^n'd, because thou art not saved,
Blame none, because thy self thou have enslaved.
Let God do what he will, let him alone
To do his pleasure with what is his own:
Let him dispense, perform, or execute,
Which royal title, name, or attribte,
Is meet according to his holy will;
Then no malignant, sland'rous tongue or quill
Has cause to say, he wrongs although he pardon
This man, or that alone, and others harden.
If Princes be so good as to promote
One traitor to their persons: just to vote
Another execution, with all speed
For th'very same offense, fact, or like deed,
Like Genesis 40. 20, ^^ 22.
King Pharaoh; I answer thus in short,
Who has just cause to tax, to blame the^ for it?
May not a Creditor be true, and just
Unto such loose debtors, that have through lust
Their bills forfeited, if he does acquit
One, yet another sue, withal commit
Him to the Law, to be confined, Mat. 18 23, to 35.
restrained?
Does not injustice here prove merely feigned?
What cause has he of any just complaint,
Who for his wilful debt has just restraint?
If natural parents have two prodigal
Sons, and they please to send for and to call
Home one, and what? if they likewise affect,
To make him be their heir, cast off, reject
The other, what show is here all along
Expressed to him, of injury, or wrong?
Say Masters have two servants that abuse
Their words, and yet retein one, and refuse
To keep the other, but will forthwith cast
Him out of doors, is he not now displac't
Deservedly? God deals but even so
With wretched man since Adams fall, for oh!
What debtors, traitors, Romans 3. 10, 11, 12. (...)*
disobedient
Children are we? what faithless, negligent
Servants? the best deserves not his breath
Of God, but reject'on, ex'cut'on, Romans 6. 23. (...)*
death
Yet notwithstanding does it, will or please
Jehovah some to pardon, and release;
To send for home some men, adopt or choose
Them for his heirs, and to cast out, refuse
Others, what wrong is here? though God award
His love to this or that, and some discard?
Does all mankind deserve rejection?
O what admirable love, affection
Does God vouchsafe to show! a higher note
Of love was never, nor a juster vote
By man, yet I wonder that God not prove
So true a lover, since his name is love:
Likewise I do not, dare not, neither must
Any man who is rebellious dust,
For God his well deserved justice blame
Him; for as love, so justice is his name.
From all the lines that I have here premised,
Let sinful wretched man be well advised,
(...)
How he renders this great and mighty Name
Of Jehovah.
God: for what his titles are, the same
He is now, let not frail, uncertain dust
Say God is partial, merciless, unjust.
O! let him have the praise and glory Psalm. 96. 8. Hebr. (...) The glory of his
Name.
due
Unto his titles named from me, and you.
I judge it meet to make an end, because
I think enough's already said, to pause
Upon, enough to overthrow, or foil
Gainsayers, and I do not love to toil,
But recreate, for it is my delight:
To praise Jehovah when I speak or write.
And though I here conclude this Psalm or Song
Yet if my God will but untie my tongue,
If he vouchsafe my worldly thoughts to raise,
And keep me still within his perfect ways,
If he his Oracles to me impart
If he enlarge my much confined heart;
From heart with tongue I will always
To him sing Hymns, and Psalms of praise:
Lord plant more Songs of Praises in my breast,
That though I end this Song, I may not rest
Praising thee, but my well tuned heart may bless
That love of thine, which tongues cannot express.
Soli Deo Gloria.
An Elogie upon the incomparable Divine Patron of this little Book, the Sacred
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament.
IF I should here presume to speak your praise,
Some may object, I am too young of days,
And that is truth, and so's the oldest man,
Let him prepare to speak the best he can:
But yet although my juvenility
Impede my Muse from notes or strains so high,
I'ill speak what I have learned in this my Aetatis 23, May 16. 1652.
age,
And leave it to be judged by men more sage.
You are good and perfect, clean, sweet, and pure;
You are righteous Psalm. 19* 7, 8. (...)
, faithful, sound, and sure.
You 're the Casket wherein those jewels are,
Even Psalm. 119 86. (...)
truth and peace, of late with us so rare.
You are the Mint of Doctrine, the only Mine,
Where truth does grow, the Orb from whence it shine.
Who meditates on you is not to blame,
For that your sou^dnes dothpreserve from Psalm. 119. 80.
shame,
While we like Pilgrims here do walk along:
Your law does prove to us, our chiefest Psalm. 119 54. (...)
song,
Your law we should inherit, what is that I say?
It should be our med'tation all Psalm. 119. 106
the day;
For what the Lord our God did you ordain,
You do perform, you nere return in Isa. 55* 11.
vain*
You are of no private stock, as some boast,
Your orig'nall is from the Holy Pet. 1. 21. (...).
Ghost:
You are unfeignedly the Spirits Ephesians. 6. 17.
sword,
You are the Psalm. 119. 30. (...) Psalm. 119. 117.
way of truth, you are Gods Word.
When any of us here do go astray,
You call us back, and put us in the way,
Your power is such, you Jer. 1. 10.
build, and plant a crown,
And then you root it up, and throw it down.
You convert Psalm. 19. 7.
souls, you make the simple wise;
Your Laws are pure, they'lluminate our Psalm. 19. 8.
eyes,
You're like Jer. 23. 29.
a hammer, like a burning fire,
How you break the rocky heart I admire:
I Am not able of my self, this t'unfold,
How more you are to be desired than Ps. 19. 10, 11.
gold.
You are at liberty, you are not 2 Timothy 2* 9. (...).
bound,
Naught that belo^gs to you shall fall to 2 Kings 10. 10.
ground.
Whoever keeps your Law is near of Luke 8. 21. (...).
kin
To Christ, and an Antagonist to sin.
He that keeps your law shall know no Eccles. 8. 5. (...)
ill thing,
Your laws b'ing kept do take away deathssting.
t 1 Cor. 15. 36.
If we could keep your Jo. 13. 7.
laws, it would be thus,
What we asked it should be granted us.
But, oh! it is so with wretched lapsed man,
He cannot keep your laws do what he can,
It Is God to man must Psalm. 119. 73.
understanding give,
Before he learn your laws, thereby to live;
Yet of the Psalm. 119. 19.
world the less we know and learn,
The more of you and yours we shall discern.
But what can man do any thing he ought,
Since of himself he has not onegood Genesis 6. 5.
thought?
No, the great God himself must these things Psalm. 119. 18.
teach,
Or else they are far 'nough out of man's reach:
He cannot know your will, much less obey,
Yet prayer is truly termed heavens James 5. 17.
key.
From all that has been said, let us all on you
Bestow our Ps. 119. 140.
loves, our hearts, as only due.
Lord, draw us to this love, with thy love-cords,
Quaedam tametsi paradoxa videntur, utraque pars est vera.
That in hearts we be what w'express in words:
But lest I seem prolix, I Will here surcease,
Yet rest a breather after you and peace.
John Davis.

CERTAIN DIVINE EPIGRAMS To certain worthy persons, approved Friends, and near
relations, to whom the Author presented some of his Books.

LONDON, Printed, Anno Dom. 1652.

To his most honored father Master DAVIS Minister of the Gospel in
Hereford-Shire.
SIR,
IF you vouchsafe (in love) to read each line,
You Will say with me the work's your own not mine;
For what I say, or write I cannot own:
What I have reapt, is that which you have sown,
But yet (I must confess) our Author more
Was principal herein, whom I adore
To wit, the Lord of heaven, who gives to all
And upbraideth none, whether great, or small.
He Is Father of us both, our gifts, and parts
Wherefore to him let us both bequeath ourharts.
But Sir: the sum that once I borrowed of you
I cannot half discharge, though all be due,
But please a little while to bear with me,
I Will pay you all, and set my My word,
surety free,
But what was this sum money? no' it was better,
O! then, I doubt, I shall be still your debtor:
Except for all, you will accept one part,
Which I will pay (in love) with all my heart,
And what you say is truly due behind:
I Will still be paying too, it is the honest mind*
Of your eldest obedient, John Davis.

To his dear Mother Mistress DAVIS.
NOne can express the great, yet joyful pain
A Mother undergoes a son to gain.
Yet since the Lord has made my wife a mother,
I can the care, though not the pain discover.
What care have I! that those who bear my name
May be instructed well, yours was the same
For me, which was to me much hid, not known
Till now of late I had some of my own.
Now I know your pains!, your cares, and your fears,
Your earnest late, and early prayers, and tears.
As I now handle, dandle on my knee
My son, and my daughter, so you did me.
But oh! there is much to mine as yet not done,
Which is performed by you to me, your son
In all obedience, John Davis.

To my Father in Law Thomas Rider Gentleman, and his loving Consort my Mother
in Law.
MY very few spare minutes I have spent,
In studying of some pledge, or argument
To prove my thankfulness unto you both,
For that you freely did bequeath betroth
Your loves to me, thus clear, thus plain set down,
Giving your daughter for my wife, my crown:
To sign your love to me, you did bestow
On me, the issue of your bodies, lo
To sign my love to you I Am not behind,
I give you here the issue of my mind.
If any more remain to you from me,
I cannot brook a debtor still to be.
Be sure of this, if God does not with hold,
I^le pay you all in better coin than gold.
I am your loving son, John Davis.

To his dear Wife Abigail Davis.
LOVE,
LEt not thy love from anc'ent truthsdecline;
Hate thou falsehood: love truly truths divine.
Let not the love of earthly Authors make
Thee love a truth, love truth for its own sake.
None will slight cord'als, though a foe do send
Them, nor poys'n take though from a bosom friend.
Let nothing here be doubtful unto you,
Not that The Author, but th'patro^ speaks it true.
Convince gainsayers with the patrons words,
They Are fitter weapons for this end than swords.
If thou assuage the rage of some that rail,
Against this truth, thou do like Abigail
Preserve thy husband, and what does belong
To him, from danger, violence and wrong.
Accept of this, as I accepted thee,
In love esteem it, as a gift from me,
Your faithful and loving husband, John Davis.

To the reverend, faithful and profitable Minister of the Gospel: Mr.
Rawlinson, of the Parish of Lambeth Pastor.
I Know you will not slight truth, 'cause compact
In Verse, I did it truly to contract
Much matter in few words, in little space,
And Sir, to sing a Psalm is no disgrace,
The stile's the recreat'on of my youth,
If you but please to call the matter truth,
No man I dare presume will then contend
With it, that is double-prais'd, that you commend.
In contemplation of this paradox
I seemed to see destructive shelve's, and rocks,
My soul was in a strait, could see no light,
Scyll'on my left Hand.
. Charibais on my right,
Which to eschew I fixed both mine eyes
On th'fixed star of Scripture-verities,
And so I was directed, guided far,
From either danger by the foresaid star;
And your conduct, which I must needs confess
Has been a happy instrument to repress
In me those wanderings from the perfect way
Of truth, where unregen'rate man does stray.
But now this point I do rely upon
Although by some it is heterocliton.
Sir, from your mouth proceeds strength to quell,
Depraved, rebell'ous nature, sin and hell,
You're valiant, victorious in your Your Ministry.
war;
And yet come off, free both from wound, or scar,
The profit reapt from you (with thanks) I name.
I part from you, more knowing than I came,
As fear, and joy into the Arc the Dove
Did bring, so you bring law, then Gospel-love
Into our souls: first Law, that souls may fear
Justice; then love in Christ: all which indeare
Me, for ever your servant, and while health and place permit, your delightful
hearer,John Davis.

To his approved good friend the learned and experienced, Master John Hinton,
Physician.
O! How near the brink; o! how near was I
To danger: to death: o! how near to die,
Yet preserved from falling in, yet I live,
Oh! let me praise the God of life and give
Him hearty thanks, for this his providence
To me: such love I cannot recompense,
Or satisfy; but yet I Will strive to pay
In humble thankfulness, in this my day
Some small returns, I will confess
His love is infinite, and I will bless
His name: the occas'on was only hence,
That it is not long ago I had a sense
Of rich mercies, I say, it is not long,
Since he pitied me, for which this Song,
Or Psalm I made, to sing eternal praise
To God, who from the gates of death did raise
His servant, yet grat'tude I read is due
(As th'instrument of God) from me to you.
When Nabals wife did pacify, assuage
King David's passion, anger, fury, rage;
1 Samuel 25. 22, 23.
He blessed the God of Israel that sent
Her so to meet him, and thereby prevent
His evil purpose; but he did not rest,
Until likewise her counsel he had blessed:
Yea happy, blessed be thou also, says he,
Who have this day from sin prevented me;
So noble friend, my Doctor, first must I
Express unto my God, and then imply
Unto you this word of thanks, Blessed twice
Thus: blessed be God, and you, and your advice.
The first I call the cause efficient,
The second is your self, the Instrument
Of my present health, and late recov'ry
By your Cordials, and Phlebotomie.
Now pray accept of this, as it is a token
Of humble thankfulness, for what is spoken,
I Will say but this, your skill deserves your fame,
The sick you heal, or cure: the mad you tame.
Sir, I am your servant, John Davis.

To his Country the fruitful County of Hereford in Wales.
4 W W W W. in Hereford-S hire.
I Know in double Woolf.
letters you excel,
O that you had not double hearts as well.
You exceed in Water, Wool, Wheat, and Wood,
And some esteem these things their chiefest good:
But such that count those earthly springs and pools
Summu^ bonum, my patron calls the^ fools. Water and fire good servants, bad
masters.

Water is a servant good, as a fire
Is, but snch masters, none that is wise desire.
As fire the highest tower can burn down,
So floods of water, the highest hills can drown,
And what is Wool proves
Wool? but sheeps clothing, anhyp'crite;
Which but cast off, would prove a woolf, to bite.
Add f to wool it will be Woolf thus pla in,
Take f away, 'twill seem a sheep a gain.
And what is Wood signifies mad.
Wood? but the concrete of ire,
It Is combustible fuel for a fire.
And what is Wheat? it is true of all the rest,
If any one be better, it is the best:
Of Wheat is made bread, yet bread perishing food.
But though the bread of this we eat to nourish
Our bodies, yet pray know, it is food that perish.
Now do not boast, nor set your hearts upon
The best of these, they are corrupt each one,
For yourwater esteem the gospels well or spring,
For that glad tidings to your souls it bring.
For your word 'steem the same, which is a The Word of God a tree.
tree
Where truth does grow, from a painful Be
An eatnest, frequent, praying An earnest man is a Be.
man, derive
Most sweet and wholesome cord'als t'keep a live
In time of scarcity, in time of want;
But O! here food does grow, therefore not scant.
Be no more wood, be meek, be loving, kind,
Cut down your wood, and plant a sober mind.
And for your plenty of that grain of wheat,
Overvalue not the same I entreat,
But freely give to poor distressed ones,
That have no land to plant for rock, or stones,
And value you the foresaid truth to feed
Upon Gods Word, the true immortal f 1 Pet. 1. 23. Christ's righteousness
better than Wool.
g seed,
And for your wool, be sure your selves you dress
In that white robe of Christ his righteousness.
Let Christ's Gospel, his righteousness, his blood;
Be your all, your Water, Wool, Wheat, and Wood;
Country; this little book I dedicate
To you, because I hear, I hear of late
False teachers are abroad, to you crept down,
To smooth, to flatter, smile, and not to frown;
Saying all are saved, which to the weaker sort
Seems pleasant, and some sinners thank the^ for it.
But have a care (my friends) it is more sweet
Than sound, or wholesome; therefore do not greet
Them so with congees, thanks; for it is not true
As holy Scripture here declares to you,
My friends; if any come to you, and bring
With them not this true doctrine, but shall sing
Contradicting notes, bid them not 2 John 10, 11
God speed,
Lest you partake of others evil deed.
I will forbear with paper and ink, till I speak to you face to face, John
Davis.

To his respected Uncle John Davis of The Greenway in Hereford-Shire.
SIr, to requite the many courtesies
I have received from you, my Muse denies
As impossible, yet you see she hates
Ingratitude, for that she dedicates
This Book toher relations and friends,
As so many cred'tors to make amends
In part for all their loves without delays,
Knowing that he owes most that nothing pays.
I hope you will accept from me this mite,
For that although it is small, it is weight, not light,
And having tried, you are like Persia's A^^axerxes.
King,
Who much would give, and take the smallest thing.
I rest your loving Kinsman, John Davis.

To his respected Friend Master John Wood.
SIr, be pleased to give a friendly look
On these my lines coucht in this little book,
I hope they will answer the name of orthodox,
The arguments for proof are sound as rocks,
Howsoever see them proved scan each line,
If one prove strong, it is Gods; if weak', it is mine.
Till this were out, my Muse could find no rest,
Of all, you love the godly learned best.
Your humble Servant, John Davis.

To his Honored Friend, Mr. Abraham Tailor, Merchant of the City of LONDON.
SIR,
I Know right well, untruths you cannot (book.
Behold, they are here condemned within this brook,
Here Is truth triumphing, error much ashamed,
To show her self because of most men blamed.
The old received undoubted verity,
Here I maintain against dead-quick heresy,
Answering all objections which some make
Against the truth (for naught but fash'ons sake.)
I have read th'eloquence of Cicero,
I could have writ in Latin, but why so?
All in England know not the Latin tongue,
But I could wish that all both old and young
Would learn the originals, first the Greek,
And then the sacred Hebrew Language seek;
Their worths, I cannot speak, I must admire:
O! that our youth would both these tongues acquire.
Your Servant, John Davis.

To his respected Friend, Master Thomas Churchman, of London Citizen.
SIr, of my lines be pleased to take a view;
If any thing in them shall pleasure you,
It Is yours; howsoever reject it not;
For it is truth, it self was clean from spot.
I must confess my Muse, does want a style,
To speak truths wort^orpraise, but stay a while:
'Twill praise it self; yet thus it is worth receiving,
But error condemned is scarce worth reprieving.
Your servant, John Davis.

To his much esteemed Friend and Cousin-german, John Davis of The Greenway in
Hereford-Shire.
HEre is truth and error, the first maintained,
The last before the right'ous Judge arraigned.
I hope thou have this will within thy breast,
Of trying all thou read'st, to keep the best,
And not to take things carelessly on trust,
As if all thou read were true and just:
Stir up, stir up in thee, that noble mind,
Like to the Bereans, who searched to find,
If things were so or no in holy Writ;
See if it has true Scripture stamped on it,
It Is current coin; if otherwise, it is base
Metal, receive it not on any case.
The pains of touching only here is thine,
The pleasure of composing has been mine.
Your loving Cousin and namesake, John Davis.
London, May, An. Dom. 1652.
To his Brother in Law, William Gardener of Whitchurch in Hereford-Shire.
THe world has mill'ons of obst'cles to let,
An honest man from paying of his debt:
But Love's a debt which surely might be paid
By all, without demand, and not delaid.
Love is a sum (me thinks) might soon be got,
He Is a dishonest man that pays it not;
Yet in this age so many do dis-joyn;
Love seems as scarce as any other coin,
But the debt's due, by Scripture it is attested,
Who denies to pay't will surely be arrested.
Now let you and I ere the Death.
Sergeant come,
Of all we owe be sure to pay this sum.
I am your loving Brother, John Davis.

To his Brother in Law Thomas Roberts at the Were-end in Hereford-Shire.
BRother I know you well, the truth you love,
Which is the cause that principally move
My Muse to send, to write, to tell to thee,
That error is condemned, and truth set free
In these my lines; you will avouch it true,
If you will take an hour to read them through.
An Id'a of Philosophy to me
Thou gav'st; lo, here is Divinity for thee.
From your Brother in Law, John Davis.

To his Brother Robert Davis, Barber-Chirurgeon of the City of London.
IF thou can set a Song to Instrument,
Take pains with this, it will be time well spent.
And though it may not disagree, but suite
With either Violl, Harpsecall or Lute;
Yet let it not be only set to such,
But tune thy heart hereto, and it will much
Delight thy spirits: what? though it does not like
The ears of carnal men who only strike,
And harp upon that Instrument called Base.
O! sing (with heart) Gods praises in thy place.
Bad matter never so truly played, is wrong,
Whatever others croke, sing thou this Song.
Written by your Brother, John Davis.

To his Brother Samuel Davis, Cordwainer in the Town of Monmouth in Wales.
REad here the recreat'on of thy brother,
What gifts thou have be sure thou do not smother,
With this proviso, start not out of size:
A word does prove enough unto the wise.
Your Brother, John Davis.

To the Captious READER.
I See some men do daily take and feed,
On such an herb, that I account a Tobacco.
weed:
And at Feasts, that Oysters.
dish does please my app'tite,
Which others cannot love, but vainly slight:
Wherefore I here provide at this my Feast,
Rather what is good, than pleasing to each guest,
So if some palats cannot well relish
This my sound meat, my good and wholesome dish:
The fault now is not mine, it only lights
On their unsound, and queamish appetites:
If some Critics like not my good intentions,
The fault redounds on their ill apprehensions.
FINIS.
Errata.
In the Epistle, p. 3. l. 12. r. parties, ibid. l. 24. r. are, r. when. In the
Psalm* p. 6. l. 4. r. repent, p. 7. l 6. r. ^e, p. 8. l. 19. r. they, p. 9. l,
3. dele to, p. 10. l. 16. r. if thus before but, p. 22, l. 11. r. than, ibid.
l. 24. r. one, p 23. l. 5 r. is, p. 26. l. 22. r. names. Epig. to my Country,
p. 2. l. 8. r. from whence.


