LONDON KING CHARLES HIS AUGUSTA, OR, CITY ROYAL.

Of the Founders, the Names, and oldest Honors of that CITY.

An Historical and Antiquarian Work.

Written at first in Heroical Latin Verse, according to Greek, Roman, British,
English, and other Antiquities and Authorities, and now translated into English
Couplets, with Annotations.

PSALM. 142.5. Memor fui dierum antiquorum.

Imprimatur,

Na. Brent.

LONDON. Printed for William Leybourn, 1648.

TO THE READER,
Courteous Reader,
THou art here presented with an Historical Poem of the antiquity of this
(yet) famous City; where thou shall find the Ancient Honors with the several
Names, and Founders neatly cast into this elegant composure as well be fits so
excellent a Subject.

For the Author, it seems, he was not ambitious that his Name should grace his
Work, but rather that his Work should grace his Name: for let me tell thee,
it came from the Study of that accomplished Poet of our Time, Sir Will.
Davenant, whose Ingenious Fancy has spun him such a woofe, of immortal
praise, that shall never be eaten through, with the all-else devouring teeth of
Time, or blasted by the poisonous breath of envy.

And now I shall clear the Title from some aspersions which malice might be
ready to cavil at, because, happily, it may be thought not Calculated for the
Present Times; yet who knows not that LONDON has always had the honor to be,
(as well as to be called) The City Royal; and I hope, Learning is not so much
forgot, but by that easy figure it may still be termed, the City Loyal; and
then why not King Charles his Augusta? although, for more then the last Luster
of years it has been Divorced from it is greatest luster, namely, the presence
of Him, who only made it Famous.

To conclude, May it be the prayer of all Loyal Subjects, and true Citizens,
that it would please the All-Mighty, Isa. 1.26.
to turn that Prophecy, into an History amongst us, viz. that He would
restore our Judges as at the First, and our Counselors as at the Beginning;
that afterward, it may be called the City of Righteousness; the faithful
City.

Vale.
Polid. Virgil. Anglicae Hist. lib. 7.
Caeterum, tantum abfuit, ut Londinenses Cives, qui fidelissimi erant, armis
and viris muniti, adventu hostium territi sint, ut apertis partis adversum eos
[DACOS] confestim irruperint, ita ut illi minime sustinentes subito cesserint.

The valor of the Citizens at the siege of LONDON by the DANES, under King
CANUTUS. Anno Dom. MXVII.
BUt so far was it off from the Citizens of London, who were most faithful,
and furnished with arms and men, from being frighted at the enemies approach,
that forthwith setting their City Gates wide open, they sallyed out against
them in such a manner, that they being utterly unable to endure the shock,
suddenly fell off and went away.

The English of the Latin Verses to the KING, To make the TRANSLATION complete.
FAmes old reserves my verses subject be,
Who London built, most sprosp'rous King for thee,
(Thine Empires glory, splendour, and defense,
Now braver in our there born Alluding to the Star which appeared at noonday.
The Latin word, in the original, is Astriferi, which signifies, or insinuates,
far more aptly then the English, a Prince who brought a Star with him at his
birth, though happing a day over.
starry Prince)
Walled like an Harp in form (an omen sure,
That peace, and happy rule should there endure)
Whence the name grew; and what the changes were:
I sing in brief. Things found, not feigned are here.
The Isles Mother-town, where Cynthia had her seat,
Our Auspurg once, because Imperial great,
I show to be such still, as fits thy fame,
And now Aeternall, if thou say the same.
"Old things have ever with the Great their grace;
"And greatly make for Kings of ancient race.
None more then Thou, by whom all claims are barred.
I tell not which is true, but what is heard.
"He Is blessed who can part doubtful things from sound.
Meanwhile then these none certainer are found.
As none, dread Sir, then I more thine can be,
Who art his son who was a God to me.
KING CHARLES HIS AUGUSTA, OR CITY ROYAL.
HE built this City, who the Nation NENNIUS (who wrote about eight hundred
years since) in Mr. Seldens Manuscript, diligently compared by himself with
Sir H. Saviles, Sir Robert Cottons, and M. Cambdens copies. Sir John Prise,
Humfrey Lhuyd, and all the Welsh, with innumerable other of our Nation, their
followers.
brought,
(As we by all our old known books are taught,
And to deny them faith our manners shames)
Upon the rising bank of royal Thames;
That valiant Worthy, who did not belly,
With deeds degenerous, his ancestry,
Equal to Kings of Troy, for parts and fame,
Most luckie dismally who rightly came
From the same stemm where Julius Caesar grew,
The Sylvian glory and surnamed new,
Of his known flight (with Pliny, and before him Diodorus Si^^^^ who writes
that (...) the Lucanian Languuge BRU^^ signifies fugitives, (...)
flight the word does suit)
In old Lucanian who was wise, ye^ Brut^.
Of him our famous Scorbie-grasse, which the Romans call Britannica.
h^^^ took also ^ame,
If true it be that from a Kings it came,
As he who was Vespasians Pliny.
friend sets down.
By flight fates drew the way for Brutes renwon,
"As for Aenoa^. Crowne^ ^o cowerds (...),
"No more then unstirr'd flames the roof attain.
This was his Troy, his Trinobants chief seat,
His empires top, by him in time made great.
But being found for ships a port secure,
(The Wels^ a ship call Mr. Camden in his Britannia.
Lhong) it did enu^^,
In after-ages far another name,
Even London, which it bears still the same.
And this, if some wise men rove right, is true;
Dinas, in Welsh a City. Thus it grew.
Mr. Seldom, and many of the Welsh.
There other are who think it called Lhan-Tain,
And of Dianas temple there did gain,
That famous title: Lhan, a temple is,
And Tain, Diana* London grew from this.
Now, more then stories, if conjectures weigh,
(A thing to which even common sense says nay)
Of all conjectures this to me seems best.
For under her, as Goddess, to the West,
Beyond the Colts land, where the Sun goes down,
That brave heroic Prince, born to renown,
Great Brutus barvely came, and fixed his seat,
Within the Oceans bosom, fixed that great,
Imperial state, beyond the worlds known end,
Shut out, where he his own known world did tend.
Nor Tamisis, but Tainisis is Tames,
If rightly called; Dianas name it names.
This, many of our Britannes (they are those,
Whom we call Welshmen) for a truth depose.
And what thou have, my Williams, in this case,
Most aptly found, my memory must embrace.
Thou art opinioned; that as the name,
Of London, from the great Diana came,
So, that it was with this word Lin, put to,
Which signifies a Pool, where waters do,
As here they did, cause lakes: and this is plain;
Because the Tames The Poole is a place so called in the River of Thames near
to the Tower of London where ships ride thickest at anchor, and lies before the
marshy medows and standing waters in the runn^ lands of Redderiffe, which seem
to have al thereof been under water or a Pool.
near part does still retain,
The title of The pool. Lhyn-Tain is then,
A town there fixed, where to Diana, men,
Had hallowed a lake. To strengthen this,
Lin, and not Lon, in Stephans Stephanus (who wrote above a thousand years
since in Greek) in his Book of Cities. And Marcianus in his circum-navigation
of Britain, says that the Citizens were of Lindoninon called Lindonines, (...).
Lindonion is,
By which that ancient Greek did London sign,
Among the Cities which then most did shine.
But not alone this City took her name,
From Dian', but the island took the same.
For lofty Britain is of Bro combinde,
With Tain, and as Dianas land designde.
Which the fit wedlock of those words begets;
For Bro is land. And that rough shire which sets,
Out far into the sea the huge head so,
Is Penbroke called, of Pen an head, and Bro.
Dianas oracles such credit wun,
(As those from which Brutes empire first begun)
That so his Brittans did her name adore,
As Ephesus it self did never more.
Muse, what those were assist thou me to sing.
From Troyes last fires whose fame through heaven should ring
Aeneas flying ignorant what fate
Attended for him in the Latin state,
Raised, in his passage, upon Pelops shore,
By her direction, near where Boea wore,
Her towrs in forhead of an half-round Bay,
A City called Paulanias in Laconicis.
Etias, called, they say,
Of his dear daughter, who that name did bear.
As unto him, so to his grand-childes heir,
( Troyes other glory, and his whole lines grace)
The huntresse Cynthia favorable was.
Brute, flying out of Italy, does stray,
In unknown Seas, foreseeing he should sway,
In some brave seat, and General of a Fleet,
Wherein above three hundred sail did meet,
With fair winds somewhile, other whiles with fowl,
He from the Admiral did all control.
Weary with Sea-work, he does ride at last,
Under a slender Island, lying waste,
Which in the old British book Lergecia is.
In ages past a Temple stood in this,
Whose ruins scarcely stood: the walls were clad,
In shallow grass; and too much light it had,
The roof turned window through. Yet the alter there
Remained, and did Dianas title bear.
Brute forthwith knew her, when he this did see,
His houses friend, and patroness to be,
A Goddess whom he had not served in vain.
"Without divine help men no good attain.
With due rites honoring her, and offerings store,
He humbly did with humble words adore.
This speak I'on the British books report,
Which into Latin turned, and taught to sort,
With common fame, may not distrusted be.
They tasting of a spirit high, and free,
As Well in sense, as number, he, in vain,
(Who, while he G. Buchanan in his Histories of Scotland.
lived, did in verses reign,
Historian turned) them blames as fiction mere,
Who well his own might wish the verses were.
And would to heaven these Welsh records in prose,
Were equal in their dignity to those.
"But diamonds in heaps of dirt do shine,
"And barbarism base unfoldeth lights, divine.
Nor would that Prelate, Geffrey, born at Monmouth in South- Wales, Bishop of
St. Asaph, about 400 years since.
who so clerkly could,
Turn Verses, fain in prose (if fain he would)
Such foolish things as some there found are thought.
He therefore only This seems to be most true. For first Nennius (that
disciple of Elnodugus) compendiously memorizeth Brutes fatal birth, his casual
killing of his Father, his sailing into Greece, and Gall, and that this Island
took the name of Britain from him. Then again, an old book found in the
library of the Abbey Beck in Normandy, by H. of Huntingdon, (who was born about
five hundred years since) in his travail to Rome, and the old Welsh copy of
Walter Archdeacon of Oxford which Geffrey of Monmouth translated into Latin,
contain the same things thoughout (witness Mr. Lambert, in his Preambulation
of Kent) which Nennius briefly touch, and they deliver at large. Therefore
Geffrey of Monmouth cannot be so much as fained, to have fained them. But of
these things elsewhere, both more exactly, and more copiously.
gave us what was brought;
And that his duty was. The faults which be,
There age, if nothing else, pronounces free.
BRUTES Orison, and Vow.
HUntresse divine, from whom wild boars do fly,
Who tracest through the turnings of the sky,
And glades of hell, unfold terrestrial fate;
Say where it is thy will to fix our state.
Seat us where we thine endless praise will sound,
And temples rear with queers of virgins crowned.
Sweet sleep then seiseth on him, and sweet dreams
Present to his tirde soul their pleasing theames.
For she appeared, and this fair answer gave,
Which from the true, translatour here we have.
DIANAS Oracle, and Grant
BRute, beyond Gall, where Phoebus stoops to rest,
A land is lodged within the Oceans breast,
Which once wild giants held, now vacant lies,
Most fit for Thee Thine There t'encolonize.
Reach This. For Thou shall ever This enjoy;
This shall to Thine be made a second Troy.
Here, from Thy loins shall royal of-springs grow,
To whom A Prophecy nothing less then a lie. For the whole World of the
Britian Islands which very lately were under King James, is now obedient to his
son King CHARLES. The whole World moreover was subject of old to Constantine a
Britain who was Emperor, or Caesar Augustus. The Oracle therefore is
fulfilled in both those respects* and in a more high, (of which the spirit of
the Oracle thought nothing, but as one of the Sibills or Balaam might) that is
to say, the Empire of the faith of Christ, by means of that blessed Emperor,
being through all Nations most freely spread and settled.
the whole worlds globe shall homage owe.
Hence came it, that so constantly, and long,
Chaste Cynthias honor was the Brittans song.
"Who would be so^thing, set thine heart to know
"Things long since past: who does not, old may show
"But is an infant. That which makes men wise,
"Is the records of ages to revise,
"The sacred shrines, and cabanets abstruse,
"Of hoary date, worn out of Vulgar use.
Thus divine Plato was in Egypt told,
And has in his Timaeus it enrold.
To herth' whole Island dedicated was.
For where St. Paul's Sulcardus, an ancient English writer.
most stately church haht place,
Her temple stood, under Geofrey of Monmouth, of the Original and acts of the
Britains, lib. 2. cap. 1. The seats of the three Arch-flamins were at London,
York, and Caer Leon. Seeds Arcbistaminum in tribus nobilloribus civitatibus
fuerant Londoniis, Eboraco, and in Urbe Legionum.
the Archflamins charge.
The giants Dance (so called) that structure large,
On Plains of Sal'sbery, the same does show,
Where made sto^es ar more hard the^ sto^es that grow
The common sort that heap does Stonage name;
And albeit heavens whole force beats the same;
As disobedient; undemolisht still,
Yet bears it up the head, and ever will,
Though part be swallowed by the yiedling ground.
It has two rude rows of huge stone set round,
(Rude ones indeed unless time makes them such,
The art worn out, and of the substance, much)
From under whose vast pile late times did dig,
The antlers of a dear extremely big,
Whose sacrificed body flames had fed.
Such were the offerings which to Cynthia bled.
He, whosoever, holds, that the same,
Was raised to immortalise In the book called Nero Casar.
Bunducas name,
That martial Queen, shall have no foe of me:
For, without Phoebes wrong, it well may be.
Thus Britain ever more that Virgins style.
Britain, the Atlantic Oceans fairest I Will,
It self the Oceans mistress, and sole Queen,
Which she to curb from her white clifts is seen.
The circling Seas chief darling, pearl more clear,
Then is the Moon when she does full appear:
Although the British pearls look pale, Pliny in his Naurall History.
and wan,
For grief they took, since so far Caesar ran,
As to break through the secrets of her Seas,
Nor have they yet recovered their disease;
Unlike those pearls, which that triumphant Prince,
Did gather here, and brought away from hence,
To deck the breast plate, he to Venus vowed,
In Venus Suetonius in his Julius Caesar.
Temple, Rome thereby made proud.
But ever under Virgins was our I Will.
The blessed Virgin had it in her style,
After Diana had the title lost:
The maiden mother Delias glory crossed,
"Light drives out darkness, mild the fierce out-weares,
Protectrix here above one thousand years.
This moved King Arthur to advance in William of Malmesburie, in his Latin
Histories, published by Sr. H. Saevile, and dedicated, with the works of some
other our oldest Historians, (by that rare gentleman) to Q. Elizabeth, printed
in one great Volume, at London, first, and since beyond the seas. Mr. Camden
makes it clear, that this most victorious Britian Prince, King Arthur, was
enterred at Glastenburie.
shield,
The Virgins semblant, who from every field,
Returning victor vanquished in fight,
The Saxons powr's (in vain, through fates despite,
The Britans bravery withering in his death)
And crowned her forhead with a Nennius (who also writteth of the picture in his
shield) names the twelve several places where King Arthur obtained those
twelve several victories, in the like number of set battles.
twelvfold wreath.
England was after called, Our Ladies Dower.
And we have seen it under maidens power;
Eliza Maiden Queen, her title reft:
Dian' to Mary, Mary to her it left.
Eliza so was by another name,
Enstyled The Art of English poesy, a book dedicated to her self. Sir Walter
Raleighs English Poem entitled Cynthia, and dedicated to that Goddess Queen,
as Mr. Camden every where calls her. The most famous, and most learned Poet of
our Nation, Mr. Spenser, in his Colin Clowt's come home again, mentions
Raleighs Cynthia, with much honor.
Cynthia; nor amiss the same.
In the mean time, they will have London be,
Lhan-Tain of her, that the names pedigree.
Let various fancies, under face of truth,
Take whom they will. My Muse things sure ensu'th,
Our Worlds chief City loves not names blind born,
And what is not like her royal self does scorn.
The brother german of that paramount Prince,
Great Cassibeline, (who drove Julius Caesar himself, (though not so clearly)
in his Commentaries, and all other who have written of his war in Britain,
though some of them more magnificently, for Cassibelines glory, as Lucan, then
some others have done.
Caesar hence,
And made Romes Eagles back to take their flight,
His Trojan wheels swift thu^dring through the fight)
His brother, royal Lud, when once he had,
The aged City with new buildings clad,
Made all things new, the marble gates, and walls,
Then Dinas-Lud, or Gildas, the Historian, whom Monmowth cites, and Polydore
Virgil confesses to have read.
Lud-Dine he it calls,
(The old name changed, which was at first new Troy,
Whose prints the Trin^bants in theirs enjoy)
Lud-Dine, of Lud, refounder of the same,
By use, and time, softened to Londons name.
Nor is the word, Lud, barbarous, being found,
In Hebrew names, by Genesis 10.27.
Moses self renowned.
Therefore, though Sems Lud was no' 'kin to this,
Yet to the word thence splend or added is.
This, of all Cities in the British clime,
Because, for majesty, it was the prime,
(Old seats a kind of majesty retain)
And finally, because it was the main,
Of all, which being Romes, our Seas did wall,
Those times Ammianus Mercellus.
Augusta (nor did falsely) call.
King A Greek coin of the Emperor Claudius, in Octavius Strada, and in the
English Nero Caesar, where it is explained.
Etiminius, or Svetonius.
Adminius (he,
Who, King Cun' ob^lines son was, one of three)
His court kept here, when Dion Cassius.
Beric sold our land,
To Claudius Caesar, who did Rome command,
And by his right of conquest gained therein,
Made Romes walls Pomeria protulit. Old Inscriptions extant in Gruterus, and
Rolinus, and the best ancient authors.
wider then they carst had bin.
London was, long before Cor. Pacitus, Annal. lib. 14.
Cornelius wrote,
A place for trade, and concourse most of note,
And known to Rome for such; and long before,
To the bold Julius Caesar writes, that the Britains sent aid to the Galls: and
Strabo, that the Veneti, in Gallia, had sea helps from hence, in their war
against Caesar, for preserving their Mart here, which was no where more likely
to have been then at London, which, in Neros time, was above all other Towns of
ours most famous.
Venets on the Celtick shore:
Which bred such envy, that the fates thought fit,
With Romes self, in mishap to equal it,
Under one tyrant both to cinders turned,
That want only, this miserably burned.
But Londons greater glory hence did spring,
That the first Christian, The old British book translated by Monmouth.
Lucius, was her King.
The realm, Hereof I have long since written a small book, unpublished.
and London, for a sign of this,
One cross display, gules in argent is.
A glorious standard (God) and good indeed,
When the brave English, here Matthew of Westminster, and other old ones.
made Pagans bleed,
And Saracens there (that Antichristian sect)
In Henry of Huntingdon, Matthew Ranis, ^o^eden, and others.
Cordelions days, with blessed effect.
Great are these glories, and enough: but more,
Do here ensue. That Monarch, who first wore,
And first did spread in Roman arms the cross,
And therewith his own standard did embosse,
Called Labarum, The coins of Constantine the Great, and of other Emperors,
after him, do show the figure of that heavenly sign, with which he adorned
the Imperial Banner, or Standard, most richly wrought and set with stones of
greatest price, and beauty. Eusebius in Constantines life. The figure in those
coins is
who crowned Christ's fold with rest
The empire carrying with him from the West,
He whom new Rome did worthily adore,
Constantinoples name unknown before)
Was born Fitz-Stephan, an old Topographer of London, first published in print
by that memorable Citizen, Mr. John Stow. With these few small drops, drawn
hither out of my fuller annotations upon the Latin verses, of which these are
the translation, I have sprinkled their margents, as with a kind of dewle
salt. For, the noble matter may relish so the more kindly, and be the more
fi^tly understood, by the learned, and ingenuous reader. Both which aims of
mine will hold good, I hope; who professing my self to be herein an
Historical Antiquarie, have truly declared my self to be such, as the duty of
mine office did oblige. The contrary whereof, what it were else, then, under
the color of being an Antiquarie, to destroy antiquity, I must confess, I
know not. The most able Censor among the Greeks, Dionysius Halicarnassaeus,
(familiar with Pompey, the Great) in his judgment upon the best Greek
Historian, Thucydides, is so far from condmning the inserting of National
traditions into Histories (such as those of Brute, and some other of ours here
are) as he plainly confesses it to be a duty. His one words are; (...), etc.
That among all men, as well in general, concerning places, as in particulars,
concerning cities, such memorials were preserved, as came by hearsay; which
sons receiving from their fathers, they again endeavored to commend by their
sons to posterity. They therefore who would write of such, ought to write so,
as they find them received of old. Thus, and much more to that purpose, upon
which the justification of Herodotus (whom Cicero styles the Father of
Histories) depends, has that Dionysius written there, and written truly. That
the things in that British book, which Geofrey of Monmouth translated, were of
such a traditional kind, his dedicatory Epistle to that valiant, and learned
Prince, Robert, Earl of Gloucester, natural son to King Henry the first, King
of England, clearly declares. This was the reason which moved Herodotus
(without fearing, or caring, to be reputed fabul^^^, by the rash, or ignorant,
for his so doing) to recite what he commonly found in traditions among Nations,
Common-weals, or Cities, touching their own originals, as knowing it to be his
duty, as an Historian. Therefore, he tells us, that one Targitau^, the son of
Jupiter, by the daughter of Boristh^nes, had three sons, Lipo-xais, Apo-xais,
and Colae-xais, among whom he divided all Scyt^^a, which so became first to be
empeopled. The same cause also moved Cornel. Tacitus to remember unto us, that
the old Germans derived their beginning from God Tuisto, whose three nephews by
his son Mannus, shared Germany among them, and were of that Nation the first
reputed parents. The like (but with much more likelihood) our oldest British
traditions report, of the tripartite division of this great I stand, between
Lycrinus, Camber, and Albanact, the three sons of Brute, Julius Silvius Brutu^
father of the Britains, and founder of London.
in London, of a British Queen.
For which, and that the place was worthy seen,
To suit the change, Augusta 'twas proclaimed:
Before his days not to be found so named.
Wherefore, great City, willingly I grant,
This freeman unto thee, who well may vaunt,
Thy self thereof, because he proved the man,
Who, first of Emperors, the Title wan,
And great surname of Great. Then let it be,
An omen apt, that mankindes Chief, in thee,
The chief of Cities, should be happy born:
Which, boding nothing, yet does both adorn.
But if she had not heretofore been taught,
That stately style, now certainly she ought,
When royal Charles the British empire swayes.
London, which royal Lud did newly raise,
And newly name, now ought Augusta be,
Well able to make good that old decree.
The world too narrow for the same she bears,
With lofty crest she roll's the heavenly spheres.
Then, 'till the Thames shall cease to ebb, and flow,
The ground to bear, and skies about to go,
(The heavens, and earth to her most freindly both)
Aeternall flowers the state thereof shall cloth,
Far (if God will) beyond the reach of spite,
And, never braver, is Augusta right.
FINIS.

