A IVDGEMENT OR A DEFINITION OF THE VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE CHVRCH OF OUR LORD
JESUS CHRIST.

By J. D.

CANTICLES 1.5. J am black, but comely (O ye Daughters of Jerusalem.

CANT. 4.7. Thou art fair, my Love; there is no spot in thee.

PSALM. 45.13. The Kings Daughter is all glorious within; her clothing is of
wrought Gold.

Printed in the Year, 1641.

THE CHVRCHES OVTVVARD BEING AND INWARD GLORY LAID OPEN.
A Church is of none but those which are called of God, (to Define it) It is a
company of Believers, and regenerate persons, which God gathers together in
Christ, by the Word in the holy Ghost, and the Ministers governing the same,
with pureness of Doctrine, with lawful use of the Sacraments, and with
Discipline; and it is called the body of Christ; these members have him for
their Head, from whom by their joints and synewes, they take their growing, and
attain unto life by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost; for these members are
so thoroughly joined, as they are called Flesh of his flesh, and bone of his
bone, Ephesians. 5.30.

It is true, in assemblies there be those that mingle among the Saints of God,
nay, very many which be strangers from Christ, and these in show only, not
indeed, do belong unto the Church. Wherefore of them the Apostle John says,
They went out from us, but were not of us. The Apostle Paul in the first
Chapter of the Corinthians, the first Epistle, after he had saluted the Church
of God, added by exposition unto them which are sanctified by Jesus Christ,
called to be Saints. That we may understand in very deed that the wicked
appertain not to the Church, although they be always conversant therein. And
this we may confess to be a true Church, which are called the Communion of
Saints. There be some of our times, nay, questionless many of Gods Children
conclude, that the true Church is not to be known as they are mixed together;
but we may deny it to be a firm conclusion. There be proper marks assigned, by
which the same may be very well known, without the separate Assemblies, for
whereby the pureness of doctrine flourishes, the Sacraments are purely
ministered, and Discipline exercised, that is a Congregation whereby we may
safely join our selves, although the honesty of every particular man, is not
sufficiently known unto thee.

Neither is it of necessity required, that the godly should be discerned of
men, what manner of persons they be while they live here. Christ while he lived
here, was not known among mortal men: and we, as the Apostle does declare
unto the Colossians, Chapter 3. verse. 3.4. We have our life hidden with God,
and when Christ which is our life shall appear, then we also shall be made
manifest with him in glory.

We read in the first Book of Samuel. 16.7. It is God that looks into the
heart; therefore it is but an unadvised thought, that because the wicked do
frequent in place with the godly, that they should be the members of Christ. We
may as well say, a dead man, is a man. I do confess indeed, by Christ, and by
the Holy Ghost, he may be restored unto life, but in the mean time, while that
is not done, we will not grant him to be the member of Christ, unless we
should judge by the form and outward show. Some may perhaps say, how Paul
might truly call the Church of the Corinthians, and Church of God; the which
was so infected with so many vices. But it may be understood, that all they
which were there, were not utterly corrupted, many good men remained.

Further, they were instructed with pure doctrine, and they retained the
Sacraments holy and purely; and the godly labored much about the converting of
them; for we know that Paul was admonished by them of Cloas, That he should
prevent the evils that were then breaking forth, 1 Corinthians. 1.11. Besides,
Paul had a respect to the testimony of God, who had said unto him, that in the
same City he had much people. Moreover, by this you may understand, that the
Church of God, does not so fall away for every blemish, as that it should no
more be called the Church of God.

And because now adays, the Prelates of our times, have opposed the rules of
Christ, which he has laid down by his Word, how his members should be
governed. But this precious Word, the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, these
Prelates, I mean, these Primate Metropolitans, and the rest of that function,
those that have made nothing of the blood of Christ, in persecuting his
members, and trampling the Lord of life under foot. The Lord furnish his
Saints, with an infinite power in their Spirits, that by the Spirit of the
Lord, they may cry mightily, that he hearing them, this work of Reformation,
may be to the Saints happiness, and Gods great glory. And the people of God by
that light which may and has been discovered by the glorious Gospel, do see
how they have labored to seduce the Church, in fashioning Christ according to
their Idolatrous Will Worship. But blessed be the Lord Christ; I say, blessed
be Michael and his Angels, which have overcome the Dragon and his Angels. And
does appear to us as a glorious Christ, showing himself, how willing he is to
reform us, if we by sin do not cause him to turn away his face, and carry
away all the hopes we have of our Reformation. I beseech the Lord, it may not
be said of us, as it was of those people of the Jews, Jeremiah 5.31. The
Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means, and my
people love to have it so; love to have no reformation; But what will become of
us in the end thereof?

O that the Lord would take away that great hindrance of our Reformation in
this Land, which is sin, and daily discover unto us the truth of the Gospel,
which is the greatest means of our salvation, that the Lord Christ's bodily
members may behold his glory more and more; which is not yet without spot or
wrinkle, but in that day when the great Bishop of our souls, the Lord Christ,
our Mediator shall appear, we beholding his glorious person, standing ready to
reward every man according to his works; and at that day his Church shall be a
glorious Church, without spot or wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.27. Then shall we behold
Christ overcoming all his enemies.

But dissentions in this outward estate of the Churches being here on earth
were never rooted out yet, and many Christians we have now adays wandering
from the Church of England, as if there were never dissension in the Church of
God. Consider, the people of Israel, which was the Church of God, oftentimes
would have killed Moses, Exodus 7.4. Numb. 14.10. 16. 1. diverse other places I
could express.

And in the New Testament of Christ, upon that Church of the Corinthians, 1.5.
The which is very much commended by Paul, saying that they were instructers of
Wisdom, and in the Word. Were they quiet among themselves? No; there were
schisms among them; Some held of Paul, some of Apollo, some of Peter. But you
may say, they disagreed not touching matters of weight: many were of that
point, that they thought simple fornication was no sin: so that it behoved
Paul, to instruct them concerning the same, 1 Cor. 6.12.

Wherein then appears the Churches glory? It is more inwardly glorious; her
glory is more Internal, than External. As there is a twofold state of the
Church, the outward I have discovered to you already, standing in visible
Assemblies, in the public Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, in external
Discipline, and Government. So now I pitch upon the Inward, the Invisible
estate of the Church; this estate stands in the true knowledge of God in
Christ; in comforts touching remission of sins, and life everlasting, in the
gifts of grace, and of the Spirit, and of Gods protection. And in this respect,
she is right glorious, yea, a most glorious Church; for what glory is it to
have a painted outside, and a most deformed inside. Take a Tomb gilded
outwardly, but within full of dead men's bones, Math. 23.27. It is the inward
virtue which God requires; My son give me thy heart, Prove. 23.26. He desires
truth in the inward parts, and in the hidden parts thou shall make me to know
wisdom, Psalm. 51.1.6. It is this Inward glory which the Lord requires, and
does respect; The inward ornament of a meek and quiet spirit in the sight of
God, is of great price, 1 Pet. 3.4. This inward beauty of the Church, what
tongue of man can sufficiently express it, it is but a glimpse hereof. All
that I can say, or express to you, we may note in these seven degrees.

First, The Churches inward glory, it has the possesson of Gods word, and the
acknowledgment of the true God, Deuteronomy. 4.7.8. What Nation is so great, that has
God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is unto us; What Nation is so great
and glorious, that has statutes so righteous, as all these Laws, Psalm.
147.19, 20. He has showed his Word unto Jacob, his statutes, and his
judgments unto Israel; he has not dealt so with any Nation.

Secondly, The confidence in prayer, and his assured love, in hearing her
prayers, Romans 5.15. We have received the spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry
Abba, Father; Whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, Joh. 3.22.

Thirdly, Perpetual Preservation in the midst of all affliction: Mat. 16.18.
The gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Isa. 43.2. When thou passest
through the waters, I will be with thee, and when thou walk through the
fire, the fire shall not hurt thee.

Fourthly, To it belongs the Covenant of promise; Romans 9.4. It has a more
sure word of promise, 2 Pet. 1.19.

Fifthly, It is adorned with the gracious gifts of the Spirit; as, love, joy,
peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance,
Gal. 5.22. The world is not worthy of them, Heb. 11.38.

Sixthly, It is secure and void of fear, We will not fear though the earth
be moved, and though the mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea, Psalm.
46.2. They have the peace of conscience, which passes all understanding, Phil.
4.7.

Seventhly, It has inheritance of life everlasting, and the promise of
endless glory; They are heirs according to the hope of eternal glory, of a
better life, 2 Cor. 4.17.

This is the Churches Inward glory; Let us strive to make as great show as we
will of perfection in this world, if we are not members of this glorious
Church, we are lost, and must abide in a gall of bitterness for ever; but
those that are of this glorious Church, shall obtain this pureness. Now
because of the Inward glory, notwithstanding the outward blemish and defects,
it is esteemed glorious; as the Prophet says, Psalm. 45.13. She is all
glorious within: and so in Canticles fourth Chapter, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
Behold, thou art fair, my Love, and so forward, you may read sweet
expressions of uniting Love, that passes between the Lord Christ, and his
Espoused Bride, the Church; As in the seventh verse, he concludes, Thou art
fair, my Love, and there is no spot in thee. No spot, how can that be, seeing
the Church it self acknowledges its own blackness, Cant. 1.8. and her own
drowsinesse, Cant. 5.2.

But she is all glorious;

First, in regard of Christ's imputation, he gave himself for her, that he
might sanctify her and cleanse her with the washing of water by the Word, that
he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle,
or any such defect, but that it should be holy, and without blemish, Ephesians.
5.26.27.

Secondly, In respect of Gods acceptance, Seeing thou wast precious in my
sight, thou have been honored, and I have loved thee, Isa. 43.4.

Thirdly, In regard of the future glorification of it, it shall be full of
glory, Revel. 21.23.

Now we see this point of the Churches glory discovered; and we see the Church
what it is, and so by consequence, a particular Church is a glorious Church, if
it has Inward soundness, although it be not wholly freed from outward
blemishes. Therefore this does condemn some spirits of the times, that do
rail too much, not looking upon GODS great Work, which do not labor with
their prayers, to cry to the Lord, to finish his own Work. Would they would
discern between the substance and the circumstance, between doctrine and
manners, between the outward hue, and the inward beauty, but it cannot be,
because of many evils, therefore no true Church. If that blackness of the
tyranny of these Prelates, as we hope they shall not mar the Churches
foundation, nay, if they do it, it shall be a glorious Church in Gods
estimation. You see as before the Church of Corinth was a true Church,
notwithstanding her manifold disorders. The Church of Ephesus was a true Church
notwithstanding her declining, Rev. 2.4. The Church of Pergamus was a true
Church, notwithstanding she was sealed even In Satan's circuit, and pestred
with the devilish sect of Balaamites and Nicholaitans, Revel. 2.13, 14, 15. So
was Thyatira, notwithstanding her Jezabelising, Revel. 2.20. So was Sardis,
notwithstanding her lukewarmenesse, poverty, and nakedness, Revel. 3.16, 17.
Has not the brightest day his Cloud, the finest Laune his brack, the purest
gold his dross. Is there or was there ever any Church in the world, that might
not be tainted with some imperfection. Deny as well they may, there is no Sun
in the Firmament, because it is sometimes over-clouded, (and no soul within
that body, which outwardly is deformed.) And let this be our comfort, although
we are far from perfection in this life. Sanctification in any thing else,
all sinning, James 3.7. Having the flesh lusting against the Spirit, and the
Spirit against the flesh, Gal. 5.17. Though here we cannot wholly be freed from
spot and blot, yet so long as we delight in the Laws of God, concerning the
Inward man, Romans 7.22. and strive forward toward the mark of the price of the
high calling of God in Christ, Phil. 3.14. We have a gracious Father, who will
spare us as a man spares his own son that serves him, Mala. 3.17. We have
an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the just, who is the reconciliation
for our sins, 1 John 2.12. In him we are presented to God without spot or
wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.27. and for his sake in Gods sight we are all glorious. Which
I beseech the LORD, that all the Saints of God, whether Paul, or Apollo, or
Cephas, or the world, or life or death, or things present, or things to come,
all may be ours, and we Christ's, as Christ is Gods.

FINIS.

