A Disengaged Survey OF THE Engagement. In relation to public Obligations.

1. Precedent, 2. Present,
In the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, the Protestation, and Covenant, and
under the present juncture of affairs.

Bucer in Romans 13. Summun jus omnium potestatum, regum, principum, and
Magistratuum in eo situmest, quod a Deo ordinatae sunt. Et hujus ordination is
Vnum and indubitatum (...) est, esse potestates.

Pacem debet habere voluntas bellum necessitas. Aug.

If it be POSSIBLE, as much as lies in YOU, live peaceably with all men. Romans
12.18.

London printed for John Wright, at the Kings Head in the Old-Bayley. 1650.

A Disengaged Survey OF THE Engagement, IN Relation to public Obligations.
FUlly to satisfy Conscience concerning the present Engagement, two Questions
would be propounded and cleared.

1. Whether ex Licito of right we may subscribe when called to it. 2. Whether ex
dibito of duty we must subscribe when called to it.
For as we sin by way of Commission if we subscribe, when of right we ought
not: so we sin by way of Omission if we subscribe not when of duty we ought
to do it. The reason of the first Question is, because it is objected that we
are under the obligation of precedent Engagements, which bear a contrariety to
the present. The reason of the second is, because it is asserted that the
present Engagement comes to us in the name of Authority, and as an Act in law.
The first reason stands upon (...), First the Contrariety: Secondly the
Obligation. Of these neither can stand if either fail, but both, with the
whole weight of the objection must of necessity fall to the ground. For if
those former Engagements be either contrary, but not binding; or bindding, buy
not contrary, nothing can hinder but that we may as lawfully subscribe the
present Engagement as if they were neither binding nor contrary.

The former Engagements which minister matter of scruple concerning the
present, are the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, the Protestation and
Covenant.

The Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy considered.
The first scruple arises from the Oaths of Allegiance, and Supremacy; both in
effect one. Their parts are two 1. Declaratory. 2, Promissory. The Declaratory
part consisting of an Act merely transient leaves no ground of doubt; the
Promissory part is only scrupled, and therein the word Heirs (or as the Oath
of Supremacy) Lawful beires and Successors, for what concerned the King is
extinct with his person.

The doubt may be thus stated, Whether a promise made and sworn to bear faith
and true Allegiance to, id est. (as it is afterward interpreted) to defend the
Kings lawful heirs and Successors, their Crown and dignity, to uttermost
power, be not contrary to and obliging against a promise to be true and
faithful to the Commonwealth as it is now established without a King? for the
Lords in this place signify nothing.

The parts of the quere are two. 1. the Contrariety, 2, the Obligation. And
first for satisfaction to the point of Contrariety. It may be considered that
all Oaths being to be taken in their sense that give them, the intention of the
first giver, must certainly be the most proper key to open their true meaning.
And therefore such subsequent emergencies, as at first had no place in the
intention of the giver, ought not afterward to be scru'd into the meaning of
an Oath; seeing they do not properly fall under it, but rather beyond, or
beside it. Now the intention of the giver will appear from two things. First,
from the Occasion. Secondly, From the equity of the Oath. The one shows us what
first was; the other, what still should be in the intent of the giver. And
first for the occasion, it is evident concerning the present Oaths, that they
were at first occasioned by, and by consequence intended against the frequent
and pernicious attempts of Papists chiefly, and collaterally other
Delinquents, by foreign invasions and domesticke Conspiracies, against the
then peaceably established Princes in Conjunction with Parliaments; And
certainly that Parliaments should provide by Oath, for the security of Princes
joining with Parliaments, against Papists and other Delinquents, is but reason
and justice: but that the same provision should also intend Princes joining
with Papists and other Delinquents, against Parliaments, or their Heirs and
Successors, in courses of that nature, can no way stand with either. Fortis
plain that such case neither did, could, nor ought to fall under the intention
of the Legislators; and therefore must fall beyond and beside the meaning of
these Oaths. So that when Princes prove untrue, and unfaithful to their
places; it is of right that we may, and of duty, that we must be true and
faithful to the Commonwealth, though established without them, (yea and bless
God that we have an establishment) notwithstanding any thing really intended;
however pretended, in these Oaths to the contrary.

Secondly, It is to be considered, that where the Letter binds to a thing
that is dubious, and cannot stand with reason and justice, not it, but the
equity of a Law is to be regarded. In omni dubio praesumendum est pro aquitale
legis. And the reason is, because the Letter is variable; but the equity is
immutable and eternal. Now it is impossible that two pretending to the (...) or
public authority, commanding things contrary, should both command things just
at once in the same place; and therefore the equity of the Law (in which both
the precedent and present engagements agree) requires us (in order of the Salus
of that Society, whereof we are Members) to be true and faithful to the
obtaining (...) or public authority, commanding things lawful and just,
because in the peace thereof, our selves shall have Peace. And the truth of
this will further appear, if we consider that the obligation in the Oaths
scrupled, so far as it concerns the persons, must be taken only Conjunction
with the Crown and Dignity. i. e. the (...) or public authority, because the
formalis ratio, under which they are capable either of requiring, or receiving
the performance, is, qua invested with the (...) or public authority; for the
persons that act the Authority, give nothing to, but take all from it; and
therefore without it, are not the formal object, to whom the obligation ought
to be performed. Whereupon it follows, that in case the King, his Heirs, and
Successors shall divide, and separate their persons from the Crown and Dignity;
and prostitute them to the patronage of the most opposite indignities, they put
themselves into an incapacity of receiving the obligation, in the Oaths in
question. Which division and separation; The Parliaments of both Nations have
long since declared to have been the case of the Father, and the Kirk of
Scotland have lately declared to be the case of the Son. And indeed upon this
account, it was that when the person of the King removed with Papists, and
Delinquents to Oxford; the conscientious of the Nation thought it their duty*
(notwithstanding any obligations in the Oaths now scrupled, and then pretended
by the other side, to the contrary) to abide with the Crown and dignity at
Westminster. judging it more agreeable to their Obligation in the Oaths mentioned;
thus to keep it in the intention and equity, by seemingly breaking it (if it
must needs be called so) in some part of the expression and letter; then
otherwise really to break it upon a bare pretense of keeping it. Although now
(such is the power of passion, or interest, or both) some of the same persons
could almost persuade themselves, that the Crown and Dignity which remained at
Westminster, while the person of the late King kept Garrison at Oxford, has of
late (I know not by what wind) taken sail for the I Will of Jersey, which if in
any thing it differ from Oxford, it is in this; That as it has not any more of
the thing, so it has much less (if any thing at all) of the appearance of the
Crown and Dignity. For really if men were free to use their own reason, they
might easily discern that as to the Crown and Dignity in a right acceptance,
neither is any thing present THERE, nor any thing absent HERE, but an empty
name. Neither certainly can any satisfactory reason be given, why we may not
with as little contrariety to the present Oaths, Master Pym's speech at a
conference.
promise to be true and faithful to the Commonwealth, as now established
without a King, as formerly engage to, and with the Parliament exercising the
(...) or public Authority wholly without him; Votes against Hamiltons Army
yea and in some things without the Lords. And which comes up fully to the
present case, avowing the doing the like in all cases, if they should find it
requisite for the good and safety of the Nation. And if it shall be objected,
that however they never changed the Government, but left a door open for the
King to enter in at; It Is answered in the first place, That makes the matter
worse, rather then better; for to acknowledge a part of the (...) or public
Authority in the King, and to make addresses to him accordingly, and yet to
exercise the whole wholly without him, however it could not, the cause duly
considered, render such Engagements any thing the less lawful, yet it could
not (at the first appeareance) but render them so much the more doubtful; and
the adverse party constantly endeavored to make advantage of it accordingly.

Secondly, As they left a door open, so they prepared suficient locks for that
door, and (not without cause neither) to shut him up fast enough when entered;
so as he had as much share in the (...) or public authority, without doors,
as he was like to have had within. But to speak the truth in plain English,
or rather Scottish; has not the Kirk of Scotland lately told their proclaimed
King, that unless he intend to be forever shut out, he must make his entrance
into that Kingdom, by the door of the Covenant, and an universal compliance
with the religious Party there. Which when it shall be cordially performed,
with a Demonstration of the sincerity thereof, clear and convincing, then
there may be some show perhaps of a ground to scruple the point in hand, but
till then it may well become all peaceably godly men, not to scruple, to
promise to be true and faithful to the present Government, until they see a
better; for at present, there appears none other; and if that return which is
by some desired, it is like to prove worse, (if there can be a worse) then none?

The result of all that has been said, is, That the r^-Oathes of Allegiance,
and Supremacy, so far as they are binding, which is according to the
legislators intention, and their own equity, are not contrary to the present
Engagement; but as in the one respect not contra, but praeter, so in the other
neither, but rather full for it: which may satisfy as to the point of
contrariety.

The second part of the quaere, was concerning the Obligation of the premised
Oaths; And it is whether bindging or not binding, so far as it crosses the
present Engagement. In which Particular to arrive at the truth; we must set out
at the consideration of such cases as have power to null the Obligation of an
Oath. Not to speak of any but what are pertinent, and unquestionable; When the
performance becomes either; First, unlawful: or Secondly, Impossible. In these
two cases the obligation is rendered null. For as to bind to what ought not to
be done, makes sin a duty; so to bind to what cannot be done, makes duty a
sin; because it is a duty that the creature as well willingly, as of necessity,
contain himself within those lists, wherewith, in actions of this nature, the
providence of God, ordering things contingent to us, by a power and wisdom
infinitely above us, contrary to our expectations, is pleased to circumscribe
it.

The unlawfulness may arise two ways, either in respect of the persons first
to to whom; or secondly, by whom, the Obligation is to be performed. First, to
whom, As put case a Ship designed to public service, putting forth to Sea,
the whole company (other Officers and Mariners) swear to be true and
faithful to the Captain, and to defend his person, Place and Authority.
Afterward the Captain with others of the company, forsake their own Vessel,
and shipping themselves with the common Enemy; the Captain require the rest of
the company, with their Ship to attend his person, and submit to his authority,
by virtue of the Obligation of the former Oath: Mean while the other Officers
joining together in the Government of the Ship, require the rest of the
Mariners to enter into an engagement, to be true and faithful to the public
service under their Government. Can it be doubted that the obligation of the
first Oath, in this case became null? And need it be scrupled, whether it be
lawful to enter into the second? And is not the reason evident, because if the
former Oath should oblige in the letter, against the intention and equity; a
necessity would be laid upon them by pretended fidelity to their late Captain,
to be really false to their Country. Now a Ship being as it were a little
Commonwealth, and a Commonwealth, no other but a great Ship; the application
will need no explication, especially the case to which the allusion looks being
sufficienty known, and decided both by God and Man.

Secondly, The performance may be unlawful, and consequently the obligation
null in respect of those by whom it is to be performed: And that in two cases,
when way must be made to the performance by them; either first through the
Commission of a greater evil, then the nonperformance. Or secondly, through
the omission of a greater good, then the performance.

For first, if no Obligation can bind to that which is evil, much less of two
evils, can it bind to the greater. And therefore when God has given a Nation
the substantials of Government, Righteousness and Peace, to throw them into
blood and confusion, for that which is but a circumstantial (or scarce so much)
the bare Title of a pretender, is that which the world by sad experience can
witness to be the continued practice of tyranicall Princes, but never can be
proved, to be the duty of true Christians, upon pretense of any obligation
whatsoever. Neither can it be denied, that in such a case, were the cause of
the pretender never so just, yet it were not to be prosecuted by a cruelty so
unjust; but rather in reason and Religion (if either could be expected from
such) a strong obligation would lie upon him, to desist from his claim; but
not the least show of any obligation upon that people, by means so
inconsistent with humanity, to be assisting (not so much to his cause, in a
condition so desperate) as to their own miserable and unavoidable ruin. But
then put case the pretenders cause be unjust in it self, how desperately
wicked will it be rendered by the accession of that guilt which will eternally
cleave unto it by so horrid a prosecution! Were the nonperformance of such an
Obligation, to such a pretender in regard of the justness of his cause evil,
as was said before, yet it ought to be chosen before an evil, so beyond all
controversy greater; But when not the nonperformance, but the performance is
the evil (as it is in an unjust cause) then it is to endeavor to set the Crown
upon the head of wickedness, and by a violence no less bloody then unjust to
attempt, to place unjustice in the throne of righteousness. Concerning the
cause of the present Pretender, continuing in those ways wherein he is so
deeply and desperately engaged, there needs no more but this, if it be (as
certainly it is) the same now that was at first; it either then was unjustly,
or now may be as justly, as formerly opposed.

But secondly, An Obligation may be rendered Null, because unlawful, when the
performance cannot be, but by omission of a greater good; that is, Of a duty
more immediately necessary. It Is of immediate necessity that there be a
Government; a duty immediately necessary, that they that live under it, be true
and faithful to it; otherwise neither Governors nor Government can be
secured against fraud and force, in the discharge of their duty; but that this
Government must be continued; because once begun in the name of such a Family,
though entering and possessing the place with approved justice, is no way
necessary; no nor when providence has otherwise determined it, lawful, for
the Kingdoms of the Earth are the Lords, and he gives them to whomsoever he
pleases; neither can any Obligation bind against his determination; which
appears to us only by external providence. For secret things belong to God,
but to us things revealed. And whereby can providence reveal the mind of God
^ore clearly, then by devesting the former, and investing the present
Governors; with the plenary possession of the (...), that public Authority,
which is the foundation and formal object of all public Obligations of this
nature, which we are there, and there only to perform where the Almighty, who
is the Lord Paramount, shall be pleased to fix it. Wherefore to neglect a
present duty by an overruling providence fastened upon us, upon pretense of
ormer obligations to the contrary, when notwithstanding, God has razed the
foundations of those Obligations; what can it be but to rebel against the
Ordinances, out only of men, but of God himself, against the universal good
(with the universal confusion, if not ruin) of a Nation, against our
Obligation, to that (...) that public Authority, under whose shadow we sit
down in peace, and may (if our own frowardness hinder not) enjoy all the
Ordinances of Righteousness, both divine and humane; and in a word, against
that gratitude and obedience which we owe to divine dispensations. To conclude;
if the bare Title of a Pretender though just, cannot oblige against an
immediate and necessary duty to present authority; much less where the cause
is doubtful, or apparently unjust: Seeing that were to pull down that ruin
upon our own heads, (by our own breach of duty) from which a divine hand has
in mercy rescued us, without leaving our selves the excuse of so much at a good
intention. Which whether it be the present case let the impartial judge.

The second thing which nulls the Obligation of an Oath, is the Impossibility
of performance. Nemo tenetur ad impossibilia. To which beside what has been
said, as to the unlawfulness (for id tantum possumus quod jure possumus) Upon
which ground the limitation in the Oaths scrupled to uttermost power) was
inserted. We may then lawfully conclude, that God has shut men up under an
impossibility, when he has not only deprived them of all natural means and
power, but also destroyed the foundotion, upon which the Obligation was built,
and substituted another in its stead. And this also is more evident in the
present case, then to need a demonstration, which yet will be more fully
evinc't, when we come to speak of the present Authority.

And so we have done with the Oaths of Allegiance, and Supremacy, wherein we
havee been the more large, because all that is scrupled in the other
Engagements, save what concerns the Privileges of Parliament, is built upon
the same foundation.

The Protest. considered.
The next Scandal at which Conscience sticks, and until it be removed, cannot
find its way clear to enter into the present Engagement, is taken from the
Protestation and Covenant. And first for the Protestation; It promises the
preservation and defense of five particulars: The Doctrine of the Church of
England, The Kings Person, Honor and Estate, The Power and Privileges of
Parliament, The Rights and Liberties of the Subject, and lastly, The Union and
Peace of the three Kingdoms; But with this limitation, To the power of the
party protesting, and as far as lawfully he may. The first, the last, and the
second Branch (so far as it concerns the Person of the King) are not here at
all concerned. What concerns the Kings Honor and Estate, if it be to be
understood of the Heirs of his Person, has already been considered in the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy. Neither may we, by the express Limits of
the present Protestation, lawfully defend them in ways long since and still
condemned for unlawful; or not lawfully be true and faithful to the
Commonwealth without them, when their own posture will not admit us to be
true and faithful (in a right sense) to them with it. But if it be (as in
reason it may be) understood of the Public Authority, resulting from, and
exercised by the Laws of the Nation, it is involved in the Commonwealth, and
so this Branch in effect speaks the same Language with the Engagement. And for
the thied and fourth: First, in a general consideration (if the substance of
things, not circumstance of persons, be, as they must be, principally minded)
why the Power and Privileges of Parliament should not be capable of the
firmest preservation and fullest improvement, without a King or House of Lords
(especially proving opposite) cannot easily sink into the head of any
impartial man, that shall without prejudice consult the free vote of his own
reason, together with the constant experience of former times. For it is reason
to believe, That the Lords Temporal (in this personal consideration) are no
more essential to the Power of Parliaments, then the Lords Spiritual, nor the
King, then either. And what can be more plain, if we consider that in the
Coronation Oath, the Office of the King (and the Lords his Creatures have for
the most part the same) is neither to enact nor repeal Laws, save only by
giving ( pro forma, for he is bound by Oath to do it) his consent to both; both
which (things thus standing) necessarily must, and possibly may be done without
them, with more expedition and advantage, and less delay and difficulty. For
it is well known, though by ill experience, that both King and Lords, partly by
assuming to themselves in the House of Peers, an Arbitrary Jurisdiction over
the Persons and Estates of the free People of this Nation; and partly by the
perverse Engine of a Negative Voice, have exercised a power of their own, to
enervate at their pleasure the power of Parliaments, both obstructing the
progress of the best Laws, and measuring out the Rights and Liberties of the
People, by the Line of their own Wills and Interests. It remains that to a
real and substantial observation of these two Branches (especially when the
circumstantiall is not in our power) no better way appears then cordially to
enter into the present Engagement. For from what has last been said, thus much
doubtless may with sufficient evidence of truth be affirmed, That the Power of
Parliaments abstractly considered, and the Rights and Liberties of the People,
may be preserved and defended by being true and faithful to the Commonwealth
without (at least) AS WELL as with a King or House of Lords; and if the present
Juncture of affairs will not admit it to be done with them, it not only may,
but must be done without them; else it were to throw away the substance,
because the circumstance cannot be preserved. But secondly, the only question
therefore being concerning the Privileges as vesting some part of the exercise
of the Power in the King and House of Lords, for there is nothing in the
present Engagement, but what makes rather for then against the Preservation and
Defense of other Privileges. And first for that part which concerns the King,
it referres to what has formerly been considered in the preceding Discourse,
and shall be further in the succeeding, when we come to the Covenant, as being
more express in that particular. The true state of the question therefore will
only be: Whether having protested to preserve the Privileges of Parliament,
and by consequence inclusively the House of Lords, to our power, and so far as
lawfully we may; whether, I say, we may without breach of Protestation, promise
to be true and faithful to the Commonwealth without them? Now to come to a
clear resolution in the question; first let it be observed, that the present
Protestation supposes the House of Lords actually in BEING, and accordingly the
promise is to preserve and defend it. Neither is it possible to perform such a
promise to that which IS NOT. And this is generally observable concerning the
Engagements scrupled, that they all promise a preservation and defense of
things as in BEING, not as surceasing to BE. Wherefore to conclude, either the
House of Lords is not now actually in BEING, and then it must be a strong
obligation indeed, that shall bind to preserve and defend that which is not:
Or if it have yet a being, why does it not appear? why is it not operative?
for Non apparere and non operari sunt nec esse. To us, what appears not, acts
not, IS NOT. Now to be true and faithful to that which is not, and not to be
true and faithful to that which is; but by being untrue and unfaithful to
that which is, to be true and faithful to that which is not; is such a riddle
of absurdities, as I know no solution fitter to be given it then this: That the
only way to be true and faithful in preserving that which is not, is not to
do any thing in its preservation; and so there may be a freedom left to be
true and faithful to that which is.

But secondly, put case the House of Lords were in a capacity of receiving, it
must further be shown that the obliged also are in a capacity of giving their
assistance in order to their preservation and defense. Now where is that power
Natural or Moral, that warrant from Authority Divine or Humane, by which they
may be armed both with might and right sufficient for such a work? If there be
any, why is it not used? if there be none, why is the Obligation of this and
other Engagements urged, which bind the obliged but to their power, and so far
as lawfully they may? And lastly, if they be free in this respect from others,
why not free to the present Engagement?

Thirdly, supposing there were both might and right sufficient; it would still
remain a question, Whether we might (or rather it would be out of question,
that we might not) enter into blood to contend against the substance, the
Authority, and peace of the Nation, for a circumstance (the exercise of some
part of that Authority by some peculiary persons in such a peculiar manner) a
circumstance I say so much out of our power, as it is not a little doubtful
whether it will ever be within, or (if so) any way worth our recovery at so
dear a rate. Beside in such a wretched, if not wicked pursuit of a
circumstance, we run the present loss of the substance, the Government and
peace, under which Providence has placed us, and with so gracious a hand, that
we feel not any want of the Circumstance lost, but rather enjoy the benefit of
our loss, a freedom from the superfluous and unnecessary burdens of an
Arbitrary Jurisdiction, and the obstructions of a Negative Voice.

Lastly, if there may be a Delinquency deserving a dissolution, what might be
thought of theirs, who have in the face of the Nation refused to dis-owne and
declare against an Army of Forraigners in the bowels thereof, dis-own'd and
declared against not only by the Kirk of Scotland, and all the well-affected
there, but also by the Commons in Parliament here, and owned them by Votes,
etc. made public to the view of the whole world? And thus far shall suffice
to have considered the Protestation.

The Covenant considered.
In the last place, among former Engagements, though not least urged against the
present, comes the Solemn League and Covenant, and the Scruples therein. The
occasion seems to be taken from some expressions in the Preamble and the third
Article: For the Covenanters having in the Preamble professed an intention to
advance the Honor and Happiness of the King and his Posterity; and in the
third Article, no intention to diminish his just Power and Greatness; and
covenanted to preserve and defend his Person and Authority; apprehend that they
cannot with truth and faithfulness to the Covenant in these particulars,
promise to be true and faithful to the Commonwealth without a King. This is
the first scruple. Now that we may come to a right understanding in the
Premises, it would be soberly considered, that from present intentions to
positive execution, in things de futuro, and of a contingent nature, we may not
draw conclusions absolute and peremptory; but with subordination to the Divine
Majesty, many times contrary to our expectations, by an overruling power,
Wisdom and goodness interposing. Man purposes but God disposes, and
frequently things fall out between the intention and execution, which may
justly alter the one, and hinder the other, by rendering the performance either
unlawful or impossible: Neither is an intention simply as such an Obligation.
Wherefore that in this case we may come to a clear issue, two things would be
remembered: First, That there is a tacit condition necessarily implied in all
intentionall Promises. Secondly, That there is an express limitation annexed
with this. Was it not upon the account of a tacit condition, that Solomon when
he had promised his Mother not to refuse her request, not only refused to
perform his promise, but vowed the capital punishment of the party for whom
the request was made, 1 Kin. 2.20, 24. And certainly if (in a case of the like
nature) Herod had denied the Baptists head, he had been true to his duty,
without being false to his Oath. It Is true therefore, the intent of the
Covenanters was, to advance the honor and happiness of the King and his
Posterity; but with this condition, That in their respective capacities they
should cooperate and assist, at least, not obstinately persist to resist the
effectual means thereunto conducing. For what were it but to put our selves
upon a contradictory impossibility, if we should intend the honor and
happiness of persons in ways directly opposite to, and inconsistent with
either. It Is said, Luke 7.30. That the Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the
Council of God against themselves: And may not the Councels of men concerning
the honor and happiness of others, though never so really intended, be much
more rejected by them against themselves? Shall the real intention of the
Phisician, for the recovery of his Patient be questioned; if the Patient
obstinately join with the distemper of his disease, against the advice of the
Phisician to his own ruin? But secondly, What if the King and his posterity
will not be so true and faithful, as could be wished, to their own honor and
happiness; must that hinder us from being true and faithful to the honor and
happiness of the Commonwealth without them? Must the Commonwealth be
miserable, because they will not be happy? What if nothing will content others,
but an unjust power and greatness; must the Commonwealth loose any part of its
greatness, for want of the exercise of a just power, which may be a terror to
evil doers, and apraise to them that do well? And can any thing be more equal
and reasonable, then that they that are careful to see this just power
executed, should be secured against turbulent spirits, and practices in the
execution of this power, not only just but necessary? The truth is, this is so
far from being a question in the true intent and meaning of the Covenant,
That the Covenant it self puts it clearly out of question, as will evidently
appear, if in the second place we consider the limitation annexed. For when the
Covenanters profess in the preamble, that they enter into this Covenant,
having before their eyes, the honor and happiness of the King, and his
posterity, it follows conjunctim, and the true public liberty, safety, and
peace of the Kingdoms. And accordingly in the third Article (which mutually
interprets, and is interpreted by the preamble) they engage to preserve and
defend the Kings person and authority, but how? In the preservation and defense
of the liberties of the Kingdom.

Upon the foundation of which expressions, we may fairly and firmly raise a
twofold conclusion. First, That according to the sense of the Covenant, the
liberties of the Kingdom are the greater, and more worthy part of this branch:
and secondly, That thererefore they ought to have the precedence, in point of
preservation and defense; For that which comprehends, is greater then that
which is comprehended; and that which limits is greater, and more excellent
then that which is limited; and by consequence in case of competition to be
preferred before it. When therefore persons engage for the discharge of duties
different in their worths, but yet consistent in their performance, at the time
of Engagements; if in process of time they shall prove wholly inconsistent;
both reason and Religion, and the Covenant accordingly obliges to prefer the
more excellent and necessary, with the rejection of the lesser. And so we are
come home to the present Case. For the Conscientious of the Nation after, yea
and by the taking of the Covenant, accounted themselves obliged to preserve and
defend the liberties of the Kingdom, without the Conjunction of, and against
the opposition made by the King, and his personal authority, and acted
accordingly. In short then, it is true, that at the entering into Covenant, such
was the modesty and charity of the Covenanters, that they hoped and desired,
and with a faithfulness answerable, a long time endeavored, a compliance
between the King and the peoples concernments. But now, after much patience,
being clearly convinced of their absolute inconsistencie, (if the pertinacious
opposition of the Father deceased; and the pernicious proceedings of the living
Son may be believed) no wonder if at last they think it time, to neglect what
has so long, but in vain been expected; and provide for what must no longer,
if it might be so long neglected, the true public liberty, safety, and peace
of the Nation, though (with as much justice as necessiity) without the
concurrence of the active constant and implacable opposers thereof; which
according to the Covenant is the chief; and according to the present juncture
of affairs, the only duty in their power. And why all that follow peace with
holiness, should not contribute their parts, to the preservation and defense
of that true public liberty, safety, and peace of the Nation, mentioned in the
preamble of this Covenant, by promising to be true and faithful to the
Commonwealth, wherein (if any where) it is now involved, though without a King
or House of Lords; Why, I say, they would not thus far contribute their parts
to the public Peace at least, notwithstanding any scruple that may justly be
grounded upon this, or any of the Oaths preceding in this discourse is
difficult, if not impossible to discern, upon a sober and disengaged survey.

What concerns the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, has been spoken to
in the Protestation.

The endeavor of the foregoing discourse, hitherto has been by a through
disqusition, managed as in a matter of Conscience, with the greatest stricktnes
and impartiality, to examine the true state of former Engagements, whether
contrary to, and obliging against the present. And the result upon the whole
matter, seems to afford a threefold conclusion. First, That as to the
substantial part, their true intention and equity, there is no contrariety,
there is an absolute harmony between both: both according to equity joining in
this intention, by a promissory caution to oblige the engaged not to distru^^
by any unlawful practices, but by all lawful ways against such disturbances,
to endeavor to preserve the obtaining (...) or public authority, because it is
ever the PRESENT Authority, that gives life to those laws of the Nation, which
by the public administration of justice, propagate peace; and by peace the
prosperity of the public, the proper and ultimate end, in to which all
Governors and Government ought to be resolved. Secondly, That as to the
Circumstantiall part, the persons sometime vested with some part of the
Authority; No Obligation does or can lie against the present Engagement,
because neither are they now vested with that Authority; the possession and
exercise whereof is the sole thing that must both render them the formal
object, and furnish them with a capacity of performing those reciprocal acts
of public justice and protection, which are the fundamental reason, of all
such relative Obligations, on which alone they do, and without which they
cannot stand: neither secondly, ought they to be so invested, because engaged
in ways inconsistent and destructive. And thirdly, That therefore no
contrariety or obligation of former Engagements hinders; but that lawfully we
may subscribe the present. And so answer is given to the first general
question, and way made for the second. viz.

Whether of duty we must subscribe the present Engagement (already proved
lawful) when called thereunto by the present Authority.

For orders sake, that we may proceed with the more clearness, we shall cast the
answer into two positions. First, That the authority in question is, de facto,
an Authority. 2ly. that an Authority de facto, is to be obeyed, ex debito in
things lawful, and consequently in the matter of the present Engagement. Were
it not that daily experience tells us, that men forsake their reason, to follow
their affection; it could not with any reason be imagined, that any man should
be so without all reason in the present controversy, as not to grant that the
present Authority is, de facto an Authority. For to deny that, is to
contradict, not only our own, but the sense and experience of the whole
Nation, who in all matters of commutative and distributive (...) derive all the
benefit of the laws of the Land, only by mediation of such public ministers of
State, as derive the Commissions by which they act from them, (...) only from
them, and their authority. And the truth is to deny the existence de facto, of
a public Authority in a Nation, is the worst kind of that which men call
Levelling. For if there be no Authority, there can be no Law, (for the Laws of
the Land out of the hand of Authority, signify no more then the Laws of Solon
or Lycurgus, in a Library or Study) and if there be no Law; neither first can
there be any propriety, because it is only the Law in the hand of Authority,
that determines propriety, unless every man may be his own judge; and then he
will quickly make his own law, so far as his power can reach: neither
secondly, if there be no Law, is there any trangression; and so the Judges and
Jury etc. that condemn men for Capital offenses, are all concluded under the
guilt of murder, which is enough to show the wicked absurdity of this wretched
Doctrine. I shall therefore leave such erroneous judgments, to be rectified by
the pious, and (I hope) peaceable ministers, the Authors of the Proposals, who
ingenuously acknowledge a necessity of the existence of a Government de facto
in a Nation. (Now a Government without Authority is such an Idol that as St.
Paul speaks, we may say it is nothing.) And therefore I cannot but wonder at
those godly and learned Ministers, that when they had gone so far, as to
acknowledge the necessity of an authority in a Nation, and an obedience in all
things lawful unto that authority; that (I say) they could not proceed one
step further upon the same ground, to acknowledge the lawfulness and duty of
promising to be true and faithful to the authority in Being, which as it is
agreeable to present, so it cannot be contrary to former public obligations,
seeing nothing can bind to that which is not in Being; unless they would have
those that labor not in, but rather against the proper work of magistracy, to
have the wages of faithfulness, for being unfaithful; and those that are truly
faithful, the reward of unfaithfulnes; which I am sure they would not. For that
were, as if the dumb and scandalous Clergi^, justly sequestered by Parliament,
should still have the double honor of their parishes and places, because of a
former title in Law, and those godly ministers that are placed in their stead,
and conscienciously labor in the word and doctrine, should be rewarded with
double dishonor. It Is therefore a truth, both in reason and religion, that
will never want ground sufficient to clear it, that they that possess the
places and peforme the duty de facto, must de jure and ex debito, receive the
dignity annexed to the public authority. And so we are come to the second
position. viz.

That Authority de facto, must be obeyed ex debito. The foundation of this
Position has already been laid, and in a great measure cleared in the
precedent Discourse: For the consequences are co incident, and what lawfully
may, of duty must be performed, when we are called to the performance by
public Authority. And therefore (how properly soever the Demurrer was pleased
to term it such) it was no absurdity in the learned Pen that wrote The
lawfulness of obeying the present Government, jointly to infer those
conclusions that were inseperably complicated in the premises that were the
cause of those conclusions. And here, as most due, this Testimony must in
justice be given to the worthy Author of that Tract, That had his mature
abilities* and peaceable piety, met with the same spirit of wisdom from above,
in the Readers, as breathes in all his works, not only this controversy might
have been ended, upon the advantageous terms of truth and peace, but the Balm
of love might by this time have closed up and cured in a great measure, the
never enough to be lamented breathes among the truly godly of this Nation, and
rendered them an united and an happy People: From those few gleanings therefore
here, the Reader may be pleased to have recourse to his fuller harvest, and if
himself be as free to receive, as the piously learned Author is furnished to
give satisfaction in the present position, there is no doubt but he may
abundantly find wherein to acquiesse, upon the clearest grounds of Scripture
and reason, witnest to by the suffrage of the most approved Divines, both
Ancient and Modern, and the practice of the godly accordingly. But what need
we, as to the practice of the godly in the present point, either seek far
abroad, or farther at home, then the late days of Queen Mary: For which of the
godly in her time, after her actual possession of the Crown, scrupled
obedience to her in civil things, although she were the Issue of an incestuous
Marriage, condemned by express Text of Scripture, and the suffrage of the most
eminent Divines of that age, purposely consulted upon it. Wherefore to shut up
this position, and with it the present discourse, (though practices may be
questioned) with the unquestionable Authority of the Apostle, To. 13. If every
foul must be subject, then certainly every power must be subjected to, else
some souls must not be subject, because some powers are not of right; yea but
though they have not a right to make themselves, yet God has a right to make
them powers; and we must be subject, nor because of the subordinate and
doubtful rights of men, but the Supreme and undoubted Right of God, and so the
premises are as large as the conclusion, which otherwise would be too narrow
for it. Again, Every soul must be subject, yea but every soul cannot skill of
the Titles of Governors. True, but no soul so ignorant, but can apprehend Gods
Title, at least when the Apostle shall have told him, that there is NO Power
but of God, and the Powers that BE are ordained of God. And 2. No soul so in
the dark, but can on the one side see who has a power to give him praise for
well doing, and to punish him for doing ill, and so bears not the sword in
vain; and on the other, who either bears no sword, or in vain, an^ ^o no
purpose; and lastly, who are continually attending on the work of Government,
and who are discontinuers. So that in conclusion, the Apostle gives a rule of
subjection, clear and obvious, and suited to the capacity of the meanest
Christian; whereas if to examine the rights of Governors be the rule, most
Christians would want the means fully to inform themselves; and they that could
have the best in such cases to be had, might sooner find just grounds to
scruple all, then to be satisfied in any.

FINIS.

