MOTIVES TO INDUCE THE Protestant Princes To mind the work of peace
Ecclesiastical amongst themselves.

LONDON, Printed for William Hope, and are to be sold at the Unicorne in
Cornehill, 1641.

MOTIVES TO INDUCE THE PROTESTANT PRINCES to mind the work of peace
Ecclesiastical amongst themselves:
1. THe first is, If Protestants be not reconciled together, it will be
impossible to prevent the utter ruin of their Churches, and overthrow of their
States in Germany: For the maxim of States which Christ teaches is
infallible; Every kingdom (says he) divided against it self, is brought to
naught; and every city (or house) divided against it self, shall not stand.

Whence then the Apostles inference follows, and is found by experience
dolefully true, That when we bite and devour one another, we shall (if we
take not heed) be consumed one of another. Therefore we must lay this for a
fundamental conclusion, Except the ground of evil (which is the distance of
men's spirits, either opposite, or estranger'd one from another for matters of
Religion) be taken away from amongst Protestants, that their affections will be
always divided, their intentions will never be brought together, their
counsels will never either fundamentally or effectually concur, and
consequently, no confederation nor conjunction in real endeavors will ever be
brought to any purpose amongst them. And without this, I may freely say, that
there is no humane appearance of any safety for the state of Protestants in
Germany.

2. In the second place, it is evidently known, That the house of Austria,
does settle a form of government in the Empire conformable to the Spanish
Maxims of State, which will introduce a most absolute and unlimited power of
the Emperor over all the free States and Princes in Germany; that when he
shall be able to command the strength of that vast body at his own will, he
may be able by it to conquer the rest of the Europian States, and so erect his
intended Monarchy.

Which because nothing can so much hinder, as the public profession of the
Protestant religion; therefore they have concluded a total extirpation
thereof, together with the impoverishing and desolation of the Protestant
States: To which effect these means have been, and are still practiced:

1. All is done that can be done, to keep the Protestant Princes, and great
houses in perpetual divisions one against another within the Empire. 2. The
State of Religion sub utraque in Bohemia has been persecuted, together with
the strength of the Protector thereof, the Prince Elector Palatine. 3. The
Schism of the Churches amongst the other Protestants has been carefully
fomented, not only by the practice of unconscionable Divines, who have been
hired to maintain the pretenses of a fundamental difference betwixt the
Reformed and the Lutheran Religion, which in substance are but all one; but
also by the establishment of privileges and promises made unto the Lutherans
alone, that the Reformed being excluded from the same, the occasion of envy
and disputes, should never be wanting amongst them, no less for worldly, then
for spiritual causes. 4. Lastly all possible endeavors, have been used to
keep off a real concurrence of intentions, betwixt foraigne States and the
Princes of Germany, lest they should be supported with military assistance,
as in a common cause they ought to be. 5. These being the means, by which
Protestants are now extremely weakened, the Austrians will be able in process
of time to overthrow the same quite, and gain all their own ends, if no course
be taken to work against them.
And to do this, no way will ever be effectual, either to stop their
proceedings, and to preserve these remnants, and recover the losses, but that
which is most fit to unite the spirits of Protestants amongst themselves: And
nothing so fit to do this as the composition of their differences about
Religion, which have occasioned all these distractions, for which the house of
Austria has hitherto prevailed.

3. The first ground and fundamental occasion of this war is the matter of
Religion, in respect it is different from Popery: for we know that hereupon
the quarrel did first arise, and now we see that the Austrians re-establish
the same in all places which they conquer; Hence then it follows, that the
cause will be quitel often, and in effect given over, if once the first intention
of mainteining the state of Religion be laid aside: If the work of
Ecclesiastical reconcilement (without which the public profession of religion
cannot well stand) be not aimed at and prosecuted as it ought to be.

4. Seeing God has honored most of the Protestant Princes, and chiefly the
Palatine house, to suffer thus much, and to be brought thus low, for the cause
of Religion, which is most put at; therefore we may firmly conclude that he
will raise again the Palatine house, and the other Princes which have suffered
for his Churches sake, if they leave not the cause; for it is certain that he
will at last raise his Church, because it is impossible that she should fall
so, as to lie for ever. Now when this shall come to pass, then he will also
re-establish those that have suffered for the same, and have remained faithful
unto him constantly unto the end: and although they should fail him, yet he
cannot deny himself; or be failing to his own cause.

But in a case of their falling away (as Mordecai said to Esther, 4.13, 14.)
Deliverance will be wrought another way, because Gods work depends not upon
the counsels and endeavors of men, but such as he pleases to make use of;
for his service depends upon the issue of his work. Therefore if ever he
raises the house Palatine, and other Princes again, he will certainly use no
other means to do it, but the matter of Religion, for which they have
suffered: And indeed, in all humane appearance, it is impossible that the house
Palatine can henceforth be in any safety and splendour, without the
re-establishment of Religion. For, to speak rationally, there is no humane
appearance of possibility, that it should receive any powerful support from
any, nor can it expect credit or estimation by any, but from, and by those that
are now in the same case with it self, who by reason of their opposition to
the house of Austria's power, and prevailing intentions, must resolve to stand
and fall together with it.

Therefore if the Protestant Princes intend their own restitution and
preservation, they must needs also intend the re-establishment and conservation
of the reformed Churches in Germany; and ought, as I supppose, to make this
intention no less a fundamental reason of State in all their conjoint or
several proceedings, then the house of Austria makes the opposite intention
fundamental unto it self.

And to do this, there is none other way so likely, or so sure to do good, or
so safe without danger, or so lawful and laudable before. God and man, as this
is, of procuring a reconcilement of differences in Religion, that the body and
cases of all Protestants being made one and the same, their unity may be their
strength, and their Religion may be their preservation: because God has
promised, that when we shall seek first his kingdom, and the righteousness
thereof, that then all other things shall be added unto us.

5 The leaders of a weak party, cannot be otherwise supported, then in making
themselves considerable by winning the affections and hearts of the Common
people: And to do this, nothing is more fit in its own nature, or at this
time more seasonable, then to undertake and follow out the cause of Religion,
in a way which is unblameable, tending to brotherly love and reconciliation.

6 A general peace is sued for, but, except this unity of Protestants amongst
themselves be really taken to heart, it is not like that ever it will be
obtained, or being granted, safely and inviolably kept.

But if this business can once be brought unto some perfection, no doubt but
it will daunt the Austrians more, then any thing which can be attempted, and
consequently will be a greater means of peace then any thing else.

7 To oppose the Austrian and Papal designs against Protestants, no course
more rational and effectual can be devised, then to cross the intentions of
those counsels, whereby they get their greatest advantages. Seeing therefore
that it is most clear, that their chiefest advantages arise from the division
of Protestants amongst themselves for matters of Religion, it follows, that
no course can be taken in hand more fit to oppose them, then to heal these
breaches whereby they have prevailed.

8 Lastly God does require those whom he has established in places of eminent
authority, that they should be careful to employ themselves and make use of
their eminency in his service: Now his service is nothing else, but to do good
to the mystical body of his Son Jesus Christ, which is his Church. For all
the dignity which is bestowed upon men, is given to this end, that Gods
kingdom may be advanced in their greatness.

Therefore this duty is to be taken to heart, not only for worldly reasons,
but also for conscience sake, as being an obligation laid by God upon the
places of great men: For such as are honored by God with the first places
above all other men, are obliged reciprocally to honor him in the first places
of their thoughts; which if they do, he has promised to add more honor unto
them.

Those that honor me (says the Lord) I will honor, and he that despises
me shall be lightly esteemed. To this purpose then, the words of the Prophet
Azariah, 2 Chronicles. 15.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. spoken to King Asah, may be at this time
fitly applied to all Protestant Princes: Hear me (says he) Asah and all Judah
and Benjamin: The Lord is with you while ye be with him, and if ye seek him,
he will be found of you; if ye forsake him, he will forsake you: Now for a
long season Israel has been without the true God, and without a teaching
Priest, and without Law: But when they in their trouble did turn unto the Lord
God of Israel, and sought him, he was found of them. And in those days there
was no peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in, but great vexations
were upon all the inhabitants of the Country, and Nation was destroyed of
nation, and City of city, for God did vex them with all adversities: Be
strong therefore, and let not your hands be weak, for your work shall be
rewarded.

These are the words of the Prophet: From whence we observe, that when the
afflictions of the Church are greatest, then the opportunity of working, and
gaining a full reward is most seasonable.

Therefore this is a duty unto which all Protestant Princes and Statesmen are
bound, not only for reasons of State, but also by reason of conscience; for
this is the only thing that God does regard in all men, namely what they intend
to do for conscience unto him: For if we serve God for other end, then for
himself, although we do his work, yet it is not thanks worthy; neither can
a blessing upon any other undertaking be hoped for, except this business also
be heartily intended.

For God that sees the hearts, does bless men according to their secret
intentions toward himself, which he knows best. God is just and as we
deal with him, so he deals with us, with the pure, he shows himself pure,
and with the froward, he shows himself froward, and does reward every man
according to the cleanesse of his hands in his eyesight. Let us look to David;
he did prosper, because God was with him: And why was God with him? Because his
heart was with God in uprightness: He testifies himself that this was the
cause of his deliverances, Psalm. 18.16. to 27.

And afterward, when he was come to the kingdom, What care had he to bring
God's Ark into his City? Nay, what zeal had he for the house of God, that it
might be built, when he made a solemn vow never to rest, till he knew the
place which God would appoint for the building of it? And this was that which
God regarded in him, and rewarded. For he had no sooner intended to build an
house unto God, but God reveals his intention toward him, that he would
establish his throne and house for ever.

Thus then God is a faithful master to faithful servants, and rewards
carefully all good endeavors taken up for his Name sake: Therefore it is
certain, he will be mindful of those that mind his Church, he will honor
those that honor his cause, he will have good intentions toward those, that
mean uprightly with him, and he will invincibly maintain such as, by
suffering for him, have maintained the truth of the Gospel: From all which
considerations we may thus conclude, that except the work of Ecclesiastical
reconcilement be seriously intended, all these evils will follow:

First, the Protestant Churches and States overthrow will be inevitable in
Germany. Secondly, the Austrian absolute government will take effect over it.
Thirdly, the true cause for which the war was undertaken will be quite
deserted. Fourthly, the sufferings of the Protestant Princes will be (which God
forbid) remediless, and the State thereof irrecoverable. Fifthly, the
affections of all men will decay, and be lost from the Leaders of the cause.
Sixthly, a general peace will never either be obtained, or kept inviolable.
Seventhly, the Austrian, and Papal designs will not be directly opposed.
Eighthly and lastly, the chief duty to which all Protestant Princes are bound
in conscience toward God, will be wholly neglected, for which cause greater
judgments will seize upon them.
But to prevent all those evils, the establishment of Religion in Germany, by
the composure of Ecclesiastical differences, will be a means useful and
sufficient.

An Extract out of the 27. book of the History of Thuanus, Tom. 2. pa. 28.
Edit. Genesis
ABout this time came Ambassadors from Kings and Princes, who (according to
the usual Style and Ceremonies due to Princes) after they had condoled the
death of King Francis, congratulated the succession of King Charles to the
Crown. Amongst these was George Glukus the Ambassador of Frederick King of
Denmark, who had been oftentimes before sent into France, and long remained
there: He, being invited to dinner by the King of Navarre, (induced thereunto
by his wives advice) and (as it is reported) put in hope by him, that, before
the year should go about, he should see Gods purer worship celebrated
thorough all that kingdom, and therefore desired by him, that he would assure
his King as much: having first returned thanks to God, and then approved the
resolutions of the King therein, desired of him again, that he would use his
best indevours that Calvin's doctrine (which the Switzers then professed) might
not be entertained there, but rather that the Augustane Confession, drawn from
Luthers Jenets, might be introduced: By which means he assured him, he should
gain no small respect from the King of Swede and Denmark, and all the Germane
Protestants, the extent of whose Dominions came not short of all those
Countries which acknowledged obedience to the Pope. To which the King made
answer thus, That Luther and Calvin both dissented from the Pope in forty
points, in thirty eight whereof they both agreed; thus there were only two
remained in controversy then betwixt them, and that, in his opinion, both
parts should unite their means and forces to suppress the Common Enemy, and
that once done, the reconciling of the two points yet in question, and
restoring of the Church of God to the ancient purity and splendour of it, would
with far less difficulty be effected.

FINIS.

