THE RIGHT RECEIVING OF CHRIST.

OR, AN APPENDIX To the worthy COMMUNICANT, OR A Treatise showing the due order
of Receiving the SACRAMENT.

BY JER. DYKE, Late Minister of Epping in Essex.

Which was intended by the said Author in his life time to be annexed to this
Treatise of the Sacrament; as appears in the Epistle.

Wherein a Christian may know, whether he has rightly received Christ in the
Sacrament or no.

LONDON; Printed by M. Simmons for John Rothwell at the sign of the Sun in
Paul's Churchyard.

1645.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader;
IF we consider the exceeding excellency of the whole Creation, resulting from
the conjoined and combined excellencies of the several and various species of
creatures, the least we can do is to admire; and who that admires the whole,
can but observe this one particular as most remarkable? what creature it was
which GOD the Creator wound up the Worlds perfection with; and that was man:
Man, who though in regard of time, he was made the last of all, yet for
similitude, the best of all, he being made after the Image of God himself, for
so was the Counsel and Decree of Heaven concerning him before he was made, and
so also was the execution of that Decree when he was made. So God created man
in his own Image, in the Image of God created he him. The first gives him all
the perfections of the rest; the second a perfection far above them all: The
first gives him the possession and use of all this whole inferior world, being
then as an house well furnished by God with all other sublunary perfections,
for the entertainment of man, and to be tenanted by him: the second, that gives
him Dominion Genesis 1. 26.
and Lordship over all. And both of them show, that as all things else were
created for man, so man for God: then which, what higher perfection could there
be? and man thus made, made up the complement and perfection of the whole. Then
God looking upon every thing that he had made, saw it not barely bonum, as
before, but bonum valde, i. e. Genesis 1. 31.
very good indeed: then also was man, in respect of all the other sublunaries,
as the Diamond to the Ring; not only shining and glorious with the best
excellencies of the more inferior natures, but also glittering and sparkling
with the radiancie of his own, and that as enriched with the divine, of which
in a greater measure man at the first was made partaker: Man then was the
choicest plant of all that the Omnipotent hand of God had planted in that
Garden of God where he was put; a right generous and Noble Vine. And had he
then contented himself with that perfection and transcendent excellency of
estate, which the all-wise God had thought fit, for that present to confer
upon him, paying duly his rent unto him, as he was made well able to do; and
doing this homage to him, in acknowledging him to be chief Lord of all, as it
was very fit he should have done; and bringing forth that acceptable fruit unto
him, which he might have done; for he had in him the seed thereof: then might
he have so continued without any change or alteration of estate, till at the
last be had gathered to himself, and tasted the most delicious sweetness of
the Fruit, not only of all the other Trees (which for the present was allowed
him) but also of that Tree growing in the midst of the Garden by the Tree of
knowledge of good and evil, even of the Tree of Life, and Genesis 2. 9.
that not in the Figure, but in the substance; which thing he was by hope to
have expected and waited for, till Gods time of his translation or removal
from an earthly to an Heavenly Paradise.

But man, foolish man, aspiring higher then was meet, and preposterously
reaching after a condition above himself, so at once, both fell short of what
he aimed at, and of himself; precipitantly falling from an higher excellency
then he was any way worthy of (in regard of so ill managing his affairs) into
a condition far below himself. And so now again you see him, who was once the
best of all, become the very worst of all; and him for whom once the whole
Creation groaned (as laboring of imperfection till he was made) now by his sin
become a Romans 8. 22
burden which the whole Creation groaneth under: I may add, and that no less
then such as presses under it the Creator of the Amo. 2. 13. Isa. 43. 24.
whole; yea, and by pressing, wearieth him; him, whom once you saw Gods tenant
to all, now you see discharged and turned out of all: he, who once, under God
himself (the chief Lord) had dominion over all, is now become the very drudge
and slave of all, and not the slave of all the works of God alone, but which is
worst of all, the slave of sin to his own depraved and accursed work: him,
whom once you saw the choicest plant of all Gods hand, planted by him a noble
Vine, and wholly Jer. 2. 21.
a right seed unto himself, you now see turned into the degenerate plant of a
strange Vine; a Vine like that the Prophet speaks of, fit for no use at all but
for a fire. And thus his greater happiness before, is now become his greater
misery, the higher perfection of that condition being but the lower defection
of this; and the greater excellency of the one, but the greater aggravation of
the other: in as much as from the higher pinnacle that we fall (you know) by so
much the greater the hurt and danger that does ensue.

But is the misery then so great, as that its past all cure and remedy? And is
man, who thus had lost himself, quite lost for ever? Yes, lost for ever, and
utterly remediless in his misery, for any thing at all that he can do to
help himself: Yet God, not willing to lose the Masterpiece of all his works,
and that the choicest plant which his hand had planted, should so miscarry,
then finds out a way to save him, who had lost himself; and to replant him,
who by Satan had been so supplanted: to which purpose therefore, he causes a
root of Jesse to put forth, and to Isa. 11. 10. and 53. 2.
grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground; into
which stock or good Olive Tree, man so degenerated, To. 11. 24.
might be ingraffed, and so recover his former nobleness and generositie: his
former nobleness did I say? nay doubtless I may be bold to say, that as God,
to the effecting of this for man, showed greater wisdom and mercy, then he
before had done power and goodness in making of him; so that it being once
effected, he has much bettered his condition, and raised it to an higher
excellency then before; for though man in his first estate had in himself a
principle of life, and by that a seed of fruit answerable to his present
condition then, yet so as that it was wholly in his own keeping; like to a
plant that grows upon its own bottom: yet now is life so in himself, as that
it is more in another, even in Christ, from whom (by virtue of union with him)
as from a root or fountain he receives vivificall power and vigor continually
to produce all spiritual and living actions, and to bring forth the fruits of
holiness unto eternal life: even as the branch that lives not of it self,
but has all lively sap and moisture, both unto life and fruitfulness, from
the root or stock on which it grows: and so is our estate in Christ the second
Adam, far more secure and glorious then ever it could have been in the first:
besides herein is the excellency of man in this condition, even above the
Angels themselves, in that Christ by assuming our Nature, has thereby advanced
it above theirs, Heb. 2. 16.
which he never took upon him; in which respect, man is now higher then those
glorious and celestial Creatures, who at the first was made inferior to them,
though but a little Psalm. 8. 5.
lower then they. So that look what difference there sometimes was betwixt the
first Temple and the second; the very like may you see here betwixt these two
conditions, if you compare them of man in Adam before his fall, as he was then
by Creation, and of man since his fall, as he is now by Regeneration: Only
there the former house did exceed in glory, and that so far, as the ancient men
Hag. 2. 3.
of the Priests and Levites, which had seen the first, when they also saw the
Ezr. 3. 12.
last, could not but weep with a loud voice to behold the difference; but here
now the latter condition exceeds the former, in so much that they who shall
once live to see, and experimentally to know the excellency of this above that,
cannot but rejoice with exceeding joy.

And now (Christian Reader) should I here pass over in silence the far more
exceeding and transcendent excellency which is in Christ, (the fountain of all
that in the Saints excells in goodness) I might seem to obscure what all this
while I have endeavored to clear: for if their excellency in this renewed
estate be not from him, then is it not so great an excellency as I have said:
But if it be derived all from him (as indeed it is) then shall I neither give
him that honor, which is his due, by being silent in such a case; nor do thee
that right I should, who by beholding of his beauty, may perhaps be enamoured
with it, and so the rather be brought to fall in love with him, in whom
otherwise thou may see no form nor Isa. 53. 2.
comeliness, nor any thing else that thou should desire him. Tell me
therefore:

Is there nothing that thou can behold in Christ more amiable and lovely,
then in the world? Is it nothing that while the world is a lump of vanity and
mere vacuitie, Eccles. 1. Col. 1. 19.
yet that in him all fullness dwells? fullness in other things has an
attractive and invitatory virtue: the full garners drew Jacobs sons down
into Egypt; plentitude of wisdom, the Queen of Sheba to King Solomon: and
why do thou covet the world, but from a delight de pleno tollere acervo, to
take of a full heap? But alas! all this is emptiness to the fullness of
Christ, who has transcendently in him, all that this world affords. One little
piece of gold is fuller of worth then many of silver, and one little Diamond
then an heap of gold, all the petty perfections scattered abroad in the
creatures, are in him united: that great volume of excellencies spread up and
down through Heaven and Earth, is in him epitomized: besides that fullness of
Grace, of which the world has not a dram. The world, at the fullest, is but an
Ocean which is lessened by losing the least drop; but Christ his fullness, is
the fullness of fire, which is not one jot diminished, though it gives light to
a thousand Torches. The continual effluences of virtue out of him, and
influences of the sap of his quickening grace, into all those fruit-bearing
branches (though infinite in number) that draw from him, is not the least
evacuation at all unto him.

Is it nothing, that while the creature does allure us from God, our own guilty
consciences, and the dreadfulnesse of his glorious Majesty deter us; Christ
only draws us to him (who is the chiefest and only good,) so that through him
alone we have access Ephesians. 2. 18.
unto the Father? God is a Sun, the resplendent beams of whose Majesty, so
glorious an object, would overcharge, and even quite put out those presumptuous
eyes, that should dare to look up to him, unless overcast with the Cloud of
Christ a Mediator. God is a consuming fire, and mortal were it for us
mortals, to come near it without the interposed Skreene of Christ his
Mediation. First must we come to the manger of Christ's humanity, before we can
have an access with boldness to the Throne of divine Majesty.

Is it nothing, that while the world, in our greatest exigents, sues out a
divorce, and then deserts us, yet that Christ is constant in his love, having
once tied himself to us with the knot of conjugall affection, which with him
is indissoluble? Christ is our husband: And hence, how many precious
privileges ensured to us? In law uxori lis non intenditur; what then has the
law, exacting obedience unto life, to do with Christians? Again, Mulier
fulget radiis mariti: The Husband communicates all that he has unto his Wife:
and even such a community of grace is there betwixt Christ and true believers;
Christ his graces and a believers differing only secundum gradum, i. e. in
respect of measure or degree; but not at all secundum speciem, i. e. in kind
or quality, in which respect they are the same.

Besides all which, are all the benefits of our mystical union with Christ,
nothing? Hence spiritual life: Hence conformity Col. 3. 3. 4. Romans 6. 5. 1
Pet. 1. 14. Phil. 2. 5. 1 John 2. 6. Joh. 15. 5. Romans 8. 35.
with Christ our head, a triple conformity, in nature, in mind, in
conversation: Hence fructification for the present: Hence perseverance for the
future, even to the end: Hence glorification also in the end; yea, and therein
admission of our bodies as well as souls into eternal glory at the last. And
is all this to be accounted nothing?

Many, and many are the excellencies to be found in Christ, and to be received
from him, which (besides these that I have mentioned) I might instance in, and
so lead thee still on forward in this way, even till I should, as in a maze or
labyrinth, lose both my self and thee, in the contemplation of them: But
because I had much rather, that thou should be found in Christ, then lost in
the contemplation of Christ; and because my hearty desire is for thee, that
thou should be more a real Christian, and estated in him, then
contemplative, and always only meditating of him; as an excellent means
therefore amongst many others, to help thee in, and guide thee to the Right
Receiving of, and rooting in Christ, I can now forbear no longer, to commend
unto thy perusal this following Treatise: Not a pack of Brachygraphicall
fragments, and incoherent scraps, jumbled together by some pragmaticall pen
man; but a work (upon my certain knowledge) perfectly finished, and that
purposely for the Press, by the learned and most judicious Pen of my Most
dear and late deceased Father, and then intended by him to have been annexed,
as an Appendix to that last work of his, which himself published before his
death, entitled, A worthy Communicant, Or a Treatise showing the due order of
receiving the Sacrament, etc. and this a Treatise, entitled, The Right
Receiving of, and Rooting in Christ; the very Title which he himself did put
upon it while he lived. Which forenamed Treatise (Christian Reader) with all
his Former Works by himself published (that gracious acceptance which they
ever found from thee, and the duty and honor I still do, and shall ever owe
to him) made me thus far to deny my self, as to adventure (though but a
bungler at it) to afford my obstretricatory assistance to this Posthumus
Infant, rather then it should always lie gasping in the Press, ready to
perish for want of help.

To speak any thing in the commendations of this Work, its own mouth denies me;
and is the rather needless, in that I have now so far assured thee of its
Author, who himself had thus finished it for thy use, as thou now receiv'st it.

To speak much of the Author, modesty and my near relation to him, will not
admit of; and to say nothing of him, duty forbids me: With the leave of modesty
then will I speak thus much only and no more; and if any shall think I say
too much, I will leave it to duty to excuse me. For his Fidelity and
Impartiality in the Work of his Ministry, who knew him, and knows not, that
the Sword of the Spirit was in his hands, a two-edged Sword, which cut every
way? not like Saul's, that cut off the lean and worst of the people and
cattle, and spared Agag and the fattest cattle; but like the Psalmists Sword,
which spared none. Yet so, as that always men's sins, not their persons, were
the objects of his hottest thunderbolts.

I will here pass by his rare accomplishments with all Ministerial abilities,
as better known, then that I need to mention them. Alii pleni, and non
loquuntur, hi non pleni, loquuntur: Alii multiscii, and muti; hi ignari, and
sonori. How he was every way free from both these Ministerial defects, thou
who know him not in the Pulpit, read him in the Press, and judge.

For his indefatigabilitie in his labors, and all for other men's eternal
profit, more then his own private and worldly benefit, he was one of Saint
Chrysostoms Bees, Gloriosissimum animal, not because it labors, but because
its labor is to others profitable.

And for his inoffensive life, who knows not that he was none of those slimy
Lizards, who wipe out the wholesome Print of their Doctrine, with the filthy
tail of their scandalous practices.

But here now, though Modesty did not, yet the Father would take me off, who
tells me, now God has taken the Arc of his blessed soul out of the moveable
earthly Tabernacle of his body, and placed it in the fixed Temple of celestial
bliss, Imitationem quaerit, August.
non lauds, that my best commendation will be imitation. While he lived, God
honored him to be one of Gideons Soldiers, who carried both a Trumpet and a
Lamp; the Trumpet of his Ministry he let fall, and the light of his practice
we all lost when God cracked asunder his earthen Pitcher. The greatest honor
I can now do him, is not to Trumpet forth his praises, and make a blaze with
his commendations; but to take up both the Trumpet and Lamp which he laid
down, in an holy imitation of him, both in soundness of Doctrine, and piety
of practice: and in this case I am sure, what duty commands me, that Modesty
will not forbid.

And thus, that God would not only bestow the mantle, but double the spirit of
this deceased Eliah, upon his surviving posterity, be it thy daily Petition at
the Throne of Grace; and to requite thee, that God would redouble a blessing of
his servants Labors upon thy pious endeavors, shall be the humble
Supplication of

The Churches devoted Servant,
JER. DYKE.
The Contents.
CHAP. I. It is the duty of every one that will be a Christian, to receive
Christ. fol. 6. CHAP. II. Ignorance of the worth of Christ, keeps men from
receiving him. 9. CHAP. III. The great benefit that comes by the receiving of
Christ. 13. CHAP. IIII. The great danger of not Receiving Christ. 26 CHAP. V.
Hindrances to be removed by such as would Receive Christ. 32 CHAP. VI. The love
of our lusts, a hindrance from receiving Christ. 37 CHAP. VII. False and
groundless fears, a hindrance to the receiving of Christ. 41 CHAP. VIII. The
Positive Duty which must be performed of all that will receive Christ. 46 CHAP.
IX. How to know whether we have received Christ aright. 62 CHAP. X. Whosoever
they are that have indeed received Christ, they do walk in him. 75 CHAP. XI.
Trialls of Men's Receiving of Christ. 80 CHAP. XII. It is a Christians Duty to
walk in Christ. 84 CHAP. XIII. It is not enough for a Christian to profess,
and bear the Name of Christ, but he must be Rooted in him. 89 CHAP. XIIII.
What is to be done that we may get our selves to be Rooted in Christ. 104
CHAP. XV. How to know whether we be Rooted in Christ, or not. 115
THE RIGHT RECEIVING OF AND ROOTING IN CHRIST.
COLOS. 2. 6, 7. As ye have therefore received the Lord Jesus Christ, so walk
ye in him, Rooted in him.
IN the former Chapter, v. 23. the Apostle entered upon an Exhortation to
perseverance in the faith. In the first seven verses of this chapter he
continues that exhortation, laying down more reasons, and removing objections.

1. He lays down reasons to press them; And they are specially two.

1. The first taken from his own care that he had for their, and others good,
ver. 1, 2. 2. The second taken from the certainty, sublimity, and perfection of
the Gospel, ver. 2, 3.
2. He removes Objections. What needs all this ado with us? might the
Colossians say. Answ. I would have you construe it to be done out of a loving
fear and jealousy, lest any should seduce and wrong you, ver. 4. I, but is
not this an unchristian suspicion in you, thus hastily to surmise the worst by
us? might they reply. Answ. No such matter, for I do with great joy behold and
acknowledge that great good that is in, and amongst you, ver. 5. Well then,
what is it that you would have us do? Answ. Since my care is so great for you,
since the Gospel is so certain, sublime and perfect, therefore I would have
you, That as you have received Christ, so ye would walk on in him, etc. In
which words, he exhorts them unto two things.

1. To walk in Christ. 2. To be rooted in him.
To a going on in the profession of Christ, and to a stability, and
steadfastness there in.

He first exhorts to a walking in Christ. To this he urges them by that they
had already done. As ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord. As if he had
said, Ye have begun well, ye have received Christ the Lord, and ye profess
ye have received him, now then as ye have begun, so go on, and to your
receiving of Christ, add your going on, and walking in him; from which
argument of the Apostle, we may take this lesson by the way:

That good beginnings are an engagement Doct.
to good proceedings. Receiving Christ is an engagement and an obligation to
walking in him, Psalm. 4. 9. Those things that ye have both learned, and
received, and heard, and seen in me, do. Thus you have learned, and received,
therefore do thus. Apoc. 3. 3. Remember therefore how thou have received, and
heard, and hold fast and repent. It is this ground that edges those sharp
reproofs, Gal. 3. 3. Are ye so foolish? Having begun in the Spirit, are ye
now made perfect by the flesh? and Gal. 5. 7. Ye did run well, who did hinder
you that you should not obey the truth? And this is the reason why they that
have begun well, and yet go not on, shall receive a smarter punishment, then
such as never made any such beginning at all, because they had a greater tie
and engagement then others to be godly, and religious. Their latter end is
worse then their beginning, 2 Pet. 2. 20. And why so? because their beginnings
were better then other men's. They began to build, they began to look toward
Christ and Heaven, these beginnings engaged them to a further progress, and
because such engagement, notwithstanding they brake off, therefore have they
made their account the heavier.

Let it teach us therefore if once we have given up our names to Christ, to
go on, and hold on. A giving up the name to Christ, and a beginning to
profess religion, it is a subscribing with the hand to the Lord. Isa. 44. 5.
It is a saying, I am the Lords. Now when we have once said we are the Lords,
and have subscribed to it, set us also have a care to say, we will be the
Lords, and to stand to, and make good our subscription. But if once we have
subscribed with our hand, and after our subscription be found Revolters, God
will bring in our own hands against us. The entrance upon profession of Christ's
name is subscription; Subscription is an obligation to God. An obligation
forfeited makes a man liable to the penalty. This by the way. Before I come to
the thing pressed, I will take the words in order as they lie, and begin first
with that ground upon which he presses them to that duty. As ye have received
Jesus Christ the Lord. In which words he implies that they had received Christ,
they professed that they had received him, and he takes it for granted, as a
ground upon which he will work them on further; from what these Colossians did,
learn What is every man's duty to do, that means to be a true Christian
indeed.

CHAP. I.
It is the duty of every one that will be a Christian, to receive Christ.

A Man is never a Christian indeed till this be done. The Lord Jesus Christ is
to be received of us. God he offers Christ to us, he tenders him in the Gospel,
and as it is Gods mercy to offer him, so it is our duty, and should be our
wisdom to receive him; for that is the end of all Gods offers. He does not
offer him only to show that there is a Christ, or what kind of Christ he is,
he does not offer him to be seen, and showed, but God offers him to this end,
that he might be received. And therefore when God sends his Ministers to preach
Christ, and to offer him unto people in their ministry, he speaks of Christ
in this case, as Paul speaks to the Philippians of Epaphroditus, Phil. 2. 29.
Receive him with all gladness, and hold him in reputation. And as God offers
Christ to be received, so he himself also is willing to be received. We know
what the Pharisees quarrel was with him, Luke 15. 2. This man receives
sinners. And it was true he did so. But why did he so? Surely to let sinners
see how willing he is that they should receive him. His receiving of sinners
was but to invite them to the receiving of him. Yea, the errand he sends his
Ministers upon, is but to persuade men to receive him. He seeks to be
received, Cant. 5. 2. Open unto me my sister, my love, etc. As if he had said,
Lo, here I am, I offer my self unto thee, I sue and seek unto thee to be
received and entertained. Yea, he complains of it, and takes it ill, when men
receive him not, John 5. 43. I came in my Fathers Name, and ye received me
not. Now if Christ were not willing, and desirous to be received, he would not
complain of it, and take it as an unkindness not to be received. We ought in
their kind to receive godly men, John 3. 8. We therefore ought to receive such.
And if we ought to receive such, then much more ought we to receive Christ
himself.

As then we would prove our selves Use 1.
true Christians indeed, so be we forward, and ready to receive Christ offered
unto us. We should do in this case as Zacheus did in that, Luke 19. 5, 6.
Zacheus, says Christ, Make haste, and come down, for to day I must abide at
thine house. Here was an offer, a fair offer of Christ; What does Zacheus do?
does he demurre and deliberate upon it, and take time to think of it? no such
matter, And he made have, says the Text, and came down, and received him
joyfully. Zacheus presently embraces the offer, and receives him hastily, and
joyfully. No sooner should Christ offer himself unto us, but with all readiness
and greedines should he be received of us: There is a strange perverseness of
spirit in us, a strange natural untowardnesse in us to receive Christ: See how
Christ speaks, Joh. 5. 43. I am come unto you in my Fathers name, and ye
receive me not; if another come in his own name, him ye will receive. So it is
still with us: If Satan come with a tentation, if a lust come with a motion, if
a false teacher come with a novelty, if any thing come that should not come, it
is strange to see with what readiness and greedines we receive these: but if
Christ come, with whom comes all good, how awke, and how backward are we to
receive him? Men bless themselves with coming to Church, and receivng the
Sacrament, and think all is well so long as this is done: But how many come to
Church that come not to Christ, and how many receive the Sacrament, that yet
receive not the Lord Jesus Christ? This therefore being a point of so great
consequence, and necessity as none greater; it will not be amiss to help to
sink it down with some considerations, as may make way for it into our hearts.
Consider therefore these three things.

CHAP. II.
Ignorance of the worth of Christ, keeps men from receiving him.

FIrst, consider who it is that is to be received. It is Jesus Christ the Lord,
says the Text. He in whom is all our good, and by whom we have all spiritual,
and eternal good that is to be had. How gladly do some receive Lords, great
ones, how gladly do men receive Kings? Now Christ, he is the Lord, the King of
Glory. Upon this ground are we excited to receive him: Psalm. 24. 7. 9. Lift up
your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, that is,
lift up your hearts, and set the doors of your hearts wide open. But why, what
shall we get by it? The King of glory shall enter. So that when the King of
Glory is to be received, how readily should men set their hearts wide open to
receive him? Receive Christ, and ye receive the King of Glory, and the King of
Glory enters. The Apostle pressing to hospitality, uses this argument, Hebr.
13. 2. that some thereby received Angels. Oh, how glad would a man be, to have
such guests as Abraham and Lot had? how glad would a man be to receive Angels?
I, but here is a greater matter. In receiving Christ, we receive not Angels,
but we receive the Son of God himself, not into our houses, but into our
hearts. What be Angels to the King of Glory, to the Son of God? If men did but
consider, who it is that should be received, and what a guest they should
receive, when they receive Christ, how easily would they be persuaded to
receive him? Men know not Christ, know not his worth and excellency, and
therefore receive him not, Joh. 1. 10, 11. That which is in one verse, Knew him
not, is in the other, Receive him not: To show that men therefore receive not
Christ, because they know him not, they know not how precious a Christ he is.
Oh, how gladly and readily would men receive him, if once they knew who, and
what he were? We find, John 6. 19. that the Disciples not knowing Christ, were
afraid of him, though he came toward them, yet they were so far from
receiving him, that they would well have wished him further off. Being afraid of
him, they must needs be afraid to receive him. But when, verse 20. Christ makes
himself known unto them, It is I, be not afraid; then verse 21. They willingly
received him into the ship. When once they knew it was Christ whom they should
receive, they then no longer fear, but willingly and gladly receive him. So
when Christ is offered unto men they receive him not, because they know him
not, and therefore indeed are many times afraid to receive him. They think if he
be received, they may lose their credit and friends in the world; that this
Christ will mar all the joy and pleasure of their lives, and that they should
lead but melancholy mopish lives; and so not knowing Christ, are afraid of him.
I, but it is the Lord Christ that is offered unto you, the Lord of life, and
grace, the Lord of all comfort and consolation; it is a Savior and Redeemer
that is offered unto you; It is that Christ that dyed for you, that shed his
blood for you, that did undergo the curse of God, and bare the infinite weight
of his Fathers wrath to deliver you; It is a Jesus Christ, a saving Christ who
is offered unto you. Since therefore it is Christ, and he such a Christ, this
should make us receive him, and receive him as willingly into our hearts, as
they when they knew him, received him into the ship; It is the Lord Jesus
Christ that is offered us, be ye then lift up ye everlasting doors, fly open
ye gates of our hearts, that Jesus Christ the Lord may be received and
entertained. How gladly did the Galatians receive Paul who was but a Minister,
and an Apostle of Christ? Gal. 4. 14. Ye received me as an Angel of God, even
as Jesus Christ. If they so received a Minister of Christ, how then should
Christ Jesus himself be received?

CHAP. III.
The great benefit that comes by receiving Christ.

SEcondly, Consider the great benefit we shall receive by receiving Christ, we
shall be sure to be on the receiving hand by receiving Christ. It is a great
advantage we receive to our selves by receiving Christ into our hearts. There
is a great reward to be received in receiving a Prophet, nay, in receiving an
ordinary righteous man, Matthew. 10. 41. He that receives a Prophet, in the name
of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward; he that receives a righteous
man in the name of a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward. In
the 40. verse, our Savior speaks of receiving himself, He that receives you
receives me. Now if such a reward to him that receives a Prophet, if such a
reward to him that receives a righteous man, how much more shall that man, that
soul be richly blessed and rewarded that receives Christ Jesus the Lord, the
Prophet of the Church, and that great Righteous One? Let us a little then
consider the Reward of receiving Christ, what it is, and what benefit will
follow thereupon. There is a threefold Reward or Benefit that follows upon it.

The first Benefit is the Adoption of sons and daughters. They that receive
Christ shall thereupon receive this honor and happiness, to be made sons of
God. Seems it a small thing unto you to be the Kings son in Law? says David to
the servants of Saul. And if it be no small thing to be the Kings son in Law,
then it is no small honor to be Gods sons and daughters, 1 John 3. 1.
Behold, what love the Father has showed unto us, that we should be called the
sons of God. It was the greatest love that God could show us, the greatest
honor that God could do us, to make us his sons. But now how come we to
receive this great honor? We receive this honor by receiving Christ. They
that receive Christ, receive this honor to be the sons of God, John 1. 12.
To as many as received him he gave this privilege to become the sons of God.
As many as received him. What ever they were for outward condition, rich or
poor, bond or free, high or low, old or young, if they received him, they lost
nothing by it; Christ thereupon gave them this honor, to be made the sons of
God. The Apostle twice speaks of the great privilege of Christians, Romans 8.
15. Ye have received the Spirit of Adoption. Gal. 4. 4, 5. That we might
receive the Adoption of sons. I, but how come we to receive the Adoption of
sons? God sent his Son that we might receive the Adoption of sons. But
is that all that is to be done that God should send his Son? No, for though
God has sent his Son, yet all are not made sons. Therefore as on Gods part, so
something is to be done on our part also, God sent forth his Son that we
might receive his Son, and so might receive the Adoption of sons: For to as
many as received him, he gave them this privilege to be made the Sons of God.
Luke 19. 9. This day, is Zacheus become a son of Abraham. It is all one to be
a son of Abraham in our Saviors sense, and a son of God. Now when became
Zacheus a son of Abraham, and so a son of God? This day, namely, in which
he had received Christ, not only into his house, but into his heart. The very
same day, and hour then that a man receives Christ into his heart, that very
day and hour he receives the honor and happiness of being a son of God.
When we receive Christ, God receives us, and when he receives us, we receive
the great benefit of Adoption. 2 Cor. 6. 17, 18. I will receive you. And what
shall we receive by that? And will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my
sons and daughters, says the Lord God Almighty. Now what a motive is this,
if well considered, to make us receive Christ? It may be for thine outward
estate thou art but the son of mean parents, of poor obscure parents, it
may be in a servile and bond condition. Or what ever thou art for thine
outward, yet for thy spiritual condition, thou art naturally no better then a
child of wrath, a child of death, a cursed child, a slave of the devil, a
base drudge to thy lusts. And were it not now a fair advancement, a goodly and
a glorious privilege for such an one to be made a son of God? why then, do
but receive Christ, and he will presently honor thee with this privilege, to
be made a son of God, Gal. 3. 7. Know ye therefore that they which are of
faith, and so by faith do receive Christ, the same are the Children of
Abraham, yea, know ye, that they which receive Christ, the same are the
children of God. Gal. 3. 26, 27. Ye are the children of God by faith. Why so?
Because ye have put on Christ. He that puts on Christ receives him, as he that
puts on a garment receives it. So that by faith putting on, and receiving
Christ, we are made the sons of God. Had we but hearts to consider, and in
some sort but to conceive, what it is to be a damned dog, a son of wrath, and
what it is to be a son of God, how would our souls not almost but altogether
be persuaded to receive Christ? If the receiving of the Kings son would make
us but the Kings favorites, how ambitious would we be, and at what cost to
receive him, if but an opportunity offered? But here now do but receive
Christ, and thou shall be not only one of Gods favorites, but one of Gods
sons.

The second benefit, is the Spirit of God. There is a promise, Act. 2. 38. Ye
shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. It is a blessed thing to receive the
Holy Ghost. He is the Spirit of life, and light, the spirit of consolation,
power, and prayer. So that the receiving of the Spirit of God is the receiving
of all spiritual good, Isa. 32. 15. where the Spirit of God is powered forth,
the wilderness becomes a fruitful field. And there is thriving, and growing
in Grace, Isa. 44. 3. It were needless to insist in all the benefits we have
by receiving the Holy Ghost. Consider that 1 Cor. 2. 10. 12. But now how come
we to receive the Holy Ghost? By Receiving Christ; The Receiving of Christ is
the way to receive the Holy Ghost. Gal. 3. 14. That we might receive the
promise of the Spirit through faith. Through faith we receive Christ, Joh. 1.
12. and through that receiving of Christ by faith, we also receive the Spirit.
Joh. 7. 39. This be spoke of the Spirit which they that believe in him should
receive. When Christ once is in us, and dwells in us, we have received him, as
he that dwells in an house is received thereinto. And Romans 8. 9, 10, 11. The
Apostle shows that by Christ's being in us, we have the Spirit in us. As we
know, when Christ gives us his Spirit, that he dwells in us, 1 John 4. 13. so
we know also that when he dwells in us, he gives us his Spirit. It is not every
man's case to have Gods Spirit. As all men have not faith, so all men have not
the Spirit of God. Every one receives him not, every one cannot receive him,
Joh. 14. 17. The Spirit of Truth, whom the world cannot receive; And what is
the reason why worldly men cannot receive him? Because they will not receive
Christ. Christ must be first received, before his Spirit can be received, for
the Spirit is Christ's Spirit, and therefore must he be received before his
Spirit can. No sooner is Christ received, but he breaths upon that soul that
receives him, and says unto it, as he did in that case to his Disciples,
Receive the Holy Ghost. When Simon Magus saw, that by laying on of the Apostles
hands, men received the Holy Ghost, he would presently have been drawing his
purse, and would have given money to have had that gift, Act. 8. 17, 18, 19.
Now if we would have the blessing our selves to receive the Holy Ghost, we
shall not need to seek it by money, that will not do it. It must be had not by
Giving, but by Receiving. Receive Christ, and his Spirit is ours. Mark how the
Apostle carries those words, Romans 13. 13, 14. Let us walk honestly, as in the
day, not in rioting, drunkenness, etc. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ.
One would have thought he should have said, But put on the Graces of sobriety,
chastity, love, etc. and all the graces of the Spirit, but in stead of that he
says, put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, because the putting on of Christ, and
receiving of him, is the putting on, and the receiving of the Spirit, and all
the sanctifying graces thereof. If then we prize the receiving of the Spirit of
grace into our hearts, then with all forwardness receive we Christ.

The third benefit is Power and Ability 3.
to yield God obedience. In receiving Christ we do withal receive power and
ability to give God obedience. He requires of us duties of obedience, duties of
worship, as hearing, prayer, etc. He requires of us to work the works of God,
and to walk in the ways of God. Now take us in our selves, and we can do
nothing: till we have received Christ we can do no duty of obedience, of
service, we can neither walk, nor work. But when Christ is once received into
the soul, then there is withal a power received into the soul, by which it is
enabled to do the duties God requires of us: See how these are joined together
in this Text, As ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in him. We
are commanded to walk in him, but yet we must receive him. A man that will
walk, must first receive a principle of life and motion. A dead man can neither
walk nor work; we are made alive before we do walk, and we are made alive
by receiving Christ, 1 John 5. 12. He that has the Son has life. He that
has received Christ has received life, by which he is enabled to actions of
life, Gal. 2. 20. The life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith
of the Son of God, as if he had said; I have received Christ, and so having
received him, have also received spiritual life by which I am quickened and
enabled to all duties of obedience, Gal. 5. 25. If we live in the Spirit, let
us also walk in the Spirit: And if we would walk in the Spirit, we must live in
the Spirit: and so, if we would walk in Christ, we must first live in Christ,
and live by Christ. It is impossible for us to live, till we have received
Christ, who is our life. The Apostle here speaks of walking in Christ, 2 Cor.
6. 16. he speaks of Christ's walking in us, I will dwell in them, and walk in
them. It is a sure thing, that he must walk in us, before we can walk in him.
And he cannot walk in us, till we receive him: Joh. 15. Without me, or
separated from me, ye can do nothing. Now till we receive him we are
separated from him. But now let us once receive him, and we receive power to
do what he requires. When Adam lay a lump of clay on the earth, though his body
had the shape, parts, and proportion of a man, yet could he do no action
belonging to a man till he received life. But so soon as he received life, he
could walk, speak, discourse, do any thing that belonged to a man. So though a
man in his natural condition may do moral duties of obedience, and perform
outward services, yet all this while this is but the livelesse shape of a
Christian. But when once he receives Christ, who is our life, Col. 3. then
Christian life is infused, and received, and then he can do such things as a
Christian does them, with that power and spirit that is required in a
Christian. It is little comfort we can have in any thing we do, or have, till
we have received Christ, and do what we do by his power. Then a man has
comfort in the fruits of his obedience, when it is fruit unto God. Then our
fruit is brought forth to God when we bring it forth by virtue of our marriage
to Christ. Romans 7. 4. That ye should be married to Christ, that we should
bring forth fruit unto God. A woman may have children that is not married, but
she can have little credit and comfort in such fruit of her womb; It is but
bastardly fruit, upon which she cannot look without blushing cheeks: but then
has she comfort in her children, when they are legitimate, and she has them
by her husband in marriage. Turks and Heathens may do some moral duties of
Justice, mercy, etc. but it is all but spurious fruit, base-born issue, in
which they can have no comfort, because all these are children out of lawful
wedlock, they are not married in Christ, and bring not forth by a principle of
life from him. What a motive should this be to make us receive Christ? We are
in a miserable condition, till we do receive him. God commands to repent, and
we know that without repentance there is no way but damnation; Except ye
repent, ye shall all perish. God commands to mortify the deeds of the flesh,
and we know that without mortification there is no way but death, Romans 8. 13.
Now until we receive Christ, we can as well remove mountains, as repent for
one sin, as mortify one lust. But when Christ is once received, then is
power received to mortify lusts, then there is power received to repent, Act.
5. 13. Him has God exalted to be a Prince, and a Savior, for to give
repentance to Israel. As therefore we desire to receive power and ability to
give God obedience, and to perform the duties of his service he requires, so
be ready and forward to receive Christ.

CHAP. IIII.
The great danger of not Receiving Christ.

THirdly, Consider the great Danger of not Receiving Christ. It is a 3.
wonderful dangerous thing not to receive Christ when God offers him, and when
he seeks to us, and invites us to receive him. It is a great sin not to
receive Christ, Joh. 5. 43. Ye receive me not. John complains, 3 John 9. 10.
that Diotrephes received him not, and that he received not the brethren. This
is complained of as a great sin. And if a great sin in Diotrephes not to
receive John, and not to receive the brethren, how much more is it a great
sin not to receive Christ? specially when he offers himself to be received of
us? It is complained of as the heinous and horrible sin of the Jews, Joh. 1.
11. That he came to his own, and his own received him not. It was the foul
sin of the world, that when Christ as God was in the world, and the world was
made by him, that the world knew him not, Joh. 1. 10. but it is made the
greater sin of the Jews, that when he was manifested in the flesh, and he
came to them in person, and offered himself to them, yet they received him
not. And our sin now under the more clear light of the Gospel, will be
greater then theirs if we receive him not. And as the sin is great, so must
the danger and punishment of it needs be great, if we receive him not. They to
whom Christ is offered, if they receive him not, it may be said of them in this
case, as our Savior speaks of the Pharisees in that, Luke 20. 47. They shall
receive the greater Damnation. There is a greater Damnation for some men then
for other some. There is Damnation for such as know not God, and never heard of
Christ, but for those that have heard of Christ, and have had him offered unto
them, and have refused, and not received that offered Christ, there is a
greater Damnation. If men receive not so great salvation, Heb. 2. 3. as is
offered by receiving Christ, how shall they but receive the greater Damnation?
Consider that, Mat. 10. 14, 15. Whosoever shall not receive you, and hear your
words, shake off the dust of your feet; It shall be easier for Sodom and
Gomorrah in the day of Judgment then for that City. Why so? See the reason,
ver. 40. He that receives you, receives me, and so also, he that refuses you
refuses me. So then, he that refused to receive the Apostles, their sin was
that they refused to receive Christ. And what should become of those that
refused to receive him? Gods vengeance shall lie heavier upon such men's heads
at the day of Judgment, then upon the head of a cursed damned Sodomite. That
sin shall press and sink a man's soul deeper into hell then Sodoms sin. How
heavy and dreadful will Sodoms Hell be in Hell, whose sin made a visible
Hell on earth? and such an Hell on earth, the monuments whereof remain extant,
and exemplary to this day, to be a terror to all ungodly ones. And yet as
heavy as Sodoms punishment shall be, it shall be easier then thine, that
receivest not Christ when offered unto thee. Indeed when Christ would have come
into a village of Samaria, Luke 9. 53. they would not receive him, and they did
not receive him, says the Text. The Disciples would have had fire from heaven
to have consumed them. And if they thought they were worthy of fire from
heaven, that would not receive him but to lodge in their Town, and in some of
their houses; How much more shall they be judged worthy of fire in hell, that
do not, and will not receive him into their hearts, when his Ministers offer
him to men, and labor to make ready for him? And though then Christ would not
have fire come down upon those Samaritans, yet when the time of judgment
comes, he will bring fiery vengeance upon all those that have not received him
into their hearts, 2 These. 1. 7, 8. When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from
heaven in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that
obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Not to obey the Gospel, is not to
obey the commandments of the Gospel, as not to obey the Law, is not to obey
the commandments of the Law. Now the maine commandment of the Gospel is,
Receive the Lord Jesus Christ. This commandment not obeyed, will bring fiery
vengeance on his head that obeyes it not. Oh that men would but think
seriously of this danger. The stoutest, sturdiest, and most rebellious spirit
that ever was, when he shall see Christ come in Glory, shall then with howling
and wringing of hands cry out upon himself, Ah cursed wretch that I am, oh that
I had had the grace to have received this Lord Christ, when he was offered to
me! Ah beast and fool, that I received him not when I was so often pressed to
it, now shall I receive vengeance, and wrath for ever, because I received not
the Lord Christ! Nay think upon one thing also before that day come. There
will be a day of Death before the day of Judgment: Thou must dye, and thou
know not how soon, and when thou come to dye, like enough thou will take
up Stephens prayer, Acts 7. 59. Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Then full feign
will thou be to have Christ Jesus receive thy soul. Now would thou in good
earnest have Christ Jesus receive thy soul when thou dyest? why then, be as
willing to receive Christ Jesus into thy soul whilst thou live. He will
receive no soul that has not first received him. In vain shall thou cry at
thy last gasp; Lord Jesus receive my soul, if thy soul have not before
received him. He will return thee a cold and a comfortless answer, Oh now ye
can call to me to receive your soul, I called all the days of your life to
receive me, for these thirty, forty, fifty years together, and you would never
be brought to receive me. As you have dealt by me, so will I now deal by you.
I will now be quit with you, I called upon you to receive me, and ye would
not, now cry you on, and howl on to me, to receive you, I will as little
regard your calls, as you regarded mine: your own measure be mete unto you.
Let this meditation sink deeply down into our hearts, and as willingly as we
would have Christ receive our souls at death, and as willingly as we would be
received into everlasting habitations at the last day, so willingly, so gladly
receive the Lord Jesus Christ now he is offered to you in the Gospel.

It being a matter of so great consequence and necessity to receive Christ,
Quest.
how may we come, and what must be done to receive him?

They that will receive Christ, there must be two things done by them. Answ.


1. All hindrances must be removed. 2. Some positive duties must be done.
CHAP. V.
Hindrances to be removed by such as will receive Christ.

FIrst, All such things must be removed that hinder the soul from Receiving
Christ. There is no man that receives not Christ, but there is something that
holds him off. We read of a man in the Gospel that had a withered arm. Now if
a man would have offered him money upon condition that he would have received
it with his hand, he could not have received it, because his arm was withered.
So God offers Christ to be received, and men receive him not, because their
arms are withered. A Palsy shaking hand may receive an alms, but a withered
hand cannot. Now there is one thing or other that withers the hand of the
soul, that it cannot stretch out it self to receive Christ. Men must
therefore first consider, what that is which withers their hand and arm, and
must get that first removed, before they can receive Christ. When Antichrist
was to come into the world, he could not be received until that which hindered
were taken out of the way, 2 These. 2. 7. when Christ would and should be
received, there is still some one thing or other, that lets and hinders it. And
he cannot be received, till that which hinders be taken out of the way. Let us
see what those hindrances are, that must be first taken out of the way. They
are these.

First, An over-good conceit of a 1.
man's own condition and estate, wherein he is for the present. Such a conceit
disconceits a man of the necessity of Christ, and makes him regardlesse of him
when offered. Offer to a man a thing that he needs not, and he will not be at
the pains to reach forth his hand to receive it. What cares he to receive a
thing he needs not? Offer an alms to a rich man, and he scorns it, what he
take an alms, that has money of his own in his purse? he thinks it an
abuse, a disgrace, and a disparagement to him for one of his rank and repute,
to have an alms offered him. But offer it to a poor man, to a needy person,
his heart is gladded at the offer, and he thankfully receives it. A man that
thinks highly well of his estate already, he thinks meanly of Christ. The
whole need not the Physician, need no Physic, and therefore care neither for
Physic, nor Physician. Men that are strongly possessed with the conceit of the
present goodness of their estates, and conditions, Christ is vile in their
eyes. A man therefore that would ever receive Christ, must first empty his
heart of all such conceits, and be under the sense and under the pinch too of
selfe-emptinesse. A man that would receive Christ, must come with an empty
hand. The full stomach despises the honey-combs of the Gospel, and the full
hand will never receive Christ offered. Stout-hearted persons are far from
righteousness, Isa. 46. 12. Hearken unto me ye stout-hearted, that are far
from righteousness, I bring near my righteousness. God brings Christ, and
his righteousness near to men, he offers it them in the ministry of the
Gospel, and yet though it be brought near, they are far from it, because
they do not receive it. And why do they not receive it, when it is brought so
near unto them? Because they are stout-hearted. They have a conceit, that
their estate is good already, and they build and rest upon a righteousness of
their own in their moralities and performances; and this conceit makes them so
stouthearted, that they will not submit themselves to the righteousness of
God, Romans 10. 3. We are Lords, we will not come unto thee, Jer. 2. 31.
Beggars will come and receive Gods offers, and his alms, but whilst men
conceit themselves to be Lords, to have Lords estates, they will neither come,
nor receive Gods offers. If therefore we would receive Christ, we must away
with all these swelling conceits, we must away with our Lordships, with our
stoutnesse, and fullness, and labor to see our cursed and damnable condition
by nature, the emptiness and vanity of all we have, and do, we must be in a
perishing condition, Luke 15. 17. in a lost condition, Luke 19. 10. He that
will be Christ's disciple, and receive him for his Lord, must deny himself. The
Apostle, Phil. 3. counts all things dung, that he may win and receive Christ.
And Christ before he offers Laodicea Gold, Raiment, and eye salve, he first
convinces her of her poverty, beggary, nakedness, and labors, to empty her of
her self-love, and selfe-conceitednesse that she was rich, and needed nothing.
Thereby giving to understand, that it is a most dangerous hindrance that keeps
men from receiving Christ, to have an overgood conceit of a man's own natural
estate, of what he has, and does. As ever therefore thou will receive Christ,
away with it. Such as go down to the dust, and in the sense of their
wretchedness are laid in the dust; That cannot keep alive their own souls,
and see no way but death, they they are, that will bow to Christ, and receive
him with all their souls, Psalm. 22. 29.

CHAP. VI.
The love of our lusts, a hindrance from receiving Christ.

ANother maine hindrance to the receiving of Christ, is a love of our lusts, an
inordinate love of our profits, pleasures, credits, etc. Our lusts loved at
all, our profits and pleasures overloved, do altogether hinder a man from
receiving of Christ. A man's lusts must be cast out, if Christ be received in.
Now men's lusts are dear to them, men are strongly bewitched with them, and they
will never endure to receive Christ upon such terms, as to turn their lusts
going. When Christ is once received for the husband, there must be a bill of
Divorce given to all these, and they must be packt out. That Is death to a
carnal heart to do so, he can as easily die as do it, and therefore will
rather refuse to receive Christ, then he will receive him upon such harsh
terms. When it was propounded to the Roman Emperor to receive Christ for a
God, the Senate refused to do it, because they understood if he were received
as a God, he only must be received, and no other with him, all other gods must
down, if they received him: upon the very same ground it is that men do not
receive Christ into their hearts; because they see that if Christ be received,
their lusts must out of doors, and Christ alone must have their hearts. Christ
will not be received by us whilst the rooms of our hearts are taken up by
base and sinful lusts. As when he was borne, he was feign to be in the stable,
because no room for him in the Inn, Luke 2. 7. So if we make, and will have
our hearts common Innes, and receptacles for lusts to harbor and lodge them,
How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? Jer. 4. 14. Christ cannot,
will not be received, because there is no Room for him. What was the reason
Diatrephes would not receive John, but because he loved to have the
pre-eminence? 3 John 9. Lusts love to have the pre-eminence in the heart, and
therefore keep out Christ from being received, because if he be received, they
must lose their pre-eminence, and they had as lieve lose their lives as that.
So it is also in the inordinate love of the world, and our profits. It was a
fair offer which was made to them, Luke 14. Come; for all things are ready:
Receive Christ tendered to you in the Gospel, and ye shall receive with him all
things your souls can desire. And yet they received not Christ in that offer,
and all because their oxen, and their farms inordinately loved, drew their
hearts another way. It is so in the case of credit and respect in the world,
inordinately respected. Christ is offered to many a man in the world, but he
sticks at receiving him. What is the matter? Oh, says he, If I receive him, I
shall receive but little credit by it in the world, nay, I shall lose credit
and respect amongst my friends. If I might receive Christ, and credit both, I
could then receive him; but because if Christ be received my credit will be
gone, therefore I will none, I will not meddle. Our Savior charging those with
this sin of not receiving him, Joh. 5. 43. I am come in my Fathers name, and
ye receive me not, does there show this very thing to be the reason of their
not receiving him, ver. 44. How can ye believe which receive honor one of
another? As if he had said, I complain that ye receive me not; and indeed it
is no wonder ye receive me not, when ye receive honor one of another, that
is, you desire to have credit, respect, esteem, and good opinion one of
another. You see if any one receive me, all his fellows will hate him, scorn,
slight, and dis-esteeme him, and you stand so much upon your honor and
credit, one amongst another, that it is impossible for you thus inordinately
affected to your credit, ever to receive me. So that if ever we would receive
Christ, we must casheire all our lusts, send them packing. We must renounce
all our carnal lusts, worldly lusts, and see more gain to be received in
receiving Christ, then in all the Oxen and Farms in the world. Be willing to
sacrifice thy credit and esteem in the world, and be content to be the
reproach of the world, so thou may but receive, and enjoy him.

CHAP. VII.
False and groundless fears, a hindrance to the receiving of Christ.

THere be many that go further then in the former cases, that do happily 3.
seriously desire to receive Christ, and yet dare not, but are afraid to do
it. Not afraid, because of parting with their lusts, with their profits,
credit, ease, etc. but afraid in regard of their own unworthiness. They fear
that it will be over-boldly, and saucily done, for such as they are to offer to
receive Christ, in that guilty and unworthy condition in which they stand. They
have been foul and filthy sinners; what have they to do to receive Christ, or
to meddle with him? Surely Christ will never be received by such heinous
sinners as they are. These false fears keep many a soul from that
forwardness in receiving Christ that should be. But these be fears for which
no ground at all: for first; God offers him to such sinners, and calls upon
such sinners to receive him. He was offered to, and received by those very men
that crucified him, Act. 2. It is not humility to stand straining courtesy,
when God offers Christ. Nay, God offering Christ to such sinners, it is
disobedience, and not humility, not to receive him. It is no presumption, no
boldness, no sauciness to do that which God commands us to do. It is a
faithless fear, and a false humility to hang back when God wills us to
receive him. Secondly, Christ received sinners, Luke 15. 2. And therefore
heinous sinners may receive Christ. Zacheus a Publican, and such a sinner, as
the people murmr at Christ for his sake, Luke 19. 7. and yet Christ offered
himself to be received, and was received by him. Thirdly, If thou be so
unworthy, and so great a sinner, the more need thou have to receive him. The
greater thine unworthiness, the greater need of Christ to take off thine
unworthiness. Fourthly, If none should receive Christ till they were worthy,
who should ever have him? Fifthly, who ever was refused for his unworthiness
that had a desire to receive him? Therefore what ever thy sins, and
unworthiness be, I say unto thee as the Angel said to Joseph whilst he was in
that demur what to do, Mat. 1. 20. Fear not, says he, to take Mary thy wife;
to receive her for thy wife. So I say, what ever thy sins have been, what
ever thine own unworthiness be, fear not to receive Christ Jesus thine
husband. It is an undervaluing of Christ, when we fear in this case to
receive him; as if his worthiness were not such as could swallow up all our
unworthiness. It is strange to see Satan's fetches. It is his plot with most
men to keep them from receiving Christ by a conceit of their worthiness, and
when he sees that men once come to see their unworthiness, and their need of
Christ, and a desire to receive him, then he staves them of with their
unworthiness, and would have them so over-mannerly, as not to receive him,
because of their unworthiness. Shall a poor, mean conditioned woman refuse
the offer of a rich husband, because she is poor and beggarly, or has she
not the more reason to accept it for her poverty? In such a case it were a fond
thing to be overhumble, as to stand in her own light, and hinder her self for
ever. When David made the tender of marriage to Abagail, she in her humility
of spirit confesses her self not worthy of such a match, Let thine handmaid be
a servant to wash the feet of the servants of my Lord, 1 Samuel 25. 41. But yet
for all that, she refuses not the offer, but she arose, and made have, and
followed after the messengers of David, and became his wife, verse 42. So when
Christ offers himself to be received as our Husband, let us not stand so much
in our own light, as to refuse to receive him, because of our unworthiness of
such a favor. Confess we our unworthiness of it, but yet rise up, and make
have, and follow after the messengers of Christ, and become his wife. Why
should we stumble at that, at which Christ stumbled not? If any should stumble
at unworthiness, it should be Christ himself. And when he notwithstanding our
unworthiness offers himself; why should not we receive his offer? If our
unworthiness be no bar to his offer, why should it be to our receiving? If
David think not unworthily of Abigail, but is content and desirous to make her
his wife, why then should Abigail under a pretense of unworthiness, refuse to
receive David for her husband?

CHAP. VIII.
The Positive Duty which must be performed of all that will receive Christ.

THe second thing is the Positive Duty 2.
to be done for the receiving of Christ. And the duty to be done is, To
believe. To believe, is to receive Christ, and when we do believe, we do
receive him, Joh. 1. 12. To as many as received him, that is, to as many as
believed in his name. So Joh. 5. 43, 44. Ye receive me not, how can ye
believe? Therefore they received him not, because they believed not. Then
Christ is received when he dwells in our hearts, and he dwells in our hearts by
faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. For the better understanding of this point, we must know,
that the receiving of Christ by faith, stands in setting faith on work in the
several acts thereof. Now, faith is to be considered as the eye of the soul,
and as the hand of the soul, and in receiving of Christ, it must be set on
work as both. There be false faiths in the world. Some faith is all eye, and
no hand, it sees and knows not, it applies, and apprehends nothing. Some faith
is all hand, will be catching, and snatching at Christ, it is no eye. The first
is a lame faith, the second is a blind faith. 2 Samuel 5. 8. The blind, and the
lame were hated of David's soul, so is the Idol faith, the lame and blind
faith of the world hated of Gods soul; and as it is there said; The blind,
and the lame shall not come into the house, so neither shall they come into
heaven, because neither a lame nor a blind faith do receive Christ.

First, then the faith that will receive 1.
Christ, must be set on work as the eye of the soul. A man that will receive
Christ, must first see Christ, see his worth, excellency, beauty, and
all sufficiency. He must so see him, that he may see him worth the receiving,
worth the having. A man will never care to receive that, or once put out his
hand to take that, in which he sees no worth. But when a man sees a thing
offered wherein he sees worth, the worth of it will make him reach out to
receive it. Zacheus did receive Christ into his house, and into his heart, but
the first step to it was a desire to see him, and he first gat up into the
Sycamore tree to see him. The word, and the ministry of the Gospel is the
Sycamore tree, by studious reading, and hearing the word, must men get up into
the Sycamore, from whence they may see Christ. It is in this case as in Eves
tentation. The Devil offers her the forbidden fruit, and she receives it;
she should not have received it, but see what moved her to receive it. Genesis 3.
6. And when she saw that the tree was good for food, that it was a desire to
the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit,
she received it: she looked through false glasses, and was gulled with false
apprehensions, but yet thus much we may see by it; that when we see, and
judge a thing offered to be of worth, precious, and desirable, that that is
the next way to make it receiveable. And thus is it in receiving Christ. As the
Apple Tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved amongst the sons; I
sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet unto my
taste, Cant. 2. 3. If ever we would receive the fruit of this tree, we must
labor by the eye of faith to see the excellency of this tree, and the fruit of
it. We must first see that Christ as far excells all other things, as the
Appletree does excel all the ordinary and common trees of the wood, that there
is delight under his shadow, that there is sweetness in his fruit, that it is
a tree good for food, that it is a desire to the eyes, that it is a tree to be
desired to make one wise indeed, 1 Cor. 1. 30. He of God is made unto us
wisdom. And the excellencies of this tree once seen, would holily tempt us to
receive the offered fruits thereof. We see Joh. 1. 11, 12. that the Disciples,
and the faithful received Christ, when others received him not, His own
received him not, yet we his Disciples received him. But how came they to
receive him? They did it by faith, verse. 12. But mark what was the first act
of faith in receiving him; That we see verse. 14. And we beheld his glory, the
glory as of the only begotten of the Father. Our faith pierced through the
veil, and covert of the flesh. We saw him, and prized him as the only
begotten Son of God, and so by the eye of faith seeing the glory and
excellency of Christ, we received him. Look how Paul speaks in the case of
Receiving Epaphroditus, Phil. 2. 29. Receive him therefore in the Lord, with
all gladness, and hold such in reputation. Paul would have him be received,
and received gladly, and therefore that they might the readilier do that,
wi^^es them to have him in Reputation. He knew well enough, that if they did
not prize him, if they had esteemed him a fellow of little worth, that had
nothing in him, that they would never receive him, at least with no gladness.
But if they did but consider that he was a man of worth, that he was a precious
man, and so had him in reputation according to his desert, that they would
receive him with all gladness. So is it in the receiving of Christ. Hold him
once in reputation, and we shall receive him with all gladness. Labor by the
eye of faith to see his precious excellencies, and we cannot but hold him in
Reputation.

Faith first shows to the soul the precious excellencies, and glories of
Christ, it represents him exceeding precious to the soul, as the eye it lets
in the excellency of Christ into the understanding upon which the affections
are raised, and stirred up to the receiving of him. We shall see it made good
in two Texts. One is that, Mat. 13. 45, 46. The Kingdom of heaven is like unto
a Merchant man seeking goodly pearls, who when he has found one pearl of
great price, he went and sold all that he had, and bought it. He sells all you
see to receive that pearl, what moves him to it? He found one pearl of great
price. Here is then the first thing that sets all the rest on work, he saw it
was a pearl of price, of great price, of great worth, he saw it was worth the
receiving, worth the having. He that ever will receive this blessed pearl that
is offered in the Gospel, must first have the eye of faith to see the price,
value, and worth of it. Another place is that, Cant. 6. 1. Whither is thy
beloved gone? whither is thy beloved turned aside, that we may seek him with
thee? as if they had said, we have a great desire to receive Christ. But how
was this desire raised? That we may see, Chap. 5. verse. 9, 10. and so to the
end. The Church had spoken of her beloved, of her Christ, ver. 8. Thereupon
others ask her what this beloved is, and this Christ is, with whom she makes
so much ado. She therefore describes and sets him forth in all his
excellencies, beauties, and glories; and tells them, ver. 16. That he is
altogether lovely, altogether desires, or wholly desirable things. Now when
upon this description and relation of hers, they see the invaluable worth, and
excellency of Christ, when they see him to be wholly desires, then are their
desires wholly to receive him; Then they cry out, Whither is thy beloved gone,
that we may seek him with thee? So that the eye of faith is the first inlet
of Christ into the soul, and this act of faith in seeing Christ's excellencies,
is the first in receiving Christ. And therefore when the Apostle gives us the
sum of the Gospel, Christ crucified for sins, mark how he speaks, 1 Timothy 1.
15. This is a faithful saying, and says not which ought to be received of
all. That Is true, this Christ and this Doctrine concerning him, is to be
received: But he adds withal, a secret argument to persuade men to receive
it. It is worthy to be received of all. Thereby showing that before men will
receive the Gospel, and receive Christ, they must see Christ to be worthy of
all acceptance, and that when they see Christ worthy of all acceptance, then
they will set upon the receiving of him. This is then the first thing in
receiving Christ, an high prizing of him, and his excellencies, which makes way
to the actual! receiving of him; For the understanding being thoroughly and
truly convinced of his excellencies, the affections necessarily follow, and
stir up proportionable endeavors for the receiving of him. And what is the
cause that men do not receive Christ, but the ignorance of his worth? Joh. 4.
10. If thou knew the gift of God, and who it is that says to thee, Give me
to drink, thou would have asked of him. Romans 10. 3. For they being ignorant
of Gods righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness
of God. Men's ignorance of Christ, breeds in them a low prizing, and a base
undervaluing of him, and therefore every vile thing is preferred before him. It
was a vile sin which is complained of, Amos 2. 6. That they sold the righteous
for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes. A vile sin that Joel
complains of, Joel 3. 3. They have cast lots upon my people, and have given a
boy for an harlot, and sold a girl for wine, that they might drink. It was a
vile sin in Judas, that he sold, and prized Christ at thirty pieces: A goodly
price that I was prized at of them. Zech. 11. 13. It was the price at which
slaves were prized. Exodus 21. 32. Now if so base a thing in the Israelites, to
prize the righteous and the poor so basely, as to sell them for old shoes, to
sell a boy for an harlot, if in Judas to prize Christ but at thirty pieces,
what is it then to prize Christ under old shoes, to sell him for an harlot,
for wine, for unclean and drunken lusts? And yet thus is Christ prized by men,
men will sell him for old shoes, for an harlot, for a pot, for a penny. So
basely is the precious Lord of Glory viliprized by sinful men. And because men
so woefully undervalue him, and esteem so basely of him, therefore it is they
receive him not; for who would trouble himself to be at that pains that is
required in the receiving of Christ, that does not prize him above thirty
pieces, above an harlot, above wine, above old shoes? Now, as this base
under-prizing of Christ makes men neglect the receiving of him, so certainly
when men once have the eye of faith to see the due worth, and the true
excellencies of Christ, then will they bestirre themselves for the receiving of
him. See Mat. 14. 35, 36. And when the men of the place had knowledge of him,
they sent out into all the Country round about, and brought unto him all that
were diseased, and besought him that they might only touch the hem of his
garment. So, had men now but the knowledge of Christ, and knew how rich, how
precious a Christ he were, they would flock thick and threefold after him,
and be earnest suitors that they might receive him. It is Christ's preciousnesse
well viewed by faith that fetches men in unto him. 1 Pet. 2. 4. As therefore
we would frame our souls to the receiving of Christ, so study Christ, study
his excellencies, view his beauties. It is a noble study to study Christ: The
Angels in Heaven are students in this Divinity, they desire to look into, to
pry into these things. 1 Pet. 1. 12. It is the same word that is used of John's
looking into Christ's grave, Joh. 20. 5. And he stooped down and looked in,
because he would thoroughly see how things were, he stooped down to look
wishly and narrowly; with such earnestness, with such desire look the blessed
Angels into the mysteries of the Gospel, they stoop down, and look into them.
They do not only study, but wondrous hard do they study the unsearchable
riches of Christ; If the Angels have benefit by Christ, yet what is their
benefit to ours? Christ came for us, was Incarnate, and crucified for us, how
much more concerns it us to look into these things then the Angels? The
looking into the Arc cost them full dear, 1 Samuel 6. 19. It is our undoing
that now we do not look into the Arc. It was death for the Kohathites that
were Levites to look into the Sanctuary, and see the holy things. Numb. 4. 4.
20. But now it is otherwise, God now under the Gospel has unveyled all the
holy things, and the very Arc which was in the holy of holies, is to be seen,
Apoc. 11. 19. It is our sin, and it is our death not to pry now into the Arc.
2 Cor. 4. 3. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that perish. Pry therefore
into the Arc, and there see the treasures of all grace, and good laid up, so
fix thine eye upon these treasures, as thou may be stirred up to an holy
covetousness, and greediness of receiving them.

Secondly, The faith that will receive Christ, must work as an hand: And it 2.
must do a double work of the hand.

First, Faith must stretch out it self 1.
and reach out it self to receive Christ. If a man would receive Christ, he
must do in this case, as Christ spoke to him Mark. 3. 5. Stretch forth thine
hand. This stretching forth of the hand, is upon the sight of Christ's
excellencies, to stir up in our hearts, strong, vehement, restless, and
affectionate desires after him. Cant. 8. 2. Oh that thou were as my brother,
that sucked the breasts of my mother! Oh that I had this precious Lord Christ!
oh that he were mine, that I were possessed of him! This is the Lifting up of
the doors and gates, Psalm. 24. 7. When the soul is lifted, and raised up
after Christ in strong desires to enjoy him; these desires are the reaching,
and stretching forth of the hand to receive him. And such a reaching out of the
hand of the soul, shall not miss of receiving Christ. Mat. 5. Blessed are
they that hunger and thirst after Righteousness, for they shall be filled.
Therefore they shall receive, or else how be filled? It is as if he had said;
Blessed are they that stretch out their hands, for they shall receive. Apoc.
22. 17. Let him that is athirst come, and whosoever will let him take the water
of life freely. Thirst will make a man reach and stretch forth the hand for
water, and reaching helps to receiving. The Law of God was, Deuteronomy. 24. 15. that
a poor man should receive his pay at his day: and see what is one reason for
it. Because he lifts up his soul unto it; that is, he sets his heart upon it,
with a strong desire to receive it, and therefore God would not have him
disappointed. Now surely God will not deal worse with a poor soul, then he
would have them deal with a poor man. If a poor man that has lifted up his
soul in desires after his hyre, must not be disappointed, but must receive his
hyre, then surely when GOD sees a poor soul lift up it self, and reaching
out it self in its desires after Christ, he will not have it disappointed of
receiving Christ. What comparison between wages desired, and Christ desired?
The LORD that will not in his goodness have the desires of poor men, will
much less suffer the desires of poor souls after Christ be deceived.

Secondly, Faith as the hand, must lay hold upon, take, claspe about, and
fasten 2.
upon Christ offered. We see Luke 2. 26. that Simeon had it revealed unto him
that he should see the Lords Christ. And when Christ was brought into the
Temple by his parents, he does view him, and looks upon him; but yet that would
not satisfy him, to see him; but verse. 28. Then he took him up in his arms.
Faith does as Simeon did, It not only viewes, and sees Christ, and his worth,
but seeing him it reaches out after him, and takes him up in his Arms, claspes
about him, and holds him fast for her own. And hence is the phrase of
receiving Christ, Joh. 1. 12. And Receiving the promises, 1. Tim. 1. 15. And
the phrase of embracing the promises, Heb. 11. 13. And laying hold on eternal
life, 1 Timothy 6. 12. And this act of faith in receiving Christ, is that, Cant.
8. 2. I would lead thee, and bring thee into thy mothers house. When God offers
Christ in the Gospel a Lord, and a Savior, and we take Christ for our Lord,
and Savior, then do we receive him. Behold, says God, I offer you Christ to
be your Lord and Savior; Now then comes faith and has a double act.

An Act of the understanding, by 1.
which as the eye of the soul it sees as the necessity, so the worth, and
price of Christ. Here, says faith, I see a very precious Christ, I see
wonderful worth, and excellency in him, I see he is well worth the looking
after, well worth the having, and receiving.

An Act of the will. And that is twofold; 2.
first, as the hand of the soul to reach and stretch out it self after Christ
in vehement and strong desires after him. Here faith says, oh that I had this
precious Christ, oh that this precious Christ were mine! oh that upon any
terms my Soul might enjoy him! Secondly, as the hand of the soul to lay hold
upon, to apply, and take Christ offered. Here faith says, This precious Christ
I do willingly and gladly receive, I lay hold upon him as my Lord, and
Savior. Behold Lord, as thou offerest him unto me, so do I receive, and take
him, My Lord, and my God; Welcome Lord Christ, I claspe about thee with both
mine arms. And thus by these two Acts of faith is Christ received into the
heart.

CHAP. IX.
How to know, whether we have received Christ already.

IF Christ must be received, then try we, and examine we our selves whether
we have received him or no. It concerns every man to examine himself whether
he be a true Christian or not. No man is a true Christian till Christ be
received, therefore as it concerns us to try whether we be true Christians or
not, so it concerns us to try whether we have received Christ or not.

How may it be known whether Quest.
Christ be received or not?

It may be known by diverse things. Answ.
Try it by these.

First, By this in the Text. As ye have 1.
received Christ Jesus the Lord. Mark then what they do that truly receive
Christ. They that truly receive Christ, receive him not only a Christ Jesus,
but they receive him also a Lord Jesus, a Christ the Lord. They receive him not
only a Saving, but a Ruling Christ. They that receive Christ indeed, receive
him as God offers him in the Word, now he offers him an whole Christ to save
and rule both, 2 Cor. 4. 5. We preach Christ Jesus the Lord, we preach, and
offer him to you a Christ Jesus, a Saving Christ, a Christ to save, and we
preach, and offer him to you Christ the Lord, a Ruling Christ, a Christ to
Rule. Christ is called the Lords Christ. Luke 2. 26. Till he had seen the
Lords Christ. Our Savior tells us, Mat. 24. 24. That there shall arise false
Christ's. And the world is full of false Christ's, Idol Christ's, Christ's bred in
the brains of ignorant heads. Now a man's care should be to receive a true
Christ, the Lords Christ. But how should one know the Lords Christ from the
false and Idol Christ's of the world? What a kind of Christ is the Lords
Christ? See Zech. 6. 13. A Priest upon his throne. That is expounded by two
places. Acts 2. 36. God has made Jesus both Lord, and Christ. Acts 5. 31. He
has exalted him to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance and
forgiveness of sins. A Savior to give forgiveness, and a Prince to give
repentance; A Savior to give pardon of, and a Prince to give Power against
sin. So then, the Lords Christ which he offers is the Lord Christ, not only
a Saving, but a Ruling, not only a pardoning, but a reforming Christ, not
only a Christ with a sacrifice, but a Christ with a Scepter, and a Crown, not
only a Christ with blood, but a Christ with water. 1 John 5. Now then if we
have received Christ, we have received him such an one. Has Christ then, whom
thou say thou have received, has he wrought Repentance, Mortification,
Sanctification in thine heart? Has that Christ whom thou have received a
crown on his head, a Scepter in his hand, a throne in thine heart? does he
rule, and Lord it in thine heart, so as thine heart is swayed, and thy life
ordered by his commands? If it be thus, then have thou indeed received Christ
into thine heart. But this evidences it, that many have not received Christ,
many bear the name of Christ, and have taken up the profession of his name,
but yet they have not received him into their hearts. They have a Christ of
their own framing, a Christ forged in their own fancy. What, not received
Christ? Yes, God forbid but that they should have received Christ with all
their hearts. Well, look a little upon the Christ they say they have received.
Look upon his head: Is their Christ crowned? Look upon his hand, Is their
Christ Sceptred? Look into their hearts, Is their Christ throned? What Lordship
has he? what dominion does he exercise in their hearts? Not a whit, for all
the Christ they have received, there is no Repentance, no Mortification, no
Holiness, no Obedience, for all the Christ they have received, they are
earthly, covetous, full of unclean lusts, drunkards, swearers, profane and
loose. Be it known unto all such that they have not received the Lords Christ,
because they have not received the Lord Christ. It is a false Christ they have
received, It is the Libertins Christ, the carnal Gospellers Christ, an
Antinomian Christ, a crownless, scepterless, throneless Christ.

Object. I, but you do us wrong, we do receive Christ, and hope, and desire
to be saved by him alone.

Answ. Nay, you do Christ wrong: It is true indeed that you do not say we
will not have this man to save us, to pardon us, to deliver us from hell, so
you do not refuse him. But yet you say as those wretches, Luke 19. 14. We
will not have this man to reign over us: And thus you receive him not, thus
you do refuse him; you put a reed into his hand, and a crown of thorns upon
his head: Therefore it is a clear case, that every impenitent, unsanctified,
disobedient person does not, has not received Christ. Thou will receive him to
save thee, but rule thee he shall not; Thou likest him for a Jesus, but a Lord
Jesus thou likest him not. Is Christ divided? says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1. This
is to receive a divided Christ. They did wretchedly to part Christ's Raiment,
but they do more wretchedly that will part, and divide Christ himself, that
will divide his Kingdom from his Priesthood, that will receive him for a
Savior, but not a Prince, that will receive him an un-throned Priest. It is an
whole Christ that must be received. He that receives not all, receives none at
all.

Secondly, By that, Joh. 1. 12. with 2.
verse 16. To as many as received him. There were then that did receive him.
How were they known? Of his fullness we have all received Grace for Grace. So
then here are two things. First, They that receive Christ, receive of his
fullness, and are in their degree filled with Christ. They that receive Christ,
receive of that, yea receive that in their measure which is in him: Of his
fullness we receive. Secondly, they receive of his fullness Grace for Grace,
as the child has all parts answerable to his Father from whom he receives
life, and being, as the wax receives print for print, answerable to that which
is in the seal. So that a man that receives Christ, not only in the general
receives of that with which Christ is filled, but in his degree and measure
receives of every grace that is in Christ. 1 John 4. 17. As he is, so are we in
this world. All Christians that have received Christ in this world, are as he
is, they have, and bear upon them the prints, stamps, impressions of the same
graces that are in him. That as Solomon speaks in another case, Prove. 27. 19.
As in water face answers to face, so a Christian receiving Christ, answers to
him face to face, bears his Image, the stamp and impression of his graces; for
Christ once received, and entertained into the heart, is an assimilating
Christ, an altering, changing Christ, that turns every soul into the
likeness of himself. Christ we saw before was received both by the eye and
hand of faith. The receiving of Christ by the eye when he is indeed received,
it works strangely, 2 Cor. 3. 18. The vision of Christ by the eye of faith is a
transforming vision. As the blessed vision of Christ shall make us gloriously
like him, 1 John 3. 2. We shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is:
So also the sight of Christ by faith does make us graciously like him, holy,
heavenly, spiritual, full of goodness, zeal, love, compassion, etc. Now if
the seeing of Christ by faith will work such changes, such assimilation, such
conformity to Christ, what will then the receiving of him, and the taking him
home into our hearts, and souls do? How much more will that transform a man
into the Image of Christ? By this then may men be tried whether they have
received Christ or no. If thou have of Christ's fullness, if with Stephen, Act.
6. full of faith and the holy Ghost, if with the Romans, filled with knowledge
and all goodness. Romans 15. 4. If as the Colossians, Col. 1. 9. then thou have
received of Christ's fullness, and having received of his fullness, thou have
received Christ, for none can receive of his fullness, till they have received
him. If thou have in thee the Graces that are in Christ, Grace over against
Grace, Meekness, Humility, heavenly mindedness, Love, etc. which were in him;
this Grace for Grace, argues that thou have received of his fullness, and so
have received himself. If thou be changed, conformed, and transformed to his
Image, thou have received him. But this shows how many have not received him.
They are full indeed, but of what are they full, and with what are they filled?
They are full as they, Romans 1. 29. as he Act. 5. 3. Act. 13. 10. full as they,
2 Pet. 2. 14. eyes full of adultery, hearts full of worldliness, and
earthlinesse, heads full of wine and strong drink, mouths full of oaths and
cursing, hands full of blood. Now is this the fullness of Christ? Is this of
the fullness of Christ? or of the fullness of the Devil? Have men again
received Grace for Grace? Christ was humble, they are proud; Christ was
compassionate, they merciless; Christ was loving, they are hateful, and
hating one another; Christ heavenly, and spiritual, they earthly, and carnal,
etc. Is this Grace over against Grace? or vice or gracelesnes over against
Grace? Art thou in this world like unto Christ? and did he live as thou now
do? of Christ fullness therefore have not men received, neither yet have they
received Christ himself.

Thirdly, They that receive Christ, 3.
receive him in that way, and in those means wherein God offers him, yea and
withal their hearts receive that wherein, and whereby Christ is received. God
offers Christ to be received in his Word, and the Ministry of the Gospel. They
that receive Christ, receive his Word, and in his Word do receive him. A man
that will receive Jewels, must receive the casket in which the Jewels are; he
that will receive such gold and treasure, must receive the purse and the chest
in which the gold and treasure is. Mat. 10. 40. He that receives you, receives
me. And how are they received? verse. 14. Whosoever shall not receive you, nor
hear your words. Therefore Christ's Ministers are received when their words are
heard, and received; when the Word is received, the Ministers are received, and
when they are received, Christ is received. So here in the text; As ye have
received Christ. How and when did they receive him? As ye have received
Christ, and as ye have been taught, verse. 7. they received him when they were
taught by the ministry of the Word. We see Acts 2. 41. that some received the
Word gladly. It was a good sign they received Christ, he that receives the
Ordinance as that by which Christ is conveyed, and receives that truth in the
Word into his heart, that man receives Christ. Let men try themselves by this.
Is Gods Ordinance respected, and his truth received into thine heart? a good
sign that Christ is received. But how many talk and brag of receiving Christ,
that despise his ordinance, and resist and reject that truth therein dispensed?
Behold, to conclude against such men, that they receive not Christ.

Fourthly, He that receives Christ, 4.
receives gladly all that belong to Christ, his Ministers, his members, Mat.
10. 40. He that receives you, receives me; and so likewise he that receives
me, receives you. The Galatians had received Christ, and therefore see how
Paul was received, Gal. 4. 14. Ye received me as an Angel of God, yea as Jesus
Christ. A sign they received Jesus Christ. That as Paul speaks to Philemon of
Onesimus, Philem. 17. If thou count me therefore a partner, receive him as my
self. So says Christ to all that receive him of his Ministers, If you have
received me, receive my Ministers as my self. And so for his members, Mat. 10.
41. He that receives a Disciple. He that receives Christ, receives a Disciple,
receives him into love, fellowship, and communion. When a man entertaines and
receives a friend, he also entertaines and receives his servants. If the
servants should not be received, but be shut out, the Master would not think
himself heartily received of such a man. Shall the trial be put upon this one
thing? Judge then whether Christ be received by men in the world, by their
receiving his Ministers as his Ministers, his members as his members. Ye
suffer fools gladly, says Paul, 2 Cor. 11. 19. So men receive fools,
fiddlers, jesters, players; they receive good fellows, gamesters, drunkards,
swearers, etc. These men they receive gladly. But a Minister of Christ, and a
member of Christ, as such an one, how gladly is he received into our houses,
and companies? As gladly as water is received into the ship: men's contempt and
scorn of these, testifies how they have received Christ.

Thus much for the Argument, by which he presses to the duty. The Duty
follows, So walk in him. By walking he means a going forward in the ways of
Godliness, for walking is a progressive motion. Before we come to the duty;
first from the subjoyning this to the former, As ye have received Christ, so
walk; learn thus much.

CHAP. X.
Whosoever they are, that have indeed received Christ, they do walk in him.

THey that receive Christ, either in the Word, or in the Sacrament, they do
walk in him, that is, they do in his strength walk in obedience and
fruitfulness before God. True receivers of Christ, are walkers in Christ,
Christ truly received sets men on walking. As faith has an eye to see Christ,
and his excellencies, as it has an hand to reach out, and to receive Christ,
so it has also a foot to walk in Christ. It is in this case as it was in
that Acts 3. in the healing of the creeple, one that was lame from his mothers
womb; He could not walk, but was carried about, verse. 2. Now Peter cures this
man; And how the cure was wrought, he tells them, verse. 12. and 16. Why look
ye so earnestly on us, as though by our own power or holiness we had made
this man to walk. The Name of Christ through faith in his Name, has made this
man strong, yea the faith which is by him has given him this perfect
soundness. It is said, verse. 7. That his seete and anckle-bones received
strength, and he leaping stood, and walked, and entered into the Temple, leaping
and walking. So then the creeple by faith receiving Christ into his heart, ver.
16. does receive strength into his limbs to leap, and walk, yea so as verse.
9. All the people saw him walking. Now just so it is spiritually with all that
receive Christ. Though before they were errant creeples, creeples from the
womb, that could not stir one foot in the ways of God, yet when once by
faith they receive Christ into their hearts, the feet and anckle-bones of
their souls immediately receive strength, and they presently fall to walking,
so that all the people may see them walking, doing those duties, performing
that service and obedience, which before they did not. There was another
creeple healed, Acts 14. 8. who was a creeple from his mothers womb, who had
never walked. He hears Paul preach, verse. 9. Paul sees that he had faith in
him to be healed, and thereupon bids him stand upon his feet, And he leaped
and walked, ver. 10. So it is true spiritually, though a man have been a
creeple all his days, one that never walked, never did any duty of obedience
since he was borne, yet when once a man has faith, and by faith has received
Christ: Christ by faith received will make such an one walk, as never walked
before. We shall see that amongst other things our Savior did, it was usually
one thing with him to heal the lame, and to set them on walking, Mat. 15. 30,
31. And Mat. 21. 14. The miracles, and cures that Christ wrought upon men's
bodies, were but to teach what a Christ he should be spiritually to men's
souls. It taught that Christ received into the soul should presently cure the
lamenesse thereof, and being once received he makes lame souls walk, that
never walked before. So Romans 8. 1. There is no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus. When we are in Christ, then he is in us; Then he is in us, and
we are in him when we receive him. But what kind of persons are they that
are in Christ, and Christ in them, that have received Christ, who walk after
the Spirit? Therefore where Christ is received, he sets men a walking in the
duties of holiness, and obedience. When we receive Christ, as he abides in
us, so we abide in him. Now when a man has received Christ, so as he abides in
him, what will that man do? See 1 John 2. 6. He that says he abides in him,
ought himself also to walk. And how must he walk? Even as he walked. Christ
was a walking Christ, and so every Christian that has received Christ, must be
a walking Christian. And must, and will walk in that way in which Christ
walked. And the reasons of this are two.

First, That 1 John 5. 12. He that has 1.
the Son has life, he that has not the Son has not life. He that receives
the Son receives life, life from Christ cannot be idle, and asleep, but it is
active, stirring, and full of motion. Where Christ is received, spiritual life
is received, and spiritual life will set a man awalking, and aworking. Gal. 5.
25. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit; So that where
there is spiritual life, there is spiritual walking. And where Christ is
received there is spiritual life, for he that has the Son has life, And he
that has received the Son has the Son; for we come to have him by
receiving of him. It is possible that in nature a man may have life, and yet
not walk, but where spiritual life is, there will be walking. Christ
received, lives in us, Gal. 2. 20. And as he lives, so he walks in us, and
makes us walk in him.

Secondly, Because Christ being received, the Spirit of God is received also,
as we saw before. Now, the Spirit of God being received, he will make us walk
in duties of obedience Ezekiel. 36. 27. I will put my Spirit within you, and cause
you to walk in my statutes. Christ received, the Spirit is received; the
Spirit received causes a man to walk, so that where Christ is received, a man
must needs walk.

CHAP. XI.
Trialls of Men's Receiving of Christ.

BY this, may men try themselves, whether they have received Christ or not. Men
hear the Gospel daily Preached unto them, and live under the Ministry of the
Word in which Christ is offered unto them. Do they receive Christ thus offered
them? yes that they do by all means, if you will believe them. Men frequently
receive the Sacrament, and not one receives, but he hopes he receives Christ
into his heart. Now it deeply concerns us seriously to examine our selves
whether in truth we have received Christ or no, after so much use of his
Ordinances. If under so much Preaching, and after so much receiving the
Sacrament, we have not received Christ, we are in a miserable condition. Let
us therefore after so much hearing, and receiving, examine our selves whether
we have received Christ, or not. How shall we then know it? This is a sure
thing, where Christ is received it will be seen, and may be discerned. We
shall see Mar. 7. 24. that Christ entered into a house, and would have no man
know it, but, says the Text, he could not be hid. Where ever Christ is then, he
cannot be hid. He could not be hid in the house into which he was received, but
he was heard of, he was seen, and taken notice of. And if he could not be hid
in the house into which he was received, then much less can he be hid in the
heart into which he is received. It is a thousand times easier to hide him in
an house, then to hide him in an heart. If therefore ye have received Christ,
he cannot be hid; Why so? Because where he is received, he sets men awalking in
him, and in the ways of godliness. Well then, If we walk in Christ, if we
walk in obedience to Gods commandments, if we walk holily, and religiously,
then here is matter of sweet comfort unto us. Certainly, such as walk in
Christ, have received him. As we cannot receive him, but we must walk in
him, so we cannot walk in him, but we must receive him. Our walking in him
is an infallible evidence of our receiving him. But on the contrary, this shows
how few have received Christ in the Word and Sacrament, because so few do
walk in him. Do but consider what your walking is. Do not men walk as
Ephesians. 2. 2. Ye walked according to the course of this world, according to the
Prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now works in the children of
disobedience. Do not men walk as Epbes. 4. 17, 18. As the Gentiles walk in
the vanity of their minds, having their understanding darkened, etc. Do not
many walk as they, Phil. 3. 18, 19. Many walk who are the enemies of the
Cross, whose God is their belly, who mind earthly things. Do not many walk,
as 1 Pet. 4. 3. When we walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine,
revellings, banquettings, and abominable Idolatries. Do not many walk in
these walks, and yet talk of receiving Christ? In Gods fear, judge whether
such walking, be walking in Christ. Call ye walking in the lusts of the flesh,
the lusts of the world, the lusts of the devil, call ye this a walking in
Christ? If we would professedly walk out of Christ, what would we, or could
we do other? Lay together Ephesians. 4. 17, 18. with 20, 21. If such walkers have
not in truth learned Christ, then have not such walkers in truth received
Christ. Let such walkers in their consciences judge whether such walking be
walking in Christ, or in Satan. And do they that receive Christ, walk in
Satan? Let all such know once for all, that all their hearing, and receiving
the Sacrament notwithstanding they have not received Christ. A walking in
Christ, will prove a receiving of Christ, if no walking in him, then no
receiving of him.

Now more particularly for the Duty. Walking, that is going on, and forward in
duties of Religion, and obedience, and walking in him, that is, by his power,
and strength, or in him, that is, according to his will, or pattern. Learn
hence;

CHAP. XII.
It is a Christians duty to walk in Christ.

IT is the duty of a Christian to walk, to be in motion, in a progressive
motion, and going forwards. A Christian must not be a talker, a talker only,
but he must be a walker. It is easy to talk of Christ, though that be more
then many will do, but it is not so easy, nor so ordinary to walk in him. It
is a good sign of a man's being in Christ. Romans 8. 1. No condemnation to such
as are in him. But how may they be known that are in him? They walk after the
Spirit.

It is a sure sign, and evidence of spiritual life. Gal. 5. 25. If we live
in the spirit, let us also walk in the spirit. If we see a man walk, we are
sure he is alive.

It is a sign a man is in spiritual health. Arise, says Christ to the palsy
man, Take up thy bed and walk, Luke 5. It was a sign he was healed when he
could walk.

Sick men that keep their beds, cannot walk. It is a sign that men have
their spiritual sight, and limbs, when they can walk. The lame, and the
blind, cannot walk. Ignorant persons are blind. Men that are bodily blind,
can and do walk, but it is impossible for men spiritually blind to walk,
because it is impossible to walk but in the way, and impossible to walk in
the way, when it is not seen. And lame persons wanting limbs, and legs, as
blind persons want eyes, neither can they walk, but when men walk, it is a
sure sign that they have their eyes, their legs, their health, and
spiritual life.

It is a sign of spiritual strength. A child has life but cannot walk,
because it is weak, and wants strength, but as it grows strong, so it gets
ability to walk. And when a child can once walk, it is a sign it has
natural strength. So here, if we have some seeds, and beginnings of
spiritual life, yet we are but babes, and infirm weaklings, till we can
walk. But when once we do walk, it is a sign that we are grown in grace,
and have gotten some measure of spiritual strength. Zech. 10. 12. I will
strengthen him in the Lord, and they shall walk up and down in his Name. When
therefore men walk up and down in the name of the Lord, it is a sign they
are strengthened in the Lord.

It is a sign of Communion with God, and benefit received in the use of his
Ordinances, the Word and Sacrament. Genesis 29. 1. Then Jacob lifted up his feet,
and walked, and went on his journey; Then, namely after the sweet communion he
had with GOD in Bethel. And so when we lift up our feet, and walk, with
renewed vigor, and strength, it is a sign we have had fellowship with God in
his Word, and Sacrament. Isa. 2. 3. He will teach us his ways, and we will
walk in his paths. It is a sign that God himself has had the teaching of
us, and that in the Ministry of the Word, we have had communion with him when
once we fall awalking. So here in the Text, walking in Christ is made an
evidence of Receiving Christ. Then may a man be known to have received Christ
in the Word and Sacrament, when upon these duties done a man sets to walking.

It condemns such as will be Christians, Use.
but walk not. The world is full of talkers, but walkers are rare to be found.
Religion must be in the tongue, and it is that should be talked of, though many
men are more ashamed to have holy and good speech come from them, then to have
oaths, and filthy communication fall from their mouths. I do not condemn
talking of Christ, talking of Religion; Talk and spare not, but yet walk
withal, add walking to your talking, and then are ye right Christians
indeed. Set your feet on work as well as your tongues, and then ye shall
bridle the tongues of enemies. It condemns also Sedentary Christians, that set
them down, and sit still. Sitting is for heaven. That is the Rest that
remains for the people of God. But this life is no Resting, but a walking
life. We must not think of sitting, till we come to sit upon thrones, till
we come to sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of God.

It condemns also such kind of Christians that have sometimes some fits of
goodness, but go not on. They have their good words, but they are soon over.
This is not to walk; walking is a constant continued pace in good. A thief
may sometimes walk on in the high way, but he will not stay long in it, but
quickly turns aside into one by-way or other; whereas the honest traveller
keeps on, and goes on an end till he comes to his journeys end. It is one
thing to walk on in the ways of God, and another thing to take a few steps,
and out again. Such are no walkers. A godly man who for his settled course
walks on in the ways of obedience, may sometimes through tentation, and
infirmity, step aside into the ways of sin, yet for all that he cannot be
said to walk in those ways. Psalm. 1. 1. He walks not in the counsel of the
ungodly. And so a moral or a wicked man, may sometimes be in a good duty, or
a good way, but yet because his constant course bends, and goes another way, he
cannot be said to walk in the ways of God.

And so much for the first thing exhorted unto. The second follows. To be
Rooted in Christ, to a stabilitie, and steadfastness in the profession of
Christ, verse. 7. Rooted in him. It is a metaphor taken from trees. Trees have
no stabilitie, nor firmness, unless they root into firm earth, neither
have we any firmness, unless we root deep in Christ. The point we
learn hence is this:

CHAP. XIII.
It is not enough for a Christian to profess, and bear the Name of Christ,
but he must be Rooted in him.

CHristians must be Rooted Christians: Christ is the soil of a Christian
soul, and a Christian soul must Root in this soil. That look as Bildad
speaks in another case of a wicked man's outward estate, and flourishing in the
world, Job 8. 17. His roots are wrapped about the heap, and sees the place of
stones; that is, he roots deeply, and spreads about his roots, like a tree
that has its roots folded in the earth, and whose roots run in amongst the
stones, so should it be with a Christian: He should so root into Christ, that
his roots should wrap about the heap, wrap about Christ, he should have a
folded root in Christ. Christ is a Root, Apoc. 12. 16. I am the Root and
offspring of David, the Root, and Branch of David. How can Christ be both
Root and Branch? We read of the Root of Jesse, Isa. 11. 1. And Christ is
called the Branch, Zech. 6. 12. Behold the man whose name is the Branch. If
David then be Christ's Root, and Christ his Branch, how is Christ the Root of
David, and David and all the faithful his Branches? Joh. 15. 1. I am the Vine,
the Vine-roote, and ye are the Branches? And yet both these are true; That
Christ is both the Root, and Branch of David. Take him in his humane nature,
according to the flesh, and he is the Branch of David, for he was made of the
seed of David, according to the flesh, Romans 1. 3. But consider him in both
natures jointly in one person, and so he is the Root of David, and of all the
faithful. And as he is the Root, so should all the faithful root themselves
into this Root, Rooted in him. He is the Root into which all true Christians
must root themselves. And that upon these reasons.

First, All true Christians must grow. It is that which is often called for in
Scripture. 2 Pet. 3. 18. Grow in Grace. 2 Pet. 2. 2. that ye may grow. There
is nothing that does more evidence the truth of Grace, then the growth. Then a
Christian may have good evidence that he is a true Christian, when he is a
growing Christian. And a man that grows not in Grace, and goodness, may
justly question the truth of his Grace and goodness, the truth of his
Christianity. So that it much concerns a Christian to grow. Now look how
much it concerns a Christian to be a growing Christian, so much it concerns
him to be a Rooted Christian, to be Rooted in Christ. Because unless a man be
rooted in Christ, it is impossible he should grow. We see in nature that
plants and trees first root before they grow, and their growth follows after
their rooting. So much appears by that comparison, Job 8. 16, 17. He is
green, and his branches shoot. And this comes from that which follows, His
roots are wrapped about the heap. He roots, and therefore he shoots. A tree
cannot shoot till it root. So Jer. 12. 2. the Prophet comparing wicked men to
trees, Thou have, says he, planted them, yea they have taken root, they grow.
But first take root, and then grow. So Christians must grow, but yet before
they can grow, they must first be planted, and take root. GOD promises to make
his Church grow, and her branches to spread, but withal he promises to make
her root. Hos. 14. 5, 6. I will be as the dew unto Israel, he shall grow as
the Lilly, and cast forth his roots as Lebanon, his branches shall spread, etc.
Never can a Christian grow as a Lilly, though he be under daily dewes, nor his
branches spread, unless he cast forth his roots as Lebanon, as the trees, and
Cedars of Lebanon. What are dewes without Roots? My Doctrine, says Moses,
shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distill as the dew. Deuteronomy. 32. 2.
Though a man live under the dew of the Ministry, which is a good means of
growth, yet if he want a Root in Christ, he will never grow. The deeper a tree
is rooted, the more it grows. The greater the root, the deeper, and wider it
spreads it self, the greater is the properity of that tree. A bush grows, but
grows not to the height that a Cedar does, nor to the greatness an Oak does,
because the root of a bush is but small. It roots not as an Oak, as a Cedar,
and therefore rises not, spreads not as does an Oak, or a Cedar. We see
diverse sizes of Christians, some greater, some lesser, some higher, some lower
trees of Righteousness. What may the reason of it be? Are they not all set,
and planted in the same soil? Is it not the same Christ that feeds and
nourishes them all? It is so, and yet these trees though all set in the same
soil, all fed by the same sap, yet are they not all of the same height and
bigness: And the reason is, because they all root not alike. Some root
deeper then others, some spread out their roots further then others, and as
every one roots, so every one grows. See how the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 80.
9, 10. of that vine. It filled the land, the hills were covered with the shadow
of it, the boughs thereof were like the goodly Cedars, etc. And all came from
this, Thou causedst it to take deep root. So that the deeper root, the
greater growth; And so in this case, the deeper root we take in Christ, the
greater growth we have in Christ, and grace. In as much then as every
Christian is bound to grow, and there is no growth without a root, therefore
must every Christian root in Christ. Every Christian is bound to grow
exceedingly, 2 These. 3. therefore it concerns a Christian not only to be
rooted, but to be deeply rooted in CHRIST, because so as we root, so we grow
proportionably. The deeper root, the greater and fairer growth.

Secondly, All true Christians must 2.
bear fruit. What called for more frequently? Matthew. 3. Bring forth fruit.
Hereby we glorify God, Joh. 15. 8. Hereby we give evidence that we are
Christ's Disciples, Joh. 15. 8. Hereby we give evidence of our union with
Christ, Joh. 15. 5. It is a dangerous thing not to bring forth fruit, Joh. 15.
2. Mat. 3. 10. A matter therefore of great necessity to bring forth fruit. Now
it is impossible to bring forth the fruits of grace, and the spirit, unless
we be rooted in Christ. In nature no root no fruit. Hos. 9. 16. Their root
is dried up, they shall bear no fruit. There must be a root before there can
be fruit; as Jer. 12. 2. Thou have planted them, they have taken root, they
bring forth fruit; but first, have taken root. And that speech shows as much,
2 King. 19. 30. They shall yet again take root downward, and bring forth
fruit upward. So it is in this case: No spiritual root, no spiritual fruit.
Jude 12. Trees without fruit, plucked up by the roots. What wonder that they
were fruitless, when they were rootless? they must needs be without fruit,
when they were without root. On the contrary, a godly man he is fruitful,
because he is rooted in Christ, and therefore fruited, because rooted. Jer. 17.
8. He is a tree that brings forth fruit in a time of drought, in a time of
heat, he is fruitful. And mark whence it comes, He shall be as a tree
planted by the waters, that spreads out her roots by the river. He is rooted in
Christ, and therefore fruited by Christ. To which purpose we may allude to
that, Prove. 12. 12. The root of the righteous yields fruit. It is not the
Branch of the righteous that yields fruit, but it is the root. It is Christ
who is the root of a righteous man, and when a man is rooted in him he yields
fruit. It is impossible for a branch without a root to bring forth fruit.
That was a miraculous, and extraordinary case, that Aarons rod cut off from the
stock, and without a root, did bring forth buds, and blossoms, and yielded
Almonds. But in ordinary course it is a thing impossible. It is impossible for
us to bring forth Almonds, Grapes, or any fruit, unless we be rooted in
Christ. All fruit is from Christ the root. Philip. 1. 11. The fruits of
holiness and righteousness which are by Christ. So that then there being a
necessity that a Christian bring forth fruit, and that there can be no
fruit, unless he be rooted in Christ, it is therefore a thing of absolute
necessity, that a Christian be rooted in Christ.

Thirdly, A Christian must persevere, 3.
and be stable in the truth, must hold out, and continue. It is still called
for, Col. 1. 23. The promise of salvation is made to such as persevere. He that
perseveres to the end shall be saved, Mat. 24. It is made the note of a true
Christian, Joh. 8. 30. And it is that which at the last day will fill our
hearts with infinite comfort, and confidence, 1 John 2. 28. Now it is
impossible a man should persevere, and continue, unless he be rooted in
Christ. Boughs plucked off from trees, being set in water, may look fresh and
green for two or three days, but because they have no root, they quickly
decay, and dye. A stake, or a post is pitched in the ground, but yet because it
has no root, it is easy to wriggle, and pluck it up, and carry it whither
one will. But now it is not so with a great tree, there a man may tug, and
pluck with all his might, and not get it up. Set a teame of horse to an oak,
and they cannot stir, nor move it. And what is the reason of this difference,
but because the tree has a root that fixes, and fastens it in the earth, and
the stake or post has none? The stony ground made a fair show, it sprang
quickly, gave fair and good hopes, but yet it came to nothing, but soon
vanished; and what might the reason be? See Matthew. 13. 6. 20. 21. Luke 8. 13.
want of root was their bane, they had no root in Christ, and therefore
endured not. The tree that is rooted, though heat and drought come, yet ceases
not yielding fruit. Jer. 17. 8. Let a man make never so fair a profession of
faith, love, zeal, etc. yet if that man be not rooted in Christ, that man will
wither, vanish, and come to nothing, specially if the Sun arise, and there
come a time of heat. It is said of a righteous man, Prove. 10. 25. That he is
an everlasting foundation, he stirs not, moves not, is not a reed shaken
with the wind. How comes it about that neither heresies, nor persecutions, one
thing nor another stirs him, but he is immovable? See Prove. 12. 3. The root
of the righteous shall not be moved, he has a root, he is rooted in Christ,
and therefore is not moved. So here the Apostles drift is to persuade the
Colossians to perseverance, and exhorting them thereunto, he wishes them to be
rooted in Christ. So that in as much as Christians ought to persevere, and that
cannot be done unless a man be rooted in Christ, it is therefore of
necessity, that a man be rooted in Christ.

Fourthly, See what the Apostle says 4.
Heb. 3. 14. We are made partakers of Christ. That is a precious blessing: It
should be the aim of every Christian. And indeed a man is no Christian indeed
till he be made a partaker of Christ. We come to the Lords Table for this end
to be partakers of Christ. Now we cannot be partakers of Christ, till we be
rooted in Christ. There is no participation of Christ, till there be a
Radication in Christ. No participation of Christ in the Sacrament, till rooted
in him. A man may come to the Sacrament, and partake of Bread and Wine, may be
partaker of the Lords Table, and yet if he be not rooted in Christ, partakes
not of Christ. Herbs and trees are partakers of the heart, of the strength, of
the fat of the earth, and the moisture thereof, because they are rooted in the
earth. So by being rooted in Christ, we come to be partakers of him. See that
same Romans 11. 17. Thou were graffed in amongst them, and with them partakest of
the root and fatness of the Olive. When a cience is ingraffed into an Olive,
it partakes of the fatness of the Olive; But how? It first partakes of the
root. The Olive has a root, by that it partakes of the fatness of the earth,
and the branches by having that root for their root, are made partakers of
that fatness. There is a fatness, a sweetness in Christ, and a fatness and
sweetness in Gods Ordinances, Psalm. 63. 5. Now when we come to the Sacrament,
we desire to be made partakers of the fatness and sweetness of Christ: first
then be rooted in him, and we shall be made partakers of him, and his
sweetness. Many receive the Sacrament that are not partakers of Christ, and
all because they be not rooted in him. Thou that come to the Sacrament
before thou be rooted in Christ, art an unworthy receiver. We have no right to
the Sacrament, till we be rooted in Christ. So that as we desire to be worthy
receivers of the Sacrament, so it concerns us to be rooted in Christ. We know
the danger of unworthy receiving. He that in receiving is not made partaker of
Christ, receives unworthily. He that is not first rooted in him, cannot be
partaker of him. A rootlesse receiver is a fruitless receiver; a fruitless
receiver is an unworthy receiver. He that has a root, receives good by the
Sacrament, he that has not a root, receives hurt by it. Take a tree that
has a root, and set it in the earth, and the moisture and fat of the earth
nourishes and feeds it. But take a stick or a stake that has no root, and
drive it into the earth, and the fat and moisture of the earth rottes it. To
come to the Sacrament having a Root will make our souls thrive, but to come
to the Sacrament without a Root, will rotte and bane our souls. As therefore
we desire at any time, but specially at the Sacrament, to be partakers of
Christ, so first get we our selves rooted into him.

Fifthly, and lastly, That same is a 5.
terrible Imprecation of David's against Doeg, Psalm. 52. 5. God shall root thee
out of the land of the living. It is heaviest in a spiritual sense, as Heaven
is the land of the living. And yet as heavy as it is, it will be the portion
of all such as are not rooted in Christ. God will root out all such out of the
land of the living. As we would be rooted in the land of the living, so get
we our selves rooted in Christ.

Labor we therefore to get our selves rooted, and deeply rooted in Use 1.
Christ. Men of the world do seek to take root in their kind, and to spread
their roots in the earth. Job 5. 3. I have seen the foolish taking root.
Jer. 12. 2. Thou have planted them, they have taken root. What a do to root
themselves in a soil, out of which they shall be plucked up by the roots? Job
5. 3. I have seen the foolish taking root, but suddenly I have cursed his
habitations. It fares with them as with the cursed figtree, Mark. 11. 20. As
they passed by they saw the fig tree dried up from the roots. But alas how
few take care for Rooting in Christ Jesus, and for a blessed Radication in him.

CHAP. XIIII.
What is to be done that we may get our selves rooted in Christ?

FIrst, and principally get faith in Christ. There be other things that help a
Christian to root deeper into Christ when he is once rooted; but faith is the
first thing that must root a man into Christ. So here in the Text; Rooted and
built up in him. But how? stablished in the faith, not only in the doctrine of
faith, but in the grace of faith. Now faith does three things to a man's rooting
in Christ.

1. Faith plucks him up by the roots out of the soil of nature. A man that
will have a tree root in his Garden, in his Orchard, must first have it plucked
up by the roots out of the hedge, or wood, and common, where it naturally
grows. It cannot root in the Garden, so long as it stands rooted in the wood.
So a man cannot root in Christ, so long as he is rooted in the soil of
nature, of mere morality and civilitie. He must first be fetched up by the
very roots, out of that cursed foil. Now faith is that which does it: faith
is that which draws us up by the Roots out of the hedge, and common of
Nature. In a miraculous case it is possible to pluck up a tree by the Roots.
Luke 17. 6. Ye might say unto this Sycamore tree, Be thou plucked up by the
roots, and it should obey you. But when may a man so say? If you have faith as
a grain of mustard-seede. Miraculous faith then could pluck up trees by the
roots. So it is also with justifying faith. Before we can be rooted in Christ,
we must be un-rooted, and up-rooted in regard of our natural condition, as
before the Sycamore can be planted in the Sea, it must first be plucked up by
the roots. Now justifying faith is that which pluckes up these wild Sycamores,
and wild olives by the roots. A man is plucked up by the roots when he denies
himself, when he goes out of himself, when he comes off from all bottom, he
has in himself, and in Nature. Now faith is that which makes a man deny
himself, go out of himself, and thus un-roote himself. See how Paul pluckes
up his Pharisaisme, and all his civil legal righteousness by the very
Roots, and that by the selfe-denyall of faith. Phil. 3. 4, 8. If any man else
may grow upon his own root, then much more I, for thus and thus am I rooted,
of the root of Israel, a natural Hebrew, a circumcised Hebrew, a Pharisee, a
strict and zealous professor of Jewish Religion, and for legal righteousness,
a man before men unblameable, and yet I denied my self, plucked up my self
from all these roots, counted all loss and dung, to be found rooted in
Christ. Faith is a selfe-denying grace, and drags a man up by the roots out of
his natural condition.

2. Faith implants a man into the soil of grace, it implants a man into
Christ. When a tree is plucked up by the roots, yet if it be not set into the
earth, in the Garden, or Orchyard, it roots not there. The way to have it to
root in the Garden is, after it is plucked up by the roots to set it in the
ground, and set it in the earth. There must be a planting of a tree before
there can be a rooting. Jer. 12. 2. Thou have planted them, they have taken
root, therefore before taking root, there must be a planting. Psalm. 80. 8, 9.
Thou have planted the Vine, thou have caused it to take deep root. So it is
here, before there can be rooting in Christ, there must be a planting in him.
Now faith is that which plants us in Christ. That sets us, put us into Christ,
the soil in which we must root. The Apostle has a phrase, Romans 6. 5. of
being planted into Christ's death. There is a planting into his death, and there
is a planting into his person. When a tree is set into the earth, then it is
planted, when a man is set into Christ, and is in him, then is a man planted in
him. Now by faith it is that we are in Christ, Phil. 3. That I may be found in
him, having the righteousness of faith. And thus faith implanting us into
Christ, putting and setting us into the soil, does root us into Christ.

3. Faith suckes, attracts, and draws nourishment from Christ. If a tree be
set into the ground, yet if it draw not moisture, heart and nourishment out of
the ground, it roots not, but by degrees will dye. But when it is once set into
the ground, and fastened there, and does draw sap, and moisture out of the
earth, then the root runs and spreads this way, and that way, and so the tree
radicates to the purpose. So then a Christian being planted in Christ, does
root in him, when there is a quickening, nourishing sap drawn out of him into
a man's foul, that makes it spring and spread it self into Christ. Now faith
is that which draws, suckes, and extracts virtue and power out of Christ,
which makes us spread, and root in him. Thus by these things, faith roots us
into Christ. So that if we would root in Christ, we must get faith in
Christ, and the more faith we get, the greater and deeper root shall we have
in Christ.

Secondly, Get repentance, and mortification. 2.
When once a man has gotten into Christ, and is begun by faith to be rooted in
him, these will exceedingly help to make a man root more deeply, and to
spread abroad his root in Christ. The more sins and lusts we nourish in our
hearts, the less we root in Christ. Christ is indeed a fat, and a fertile
soil, but though a tree, or herbs be planted in fat, and good ground, yet a
man may so order the matter, that herbs and trees shall root but poorly in
it; for let a man mingle with it barren and baggage cold earth, or throw in
gravel, stones, or flints into the earth, and about the roots, and these will
hinder the rooting of a tree. So though Christ be a fat soil, yet if we
suffer our sins, and our lusts to lodge in our hearts, these will hinder our
rooting in Christ. But these removed and taken away, it will conduce
exceedingly to our rooting. Now repentance and mortification, these take away,
and remove sins and lusts. When God planted a Vineyard, Isa. 5. it was his
purpose that it should root, and it did root. Psalm. 80. 9. Thou causedst it
to take deep root. I, but mark what course God did take. Isa. 5. 2. He
fenced it, he gathered out the stones. He cleared, and rid the soil of all
such hurtful things as might hinder the rooting thereof. And so gathering out
the stones, it did take deep root. Now repentance does this, it takes away
the stones out of the heart, it takes away the heart of stone, and so makes way
for rooting. If a man be in Christ, and yet have an heart of stone, there be
stones in the soil, but repentance taking away the heart of stone, fits us for
rooting, and spreading. Again, set herbs in a rich, and fat soil, yet if
that soil be suffered to overrun with weeds, herbs will never root kindly,
and to purpose, therefore they that would have herbs and plants root, do
pluck up all offensive weeds by the roots. And when thistles, nettles, and
such like baggage trash are plucked up, then good herbs and plants root the
better, and deeper. All lusts, and sins, are so many weeds in our hearts, and
the more these weeds root in our hearts, the less shall we root in Christ.
But if these weeds be plucked up by the roots, and this noxious stuff be
carefully and diligently weeded out, then we shall root apace in Christ. Now
Repentance and Mortification they weed up, and pluck up by the roots those
sins, and lusts, which hinder our rooting in Christ. So that look what
counsel the Apostle gives them in that case, is good in this. Heb. 12. 15.
Looking diligently lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you. He
speaks of Heresies, Apostasies, and Scandalls, that might fall out in the
Church, every such one is a root of bitterness in the Church. And so every
sin and lust, fostered in a man's heart, is a root of bitterness in the
soul, and such a root of bitterness, as will trouble a man's soul from
rooting in Christ. Therefore every one that would root in Christ, must
diligently watch that no such root of bitterness spring up, and grow up in
his heart, and if any such root do spring and grow up presently, to root it
up, and root it out. There must be a Rooting out, if we would have a rooting
in; A rooting out of lusts, if we would have a rooting in Christ. We know how
Job speaks in that case of the lust of uncleanenesse, Job 31. 9. 12. If mine
heart have been deceived by a woman, it would root out all mine increase. That
one lust would be enough to root out all his substance, and all his increase.
So it is in this case with any lust, whether of uncleanenesse, covetousness,
etc. If these root in the heart, and prevail, they will root out all grace,
and goodness, and root a man quite up for taking any root in Christ. As
therefore we desire to be rooted in Christ, so it concerns us to root out
all lusts, by repentance and mortification. It is not here as in the Parable,
Mat. 13. 28, 29. Will thou then that we go and gather them up? But he said,
Nay, lest whilst ye gather up the tares, ye root up also the wheat with
them. But here the not rooting up the tares, will prove the hindrance of the
rooting of the wheat. That soul that suffers lusts to root in it, cannot
root in Christ. Our lusts cannot thrive in us, and we thrive in Christ.

Thirdly, The conscionable, and serious use of Gods Ordinances, the Word 3.
and Sacrament. The Word is called, Jam. 1. 21. The engraffed, or Implanted
Word, that is, the Word which by the Ministry is engraffed in our hearts. Now
as it is an engraffed, so it is an engraffing Word, which being rightly
received, does engraff, implant, and root us into Christ. The seed that fell
upon the stony ground, had no Root, Matthew. 13. but contrarily when the seed
falls upon good ground it Roots. And when the Word roots in our hearts, it
roots us into Christ, for Christ is received in his Word. And when the Word
roots, Christ roots, and when Christ roots in us, we root in him; for it
is a natural, and reciprocal Radication. Two things are required to make a
tree or herb root, Planting, and watring. The Ministry of the Word is both. 1
Cor. 3. Paul may plant, and Apollos may water. The Ministry of the Word
therefore is a planting, and a watering. They therefore that would root, must
seriously use that means which must plant, and water them. And so for the
Sacrament of the Supper, we being once rooted by the Word, it is an excellent
means to make us take deeper rooting. The barren figtree in the Parable, Luke
13. brought not forth fruit. There was some fault, not in the branches, but in
the root, and therefore the dresser would dig, and dung it about the root, he
would loosen and remove the hard earth from the roots, and lay some mellow
moulds about the root. And we see when such husbandry is used about trees,
that they root the better a great deal. The right use of the Sacrament, is a
digging and dunging of the tree root, is a fresh moulding of our roots, and
the Sacrament rightly used, and received as it ought, will make our root wrap
about Christ, and sprout, and spread into him. As therefore we desire to root
in Christ, so attend upon the Word and Sacrament, with that due preparation,
and religious behavior, as God requires. We shall find this a sweet fruit
of these Ordinances duly used, that they will further our rooting in Christ.

CHAP. XV.
How to know whether we be Rooted in Christ, or not.

IF every true Christian must be rooted in Christ, then as we would know
whether we be true Christians, so let us examine our selves whether we be
rooted in Christ or not. That may be known by those things mentioned before in
the reasons of the point. They that are rooted in Christ do grow, such as our
growth is, such is our root: If we grow not in Christ, it is a sign we are
not rooted in him. They that are rooted bear fruit. Trees may root, and yet
not always bear fruit. Though there can be no fruit unless there be a root,
yet in natural trees, there may be a root where there is no fruit. But not so
here. There is none roots in Christ, but he brings forth fruit in Christ. The
Apostle speaks of bringing forth fruit to God, Romans 7. 4. but he first speaks
of being married unto Christ, which is equivalent unto rooting. So that
whosoever is rooted in Christ, brings forth fruit unto God. By it may be seen
who is not, and how many are not rooted in Christ. By their fruits shall ye
know them. They bring forth no fruit unto God, therefore not rooted in Christ.
What be the fruits they bring forth? The fruits of swearing, whoring,
drunkenness, profaneness, covetousness, etc. Are these fruits unto God, or
fruits unto the Devil? Do they that are rooted in Christ, bring forth fruits
unto Satan? Therefore in as much as the fruits that most men bring forth, are
fruits unto the flesh, fruits unto Satan, it is a sign that they are rather
rooted in the flesh, in Satan, then in Christ. And when men are so easily
shaken and moved from the truth, it is a sign that they are stony ground, that
they have no root in themselves. And how little men are partakers of the
fatness of Christ, appears by the leanenesse, and lewdness of their lives.
But besides these, it may be discerned by these things.

First, By that, Romans 11. 16. If the 1.
root be holy, so are the branches; namely, the branches that are joined to
that root. Branches then that are rooted into an holy root, are such as the
root is. All that are rooted in Christ, are such as he is. There is the same
sap in the root, and branches of a tree. If a sweet sap in the root, a sweet
sap also in the branches. They that are rooted in Christ, have the same Spirit
that is in Christ. Philip. 2. 5. Let the same mind be in you which was also in
Christ Jesus. Christ is an holy root, all that are rooted in him are holy
persons. Jude 1. Sanctified in Christ Jesus. He is not only an holy, but an
hallowing Christ. Whatsoever touched the flesh of the sin offering was holy.
Levit. 6. 27. Whatsoever touched the Altar was holy, Exodus 30. 29. Both were
types of Christ. Now if but the touch of Christ make holy, then much more when
a man not touches him, but is rooted, engraffed, incorporated into him. By this
may men try their Rooting in Christ; If men's holiness must be the evidence,
how many will be clean cast? Let men's lives speak what holiness they have;
I do not think that if men had holiness, they would mock, and scoff at it.

Secondly, By a Radication in the grace of love and charity. He that is 2.
rooted in Christ, is rooted in love. Ephesians. 3. 17. That Christ may dwell in
your hearts. When Christ dwells in us, we dwell in him, and when we dwell in
him, we are rooted in him. And when thus rooted in him, see what follows;
That ye being rooted, and grounded in love; Then a man may be said to be
Rooted in love, when out of the sense, and apprehension of Gods love to him in
Christ, his love is again kindled toward God, and his neighbor, and so
increases in him, that it takes daily deeper, and deeper root in him. So then
a man that roots in Christ, roots in the love of God, of Christ, of his
members. The more we are rooted in Christ, the more we are rooted in the love
of God, and his Saints, and the more that love roots in our hearts. And
therefore it is that faith and love do lead hand in hand still in Scripture,
and that not only love to God, but to his Saints. Let men's consciences but
search themselves, and it is to be feared that they will find such poor small
roots of love to God, and his Saints, as will give them just cause to question
their being rooted in Christ.

Thirdly, By Spiritual life, and Nutrition. He that is rooted in Christ,
draws life from Christ, and receives nourishment from him. A tree that is
rooted in the earth, it lives by the sap it draws out of the earth in which it
roots. So the Christian that roots in Christ, he lives in Christ, and draws
sap out of Christ, that feeds and maintains spiritual life in him. Gal. 2.
20. As a tree lives, yet not so much the tree, as the root; and the life which
the tree lives, it lives by the root in the earth. Our life is hid with Christ
in God, Col. 3. The life of a Christian is in, and from Christ. Secret it is,
as the life of a tree is hid in the root which is under the earth. Does Christ
then quicken thee with spiritual life? does he nourish, and feed thee with
spiritual sap, so as all thou do, thou do by an influence of sap, and
life from him? Then conclude comfortably, that thou art rooted in Christ. But
many are so livelesse, so dead, and saplesse, that it is a senseless thing to
conceive them other then rootlesse Christians.

FINIS.

