OBJECTIONS AGAINST The taking of the ENGAGEMENT Answered.

OR, Some scruples of Conscience, which a godly Minister in Lancashire did
entertain against the taking of the ENGAGEMENT.

Resolved by J. D.

WHEREIN The chief mistakes of weak Consciences, about the matter of the
Engagement, are in a friendly way discovered, and rectified by
Scripture-grounds and right reason; and published for the satisfaction of
others, who may be scrupled in the same kind.

LONDON, Printed by John Clowes, for Richard Woodnothe, at the Star under St.
Peter's Church in Cornhill, 1650.

Worthy SIR,
I Have delayed writing for a time, in that I have been uncertain whether I
should come to London or no; but now at the last resolving to wait a while
before I come, do make bold to present my humble thankfulness for your former
kindness showed to me: I have been much perplexed in mind concerning the
Engagement, and still am; by which means my maintenance is, and has for a
season been withheld. Those scruples which I stick at, I shall make bold to
acquaint you with, and they are these.

1. The late Government voted down was in it self lawful, wholesome and good,
and no evil ever yet did appear to me in the power, but only in the persons who
did exercise that power, Prove. 24.21.
which was no sufficient ground of change, and it is not safe to meddle in it.

2. To that said Government I am bound by many solemn and sacred Ties, to
maintain it in my place, not only in the substance and main parts of it, but
also in the form and circumstance thereof, and those said obligations are not
merely civil and humane, but sacred and divine, and above the absolution of any
earthly power.

3. I conceive it unlawful to engage against the undoubted rights of any man. I
suppose there may be found such lawful Heirs of the Crown, as have not any
ways forfeited their rights, and also great Interests and Privileges which
mary innocent Peers of this Land may fairly challenge, which they have not lost
by their miscarriage, Treason or Rebellion.

4. I cannot be satisfied, but that the liberty of the freeborn English, is by
that means much infringed in this late settlement and constitution. 1. In that
many of the innocent and faithful Members, the Representatives of the people,
were at the voting of this new establishment, thrust out and debarred the
House, which makes it seem rather a combination or confederacy, then a lawful
constitution; for if a people have liberty in any thing, certainly it is to
choose their Governors and Government. 2. The subscription is forced upon us,
under the penalties of out-lawing and fining, so that this power, are our
absolute Lords, which is that heavy yoke that we have feared and fought against.

5. I consider, if men at their inition and installment will walk so
arbitrarily, and domineere with so high a hand, what will they do, (may we
expect) when they come to a full settlement, by the consent of all the people
of the Nation?

6. The grieving and troubling the hearts and Consciences not of loose,
perverse and seditious, but of grave, sober, pious and peaceable men, is made
nothing of, but they are trampled upon, and wholly neglected, whilst many
Atheists, Cavaliers, and base wretches that will take the Engagement, are
embraced, privileged and respected.

These and such dear Sir, are the troubles of my heart, which I make bold to
express thus plainly, not doubting of your favor in construing my harsh and
too high phrases, and ove-rbold expressions; only I follow this as the safest
way to satisfaction and resolution, hoping that the Lord will of his goodness,
stir you up and direct you to satisfy me; or heartily to think of and bear
with me: Sir, your loving invitation and encouragement has made me thus bold
to trouble you; and as for those other businesses I formerly mentioned, I
conceive little can be done, etc.

Dated 9. May. 1650.
OBJECTIONS against the taking of the ENGAGEMENT Answered.
SIR,
I Hope you have received my former, written the 28. of May; wherein I sent you
back the Petition of your Parish, with some instructions how you should do, to
get your business effected? Now I shall endeavor to offer something to your
consideration toward the satisfaction of those scruples which you have sent
me; for which you have not been able to take the Engagement: The Lord who alone
is the Father of lights, and knows the capacity of all Men's Consciences;
instruct us in the truth, and by it grant us that quietness and rest of spirit,
which may fit us, for the performance of all righteousness and dutifulness with
joy: he alone can teach us to profit, and lead the wearied sole to rest; we may
suggest to one another, that wherein according to our apprehension is truth, so
far as it appears so to us; but to seal up that truth and persuade the heart of
it, is the work of the spirit of God alone, whom our heavenly Father, by the
mouth of his own Son, has promised to give to them that ask him. Luke 11.13.
We may therefore with full assurance crave this spirit, not only for our
selves, but each for other; and perhaps herein we may do one another better
service then in suggesting our notions to each other. Yet because we are
commanded not only to ask by way of request, but to seek and knock at the Gates
of Heaven, Mat. 7.7.
by way of endeavor: therefore let us do the one, and not neglect the other,
and if it shall be the Lords will, that by the discovery of those things which
give me satisfaction in that whereat you are scrupled, you shall find more
light then you now have, and cause of satisfaction and rest to your mind
therein, I shall rejoice at it, and bless God for it.

Give me leave therefore to discover unto you, the grounds for which my
Conscience ought not to be troubled at the things which you scruple so much at;
for you are brought thereby into many inconveniences and straits, which I
conceive you have cast your self into, for want of due consideration of those
Rules, which would have steered your course clear from those Rocks and
Quicksands whereinto you are fallen.

1. Scruple, The former Government was in it self good and not alterable.
The first scruple you make is this. The late Government (say you) voted down,
was in it self lawful, wholesome and good: and no evil ever yet did appear to me
in the power, but only in the persons who did exercise that power, which was no
sufficient ground of Change, and it is not safe to meddle in it. Prove. 24.21.

Now this does not trouble me at all, and I suppose needs not to be a matter of
Conscience to you; that is; you need not to charge the consequence which you
mention here upon your Conscience; The Answer shows
for although I should think as you do, that the late Government now voted
down, was in it self lawful; yet it does not follow therefore, 1 Cor. 6.12. and
Chap. 10.23.
that it is still most expedient for the public state. The Apostle says in
two places, that all things are lawful for him, but all things are not
expedient. Showing, that the Conscience of an intelligent Christian is not
bound to every thing which may appear lawful (for no material action can be
named but in some sense it is lawful) but that a further consideration must be
had of every thing, That things obliging Conscience, must be not only good in
themselves, but expedient to us.
before we fasten it, as an obligation upon our Conscience: the consideration
of the expediency of a thing must cast the balance, as to the engaging of
Conscience into a business: and the Apostle defines this expediency or
inexpediency by two things, one in respect of our selves, another in respect of
our Neighbor. In respect of our selves it is not expedient that we should be
brought under the power of every thing which in it self is lawful; as the
Apostle says: All things are lawful for me, but I will not be brought under
the power of any. To be brought under the power of any thing is to make it so
necessary to us, that we cannot forgo it, or think that we cannot please God
without it. Now the Apostle does teach us, that no outward thing should have
any such power over our spirits, as to bring our Conscience into such a
subjection. Nor Paul, nor Apollo, nor Cephas, nor the World, 1 Cor. 3.22.
nor life, nor death, nor things present, nor things to come, should bring us
under this yoke; but we ought to account all ours, that is under our power, as
we are subordinate in reference to Conscience, unto God alone in Christ; it
follows then, that whatever things be present with us in this life, and how
lawful soever they may be in themselves; that yet my Conscience is not
otherwise to be subjected to their power, then as I stand under God in Christ;
and as those things are expedient and subservient to that subordination in
respect of our Neighbor; if any thing edify not, it is determined not to be
expedient, 1 Cor. 10.23. although then a thing may be lawful, wholesome, and
good in it self; yet if I find it not expedient for edification, I am not bound
to use it, but may leave it, and make use of something else which I shall judge
most edifying. If therefore God has set my Conscience free, so that I am not
bound to any thing further then it is edifying; it does not at all follow, that
because I judge a thing lawful and good in it self; that therefore I must needs
choose it, and be subject to the power thereof without any further deliberation:
as for example, if it were absolutely referred to me to settle what Government
I will choose; whether Monarchical, Aristocratical, or Democratical; I must not
oblige my self in this choice only, to consider what is lawful (for all these
are lawful, What Government is to be counted most expedient.
good and wholesome forms in themselves) but what is most expedient: and if I
should now speak as a Christian, to tell you what I think expedient in the
choice of any of these, I would tell you, that the Government which consists
most with the rational and orderly freedom of Christians, and which according
to Emergencies does tend most unto the edification of the public in all good
things, is that which is to be chosen. therefore if in your unprejudiced
thoughts you will contemplate this Querie: you will not do amiss, viz. Whether
the Government by a King who having the sole power, may not be controuled; or
the Government by a Parliament of Trustees, who may have this same Power put in
their hands, be more consonant to Christian freedom and public edification,
yea or no? I know what I could say to this Querie, if I were an absolute lawful
Judge of a public concernment of this nature: but now I not being free to make
my choice of Government; but it being wholly in the hand of public Trustees,
to manage all public affairs for me, so that I must be concluded by them in
such concernments; seeing (I say) I am under a power whereunto I owe
subjection, Who is to be the Judge of the expediency of Government.
and it is at all times expedient that private men should be under the power of
some Government, to whom the management of public affairs is to be committed:
therefore I must not make my self a judge how expedient or inexpedient the
resolutions are, which they settle concerning the way of Government in the
State, (for that is their proper calling to consider and not mine) and if I may
not judge either way, it is clear that my Conscience cannot be brought under
the power of their resolutions either way; but it is always free for me before
God, in civil affairs, to submit unto their changeable determinations, and not
to oppose the orders which they shall undertake to make therein: And what use
Christians ought to make of changes therein.
my meaning is, that as all other outward things, so the resolutions and
determinations of my Magistrates are min^, and that it is free for me to make
use of them so as is most expedient for public edification: if then a change
fall out in the Government amongst them, and they judge it either expedient or
necessary, to alter that form wherein no evil yet ever appeared to me; yet by
this, my Conscience is not obliged either to resist them because they alter
what seems not evil to me, or not to yield unto them to make the best of what
they have done, so far as may be edifying in my way; for I am bound in
Conscience to take all things as they fall in my way, and to make use of them
freely to the end of edification: if therefore they in their places make
changes, although as to the outward man I am concluded by them to stand under
the same; yet as to my Conscience, I am not in subjection to such changes, nor
obliged to make my self a judge, and to determine whether the changes which
they make be lawful or unlawful, expedient or inexpedient to the State, that I
must leave to God and to them, and to the event to determine. From all which
this will follow, that if I suffer my thoughts to be entangled into this
judicature, as into a matter of Conscience necessary for me to determine, I
then loose my freedom which Christ has given me: for he does not oblige my
Conscience to be under the power of any such thing in his service; for whether
the determinations of superior powers in State Affairs, be right or wrong, I
am always the same man, free to make a good use of them; so far as they can
lawfully and with expediency be referred unto edification. If therefore I
should argue as you do, Monarchy is lawful in it self, I never saw any evil in
it, but only in the persons that exercise it, and the mal-administration of a
power is no sufficient ground to change the power it self; and therefore the
change which has been made of late is not warrantable, and so conclude that I
am not bound to do any duty to the present Government: if (I say) I should
argue thus, I should find my self (upon a narrower search) to be in a deep
share, and that in several respects. First, What the fallacies are, upon which
this scruple does rise.
by bringing the Relations of State as a yoke upon my Conscience, as if it were
under the Power thereof, further then to be subject in lawful things unto the
powers which are over me. Secondly, by making my self a supreme judge of the
management of Affairs committed to other men. And thirdly, by such invalid
reasonings as these.

1. If the Government to a Monarch be lawful in it self, Ergo it was not
expedient at this time to be voted down in this State.

2. If I never saw any evil in the power of a Monarch; but only in the person:
Ergo it is not lawful for a Parliament to change that power; or expedient for
the public good that it should be changed, or for me to submit unto the change
thereof, and obey such as are over me.

If there is no evil in the power, but only in the persons that exercise it;
Ergo there was no sufficient ground in these emergencies to change that power.

4. If Solomon says, Prove. 24.21. My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and
meddle not with those that are given to change. Ergo I may not engage to be
faithful to the powers which are over me, and to the Commonwealth wherein I
live, if it be established without a King. If (I say) I should argue thus, and
upon such a way of reasoning, suffer my Conscience to be entangled, perplexed,
and suspended in matters of clear duty, so that I should not dare to make use
of all humane changes without scruple, to the ends of spiritual and bodily
advantages for common good and safety; then I would judge my self under the
power of these things by unadvisedness; and would resolve to say with the
Apostle, All things indeed are lawful; but I will not be under the power of
any, and so set my self at liberty from all such intanglements of my
Conscience. The place of the Proverbs is a clear rule for private men, not to
meddle with designs of public changes beyond their Calling: therefore
wherever I find things established in a State, or so far as I find them
established, I am bound to fear God and the King (the King is the power which
is supreme, and under God as his Vicegerent, whether it be in the hand of one
man or of many) and am not bound to contribute to the unsettlement of a
Government established, The place of Scripture, Prove. 24.21. opened.
which is the design of some who respect neither God nor the King, and perhaps
of some others also, who might be governed by higher principles then either
Cavaliers or Levellers, who are equally addicted to the extremities of changes;
but when a change is made, and a State settled under it, then not to acquiesce
in it, in the fear of God and of the power which is supreme; but to seek for
new changes in opposition to such a settlement, is manifestly against this Rule
of Solomon: for not to meddle with those that are given to changes, I conceive
is, not to have to do out of our calling with private plots tending to public
changes; but ex post facto, to do our duty in all good things to all men, and
chiefly to superiors, though they are established after a change; I suppose is
no ways prohibited in this place; and that is clearly your case, if you will
but open your eyes to behold it, and this shall suffice to your first scruple.
The second is this:

2. Scruple, My Oaths bind me to the form of a Monarchical Government.
I am bound (say you) by many solemn and sacred ties, to the Government of a
Monarch, to maintain it in my place; not only in the substance and main parts
of it, but also in the form and circumstance thereof: and those said
obligations are not merely civil and humane, but sacred and divine, and above
the absolution of any earthly power.

To this I shall say, that I was bound no less then you, to the Government of a
Monarch, The answer shows, that the former Oaths are not any more obliging.
to maintain it and show all fidelity to it so long as it was in being; but
since it is no more in being amongst us, I know no tie, (though never so solemn
and sacred at the making) that can bind me any more to it; for the obligation
of all Oaths is only observable, whiles the matter thereof is in being: and
this rule is undeniable, sublata juramenti materia tollitur obligatio. I
conceive therefore, that although when time was, I was bound to Monarchical
Government, both to the substance, and to the settled form and circumstances
thereof, as they stood in Law; yet that now I am no more bound thereunto,
because ipso facto, these ties are unloosed not by the absolution of any
earthly power, to pronounce the tie void, (which nevertheless has also been
done by the supreme power of the Nation, when they declared the Government to
be altered) but by the decree of Heaven, which has providentially, and ipso
facto, loosened the ties by removing the late King and his Heirs from the legal
capacity wherein they stood toward me formerly, that is, before this
Parliament made it treason to make any more addresses to him, and before he was
sentenced for treason himself.

Now that God has a right by the changes of Government, to absolve you from
your sacred ties, I suppose you will not deny, and that he has changed this
Government, is undeniable; for without him it could not have been done, and he
claims to himself the sole power of changing Governments, Dan. 4.17. And that
the Commonwealth has also a power according to emergencies to dispose of the
Government within it self for its own safety, I think will not by you be
denied; and if by the changes which it has power to make within it self, as
emergencies require, the matter of your Oath be taken away, it is clear, that
thereby the obligation is extinct. Above all this, I shall offer unto your
consideration, something concerning the original of your sacred tie; for the
Oath which you took to maintain certain forms and circumstances of Government
(which in their own nature are alterable) was lawful to be taken by you; What
makes an Oath sacred and binding as to Conscience.
either because the supreme Authority that then was required it of you, and you
saw no just cause to refuse that which they required, or because only you of
your own accord did choose to take such an Oath: I suppose you will not say the
last, viz. that the Oath was only sacred, because you were pleased to take it;
for then all Oaths which any man shall be pleased to take or make about
State Affairs, may be as sacred to him as yours was to you, and as justly taken
by him, although they should be quite contradictory unto yours, which is very
absurd; it will follow then, that the tie to those things was sacred; that is,
it was lawful for you to be bound by an Oath to them only, because the supreme
Authority which was over you, and had power to establish those forms and
circumstances of Government, did require such an obligation from you, to engage
you to be faithful thereunto, and if this is the only lawful original of such a
sacred tie; then I say, that the dissolution of that tie, may arise from the
same power which did establish it: he that has power to oblige me to a form of
his creating has also power to absolve me from that obligation. In old times
and now also in some places, the Soldiers were wont to be obliged by Oath to
serve their Commanders faithfully, till they should be dismissed: the Romans
called this Sacramentum militare: Now he that might lawfully give them this
Oath, might also absolve them from it; and so it is in all obligations unto
things, which in their own nature are not morally good, but good only ex
instituto legitimo: the power which gives them a being, may take it from them;
if therefore the supreme power which now is over you, has absolved you from
those ties, your voluntary continuance under them cannot make them any longer
sacred; no more then your voluntary taking an Oath at first to them, without
the conduct of the authority which was over you, could have made your
obligation lawful. I conceive then, that in things merely civil and humane
(that is of a changable nature, as being subject to civil and humane
Ordinances) your Oath cannot put a stronger tie upon you toward them, then
their nature will bear; that is, you cannot be unalterably bound unto them; for
if they cease to be, you cannot stand obliged toward them; now that they do
cease to be is clear, and that they may cease to be by the power which is over
you, and by the Acts of divine providence absolving Subjects from such Oaths.
If you will further see it made out, read the adjoined answer to the
exercitation, particularly from page 20. till 25. and this shall also suffice
for your second scruple.

3. Scruple. The Kings Heirs have an undoubted right. Ergo I may not engage
against them. The Answer shows. That no duty is per se a hinderance to any
man's rights.
Your third scruple is, that you conceive it unlawful to engage against the
undoubted rights of any man. I suppose (say you) there may be found such lawful
Heirs of the Crown, as have not any ways forfeited their right, and also great
interests and privileges, which many innocent Peers of this Land may fairly
challenge, which they have not lost by their miscarriage, treason, or rebellion.

I shall say with you, that I conceive it not lawful for me to engage against
the undoubted rights of any: nor do I so by taking the Engagement, as it is a
clear Duty; for by promising to be true and faithful to the Commonwealth, as
it is now established; and although that establishment is without a King and
House of Lords, I do not engage against the right of any man; for no man can
have any right to hinder me from this obligation which is the proper duty of a
true Subject; nor can the performance of this to my understanding, be a
hinderance per se, to any man to enjoy his rights. I say, that no duty per se,
can be opposite to any thing that is right; but if it fall out per accidens,
that the doing of a thing which in it self is good and expedient, and a clear
and necessary duty for public safety, does become the overthrow of some
particular men's pretended rights; I must not be troubled thereat, but must
leave the disposing of all such events unto Gods providence: not only because
it is not lawful for me to neglect a general and present duty, for the
consideration of any private interests, which happily may be prejudged
accidentally thereby; but also because it is not lawful for me to make my self
a judge of these things which you call undoubted rights, and to determine the
controverted titles which any have or have not to a right of Government, or how
far they may or may not lay a claim to it; it is not (I say) lawful for me in
reference to the outward State; to become a Judge thereof; far less then ought
I to make any such judgment, an engagement upon my Conscience to suspend it
from a clear Duty, when it is required by Superiors, of whom only I can expect
protection.

As for the supposals which you make concerning the Heirs of the Crown, and
concerning the innocent Peers; I might allow my self the liberty also to make
such supposals, How far the consideration of the Heirs and innocent Peers does
oblige the Conscience to act or not to act duty with the present Government.
and say with you, that possibly such may be found, who have not forfeited
their Rights, either by Treason or Rebellion; but what then? must I therefore
conclude, because such persons may possibly be found, that therefore I must in
the interim not do my duty, to those that have the power at present to protect
me? must I, or may I conclude, because those persons have not that which they
challenge; that therefore I will not do what I owe to my superiors for common
safety? this consequence will not at all follow. But you will urge the point
further and say, nay but if my Engagement to these superiors, does keep those
men from their Right; then am I accessory to the injustice which is done unto
them. I answer first, my Engagement is only to a Duty, and no such Engagement
can be per se, injurious to any, or accessory to any injustice in any: if
accidentally it does, or may fall out otherwise, I am not to answer for that,
but remit it unto Gods providence. Secondly, diverse things are supposed in this
objection, which cannot be granted so, as to make them definitive sentences of
such a nature, that your Conscience must be engaged to act by them.

First, That there are lawful Heirs of the Crown to be found, whose Right is
not forfeited by Treason or Rebellion. This is a sentence which I may perhaps
think to be a truth, yet cannot as a Judge pronounce to be so. Secondly, that
there are many innocent Peers, who have many Interests and Privileges which
they may fairly challenge, because they have not forfeited them by their
miscarriage: this is also a sentence which I may conceive to be a truth, but
yet cannot judicially assert it no more then the former. Thirdly, it is
supposed also, that because there are many innocent Peers, who have many
Interests and Privileges fairly to be challenged, that therefore they ought to
have still a separate hand in the Government by a House in Parliament, which is
a consequence for which I see no ground.

Fourthly, on the other side, you suppose that they who now are in power, do
injustice to the Heirs who have not forfeited their Right to the Crown, by not
settling the Crown upon one of them, and to the innocent Lords, by not letting
them sit to govern in a House, which are sentences no ways to be supposed by
Subjects of Superiors, and by non-judges of public State-interests, nor in my
opinion can they be made out to be truths, when we look upon them in the
judgment of discretion: for although the Heirs and Peers may lay a claim to
some rights in respect of former Customs; yet it follows not, that if in
these Emergencies former Customs be not observed, that therefore injustice is
done unto them: for all Customs are in their nature to be subservient to the
public good, and if they fall out to be at any time destructive thereunto,
they ought to be changed, and if by the change thereof particular rights, or
claims to rights are made void; that is no injustice in those that alter the
Custom, although some particular persons loose that which at another time might
be fairly challenged by them: all particular privileges must yield to the
public safety; nor can any man fairly challenge any thing, which may prejudge
public safety, and the powers that are in possession, are the only Judges of
that which is most conducible unto public safety. The case of Henry 6. who was
an usurper, and of Richard Duke of York, who in full Parliament setting himself
in the Chair of State, laid claim unto the Crown, is a clear decision of this
matter: for though he made good his Title to the Parliament, yet after a long
debate, it was enacted by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that the usurper
in possession should retain the name and honor of a King, and the right Heir
be suspended from the enjoyment of his right; because all particular rights
must yield to public welfare. This the Answer to the exercitation, does quote
out of Martins History of the Kings and Queens of England, page 258. You see
then how many ways these supposals of yours, whereupon you make consequences to
trouble your Conscience, are without ground; but now let me grant you that they
are all of them truths, yet how will you make it out rationally, that they
ought to be of such importance to you, Supposing the allegations to be valid,
yet the consequence not to engage to observe matters of duty does not follow.
that your Conscience must be charged therewith as a Judge to determine them;
and in case the sentence which you pronounce thereof, be not executed, that you
are bound to withdraw your self from all dutiful relations toward the public,
and make your self for such considerations as these unprofitable to your flock,
and unserviceable in the Ministry? I say, how will you be able to show that
this is a conscionable course in you, although the grounds of your supposals
were not so slight as they are, but as firm as any can be? to me I confess,
although they might seem in the judgment of discretion unanswerable truths; yet
because I dare not for Conscience sake, make my self a definitive Judge in the
Case; and I am instructed, that my Conscience is not to be under the Power of
such worldly changes, but that it is free for me always to do my duty, though
they be never so many, and so strange: Therefore I will not be scrupled at
these considerations, whereinto you have inconsiderately entangled your
thoughts, which I think you are bound to shake off. And this shall suffice I
hope also for the third scruple, whereunto I thought not at first to have said
half so much; but the desire to clear the matter fully, has carried me on to
be so large.

Your fourth scruple is about the liberty of the Subject. You say thus, 4.
Scruple. The liberties of the Subject are infringed, Ergo I must notangage.
I cannot be satisfied, but that the liberty of the freeborn English is by
that means much infringed in this late settlement and constitution. 1. In that
many of the innocent and faithful Members, the representatives of the people
were at the voting of this new establishment thrust out and debarred the House,
which makes it seem rather a Combination or Confederacy, then a lawful
constitution; for if a People have liberty in any thing, certainly it is to
choose their Governors and Government. 2. The subscription is forced upon us,
under the penalties of out-lawing and fining, so that this power are our
absolute Lords, which is that heavy yoke that we have feared and fought against.

The Answer shows, That the inference is not good.
Here your want of satisfaction in matters of liberty is the ground of your
scruple; and your scruple is the cause why you will not engage to do good
duties to the public, under the present powers. To me this way of proceeding
is not regular, for I conceive that no dissatisfaction for any thing which I
think amiss in others, ought to take me off from my Resolutions toward the
public, in things good and lawful to be done in my place. Nay I say the quite
contrary, because I am not satisfied in the ways of other men, and cannot see
the clear grounds of their conscionable dealing: I am bound so much the more to
look to mine own Conscience, and to keep to the duties which tend to maintain
truth and peace toward all in my place, and to advance the public welfare
without partiality. If I should intend no good Office to any, but to such in
whose ways I am satisfied, I should have little to do in the world as a
Christian: therefore I Command my spirit, either not to look to matters of
dissatisfaction in other men so deeply, as to make my self a Judge of their
ways, to the trouble of my Conscience: or if I cannot avoid observing things
dissatisfactory to my spirit, which without any judicial search offer
themselves clearly to my view; yet I suffer not those impressions to work any
distemper upon me (so far as I can discern it) against those whom I am bound to
edify, and to whom I must as a Servant of Christ, make my application for the
best of things, to build them up in that which is spiritually and morally good.

That we are not Judges (...) the Liberties definitively, but only in the
judgment of discretion.
As for the scruple it self, whether the liberty of the freeborn English, be
yea or no, much infringed by this settlement and constitution; I shall no more
in this then in other matters of the like nature take upon me to be a
definitive Judge, and whatever in the way of discretion I do judge of it, I am
free; nay I am bound to make the best of it, for edification in my way: and not
by reason of discontentedness, to obstruct the liberty of my own spirit, in the
duties of my Calling: The liberties of the freeborn English, I am bound in my
place to maintain, although I had not been engaged by Oath, to declare my
resolution so to do: and what does sensibly prejudge the same, I ought by
lawful ways within my sphere endeavor to remove; but the proper work of my
Calling is, to endeavor to bring all the freeborn English, to be freeborn in
Sion, and to partake of the glorious liberty of the Sons of God; whereby they
shall be above these kinds of humane concernments, and yet not neglect the
advantages which may redound by them to the Kingdom of God, That whatever
Ministers judge thereof in their Calling, they must make all freedom
serviceable to others through love.
which is to maintain all lawful freedom, so as to become therein a Servant to
all men through love; for I know no privilege that I have unto any freedom,
either spiritual or natural; but upon these terms which the Apostle has taught
me, Gal. 5.13. Brethren ye have been called unto liberty, only use not liberty
for an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another. Now if any
pretense to liberty in mine own behalf or others, does become an occasion of
discontentedness, of strife of murmurings, and of sullenness of spirit, whereby
I am discomposed, so that I cannot serve all men freely in the duties of my
Calling, then I am a transgressor of the Apostles Rule, and walk not according
to the Law of liberty in the Kingdom of Jesus Christ: because I suffer my
Conscience to be under the power of some other Relations to liberty, which I
have not made subordinate unto the Relations of Christianity, which
nevertheless cannot be prejudged by any Oaths of an inferior concernment,
according to the Rule, Quod in juramento semper jus superioris intelligitur
exceptum, and in our National Covenant, the obligation toward the maintaining
of the Liberties of the Kingdom, is expressed to be only in order to our
Calling and place. Now if we do not reckon our spiritual Calling as
Chrisstians, and our place in the Ministry to be the Rule, according to which
that Engagement, and the endeavors which we owe to our civil freedoms, are to
be managed, I know not what it is in our sphere of the Ministry that can be
meant by the restriction of that performance, to our Calling and place. I say
then, that by the express words of the Covenant, I am obliged not to make my
plea for civil liberties, (if infringed) such, as may prejudge my Christian or
Ministerial liberties; as if it should be lawful for me to forgo these, for
want of satisfaction in those, or think it unlawful for me to make use of these
when I conceive my self deprived of those. Now how far the freeborn English
sworn to maintain their liberties are, That these who are charged with the
infringment of liberties, plead for themselves that which seems rational.
or are not deprived by this settlement of their civil freedom, if without
presuming above our line, we may endeavor to discern by looking with an
indifferent aspect upon that which is said on both sides; we will find a plea,
which is not altogether irrational in the mouth of those who are accused of
the infringement of our liberties by this settlement. For first they will say,
that according to the Trust reposed in them for public safety and liberty,
they have discharged their Conscience in procuring this settlement, by which
they intend to break the yoke which was prepared to have been put upon our
necks, and to give all men, an equal interest into the welfare of the State, by
a Commonwealth constitution of Government, and that they have none other aim,
but to settle by just Laws, a safe and well ordered freedom throughout the
whole Nation. Secondly, to the things wherein you are dissatisfied: they will
say that the Members debarred the House by the Army were not innocent, in
respect of their designs attempted, fomented and declared against the Army:
and that they were not faithful to the prosecution of the Cause which they had
undertaken; but fell from it to a royal Interest, without any assurance of
safety and freedom left to the Subject in general, but more particularly to
those who had brought the public enemies upon their knees, to the hazard of
their lives, who by the Treaty were not provided for; but rather a plot laid
thereby to destroy them. Thirdly, they will say, that they who now sit in
Parliament, sit there by the peoples free choice, and that therein the ground
of all liberty is preserved unto them; that they may send their representatives
unto the Parliament; but to choose particular Governors to places, and the form
of Government, otherwise then by their Trustees met to that effect in
Parliament, would not be a liberty but a licentiousness in any whosoever should
attempt it. Fourthly, concerning the imposing of the subscription, under a
penalty of out-lawing and fining; they will say that it is a fundamental maxim
of all Commonwealths that allegiance and protection must answer each other: so
that he who gives protection, has a right to challenge Allegiance; and he that
will not yield in just and lawful things, his Allegiance has no right to
challenge protection: therefore this penalty in the Law of nature, is neither
unjust, nor an infringment of the liberty of the Subject; for no Subject can be
imagined to be free, to refuse the profession of his allegiance, to the
superior powers, who alone can give him under God protection. Fifthly, that
which you call a combination and confederacy, they will judge to be the honest
party which was true to the cause, and they will say, that the other party
which deserted the cause, made a combination and confederacy first against
them, so that they were put upon a necessary defense to do as they did.
Sixthly, they will say, that of necessity in all Nations, there must be
somewhere the supremacy of power which is absolute: this was never acknowledged
to be in the King, but in the Laws which are above the King, and in the
Law-making power which is originally in the Representatives of the body of the
Nation assembled to that effect. These pleas if the matters of fact be true,
and such as they allege them, are not (to a man who is disingaged in
affection, and free to discern that which is equitable) altogether irrational,
but seeing to you and me being private men, the matters of fact are not so
discernable as to oblige me to a certain belief either way, nor so referred, as
to oblige me to become a Judge therein: therefore it is neither reason nor
conscience that will permit me to give a definitive sentence either way; but I
must leave things above me, to the Judge who is above all, and upon the whole
matter I must, whiles I look upon the circumstances of civil freedom, have a
care, not to loose the liberty wherewith Christ has made me free, What posture
a Christian spirit should stand in, when civil liberties are in question.
and set my spirit above this Sea of Glass mingled with fire, that I may be fit
to show forth his praises, and the way of his life in all occurrences, whether
my outward liberty be taken from me, or preserved to me by those that rule over
me. And this is the posture wherein I labor to keep my spirit; whether I can
satisfy my self, or not satisfy my self, in the consideration of civil
changes; for though I cannot be satisfied therein by way of reasoning, (seeing
it is not possible for me to know all the circumstances of fact, and the
Emergencies of councels) yet by way of acquiescence in my duty, my Conscience
can rest satisfied; and when I am come to this way of settlement within my
self, then I am free to look upon our present condition of liberty and
subjection to make the best use of it I can, which is to discern the nature of
the changes which are come upon us, to refer them to the council of God, and to
fit my self to be subservient unto his Council thereby. Let me then tell you
what I seem to discern in our changes, What the liberty is which we now enjoy.
as to the point of liberty which gives me satisfaction. First, we have gained
the liberty for which we did fight, which was, not to be under the absolute
will of one man, in all civil concernments, and not to be under the yoaks of
humane Ordinances and superstitious formalities in religious concernments.
These two yoaks are certainly broken, and it is apparent, that we are so free
from them, that we have almost lost all the bounds of liberty: insomuch, that
both in civil and religious concernments, all the ways of order and grounds of
Government, are disregarded almost by every one, and that without any visible
severity against those that are guilty thereof. As for the liberty which we
fought for certainly it was not meant to be a freedom from all Laws and
Government: and where any Laws and Government is in a Nation, there must needs
be something supreme and absolute, else there is no bottom to settle any thing,
but all must run unto endless confusions: therefore when I look upon the great
paroxismes of changes whereinto we are fallen of late, I bless God, that being
in a state of War, we are not worse then we are; and that although there be
pressures which in the case of War are unavoidable, yet that the ways of
justice are open to find redress of wrongs, in case we will not refuse to be
true subjects to the Government, as it now stands, which is one of the intents
of the Engagement. In the pressing whereof, I do not see that any point of
liberty is lost, except we will say, that we have a liberty, and may lawfully
intend to stand without all Government whatsoever; and that such as disown the
being of a Government, deserve as well to be favored by it, as those who
conscionably and dutifully own it, which to my apprehension are very great
incongruities. I conceive then that in this case of War our liberty is
preserved as much, as possibly it can be in any Nation, where by force the
change of Government has been wrought. Now it is Gods counsel to bring this to
pass, that Rebellion may fall, and the desire of all Nations come in due time,
which I gather from these Scriptures compared together, Haggai 2.5.6.21.22.
with Heb. 12.26. and with Rev. 10.7. and 11.15, 16, 17, 18, 19. and 18. per
totum, and chap. 19. These changes then in the council of God prepare the way
to the enjoyment of our true liberty in the Kingdom of God. Therefore I think
my self bound, to fit my self with all diligence for the coming of the
Bridegroom, seeking and following peace with all men, and Holiness, without
which no man shall see his face; and to this effect my chief care is, to make
straight paths to my feet in mine own course, and not to turn the lame which I
meet withal on my way, out of their true way, but rather to endeavor their
healing, according to that measure of health which God has bestowed upon me,
which I hold forth heartily unto you, and wish that you may fully enjoy it,
without all staggering and scrupulosity. 5. Scruple is that the present power
is arbitrary.
Your 5. scruple is a mere jealousy of State, which I shall never suffer to
entrench upon my Conscience. You suppose that they which are in the supreme
place of power, walk arbitrarily; I say it is not possible that the Law-making
power of a Nation can walk otherwise, for according to their conception and
arbitration of matters all things must be settled or altered. But then you say,
if at the beginning of their installment they do all with so high a hand; The
Answer shows. That a lawmaking power must needs be arbitrary.
what will they do when they come to a full settlement by the consent of all
the People of the Nation? I answer, that I hope they will see the Nation
governed by wholesome Laws in a peaceable way, by subordinate Judicatures; and
by free chosen Representatives from time to time in a Parliament-way, whereunto
all will be accountable of their proceedings, and I have ground to hope this,
because they have promised to endeavor it, and because I see so far as I can
discern a real prosecution of it by the making of good Laws, and by the
removal of obstructions which seem to threaten a ruin of all: if the godly
party would not divide, and strengthen the hands of enemies, and by their
disaffected ness and jealousies, did not make an Army necessary: this work
might be speedily advanced: That a forcible change of Government is heavier at
first then at last.
as for the ground of your jealousy it is not sound; for wise Statesmen that
must maintain a Government, or alter it upon Emergencies by force, will rule
with a higher hand at the beginning then in the prosecution of a settlement;
for in the beginning necessity constrains them to put forth the height of their
power to lay the foundations of their Authority by Laws; but when that is
done, then the Laws Rule, and are equal to all; and I am persuaded that this,
as it will be their wisdom, so it is their design in justice to do, and by not
refusing to do my duty toward them; I make my self fit in my place to be heard
by some of them, that I may persuade and induce them to prosecute their work in
this way, which if I were possessed with such jealousies against them, as you
here express, I could not be able to do.

6. Scruple. is a complaint of ill usage.
Your last objection is not a scruple of conscience, why you cannot take the
Engagement; but a complaint concerning the usage of some who take it not, that
although they are conscientious, grave, sober, pious and peaceable men; yet
they are grieved and troubled, trampled upon and neglected, whilst on the other
hand, such as are loose, perverse, Athiests, Cavaliers and base wretches, are
embraced, privileged and respected, only because they will take the Engagement.

The answer shows, that there are many causes of grief and complaints for want
of observing the Rules of Christianity on all sides.
I confess it is greatly to be lamented, that this does so fall out, I say it is
to be lamented, that conscientious and godly men, being peaceable in their
affections should not also know the way of peace; how to behave themselves
harmless in their actions toward the powers which God has set over them, it
is to be lamented, that they should be so dealt withal by any in a time
wherein we stand for a reformation. It is to be lamented, that their Conscience
mistaking its duty, should occasion their grief; and become upon religious
grounds as to them, a cause of division in the State. It is to be lamented
lastly, that wicked and profane men, in any Christian Commonwealth, should
obtain more favor upon any ground whatsoever, then such as are truly
conscientious and godly. These evils are the sad effects of our sinful
distempers, when we walk by the interests of men, rather then by the Rules of
Christianity: for if godly, grave, pious and conscientious men, did not make
themselves subservient to a party in the State, as too many do unadvisedly,
bringing a snare upon their own Conscience, by the mixture of worldly and
religious considerations, wherein the councels of men being predominant, the
simplicity of the Gospel is neglected: this would not fall out as it does. But
the fractions of godly men, What the failings of godly men are in this kind.
about the particular ways of their profession; whereby they weaken each others
hands in the main work (which is to bring all men to Christ, to walk with him
and in him, not after the flesh but after the spirit) is the cause of all this
mischief, which God does suffer to come upon his Servants, as well for a trial
of their faith and patience, as for a chastisement of their misbehaviour and
partial walking in the dispensation of his mysteries. The injustice of humane
contentions about the ways of their own framing in the holy profession, is
justly punishable with God, by the changes of State-Governments, and the
shaking of all humane frames therein to pieces, that nothing may remain but
that which is truly spiritual and unmovable. What the principles and practices
of Statesmen and their instruments are in this kind.
All States in this world, as of this world can look to nothing but to the
interest of self preservation and power over others, and all the subordinate
Agents of such States according to their instructions, must look to nothing but
to the interest of their superiors; whatsoever therefore, or whosoever does
cross this interest, and is not harmless and unblameable toward them in point
of security; they think it just (and rationally they cannot be blamed for
thinking so) that they ought to remove both it and him out of their way; and
whatsoevr and whosoever is (professedly at least) faithful to them in point of
security; they take hold of and cherish both it and him. Nor can they as true
Statesmen look to any thing else but this; all other Relations or
contemplations of men's qualities, are drowned and swollowed up in this one
consideration, whether yea or no he be to be trusted, and is like to prove
faithful to this their interest: if they get assurance of this, the worldly
wisdom of a State looks no further; but if they can get no assurance of this,
all other considerations whatsoever are laid aside, and the more eminent men
are in parts, or in esteem and repute for godliness, they become the greater
objects of State-jealousies, if they will give them no assurance of their
fidelity; and this I conceive is the reason why godly and conscientious men,
are troubled by the Instruments of State-security and others who are base
wretches, and men void of all grace, are cherished by them. The Remedy to be
used against these evils, and the grounds thereof.
If then you and other godly men could be brought upon rational and religious
grounds to give the State wherein you live, and the Rulers thereof, that
security, which may take off the edge of their jealousy, that you are not an
enemy to their temporal standing and safety, and that you shall not be
accessory to any practices which tend to the overthrow of a Commonwealth
Interest, I make no doubt but the cause of your complaint, and with it many
public evils would cease: and why you should not give them this security,
truly I can discern no ground for it, neither in reference to Christianity nor
Morality. For in morality as you are a Subject, In respect of Morality.
and cannot live safely, nor enjoy any outward benefit of the life of nature
here without the protection of the Government which is over this State, you are
bound in gratitude toward those that manage it; for their pains in watching
and looking to public safety to own them in their places, and if you will not
own them, when without them you cannot enjoy any security, you are not only
unthankful but unjust, for by not owning them in the power whereof they are
fully possessed for the good of all you do what in you lies to dissolve the bond
of public safety, which in all Subjects is nothing else but the owning of a
Government by a professed subjection thereunto in things good and lawful: nor
can any man rationally allege any ground why he ought not to own the powers
which are actually over him by doing the things commanded by them, except it be
one of these three: Either that he does own another power, inconsistent with
the power which is over him, in the place where he lives; or that he will own
no power at all in humane societies; or that he sees cause to except against
the things commanded as unlawful in themselves.

The first exception to own another power inconsistent with the power which is
over him, a prisoner of War may make to those that have taken him prisoner, and
an Ambassador from a foreign Nation, toward those to whom he is sent.

But if he owns neither another power, nor that which is over him, then he must
own no Magistracy amongst men, nor Government at all: for this consequence as I
conceive, is unavoydable. If I will not own the powers which are over me, I
must either own other powers inconsistent with these, or none at all; if I own
other powers inconsistent with these, I ought to seek protection from those,
and not from these, and am bound to set those up against these and consequently
have no right to any common benefit from these. But if I will own no Magistracy
at all, then no Magistracy ought to own me; nor have I any right to live in any
humane society, for no society can be without some Government.

But if the exception does lie against the lawfulness of the things commanded,
then he must say, that it is unlawful for a subject to promise that he will be
true and faithful to the Commonwealth wherein he lives, because the form of
Government thereof, is not the same which it was before, which is an assertion,
so irrational that I conceive no man will own it, nor can any man lawfully
enter into any promise or obligation to God or men, which can make this
Commandment void. Let all souls be subject to the powers that are over them:
therefore it is altogether inconsistent with morality, that a Subject in things
good and lawful, should not promise submission to the powers which are over
him, which I conceive is yet more then what the Engagement in express terms
does require of you.

As for Christianity, besides that which I have said already concerning the
freedom of your Conscience, In respect of Christianity.
which is not under the power of any outward worldly things: I shall only
mention this clear rule given to all men as they are men, which to my
understanding is beyond all exception: it is the Apostles Command, Romans 13.1.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, I say then, that no soul (that
is no man) may as a Christian exempt it self from being subject in things good
and lawful to the jurisdiction which is over it; and although this translation
will bear the weight of this inference, yet the words may be rendered more
properly and merely to their full sense thus. Let every soul be subordinate to
the powers which have the eminency over them, for the original words
hupotassesthay is properly to be subordinate; (...).
and exousiai huperechousai are powers having superiority or eminency: and thus
the last Dutch Translation does render the words; All ziele zy den machten
over haer gestelt onderworpen. (...).
Let every soul be submitted to the powers which are settled over them, as for
the ordinary exception which is brought in to limit the generality of this
Rule, that the word exousia does signify only a lawful power, it is of no
validity at all, for both in heathen and in sacred writings it is taken in the
sense which signifies any ability and the power of force; look upon Scapula in
the compounds of (...) and he will tell you that Plutarch and Herodian do join
exousian and dunamin as words of the same sense, (...).
and that it is used generally for any thing that a man can do, whether
lawfully or unlawfully: as in Xenophon you have this expression exousian echo
cleptein, that is, I have power to steal. (...).
Here then the word cannot be taken for a lawful, but only for a licencious
power: that is, for an ability to do a thing unlawful: and in the Scripture so
far as I can now call to mind, I find it taken more in this sense then in any
other, exousia touscotous, (...).
the power of darkness, when Judas did lay violent hands upon his M^ster, as
upon a robber and a thief, I suppose you will not say he had a lawful warrant
to do, and Collos. 1.13. the same expression is used to describe the power
which the Devil has over our souls in corrupt nature, which I do not think
you will call a just authority used by him, (...).
and Luke 22.25. exousiazontes is to exercise might and force which is the
proper Character of the Rulers of the Nations, which Christ forbids his
Disciples to affect: so also 1 Cor. 6.12. exousiasthesomai is to be under might
and a forcible constraint without freedom; (...).
the word then in Scripture phrase is, as in Heathen Authors, the power of
force as well if not more then of right. And in general it is an ability to do
what one will which is indeed proper to superiors, for such as have an
uncontrouleable power in acting, are superior powers, intimating that where
God does put any in a place of such eminency above others, that they can do
what they will without control; there all men under them, are to submit unto
them in things good and lawful: now if men whom you call grave, pious, and
conscientious, will not take notice of this Rule conscionably and piously, to
obey their Rulers for Gods sake; I must leave them to the event which God will
determine over them, and be sorry that they understand not their duty, and the
rule of that freedom by which they stand under their superiors.

Thus I have given you my thoughts concerning your scruples, which I beseech
the Lord to manifest unto you, so far as they are his truths, and wherein they
are not such, I beseech him to let me see the error of them: for I am far from
any other interest in them, then as they are the testimonies of righteousness
without prejudice, and without partiality. I shall be glad to hear from you what
your sense thereof is, how far you are satisfied thereby. The Lord instruct us
and give us understanding in all things, and teach us to profit by all his
dispensations, to his grace I commend you and rest,

Written at St. James this 9. June, 1650. Sir, Your faithful and affectionate
Friend and Brother in Christ, JOHN DURY.

FINIS.

