MARAN-ATHA: THE SECOND ADVENT, OR, Christ's Coming to Judgment.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Honorable JUDGES of Assize, at Warwick: July 25.
1651.

BY WILLIAM DURHAM, B. D. Late Preacher at the Rolls, Now Pastor of the Church
at Tredington in Worcester shire.

1 COR. 4.4. (...). Greg. Nazianz. Orat. 53. in fine. (...), LONDON, Printed by
T. Maxey, for M. M. G. Bedell, and T. Collins: and are to be sold at their
Shop, at the Middle Temple Gate, Fleetstreet. 1652.

To the Right Honorable WILLIAM LENTHALL ESQUIRE SPEAKER of the PARLIAMENT,
AND Master of the Rolls.
SIR,
WHen importunity had prevailed with me to this service, who was never fond of
such public employments, 'twas not intended that this Sermon should be made
more public, by the showing it to the world: But that candid and charitable
account which some persons of worth (then Auditors) gave thereof unto your
Honor, made you inquisitive after it, and solemnly invite the Publication. I
was never yet so far in love with any thing of mine own, as to fancy it worth
the public view: but since it is so suitable to your desires, which must ever
have with me the force of a command, I shall not decline this advantage of
leaving some testimony to the world of those many favors, which I have
received from your hand.

The Argument of this Discourse is a plain, but a fundamental and a saving
truth; concerning which, I may take up the language of that Pious and laborious
servant of Christ in a business of the like nature; Mr. Carryll in Job. 7.6.
It Is a point easy to be known, but hardly to be believed; every man assents
to it, but few live it; we slight the hearing of common Principles, but common
truths neglected, cause the neglect of every truth; had we more serious
thoughts of Heaven and Hell, that these are, and what these are; that there is
a God, and who he is; that there shall be such a judgment, and what it shall
be, we should more profitably improve and trade our times and talents. Under
whose grave and sober judgment, I shall secure my self from the censure and
contempt of them who are taken only with new-Doctrines: It being the much
unhappiness of this present age, that so many are willing to exchange old
Truths for new Notions; Solid and sober truths, for strained Allegories;
Practical Truths, for frothy speculations.

For its dress and harness, that is plain too; and such as is suitable to the
Country, where it was born; indeed, such is the native beauty of Divine truths,
that they suffer by that paint, which humane wit would put upon them; they ever
look best in their own colors; the best Character of a Sermon is, that it be
honest, and tend to edification.

That this so inconsiderable a piece, should fly under your wings for shelter
(besides that you have pleased to invite it) can be no wonder to them who know
with what exceeding tenderness, for many years, you have there cherished its
unworthy Author. The children of our Brains, as well as those of our loins
should learn that lesson of the Wiseman, Not to forget their fathers friends;
It Is the too usual consequent (I will not say effect) of great places, to swel
men with thoughts of impunity; because men cannot call them to an account, they
are too apt to flatter themselves, that God will not; and when once that piece
of Atheism has siezed on their heart, they easily give the reins to pride and
oppression, and what not! which fault, though in the strictest scrutiny, you
could never be found tainted with, who in the height and continuance of your
great Employments, retain your natural and Christian Clemency, meekness, and
humility: yet it is not amiss to fortify your heart with all possible strength
against such encroaching thoughts, where Place and Employment is so apt to
become a snare.

To this purpose, I take the Confidence to recommend this ensuing discourse
unto your service: which may be (like Philip of Macedon's Page,) your daily
remembrancer of that which I know, is your frequent and serious meditation.

I am not so much a stranger to your affairs, to conceive you at leisure to
read large Epistles; I have only one word to you, and one for you, and I have
done; that to you is,

That as God has been pleased to set and contitinue you so long in so eminent
a place, enabled you to such incessant labor, and preserved you under such
great Revolutions of State, you would make it your business more and more to
advance him in the Gospel of his dear Son. And wherein (at present) can you
better improve your power and interest for him, then in cherishing and
preserving his Great Ordinance of the Ministry. The tender compassion which I
bear to those poor souls, which sit in darkness, and the shadow of death,
makes me continue to beg the utmost improvement of your power for the settling
of a learned and a pious Ministry in every Congregation of the Land! That the
Excellency of that calling may be preserved from those virulent and bitter
tongues, which are set on fire of hell! that their Office may not be publicly
invaded by those, who are not called to that, but to other employments! that
oil may be preserved, and provided for burning lamps! 1 Cor. 9.7.14.
That they who preach the Gospel may live upon the Gospel, (which in the
Apostles judgment is the highest equity,) until they that go a warfare go on
their own charges! That there may be a constant supply of persons fit for that
weighty employment, by preserving and cherishing those Seminaries of learning,
the Universities, so famous through the Christian world; without which,
ignorance, error, and atheism will suddenly and unavoidably overspread the Land!
In a word, that they be not justled out of their Function and maintenance, to
gratify a people, who are no better friends to Magistracy, then to Ministry.
And to speak what mine own experience assures to be truth, (you have vouchsafed
to make me so much privy to your thoughts) I know these things you desire and
endeavor; wherein, if after all your labor, you fail in the success, yet you
have freed your own soul, and your reward is with your God.

That for you, is; that that gracious God, who has enabled you to so continued
a service, would multiply all the gifts and graces of his spirit upon you and
yours! that your days may be prolonged, your health and strength continued and
increased, your Honors fastened on you, that your Family may flourish, and you
rewarded a thousand fold for all those incoragements, and tender indeerments,
whereby you have for ever obliged

Sir, Your Honors most faithful and humble Servant, WILL. DURHAM.
From my Study at Tredington, May 1. 1652.
I have perused this Sermon of Master Durham's on James 5.9. and do approve of
it, as very fit to be printed.

OBADIAH SEDGVVICK.
May 5. 1652.
P. 9. l. 27. for Teutonish, r. Teutonick. p. 10. l. 13. add these words, the
God of Nature; and lin. 27. for whence read when, p. 12. l. 13. blot out and,
14. l. 21. for despute, r. dispute, 17. l. 3. for teach r. reach. 17. l. 19.
for bave r. have, 19. l. 18. for then r. them. 22. in the margin for Origenis
r. Originis. 23. l. 6. wants it, 26. margin for (...) r. (...). 28. m. for
torquate r. Torquate. 30.15. wants shall. 30. l. 33. for impudent r. imprudent.
32. for enite, r. inite.

MARAN-ATHA: The second Advent: Or, Christ's coming to JUDGMENT.
JAMES 5.9. Behold, the Judge stands before the door.

The whole Verse runs thus:

Grudg not one against another, Brethren, lest ye be condemned, Behold, the
Judge stands before the door.


SInce that unhappy breach between Genesis 3.
Man and God, there have been perpetual differences between Man and Man; The
seeds of injustice and oppression sown then in the hearts, spring forth so
naturally and so plentifully in the lives of men, that they are become like
Hab. 1.14.
the fishes of the sea, the great ones devouring the less. As Genesis 4.8.
this appears true in that horrid act of Cain against Abel, so is it visible in
all those succeeding acts of injustice, so much complained of by Isa. 5.7. Jer.
6.6. Ezekiel. 22.7, 29.
the Prophets. As this has been too true in all ages, so especially in ours,
on whom the 1 Chr. 10.11
ends of the world are come. These are Heb. 1.2.
the last days; and as our last days are fullest of diseases and miseries, so
the worlds last days are most 2 Timothy 3.1
perilous, and most abounding with iniquity. The lower Time runs upon the lees
and dregs, the worse ever: as Time grows older, oppression grows greater; and
as oppressions increase, so will complaints increase. Sowas it here; The great
and rich men trampled upon the poor, as if there were no God to punish them:
they who were injured, did repine and grumble, as if there were no God to
relieve them. The rich oppress the poor, the poor grumble against the rich.
The Apostle being to find out a remedy against both these evils, pitches upon
this Text, as the likeliest plaster to cure both sores; to prevent the
outrageous insolences of the one, and remove the discontented grudgings of the
other; no likelier means, then by minding both of the Day of Judgment: As if he
had said, You who abuse the power and greatness which God has bestowed upon
you, to the oppressing of the needy, who live in pleasure, and are wanton; who
Isa. 3.15.
grind the faces of the poor, and sell the Amo. 2.6.
needy for a pair of shoos; who kill the just, and detain the laborers hire;
weep and howl, for the Judge stands before the door to take vengeance of
your injustice. And you whose miseries are written in letters of blood, upon
whose Ps. 129.3.
backs the plowers have made long furrows, grudge not, complain not, murmur
not; for the Lord comes, yea he stands before the door, to plead the cause of
the oppressed, and to help them to right who suffer wrong; And indeed, nothing
has, (I am sure nothing should have) a greater influence upon the spirits of
men, to keep them within the compass of their duty, then the remembrance of
their last account; be their conditions, their professions, what it will.

In which words the Apostle is quieting and cooling the minds and spirits of
those whom the injuries and oppressions of others have exasperated; and in them
we have, 1. A Prohibition [Grudge not.] 2. The inforcement of that prohibition;
from the danger of the fact, [lest ye be condemned.] 3. The Anticipation of an
objection, which they were about to make; What, may not losers have leave to
speak? Shall they wrong us, and we not so much as complain? this will but
harden them in their evil ways, and expose us to more and greater injuries; he
that quietly and tamely bears one affront, invites a second: Oh! says he, but
be patient a while, leave revenge to him to whom it appertains, commit your
cause to him who judges all things righteously, and is coming to do it;
Behold, he stands before the door.

1. The Prohibition; Do not ye repine, (...). Tyrinus in loc.
or murmur or groan, either out of grief, that you cannot be revenged; or
impatiency at your present sufferings; do not murmur nor grudge one against
another, Miserorum est ut malevolentes sint. Plautus.
as poor men use to do, (who are querulous and complaning;) do not grudge
against the rich, by calumniating and cursing them; much less against God, as
if he were unjust, in suffering you to be afflicted; Take heed of murmuring
groans, distrustful groans, revengfull groans, and envyous groans; Manton in
loc.
murmur not against Gods providence, distruct not his protection, thirst not
after the revenge of thine own injuries, envy not those who are exercised with
fewer troubles then thy self; this is the prohibition, Grudge not.

2. The inforcement; least ye be condemned; as if he had said, Impatiency,
discontent, distrust, envy, will expose you to greater miseries then you
complain of; Your sufferings here are but for your probation, but your
grudging and repining will be your condemnation: be not out of patience, your
deliverance is at hand, Behold, etc.

3. The Anticipation, (or forestalling) of the objection: where are three
things. 1. A Judge, 2. His posture, he stands; 3. The place, before the door:
and all these ushered in with (an Ecce) Behold. -- Behold the Judge; Behold, he
stands; Behold, he stands before the door.

In each of which there is somewhat remarkable.

1. Behold, (...).
the Judge; some eminent person sure, who is ushered in with such solemnity!
It Is The Judge: Emphatically; not only A Judge, but the Judge, the supreme and
universal Judge, who shall judge the quick and the dead. In the precedent
verse he is styled the Lord; it is the Lord Jesus Christ, who has on his
vesture and on his thigh a name written, Rev. 19.16. His first coming was in
humilitate. His second in majestate. In his first, judicandus; In his second,
judicaturus. Solomon's petition. 1 King. 3.9. Tiberius wished ut ipsi
intelligentem bumani divinique juris mentem dii darent. Tacit. ann. l. 4. c. 7.
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; whose first appearance was in humility, his
second shall be in power and great glory; who was then Judged by his Creatures,
but now in his second coming, shall judge his Judges -- And indeed, who could
be fitter for the work then he who was every way qualified for a Judge?

To make a Judge, two sorts of qualifications be rerequisite 1 Intrinsicall. 2
Extrinsicall.


1 Intrinsical, and those (amongst others of less moment) are two. 1. Wisdom
and judgment in the Laws, ability to find out the truth of an evidence [a
knowing head.] 2. Integrity and uprightness, not to decline from the path of
Justice; for fear, nor favor, [an honest heart.]

2. Extrinsicall, and they are likewise twofold: 1. Commission; every man that
is able to discipline soldiers, may not beat up Drums, (...), authoritatem.
raise, lead, fight soldiers without Commission; Every one that can speak
well, may not take upon him the office of a preacher, unless he be Romans 15.
sent; Every person who understands the Laws, may not arraigne and condemn men
without commission; he must be able to answer that question, Quis te constituit
judicem? who made thee a judge?

2. (...), portentiam.
Power of Execution; else all the rest is to little purpose: To sit in state,
and to condemn prisoners, and to have no power to execute the sentence, is but
to expose the Law to contempt and scorn. Dan. histor. in the life of Ed. 3d.
It was said of Edward the Third, that he was a Prince who knew his work, and
did it: and his love to Justice is observed in this, that he made so many Laws
for the Execution of Justice; Execution is the life of the Law; a knowing Head,
an honest Heart, and an active vigorous Hand, make a Judge.

But all these qualifications shine most gloriously in the Lord Jesus Christ,
who is the wisdom of his Father, and understands the Laws which himself has
made: who is a righteous Judge, no fear, no favor, no bribes, Joh. 5.22.
no hopes can turn him aside from the path of Justice: he is Commissioned to
this work; The Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the
Son. And to conclude, that he has power of Execution, Mat. 25.41.
is manifest by the very form of the sentence, -- Depart ye cursed; those words
are, as other of Gods words, effective, which work the thing they command; they
send sinners to hell without resistance: The word Cast or turned into hell, Psa.
9.17.
imports such an overruling power which the creature is no way able to resist.
Behold, this is the Judge.

2. Behold! he stands; Psa. 82.1.
which is Gods posture when he comes to execute judgment; God stands in the
congregation of Princes, he is Judge among the Gods. Isa. 3.13. Act. 7.55. Non
quasi causam dicentem, sed quasi sententiam cito laturum. Moral. homil 29.
Gataker, appeal to Prinn. in initio.
The Lord stands up to plead, and he stands to Judge the people; Stephen
sees Christ standing at Gods right hand, whom other scriptures usually
represent sitting, not as an Advocate (says Gregory,) to plead his cause, but
as a Judge to take speedy vengeance on them for this bloody act: alluding
(says one of our own) to the customs of Judges, who sit to hear the cause,
(which they do deliberately;) but stand up to pass sentence, (which they do
resolvedly.) The Church when she would hasten God to judgment, prays. Arise O
Lord and come, lift up thy self; he that stands is ready to come: -- which yet
is clearer in that he says,

3 Behold! he stands at the door; as it is Genesis 4.7. if thou do evil, Poena
peccati.
sin lies at the door; punishment is hard at hand; so, the feet of them which
have buried thy husband, are at the door, Act. 5 9. Senibus mors in Januis: de
conver si. cap. 14. 1 Pet. 4.5.
they be hard by: and Bernard when he would show the neernesse of the death of
old men, phrases it thus, Death is at old men's door: so here, The Judge
stands at the door, he is at hand, he has put on his Robes, he is ascending
his Tribunal; he is (in Saint Peter's language) ready to judge.

The words are capable of a double consideration; 1. As a positive doctrine
holding out the certainty and vicinity of the last judgment: Behold, the Judge
stands, etc. 2. Relatively, in reference to those things which the Apostle
had treated of before; Take heed, ye rich men, of violence and oppression; Why?
what is the danger? Behold, the Judge stands at the door. Take heed ye poor
oppressed people, of grumbling and repining; why? who shall releeve us? Behold,
the Judge stands, etc. I shall not ingulph my self into that vast Ocean of
matter, which the former proposition, concerning Christ's second coming to
judgment, will afford; only I shall point at the certainty of it, so far as
may make it serviceable to the second consideration of the word, which I
chiefly intend. Nor will I trouble you with meaner witnesses then God and
Nature to prove it; and when these vouchsafe to bear witness, it is vain
curiosity to expect others, and strange infidelity to suspend our assent.

Nor shall I multiply texts in so clear a case; one or two arrows from
Jonathans bow, may certify David of the Kings pleasure, as well as a quiver
full; two or three stones out of David's Budget, may fell Goliath, as well as a
whole quarry; In quotations of Scripture, I would observe the weight, rather
then the number. Should I cite all, I should be infinite: I shall select some
few, and those such as perhaps labor with some other doubts; the first text is
Romans 14.10. We shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ. How does
that appear? why from another Scripture; Isa. 45.23.
for it is written, as I live, says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and
every tongue shall confess to God. But stay, Dub.
thou learned Doctor of the Gentiles, strive not to confirm our faith by false
allegation of Scripture; that is the practice of the wily serpent the Devil, and
of his factors at Rome, the subtle Jesuits; and suits not with the Candor and
Religion of an Apostle; but the words in Isaiah, are read otherwise, I have
sworn by my self, the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness, and
shall not return, that unto me every knee shall bow, and every tongue shall
confess. Magis expressus sensus, quam expensa verba. Hierom. Regula videatur.
Ribera in Hos. 2. Number. 14. Apostolorum ac Evangelistaru^ mos est, ut
testimoniis Vet. Testam, referendis, crebro non verborum ordinem sequuntur, sed
sensum. Vivo ego, in forma jurandi, Deo propria.
It Is true indeed, they are so; but though here are not all the same words, yet
here is the same sense. The Evangelists, the Apostles, and Christ himself, in
citing the Old Testament, look not so much at the word as at the sense; in
which these two places agree. That that is the sense of the Old Testament which
is given of it in the New, is without controversy, the penmen only differing,
but the Spirit which dictates, being in both the same; to whom if we allow,
what we deny not men, to be the best interpreter of his own meaning, we cannot
but yield that he intended by Isaiah, what he expressed by Paul, and so the words
make strongly for the last judgment. -- As I live, says the Lord -- it is an
oath peculiar to God himself; Have I purposed, and shall not I bring it to
pass! have I sworn, and shall it not stand! Shall not I who punish perjury in
others, fulfill mine own oath! doubtless I will; Every knee shall bow: Those
knees which bowed to him in mockage, shall now do him homage; and those feeble
sinnews shall tremble before him on the throne, whom in a contumelious manner
they scraped to on the Cross, Every tongue shall confess. Every reviling
tongue shall confess him to be God, whom once they thought the worst of men;
and upon constraint acknowledge him their Judge, whom they lately executed as a
guilty Malefactor.

The Apostle Jude in the 14 and 15 verses of his Epistle, has another
Testimony to the same purpose: And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam,
prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousand of
Saints, to execute judgment upon all; etc.

It Is hard to say, Vtrumque vitium est, omnibus credere, and nulli: tutius hoc
crimen est, illud honestius. Sen. Rawliegh. histor. lib. 1o. part 1. cap. 5..
6. Vid. Bez.
which is worst, to believe every one, or no body; they are both faults, only
with this difference, the former is more ingenuous, the later is more secure:
That this testimony is true, there will be more will aver: And who this Enoch
was, is not so hard to guess, as what was his prophecy; That it was an
unwritten prophecy, calculated only for that Nation, and delivered over from
hand to hand, is not improbable; we find that he prophesied, that he spoke it,
but that it was written, we do not read. -- Enoch, no question, was a faithful
Preacher in his time, and strove by a flood of divine Rhetoric, to beat down
those sins, which nothing could stop but a flood of water; and amongst other of
his divine sayings, this might be one, by the care of the faithful, continuing
to succeeding ages.

Secondly, It might be written either by himself, or some other, yet not by
divine inspiration, nor never reduced into the Canon: and such (it may be) was
the Book of Jasher the upright: (if a very learned man mistake not,) Junius in
loc.
for the word rendered Book, signifies either a Catalogue of books, or else it
signifies public records, containing acts and proceedings in a Court of
Judicature; or Ecclesiastical, concerning Church Government; or historical,
concerning events and occurrences in the State; of all which sorts there were
several lodged up in the Ark, which never came to light, which might be lost
without any detriment to the Canon: and of this sort, might be this of Enoch.

Thirdly, We are not to reckon all those books lost, whose names we find
mentioned in Scripture, but not the books that bear those names; as those of
Nathan the Seer, and Gad the Seer, with those which Samuel himself wrote,
Manent libri, tacentur nomina. Junius.
make up the two Books of Samuel; the books remain, though their names be
suppressed or changed; so have I often seen smaller streams emptying themselves
into the vaster Channel, lose their own, and assume the name of the greater
current; and so this of Enoch (as others) may remain in holy Writ, though
being annexed with greater works, it has lost its name; And it moves not much,
though we find not the very words, if we find that which is equivalent; which
is sufficient to prove the citations out of the Old Testament true, as you saw
made clear in the former quotation. Thus having proved Enoch to be (bonum and
legalem hominem) a man of credit and repute in his country; let us hear his
evidence, Behold, the Lord comes, etc. where we have two things. 1 the Judge,
and then 2 the Judgment it self: The Judge, set forth by his title, and his
train. 1 His title, it is the Lord; and for his train, there is the quality or
nature of them, (Saints) and the number of them, ten thousand of Saints: and
for the judgment, it is to convince all the ungodly, of all their hard
speeches, and evil works; and all this with (an ecce) Behold, ut de presenti
loquitur; as if it were within his kenn; Enoch the seventh from Adam, through
the perspective of faith, saw the day of judgment even at his heels: we are
some thousands of years nearer then he; and can that be far from us, Verstegan
in his tract of the ancient English tongue. p. 192.
which so nearly bordered upon him? Had Enoch been silent, his very name had
proclaimed a judgment to come: In the old Teutoni^^ language (the ancient
speech of this Nation) E signifies Law or Equity, and Noch signifies, yet once
again, or to come; so that his very name imports a time to come; where shall be
the administration of justice according to right. 2 Timothy 4.8.


Paul when he came down from the third heaven, brought with him the certain
news of a Judge that should come to crown him at that great day; and not him
only, but all those that shall love his appearing; Causab. in annal. Baron.
exer. 2. c. 11. 1 Timothy 3. ult. (...).
Now there is a double appearance of Christ; the first called by the Ancients
(...), the unridling of that great mystery, God manifested in the flesh: the
second that is here mentioned by the Apostle, 2 These. 1.6, 7.
When the Son of man shall come in the clouds, and every eye shall see him: or
to use his own words in that most accurate and dreadful expression; When the
Lord Jesus Christ shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, in
flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, etc. Not to be injurious to your patience, in a
business so obvious; our Savior, the best of preachers, has laid down this
truth in the parable of tares, and in plain terms, Matthew. 25.31.

2 Thus have you heard the testimony of Nature; Naturae naturantis. Naturae
naturatae.
now lend an ear to nature her self. Nor is this word far from thee, that thou
should ask, Who will bring it unto me? only unrivet the secret Cabine of thy
breast, and thou shall find this doctrine legible; Whence else arise those
secret twinges and girds of thy conscience, which like an under-officer, bind
thee over to the great Assize? whence else that horror in thy dejected soul
for sin committed? which anticipates thy final doom, and executes thee before
thou art condemned? whence else those renting spasmes, and tearing convulsions
in his breast, whose sin is so secret that none can know it; whose person is so
eminent that none can punish him? Every man's secret thoughts bode and
fore-speak a judgment to come, when^^ conscience tells him that sin went
before. Culpam paena premit comes. Hor. Carm. lib. 4. Od. 4.
Sin and judgment, as they are in themselves, so they are in our apprehension
too, twins; yet so prodigiously are they coupled, that when we have brought
forth one, we have small hopes of being delivered from the other.

The Heathens, who had but one eye, that of nature, and that film'd over with
superstitious and carnal thoughts, Quaesitor Minos Vrnam movet.
saw distinctly this truth; That there was a Judge below, the Poet knew; and
that the Heathen generally did he like, we have clear evidence, in that the
Apostle makes that the ground of his Argument to restrain the people from sin,
Because Acts 17.31. (...) diphil. comicus. Vide hic de re Eusebius de Prepar.
Evangelic. l. 11o. c. 35.36. Idem l. 12. c. 6. and 52. cap. in fine.
God had appointed a day wherein he will judge the world in Righteousness;
which had not nature suggested the truth of it, might have been as easily
rejected, as urged. Balthasars sinews refuse to bear the luggage of his
carcass, when the wall turned Preacher, and reproved his vanity; Felix
himself, when Paul discoursed of Judgment, though in the presence of his
sweetest Drusilla, could not secure his limbs from the shiverings of an Ague;
It was much that a prisoner should so soon tremble his Judge, and that he
should quake at the mention of Judgment from his mouth, on whose head he was
ready to pass present sentence. Look back to Adam the First Man, the Second
Sinner, who had no sooner sinned, but trembles, and flies from the presence of
that God, with whom but now he talked face to face; Look on Cain, who when he
began to be a Fratricide, left off (in this point) to be an Heretic: and by
the baseness of his manners, rectified his Judgment; Glassius Philo. sacra.
page 60. Genesis 4.8.
if that be true which is cited out of the Jerusalem Targum, which runs thus;
Caine and Abel went out into the field to talk, and Cain said, There is no
Judge, nor Judgment, nor life to come; no reward for the good, nor punishment
for the wicked; for (if there were) why, I pray thee, should thy offering be
accepted, mine rejected? But Abel answered, There is a Judge, and judgment,
and life to come, a reward for the good and punishment for the wicked; because
my works were done in integrity, they were accepted; thine in hypocrisy, and
therefore rejected: And whilst they were thus wrangling about the point, Caine
smote his brother Abel, and killed him: Flagitium and flagellum, sicut acus and
filues.
But no sooner had he made a passage for his Brothers Soul, but he made a
Scourge for His own; he is now forced to recant his error, and with anguish
and sorrow pine under that Judgment, which even now he denied; whilst the
earth greedily drinks in his brothers blood, he sees Hell wide open, gaping for
his own; whilst his Butcherly hands are hiding his brothers carcass, his
distracted looks manifest his own guilt.

Thus you see, that God has implanted in the hearts of all men, Haret lateri
lathalis arundo.
an expectation of a future Judgment, which, thought oft-times by riot and
excess they desire to obliterate, yet it sticks deeper impressed in the soul,
then letters engraven in pillars of Marble. A sinner may (I deny not) in his
jovialitie, Prove. 14.13.
seem to smother all thoughts of future account; yet in the midst of laughter
his heart is heavy; and whilst his face smiles, his heart bleeds; for do but
track the guilty person to his chamber, where while he ruminates upon his acted
villainy; see how he starts and and shunts at the wagging of every feather.
Each friend that visits him is suspected for a Sergeant: and he fears to be
betrayed by his own members: his rolling eye, his shaking hand, and bloodlesse
cheek, whispers his guilt; and if others were as suspicious, as he is
conscious of his sin, his stammering, broken, distracted language would soon
discover him.

See him in his bed: The silent night, which befriends others with rest and
sleep, affects him with nothing but horror and amazement: the gloomy darkness,
that invites others to a sweet slumber, presents him only with the blackness
and foulness of his fault. How often he shifts his weary sides without rest, or
ease! and if he be befriended with a small parcel of sleep (good God!) what
tongue can express the strange imaginations of his mind, the horror and
astonishment into which a dream casts him! It Is futuri judicii pra judicium
Tert.
This is the distressed estate of a sinner; what said I? is this his estate?
alas! this does but point at it: Sinful man while he makes God his enemy is
afraid of every thing; Sadeel. in 32. Psalm.
their hearts are like the troubled sea, now at present they seem to enjoy a
pleasant calm, not a wrinkle of sorrow sits upon their brow, and they go on
in their sinful pleasures with full sails; yet by and by, the wind begins to
blow, a storm arises, the waters rage, themselves are overwhelmed in the gulf
of despair; they reel to and fro, and staggar like a drunken man, and are even
at their wits end* It was so with Caligula, Qui Deos tantopere contemneres, ad
minima tonitrua conivere, and caput advolvere, ad majora proripere se electo,
sub lectumque condere solebat! Sueton. Calig.. 51.
who though in the height of his pride he durst contest with God, yet durst he
by no means behold the lightning; but must stand beholding to the courtesy of
a cave or an oven to secure him from the messengers of Heaven, who but now
durst defy God himself: he that thought to speak as loud as the Almighty, is
struck dumb, trembling and quaking at a clap of thunder. What are all these
distractions of thoughts, and tortures of our spirits, but infallible symptoms
of an innate principle carrying over our assent to this conclusion, That there
is a judgment to come.

That there shall be such a day of account, it is, I hope, made clear; that
there should be such a day, let a few words show you the equity: That Gods
justice may be without blemish, in punishing the wicked who frolic it here,
and rewarding the godly, who drink deep of distress; If the righteous had
only hope in this life, 1 Cor. 15.19.
they were of all men the most miserable: As it is with the Church, so it is
with her members; she is a Lilly, but yet among the thorns; these are Jewels,
but trampled under foot. If you look for a Saint, small hopes of finding him
couched in a bed of down: no; the Stocks, the Den, Psalm. 105.18. Dan. 3.21.
Dan. 6.16.
the Oven, is a more likely place to find a Joseph, a Daniel, or a nest of
stiff kneed Jews that will not bow to an Idol; the man of this world you may
find ('it is likely) with David's Image, at ease upon his pillow; 1 Samuel 19.13 1 Samuel 24.1. Act. 7.59.
but David himself in some cave at Engedi. If you look for a Stephen, you will
hardly see him through the shower of stones, which in a horrid and detestable
charity, the Jews threw to make his tomb and to bury him before dead. Act.
12.4. Mat. 14.3.
Look you for a Peter, a Baptist? examine the prison, the not unlikely place to
find an honest downright preacher: Look you for a Paul? you may know him by the
wales of his back, imprinted by the sturdy hand of some cruel Bedle. 2 Cor.
11.23, 24. Mat. 27.31,
To conclude: Look you for a Jesus, a Savior? no so likely place to find him
as between two thieves, numbered amongst the transgressors, groaning under the
heavy pressures, and bloody agonies of the Cross. And if this be all the reward
that is in Gods service, Exodus 5.2. Job 21.15. Mat. 13.30. Mat. 25.32, 33 Luke
16.25. Numb. 23.10. Heb. 4.9. Jer. 5.28, 29. Jer. 12.1, 3.
men would be ready to ask with Pharaoh, Who is this Lord that I should serve
him? and with those contemptuous ones in Job, What profit is there in serving
the Almighty? On the other side; should the tares overlook the wheat here, and
hereafter be sheafed up into the barn; should the Goats enjoy their pleasure
here, and hereafter feed with the Lamb; should Dives enjoy his lusts here, and
rest hereafter in Abraham's bosom, men would readily invert Balaams wish, O that
my life might he like the wickeds, and my latter end like his. But God has
prepared a rest for the Godly, and fitted the wicked for the day of slaughter;
Dives may be their witness, they cannot have their pleasure here, and
hereafter both. That God suffers wicked men to ride on the backs of the
righteous, and makes them groan under their burdens, is an act of that wisdom
and providence which we must admire, but not dispute: But that he disposes his
kingdom to the poor in spirit, when the wicked shall be shut out with dogs and
swine; complies with, and salves that Justice of his, where at Good men
rejoice, and bad tremble.

But I leave this point to be applied together with the next, and descend to
the consideration of the words in their Relative sense: The Lord is ready to
come to judgment: -- therefore -- O ye rich men, do not ye oppress the poor; O
ye poor men, do not ye repine and grumble at the rich: Whence this:

The consideration of Christ's near approach to judgment, Demonstrated by
testimony of 1. Heathen.
and mould their conversations into a dutiful obedience to all Gods
Commandments.

For the evidencing of which truth,

1. If you consult with them who saw only by the dim eye of Nature, they are
able to tell you; That nothing has a greater influence upon men's lives for
their mendment, Nulla res magis prodcrit, quam cogitatio, mortalitatis, Sen. de
Ira l. 30. cap. 42. Julius Poll. and Harpoc.
then the serious and frequent meditation of their death.

The Athenians had a law, that no man was to be questioned during the time of
his office; which law they kept sacred and inviolable: but no sooner was his
office expired, but there was (as it were) a Committee of Acounts, to whom they
were to be exactly answerable for all their miscarriages in the precedent year.
The Romans had the like for their Consuls; and Darius, Polib. Histo. de cons.
Romans lib. 6. Dan. 6.2.
a custom not much unlike for the Princes of his Provinces; an excellent
means (doubtless) to keep them to their duty, when they knew they were to
undergo so speedy and so exact a scrutiny.

If you look higher to those who had their eyes cleared with Spiritual
eye salve, Fathers. Sic quotidic vivamus, quasi die illa judicandi simus.
Hierom in 24 Matthew.
they look upon this as the most effectual means to bridle their unruly
passions; It was this which St. Jerome found of good use, for the crucifying
the flesh with the affections and lusts in himself, and therefore prescribes
it as a special remedy to others, that whether they eat or drink, Sive editis,
etc. Surgite mortui and venite ad judicinum. Id. ib.
or whatsoever they did, they should still conceive that they heard the last
Trumpet blowing, and the Archangel crying, Arise, ye dead, and come to
Judgment.

Chrysostom expounding that Text, Romans 13.11. [Now is the high time to awake
out of sleep, etc.] (.i.) says he, Paraeus in loc.
The Resurrection is at hand, and the last Judgment is at hand, the day
approaches; therefore let us awake out of sleep, and cast off the works of
darkness: How genuinely the text is interpreted, let others censure; sure I
am, that his sense is very apposite to our present purpose; that the sense of
that day should quicken us to our duties.

And (...). Hom. in Psalm. 7.
Basil the Great thus: in many places of the Scripture there is mention made of
the last and great Judgment, which is a consideration most necessary and most
effectual for the preservation of Piety in the hearts and lives of those that
believe the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

The Apostles have not a more effectual argument to keep men to the
imbracement of the faith, 3 Apostles.
and practice of holiness, then by minding them of Christ's coming to
judgment; 1 These. 5.1.6.
Let us watch, and be sober, for the day of the Lord comes as a thief in the
night: 2 Pet. 3.10, 11.
The day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in which the Elements
shall melt with fervent heat, etc. therefore what manner of persons ought you
to be in all holy conversation and godliness. Seeing, beloved, ye look for
such things, be diligent that ye may be found of him in peace, 1 Pet. 4.7.
without spot and blameless. The end of all things is at hand, Phil. 4.5.
be ye therefore sober, and watch unto prayer. Let your moderation be known
unto all men, the Lord is at hand; and as if there were nothing by which he
could more effectually obtest them, the Apostle beseeches them by the coming of
Christ, 2 These. 2.1.
and by their gathering together to him. And when he is closing up his first
Epistle to the Corinthians, Chap. 16.22.
as if he were most firmly to clench in that great duty of our love to Christ,
which he had been long hammering at, he concludes, -- If any man love not the
Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema, accursed; How accursed! Why Maran-atha,
The Lord comes, and though we cannot now express how heavily he shall be
accursed, yet he shall then feel it; It was the heaviest kind of all their
cursings and execrations, Pessimum Anathematis genus. Vid. -- Bez. Piscat. 4.
Christ himself.
when the sinner was left off, and given up as an incorrigible person to the
coming of Christ.

Nay, Our blessed Lord and Savior has at once sanctified and strengthened
this argument by his own using it; when he forbids us to beat our
fellow servants, and not to eat, Matthew. 24.49.
and drink with the drunken, lest the Lord of the House come in an hour that we
think not of and give us our portion with hypocrites, in the lake that burns
with fire and brimstone. Five things considerable about the last judgment.
All which will yet appear more clear, if we consider these five things, which
set out the nature of this judgment so, as may render it more vigorously
quickening men to the performance of their duties, and more effectually
restraining them from the violation of Gods sacred Laws.

1 The Impartiality of it, as to persons; Romans 14.10.
it will teach all persons; we must all stand, says the Apostle, before the
Judgment Seat of Christ; the reverend age, the blooming youth, the eloquent
Orator, the blunt Peasant, rich Dives, poor Lazarus; the new fresh, varnished
Lady, as well as she that sits grinding at the Mill. Heb. 9.27.
As it is appointed for all men once to die, so for all that die to come to
judgment; no prerogative can procure exemption from his jurisdiction, who is
to be Judge of quick and dead; and that is good Logic with Saint Peter, Acts
10.24.
Because that without respect of persons, he judges every man according to his
works, therefore we should pass the time of our our sojourning here in fear.

2 The Exactness of it, as to all manner of offenses: Matthew. 5.25.
1 Of Omission; where Christ gives us a pattern of the last judgment; the
Sentence is past only for negatives, for omitting the duties they should have
done. Thou have not clothed, not visited, not fed, therefore Go ye cursed; If
he who gives not clothes to the naked, nor food to the hungry, nor lodging to
them that want, be punished with such whips, what scorpions shall be provided
for them who strip the poor of their clothes, turn them out of their own
houses, pull the bread out of their throats! if not to visit and comfort those
that are imprisoned for Christ's cause, be a sin; what is it to cast the
innocent into prison? to feed them with the bread and water of affliction? 2.
Of Commission; 1 King. 22.27.
Whether they be open and notorious, or private and secret; for God shall bring
every man's work to judgment, Eccles. 12.14. 1 Timothy 5.24.
with every secret thing. -- Some men's sins are open beforehand, going before
to judgment: and some men they follow after. Open profaneness runs to the Bar
of Justice beforehand, and waits for the sinner. Sly Hypocrisy and dissembled
sins, these follow after. The murders, thefts, rapes, burglaries of the
prisoner at the bar, they go before to judgment; the passion, injustice,
bribery of a Judge, the partiality of a Juror, the perjury of a witness, these
follow after unto judgment. We must be brought to an account, not only for the
outward acts and grosser commitments of sin, but for the first risings of the
heart, and it is secreter tendencies, and inclinations to sin; for that sin
which is conceived in the heart, though never produced, nor acted by the hand.
Matthew. 5.22.
I need not trouble you for this further, then that one Text, But I say unto
you, whosoever is angry with his brother without cause, shall be in danger of
judgment; and whosoever shall say unto his brother, Racha, shall be in danger
of the Council; and whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of
hell fire: where we may see, that if we go no further then the Pharisees, we
shall come to judgment for actual murder and adultery; we must give an
account of all our works; thus far the divinity of a Pharisee will lead us: But
is this all? no; not only he that kills his brother, but he who is angry with
him rashly, unadvisedly, shall be liable to a future account, and brought to
judgment in another world for it.

Not that all anger binds over to judgment, (...) ad textum pertinere ex eo
comprobatu^ dari potest; quod iram, quae a Christo prohibetur, pulchre
determinat, and limitat, ne omni, justa etiam, ira, ac zelo interdictum sibi
esse Christiani existimant. Sol. Glass. Philo. sac. lib. 1. tract. 2.
but this rash, unadvised anger. Over and above the usual interpretation which
the Pharisees put upon this text, our Savior shows, there be three other
things, (beside actual murder) whereby this commandment is violated, to each
of which he affixes a several punishment, proportionable to the nature and
quality of the offense. The first way by which the sixth commandment is broken,
even by him who does not actually kill his brother, is by rash and unadvised
anger: which is then rash and unadvised, when it has no good cause nor ground
to warrant it, and when it exceeds its bounds either in the degrees or
continuance of it; And to this rash andunadvised anger, though it never went
further then the breast which bred it, he assigns a suitable punishment; it
makes a man guilty of judgment. 2 But he that says, Racha, (which is a second
way whereby this commandment may be broken without actual murder,) 1. Either
from (...) vacuum, mente, optbus, ingenio. 2. Or from (...) conspuere making it
an interjection of disdaining and abhorring. Linwood provincial Constit.
and suffers the anger conceived in his heart to break forth at his mouth,
though with some moderation; that shall give any contumelious language, in
calling his brother a vain and empty fellow, a fool, idiot, or beggar; or
shall by any significant gestures or carriages express the disdain rancour
and indignation of his heart, shall be in danger of the council.

But he that shall say, Thou fool ( which is the third way that is, whose anger
breaks out by some special and remarkable kind of reproach; and vents his
passion, not only in contumelious language, but in virulent and bitter
raylings; shall be guilty of hell fire. You have seen the three several sorts
of sin, whereby the sixth Commandment is broken, as well, as by the actual
shedding of the blood of man; now cast your eyes upon the three sorts of
punishment which are here threatened to these three degrees of sin, and you will
find then rise in degrees as the sins do in guilt.

The first, to wit, rash anger, shall be in danger of judgment; where by
judgment is meant that Court of Judgment which sat almost in every Town, Dr
Reynolds praelect. in Apoc. Practical catech.
and in matters criminal of inferior nature, had power of life and death, who
punished the offender with beheading. But he that says Racha, shall be in
danger of the Council, which means the great Council, the Sanhedrim,
consisting of seventy one persons, who had cognizance of the greater and more
notorious crimes, and punished the offender with stoning, a death more grievous
then that of bebeading. -- But he that says, Thou fool, shall be in danger of
Hell fire, ignis Gehennae; a Metaphor taken from the fire in the place called
the valley of Gehinnom, which was a place near Jerusalem, where the Idolatrous
in an accursed imitation of the barbarous practice of some of their neighbor
nations, were wont to sacrifice their children unto Moloch, which was (say
some) by making them pass through the fire, till they were dead: Others, That
they were put into the belly of a brazen Image, shaped proportionally to the
limbs of a man, in which, being heated extremely hot, they were burnt and
scortch'd to death; which way soever it was, the torment was most exquisite,
and their lamentations most intolerable; wherewith least their parents, the
sacrificers should be moved and affected, the Trumpets did continually sound
(and they made otherwise a piteous dinne) that the skreeks and groans of the
tortured children might not be be heard; whence the place was called Tophet
from a wordt hat signifies a Timbrell, or a Trumpet; and the torments that
these poor creatures suffered were chosen out as the fittest resemblance to set
out the pains of hell by. The sum of all is: that as he who actually murders
a man, is subject here to be punished by the laws of men; so shall he that sins
against the law of God in any of these forementioned ways, be subject to the
judgment of God, at that great day; he that is angry with his brother
unadvisedly, shall be, without repentance, cast into hell: he that expresses
that rancour of his mind by some disdainful gesture, or contemptuous speech,
Regula peccatis quae poenas irroget aquas. Hor. scr. l. 1. sat. 3. Dr Reynolds
praelect in Apoc. p. 269.
shall be cast into hell, into greater torments; but he that shall ad any
special kind of reproach, or bitter railing, shall be cast into torments
inexpressable, such as were the torments of those who were sacrificed unto
Moloch. All our sins (you see) must come to judgment, thoughts and words, as
well as actions; they shall be all (the evil ones) rewarded with stripes,
though the last with more.

But what? must we then give an account for our words also? Mat, 12.36.
Yes, for every idle word we must give an account. But (by the way) by idle
word, we are not to understand every jesting, pleasant speech; for all such is
not idle, no more then all that is serious, is profitable. Nor are we to think
every witty jeer, 1 King. 18.27
or biting sarcasm an idle word; Elijah jeered the priests of Baal, and Solomon
the riotous young person; Eccles. 11.9.
but those are idle words, which neither savor of wisdom or holiness, be they
spoken in jest and earnest. Verbum oticsum est quod infructuosum est Greg. de
Cur. pastor. par. 3. adm. 15. otiosum verbum est quod ratione justae
necessitatis, et intention piae utilitatis caret. (...), Basil. in Ps. 7. De
peccatis cogitationum nemo poenam putitur. Ulpian in digest. Bishop of
Carlile's speech in Parliament. 1 Hen. 4. Trussell. Conatus, consilia,
cogitationes justissime castigat vindicta divina Polib. Non decet solum manus
innocents, sed and oculos, animosque puros habere.
That's an idle word (says Tertullian) which tends neither to the instruction
or edification of the hearer; And another, that's an idle word, which is
needless and unprofitable; and if we must give so strict and solemn account
for every idle word, how much more for every false and deceitful word? for
every scurrilous and rotten word? for every envious and malicious word? for
every slandering and disgraceful word? for every heretical and blasphemous
word?

But is this all? shall our works and words alone be weighed in the strict
balance of divine Justice? Shall the Proverb bear us out that Thought is free;
the Lawyer lays it down as a ruled case. That no man is punished for thinking;
But the Lawyer saw only with his own spectacles, and lookd not beyond his own
consistory; in humanes judicatories ('it is true) we punish not thoughts; till
backed with consent, some outward expression, or execution: But in Gods
judgment, it is otherwise; He who is the seacher of the hearts and tryer of the
reins, may justly punish the inward motions and waiward Counsels of the same;
As the Oracle answered Glaucus in another case, idem est tentare Deum and
facere, in Gods account, it is all one to intend and act, a villainy; Christ the
best expositor of the Law himself made, mightily convinces the Pharisees of
mis-interpreting the Law, and proves, that not only the outward Act but the
inward risings of the heart are sinful; not he only who kills, but he that is
angry with his Brother unadvisedly; breaks the Commandments; not only he that
lies with a woman, but he that lusts after her, is liable to judgment: The
pure and holy Law of God requires truth and holiness in the inward parts, as
well as a bare forbearance of the outward act; It Is not enough that our hand be
clear from blood (unless our hearts be free from malice, and our tongues from
reproach.

There may be a guilty eye, a guilty hand, us well as unlawful embraces: For
Christ in that place blames not the Law as too narrow, Non legem culpat, sed
interpretandi modum.
as not reaching to forbid evil words or thoughts: but quarrels at the false
interpretation of the Pharisees, who corruptly straightened, and so marrd the text.

The Commandments of God, as they are sincerely pure, Psa. 19.
so are they also exceeding broad, reaching to the dividing between the marrow
and the bones, betwixt the intentions and secret thoughts of the heart; The Law
is compared to the Sun, from the luster of whose rays the most secret closets
lie not hid, it is therefore called a spiritual Law, Lex Dei dicitur
spiritualis, ratione 1 Originis. 2 Impletionis. 3 Finis. 4 Obligationis.

by the Apostle, and so it is in four respects; first in regard of its
Original, proceeding from a spirit. 2. In regard of the power of fulfilling of
it; all the strength of Nature cannot fulfill it, it must be from the renewing
of the spirit: 3. In regard of its end, which is to bring us to God the Father
of spirits. 4. (Which belongs hither) in regard of its obliging power, because
it does not only restrain the outward act of wickedness, but the first motions
of the heart, the first tendencies and inclinations of the thoughts to evil;
God even in his Law set bounds to our thoughts, the transgression of that law
implies guilt, and guilt does but pave the way to judgment, which Christ the
righteous judge will execute, as well for hard thoughts, Jude ver. 14.
as for ungodly deeds. Will you hear the conclusion of the whole matter. God
shall bring every work, Eccles. 12. ult.
to judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good or whether it be
evil. What the design of some men is, Catech. Racov.
in charging the moral Law with imperfections and vacuities, which were filled
up (as they pretend) by these Additions of our Savior, is sufficiently
evident; and that the consequences of this position (with them) are no less
then the utter evacuating and nulling the meritorious passion of our blessed
Lord. For others who solemnly profess to abhor such impious conclusions, and
aim at nothing, in the use of such language, but the bringing men up to a
higher degree of holiness and perfection then the Pharisees pressed upon the
Jews. I wish they would consider, whether the same end might not be as well
attained, by charging the Pharisees with misinterpretation of the Law, as by
charging the Law it self with imperfections, and vacuities? And if so, whether
were not more suitable to Christian charity (to say no more) to forbear those
expressions, Master Jean's Treatise, of the appearance of evil, in
expressions. p. 28.
which smell so strongly of the Polonian-infected air, rather then to grieve,
and give just occasion of offense to such who are, as conscienciously
solicitous to preserve the truth, so exemplarily zealous, Antequam nasceretur
Arius, innocenter quaedam, and minus caute loquuti sunt Patres: and quae non
possunt perversorum hominum calumniam declinare. Hierom. Apol. 2. cont. Ruff.

Ante errorum and ^eres^^n originem, nondum satis illustrata and patefacta rei
veritate, quaedam scriptis suis asperserint Patres, quae cum orthodoxae fidei
regula minime consemiant.

Dion Petav. in Epiphan. Daille. treatise of the right use of the Fathers. p.
80.


to carry men up to the highest degrees of holiness, in conscience and
conversation?

An honest and grave Matron would blush to be found in the dress and harness
of an harlot; and those who would be accounted orthodox, should not contend for
such expressions as carry with them (but) an appearance of evil: for though
they may be used by us perhaps in a good sense, (and so used by the Ancients)
yet being abused by wicked men to broach their heresies under, they carry a
shrewd show of evil, and render others jealous and suspicious of our
soundness; In points not controverted the Fathers speak oftentimes more
uncircumspectly then they would in a business that is under dispute; and I am
apt to believe, that if those Fathers, who are pretended to have maintained
this doctrine of the vacuities of Moses Law, and the additions thereunto by
Christ, (how far, and how fully they do it, let others judge, but) if they
had but foreseen those sad and dismal conclusions, which some desperate
wretches have deduced thence, in derogation to the satisfaction made by Christ,
they themselves would have done execution upon those papers, which are
pretended to have conveyed it to the Christian World: But I have been too long
in this point.

3. The un-appealablenesse from this judgment: he is the supreme Judge; to him
all appeals are made, but none from him; Acts 25.10.
Paul made his appeal from Festus Court to Caesar's Throne; it is the privilege
of this Nation, that we have a Chancery to appeal to, by such who are cast by
the Rigor of the Common Law. The Countess of Arundel made her bold appeal
against King Richard the third, Life of Richard the 3d.
to the Tribunal of him that was above. The woman in the story who appealed
from King Philip sleeping, to King Philip waking, had some ground for what she
did; but we have none such for our appeal. Non temere e triclinio abscessit,
nisi distentus and madens, interdiu in juredicendo nonnunquam obdormisceret,
vixque ab advocatis de industria^ vocem augentibus exitaretur. Sueton. in vita
Claud. 33.
It Is not with him as it was wont to be with Claudius the Emperor, who never
used to rise from dinner but with a full panch, and well whitled, and was wont
to sleep so soundly on the Bench, that the Lawyers who pleaded before him,
though they purposely strained their voices, and bawled, could hardly awake
him; a posture very much mis-becoming a Judge; But the Judge of Israel neither
slumbers nor sleeps; he is unlimited in power, and untainted in point of
Judicature; he admits of no superior, it is at his Judgment Seat that that we
must stand or fall.

4 The un-repealablenesse of this judgment, it can never be reversed; It is
appointed for all men once to die, and after death to judgment; Qualem te
invenit Deus cum vocat, talempariter and judicat. Cypr. de mort.
after death, comes judgment; and after judgment nothing but the continuation
of happiness or misery; as death leaves us, judgment finds us; and as
judgment leaves us, we must remain for ever. This present age is the (...).
Greg. Nazianzen. Oration. 15
season of mercy, that to come is the time of justice; when the Sentence is
past, and the door is shut, thou may cry and call, and plead thine ancient
acquaintance, but thou shall hear nothing but that comfortless language, I
know you not, Go ye cursed; God's Sentence is firmer then the decrees of the
Medes and Persians, which can never be reversed.

5. And beyond all this which ye have heard, The nearness of this judgment,
it is at hand; Behold! the Judge stands at the door; it is a desperate degree
of boldness to be cutting of purses, while the Judge is on the bench. this is
to sin in defyance of Justice; next to him who sins as Ahaz did, when he was
under judgment, those who sin while judgment is at their heels, are most
desperately guilty; it is a strange boldness in a Scholar to set himself to
play when his Master is taking out the rod; and for a sinner to go on in his
evil ways, when God has bent his bow, and fitted his arrows upon the string,
and prepared the instruments of death, is either blockish stupidity, or daring
presumption.

Oh, but say the scoffers in Peter, 2 Epist. 3.4.
where is the promise of his coming? This has been long talked of, but it is
not yet come, nor is there any likelihood of it, for all things remain as they
were: but what says the Apostle to this Objection? God is not slack as men
count slacknesse; a thousand years is with him but as one day; though it be
much to us, yet it is nothing to his eternity, it is but a day; Behold he will come
quickly, he will come suddenly, as a whirlewind, as lightning, in a moment, in
the twinkling of an eye, in an hour we little dream of. What if he should rend
the heavens and come down, draw the curtains, and do execution, when thou art
in the heat of thy lust, as in Zimri and Cosbies case? what if that day
overtake thee when thy heart is overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness?
the light shines from heaven, but thou have not an eye to see it; the Trumpet
sounds, but thou have no ears to hear it; the Angel cries, Awake ye that sleep
and stand upright, but thou have not a foot to stand on; Christ calls for an
account, but thou have not a tongue to answer. O then ^ since there is such a
Judge, at the very door, 2 Pet. 3.11.14.
who is ready to pass such an irreversible and unchangeable sentence upon all
persons, for all sins, what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy
conversation and godliness? How diligent should we be to be found of him in
peace, without spot and blameless!

This speaks terror to all ungodly persons, whom, near approach of such a Judge
can take off from their beloved sins; to whom let me speak in the language of
Solomon, Eccles. 11.9.
and resume his sacred Irony; Rejoice O young man in thy youth, and let thy
heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine
heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: (...), etc. Greg. Nazian. oration. 53.
But know thou, that for all these things, God will bring thee to judgment.
Let the covetous wretch hugg himself in the company of his good Angels, let
him say to his gold, Thou art my hope, and to his fine gold, Thou art my
confidence: Let the Ambitious cheer up himself with those Honors, which cost
him the price of a conscience; and the Lascivious court his Paramour in beds of
roses; yet let them know, that for all this God will bring them to Judgment.
Let the Murderer multiply his slaughters as the sand, and swill his soul with
the blood of the slain: Let the Thief embrace the opportunity of the night, and
glut himself with the sweetness of the waters he has stolen: Let the Amorous
idolize a piece of Damask'd flesh, and bow down to a lump of gilded clay; but
withal let them know, that the Judge is at the door, and for all this etc. Let
the Swearer belch out as many oaths as words: Let the Profane contemn the
Sabbaths of the Lord: Let the Judges hand be so filled with bribes, that he
cannot handle the cause of the poor: Let the Council sell the cause for a
double fee, and the Witness his conscience for a morsel of bread; yet let them
know, that the Judge is at the door, and for all these things, etc. Let the
Tradesman help away his brayded wares, by the smoothness of his tongue, and
the darkness of his shop: let him enrich himself by his unequal scales, and
wrap up his conscience in each penny worth of ware: In a word, Let every man
enjoy his dearest wish, and hugg his darling sin; but withal let them know,
that the Judge stands before the door, and that for all these things he will
bring them to judgment: for all this; as well for thy secret and most retired
sin, as for that which was done in the sight of the Sun; what skils it how
secretly thou contrivest this man's death; with what privacy thou defilest
another man's wife? thy midnight embraces shall be as manifest as the day, and
thy curtain discourses proclaimed upon the house top: Those thoughts, those
loathsome thoughts, adulterous thoughts, malicious, envious, murderous,
blasphemous, black thoughts, which thou durst not impart to thy friend in thy
bosom, shall be writ in characters legible by every eye; and thy heart, that
polluted, hypocritical, deceitful heart, made transparent as the Crystal,
shall give way to the scrutiny of each prying beholder, who shall greedily gaze
upon that seminary of villainy, which thou would have trembled here to have
been thought guilty of; when the secrets of thy heart shall be laid open, and
the inside of thy ghastly soul discovered, and that loathsomenesse laid naked,
which was varnished over with gilded hypocrisy. Conceive thy self conveyed
into the most secret chambers of the earth, and there invellopt in the most
gloomy darkness, it were in vain to think thy sins would lie hid, unless
thou could flee from thy self, or escape his view, to whom the darkness is
as clear as the day; There is no darkness, nor the shadow of death, Job.
34.22. Credis hoc posse effici, inter videntes omnia ut lateas Deos?
where the workers of iniquity can hide themselves from him; In thy secretest
sin thou have a Devil to accuse, a conscience to bear witness, and a God to
condemn. Admit thy sin to be as secret as the night, yet can thou think to
cheat him that sees the first risings of the heart? or that a trick of
leger-demain can juggle him out of sight, whose eyes are ten thousand times
brighter then the Sun? No, he shall surely see, and as certainly condemn; for
who shall dare to speak for thee when thy Mediator must be thy Judge; and shall
smilingly condemn, whom (had not thou rejected him) he would willingly have
interceded for? Who shall dare to speak for thee, when thou have contemned
thine Advocate, and counted his blood an unholy thing? who shall umpire thy
cause before that Judge, who himself has suffered in all thy misdoings? when
thou murderest thy brother, thou woundest thy Judge; when thou tumblest out
oaths, thou tearest (as it were) thy Judge lim-meale; when thou grindest the
poor, thou oppressest thy Judge; when thou take his raiment, thou starvest
thy Judge; when thou detainest his wages, thou defraudest thy Judge; when thou
with-holdest thy grain, thou famishest thy Judge; for in as much as thou do it
to one of those little ones, in whom his soul delights, Mat. 25.
thou do it to thy Judge. Now if one man sin against another (says Ely) the
Judge shall judge him; 1 Samuel 2.
but if a man sin against God, against his Judge, who shall plead for him? when
thy poor naked soul shall be dragged forth in the midst of so many Angels, men,
and devils, to give up a strict account before this just and impartial Judge;
what strains of Rhetoric shall be able to move; (...), etc. Greg. Nazian.
orat. 15.
or what Mines of gold shall be sufficient to bribe thy Judge? what prevalent
Courtier shall be solicitous in thy cause? what adulterous Mistress shall dare
to beg thee? the sweetness of thy person shall move no pity; the greatness
of thy place shall draw no reverence; the eloquence of thy tongue shall
captivate no heart; the nobleness of thy birth, the excellency of thy parts,
shall not draw a sigh, a tear, a groan from any that behold thy ruin; though
thou were clothed with the treasures of the east, and thy garments bespangled
with the pearls of heaven, yet no eye shall pity, nor at thy destruction say,
Ah! my brother, Non, Torquate, genus, non te facundia, non te restituet pietas.
Horat.
ah! my Lord, or ah! his glory. Sinned thou have; condemned thou art, down thou
must; none, none, none will, none can, none dare speak for thee.

2. In particular, the text lays down woe at some particular men's doors; for to
grudg here (says Hensius) is to be quarrelsome and litigious, (...) is the
same with (...) clamorem edere and contentionem.
and denotes such a contentious spirit, as will be ever drawing others into
courts, ever comencing fresh and vexatious suits; and these are either 1. Rich
men, who if they cannot have their wills of their poor neighbors, molest them
with groundless and vexatious suits; Do not rich men draw you before the
judgment seat (says our Apostle? 2 cap.
) not that they have cause of just complaint, but upon trivial, pretended
occasion, commence suit after suit, til either they have ruined them, by
corrupting judgment, and obtaining unrighteous decrees; or by forcing them to
yield to their unjust desires, for the purchase of their peace; such as Ahab,
who coveted Naboths Vineyard, and because he might not have it upon his own
terms, accused, arraigned, 1 King. 21.14.
condemned Naboth as a Traitor, that he might gain the possession. Such as
these in this chapter, who employ poor men in their service, and make them go
to Law for their wages, and undo them ere they can recover their own; if there
be any such here, weep and howl, for the miseries which shall come upon you;
the cries of the oppressed people are entered into the ears of the Lord of
Sabbath. The pale cheeks, the thin fides, the naked backs, the hungry bellies
of the wives and children, whose soul faints in them, for want of what you
wrongfully withhold, cries to heaven, (as once the stones did out of the wall)
for vengeance against you; and this Judge, 2 Hab. 11.12.
who is at the door, is the severe avenger of all such injustice and
oppression; you have made them mourn and weep for want of bread: and you shall
weep and howl for a drop of water, and not obtain it.

2. Poor men; There is a sort of poor people (poverty is usually querulous) who
will ever be at law; a vexatious sort of men, who are enemies to peace, whose
meat and drink it is to be in law; they will fare hard, work hard, go bare, pinch
themselves and their families, and all to provide fees against the next Term,
or against the next Assizes; who verify that part of the proverb, which says,
the Jews spend at Easter, the Moors at marriages, and the Christians in suites;
these Salamanders, who delight to live in the fire of contention, when as in an
hundred else of contention, there is not an inch of love; whom every pety
trivial business draws into suites, against the advice of the wise, who tell
us, We must not go to the Physician for every grief, nor to the pot for every
thirst, nor to the Lawyer for every quarrel: O ye perverse people, when will ye
be wise! ye besotted wretches, when will ye understand! Gal. 15.5.
Know ye not yet that while ye devour one another, ye are devoured one of
another! Know you not that you raise others by your own ruin; for Lawyers
houses are built on the heads of fools: As these men should be looked upon, and
discountenanced by the Judges here, as the Bote-feux and firebrand of a
Commonwealth, so shall they be sure to have their share of judgment, Satia te
sanguine quem sitisti. Justin.
when he is come, who now stands at the door. As it was said to Cyrus, when his
head was cast into a vessel of blood, Thou delightedst in blood, take thy fill
of blood; so shall it be done to those who delight to be before the
judgment seat, they have their fill on it, when Christ comes to judgment.

Once more, it reaches such whose spirits are more imbitterr'd against their
Christian Brethren, because they come not quite up to their opinion in every
circumstantiall thing, then they are against the common enemies of Religion; so
some conceive the ground of their groaning and grumbling here, was some small
difference between Christians themselves in the matter of Circumcision, which
was carried up by the heat of their passion, to a higher pitch of enmity, then
they bare against the Heathens, or the Jews; A fault it were to be wished, were
not so rise in our age; wherein some pety differences in matters of opinion,
and that in points not fundamental too, have been fanned up by the policy of
Satan for the serving of civil interest, so far, that those who have been as
dear to each other as brethren, do prosecute one another with the deadliest
hatred, and by their impudent and unchristian dealing one against another, make
way for the common enemy to dance in the ashes of them all; Pendant que les
chiens sentregrondent, le loup devour la brebis. Proverb.
The Frenchmen say, while the dogs art snarling and grumbling one at another,
the wolf devours the sheep: I am sure the application of the proverb is too
true, that the divisions of those who are of the same Religion, especially of
those who undertake to be guides to others, is the Devils harvest.

It is said of the Civil wars of France, Herbert's Jacula Prudentum.
that they made thirty thousand witches, and a Million of Atheists: and of the
civil wars of England, that they and the division of the Princes of the West,
which followed thereupon, Habington hist. of Edw 4. page 228.
brought the greatest damage to the Christians, and gave the greatest advantage
to the Infidels: and it is more sadly true in the business before us, Principum
Christianorum inanis discordia, intestinis odiis aucta summum in modum
latissimam evertendae religionis januam laxat Barbaro. Supplement. Annal.
Baron. ad annum. 1635.
that the private animosities and heart burnings (between those that agree in
the same fundamental truths of Religion) concerning the Fringe and Trimming of
that garment, and things of lower concernment, have reduced many precious souls
to downright Atheism, and given more advantage to that man of sin, to enlarge
his territories, then ever he could get here since the time of Reformation. I
would not speak this in Gath, nor publish it in Ascalon, but that the
daughters of the uncircumcised rejoice, and the daughters of the Philistims
triumph at it already.

O that the grave and sober Counsel of old Father Abraham to his Nephew Lot,
Genesis 13.8. Genesis 45.24.
were written on all our hearts, Let there be no difference between us (for
such trivial matters) for we are brethren; and since we are all traveling to
the same Canaan; let Joseph's cantion to his brethren be for our instruction,
See that ye fall not out by the way: I remember what was said by that learned
and excellent Orator of our Nation, D^ Hall. Quid nobis cum infami illo
Remonstrantium, and contra-Remonstr. titulo Christiani sumus, simus, and (...).
who preached the Sermon at the first sitting of the Council of Dort: What have
we to do (says he) with those prodigious and odious nicknames of Remonstrant
and Antiremonstrant? etc. We be all Christians, all of one body; let us be all
of one mind, and one way: So may I say of those names which are cast upon one
another by way of scorn, and reproach amongst us; What have we to do with such
odious titles, and reproachful names, which serve only to heighten our
differences, and set our spirits at a more irreconcilable distance! Now, Per
tremendum Dei nomen; per dulcissima matris gremium; per sanctissima Christi
Servatoris viscera, etc. enite pacem, etc Vid. Council. Dodr.
(by the blessing of God) our Arms are laid down, let not our mouths be
spears and arrows, and our tongues sharp swords: let me beseech you, as he did
there his Auditors, by the dreadful name of God the Father; by the teeming
womb, and fruitful breasts of the Church our Mother; by the tender bowels of
Jesus Christ our elder Brother; by the sweet and chearing influences of the
Dove-like Spirit! that you will study peace, and quietness, and meekness, and
gentleness, not provoking to wrath, but forbearing one another in love.

Here Is the balm of Gilead for the fainting soul, Mr. Manton, in loc.
it is (doubtless) a great asswagement to a Christians's misery, to think that
Christ is ready to come to judgment. Lift up your heads, O ye dejected spirits,
for the day of your redemption draws nigh; though thou be as disconso late as
grief can make thee, either with sorrow, because thou art, or persecution,
because thou will not be sinful; yet have patience a while, and see the
salvation of God; he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry; the Sun of
Righteousness with healing in his wings to redeem thee from thine own misery,
and thine enemies cruelty. When God brought Israel out of Egypt, he went up
before them in a fire, and a cloud: And when Christ shall come to judgment,
Exodus 13.21. 2 These. 1.8. Luke 21.27. Nubes refrigerium indicat. Aquin. Isai.
32.2: Dies refrigerii. Acts 3.19.
he shall come in a fire, and a cloud; in a fire to the bad, in a cloud to the
good; in a fire to consume, but not to light; in a cloud to refresh, in a cloud
to cover: A cloud imports refreshment, and is as the shadow of a rock in a
weary land; the day of judgment, is called the day of refreshing; Christ is
therefore said to come in a cloud, because he comes to comfort and refresh the
drooping and the fainting soul; we are here in a wilderness, the dust of
opposition, contradiction, persecution, ever blowing in our eyes; but there is a
Canaan we expect will make amends for all. We are here in a sea, whose surging
waves, and swelling billows put us every moment in danger; but behold,
(secundam post naufragium tabulam,) Here Is one will preserve us from sinking,
and will bring us to the Haven where we would be.

This is the proper year of Jubilee, Fuller. Miscel. lib. 4. cap. 8. Levit.
25.9.10 Buxtorf. Lexicon, in verb.
the true day of rejoicing to a gracious spirit; whether we derive the word
Jubilee, as some do from ((...), which signifies a Ram) because the Jubilee was
proclaimed with a trumpet made of a Rams-horn; in this sense the day of
judgment shall be a day of Jubilee; For the trumpet shall blow, and the dead
shall arise, 1 Cor. 15.42.
and all shall be changed: Or whether ye derive the word Jubilee from (...), in
other significations, Jubilaus Annus est annus, 1. Restitutionis. Levit.
25.13.24.28. 2. Remissionis.
yet the day of judgment is still a day of Jubilee. The year of Jubilee is
sometimes rendered the year of Restitution; Had a man forfeited his estate, or
morgaged his lands, yet he entered again upon his inheritance at the year of
Jubilee. 2 It Is sometimes rendered the year of remission, or forgiveness; if the
manslayer had fled to the cities of refuge, and there abode till the year of
Jubilee; he was to be acquitted. 3. It Is sometimes rendered the year of freedom;
Emancipationis. Levit. 25.54.
when those, whom nature or indigence had made slaves, had leave to go forth
free: In all these senses, the day of judgment is a day of Jubilee; then we
shall be restored to the full and quiet enjoyment of that possession, which we
lost in Adam, whereof the earthly Paradise was but a type; Jubilatio, is by the
Greek gloss rendered (...), which is, fausta ac lata acclamatio, quae a
victoribus, adversus victos excitatur. G eg. Nyss. orat. de sancto feste Pasch.
in fine.
then shall we receive a full discharge from all our sins; then they who have
been here unwillingly held under the power of the world, and the Devil, shall
utterly break those bonds, and cast away those cords from them, singing
Haleluiah's to him that sits upon the Throne: Since then there is such a day at
hand, when our forfeited estates shall be restored, our sins blotted out of the
book of remembrance, and our inveterate enemies, who have holden us captives,
trampled under foot, we may well rejoice, seeing that then we shall keep a true
day of Jubilee.

2. In particular; this is improveable to enlarge both the patience and the
comfort of two sorts of people: 1. Such as are over-matched with too too potent
Adversaries, who are overcome by might, and purse, and friends, that they can
get no justice in an honest cause; Possess your souls with patience; the
coming of the Lord draws nigh: if we have our houses broken, our goods
stolen, our dearest friends murdered, yet we expect with patience till the
Assizes come, to have justice against our adversaries; so do you, grudge not,
grumble not, vex not your souls with impatience: Behold, the Judge stands at
the door.

2 Of the Ministers of the Gospel; It was with this that Luther supports the
drooping spirits of Melancthon, and others, Nolite timere, fortes estote,
Dominus prope adest. Agant quicquid possunt Henrici, Episcopi, Turca, Diabolus,
consputum and occisum Servatorem colimus and expectamus.
under the greatest oppositions and discouragements; Fear not (says he) be
cheerful, the Lord is at hand. Let Kings, and Bishops, and Turks, and Devils,
do their worst, we own and worship that Christ who was spit upon and
crucified, whom we expect from heaven to our encouragement and reward. And with
this may the Ministers of the Gospel support their spirits against all the
prejudices, and calumnies, and injuries, which the world casts upon them,
Dominus prope adest, the Judge stands before the door. Let the covetous
earth-worm, the debauched sinner, the Atheistical Politician, raise and foment
what slanders their wits and malice can invent; yet here is your comfort,
(Brethren) the Judge is at the door, the righteous Judge, who will clear up your
innocence, and vindicate you from their aspersions, who laid to your charge
things that ye knew not. Ephesians. 4.11.
The Ministry (which is Gods own Ordinance) never lay so low in the eyes of
men, as at this day, yet it is as a candle in a Lanthorn (still) on the top of a
hill, all the winds blowing against it, with this Motto, Frustra: Papists,
Atheist, Libertine, and Sectarie, would all extinguish it, but all their
endeavors will be in vain. 2 Cor. 5.20.
The Ministers, who are Christ's Ambassadors, never lay under more reproach,
and scorn, and contempt, then at this day; Micah 6.9.
God give them grace to hear the rod, and who has sent it; to see for what
sins this befalls them, and be humbled for them! And now we have casually made
mention of the Ministers, give me leave for their sakes, Luke 10.34.
to make a short-digression; what was commendable in the Samaritan, may at
least be pardonable in me, to step a little out of the way to pour wine and
oil into their wounds, who lie gasping for their last breath.

You have probably heard in your Circuit (my Lords) complaints enough against
Ministers, these are the common Buts now, against which most men shoot their
poisoned arrows; and it may be, the bottom of most of those complaints, if
well looked into, will be found only this, that they look for a little of that
which is their own, and desire rather to live upon their own propriety, then
upon (which I woos is wondrous cold) the peoples charity. If they be forced to
fly for succor to your justice, which should run a like to all, Deuteronomy. 16.19.
let not their Callings be their erime, nor they fare the worse for their
functions sake. Homo bonus, sed ideo malus quia Christianus.
It was once the impiety of some former ages, that a man in all other points
without exception, was accused and condemned, only because he was a Christian:
Let it not be (by your fault) the reproach and scandal of this age, that a
man, learned, religious, sober, orthodox, should fare the worse, because he is
a Minister.

It is storied of that wretched, that Apostate King John, that when the
Sheriffs officers had brought a thief bound, who had robbed and killed a
Priest, and desired to know what should be done with him; he replied, Loose
him, let him go, he has killed our enemy: Indeed, Princes do most fear, and
least love, Vid. Zanch. i^ Hos. 1. ver. 1. Verbum Dei factum est.
those whose gravity and judgment keep them most in awe: Let it not be the
crime of any in authority amongst us, to account Ministers their enemies,
because they tell them the truth. The Magistracy and Ministry are alike God's
Ordinances, which like those twins, smile and weep together; when it goes well
with one, it is not amiss with either; when bad with one, it is well with
neither: these are like the two Pillars against which Samson leaned, Jud.
16.25, 26. Cartwright. in Prove. 29.4.
they stand and fall together, Pietas and justitia, columnae reipublicae: Piety
and justice be those two pillars, which mutually support each other, and the
Commonwealth: if piety be destroyed, in (the rule of) the ruin of the
Ministry; justice will not long remain in the practice of the law.

The Ministers (such as are conscientious and peaceable, and for such only I
would be understood to plead) have generally no enemies, but such whose
detestable vices, have made even God himself their enemy. The covetous
worldling, who measures the goodness of his Minister, not by the excellence of
his parts, nor his painfulnesse in his calling, nor the unblamablenesse of his
conversation, but by the cheapnesse of his tithes; the profane wretch, who
would enjoy his sin uncontrolled; Matthew. 13.25.
and that envious person, who would be sowing the tares of error and heresies,
but is hindered by these watchmen: If the Ministers were but rooted up, these
miscreants might enjoy their errors and their lusts at more quiet. Monsieur
Daille, of the right use of the Fathers. lib. 2. cap. ult.
But as one proposes the question in a case not much different; what wonder is
it if a whore, or a Bawd cry down that discipline which condemns those vices,
to everlasting fire? What wonder is it, that he who drownes himself all the
day, and at night vomits up his soul in wine, should hate that religion which
forbids drunkenness under the pain of damnation? What greater wonder is it
that he who is resolved to keep and cocker up his basest lusts, should hate
that Ministry, which plows up his soul, and suffers them not to root nor grow
at quiet? to take any notice of what such wretched things as these say, is all
one, as if you should take the opinion of common strumpets, to judge of the
equity or injustice of those laws, which enjoyne people to live honest: this
is the very case, and whatsoever is the pretense, this is the true ground of
the quarrel. And as David said to the woman in another case, 2 Samuel 14.19, 20.
Is not Joabs hand in all this? so may we demand, what has set all these
wheels and engines on work? Judges 14.5.
who tied these foxces together, with firebrands in their tails? who twists
these several disagreeing conditions of men, into this united enmity against
the Ministers of the Gospel? Is not the Vid. Preface to the Annotations of the
Bible, by diverse learned Divines, (of the Assembly) Edict. the 2d.
Jesuits hand in all this? who hope thus to ruin those whom they cannot
confute: that when they have destroyed the watchmen, they may make a prey of
the souls of the poor people at their pleasure? When Philip of Macedon had laid
siege against Athens, he sends a Trumpeter to tell them, that if they would
deliver up to him ten of their Orators, whom he should choose, he would
instantly raise his siege, and depart. The Athenians, by the advice of
Demosthenes, return him their answer in this Apologue; There had been a long
quarrel between the wolves, and the Shepherds; at the last the wolves sent the
Shepherds this message; That they, (the wolves) had no quarrel against the
Shepherds, nor their flocks, but only against their dogs, who were ever barking
at them, molestiug, and troubling them; if the Shepherds would but hang up
their dogs, there would be an end of all differences, the Shepherds, and they
should live together like neighbors and friends; the credulous Shepherds
incline to the proposition, and dispatch their dogs; which was no sooner done,
but the wolves fall upon the sheep, worry them, and tare out their throats
without resistance, and without remedy. The evidence of the fable, and the
sutablenesse of it to the case in hand, spare me the application.

The next and last shall be a word of caution, first generally, to all; Let the
consideration of this approaching day, repress thy exorbitant thoughts, and
crush those brats, which issue from thy corrupted nature: if a filial fear
bridle them not, this slavish, must, and will be a good needle to introduce
the other. When thoughts of malice and murder spring up in thee, as in Genesis 4.8.
Cain; of oppression, as in 1 King. 21.
Ahab; of rebellion, as in Number. 16.2.3.
Corah; of idolatry, as in the Exodus 32.2.
Israelites; of hypocrisy, as in Acts 5.6.
Ananias; when any speaking eye would ensnare thy heart, any lascivious gesture
kindle thy blood, or when Genesis 39.7.
Potiphars wife, putting off woman and modesty together, shall in plain terms,
say, Come, lie with me; answer them all, as Joseph did that strumpet; Verse 9
How shall I do this great wickedness, and sin against God? How shall I
provoke that Majesty, who is all eye, and must needs see? who is all hand, and
must needs strike? who shall intercede for me at the day of judgment, or wipe
away that stain which this sin will contract? this sin, though it be sweet in
the mouth, will prove gall in the stomach; For the Lord comes in flaming fire,
Ribera in 2d of Amos 3. Exoritur clamorque virum, clangorque tubarum. Virg.
to render to every man according to his works; the Judge is at the very door,
and comes ushered with the sound of the trumpet; and tuba signum belli; the
trumpet strikes horror and amazement into every ear: and who shall free me
from his anger, who comes to take vengeance of my sin? who shall free me from
that scorching fire, which has heat to burn, but not light to discover a way
to escape?

2. This may caution those particular ranks of men who are to be employed in
the public administration of justice; which is the proper work of this day;
and first, to begin with the stars of the greatest magnitude, that move in this
Orb.

My Lords, and Gentlemen! I shall not take upon me the confidence of chalking
out your several duties to you, whom I presume every way fitted for those
employments, which your Commissions empower you to execute; only let me (to
use the 2 Pet. 3.1.
Apostles words) stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance, that you may be
mindful of the words spoken by the holy Prophets; and because I would not clog
your Lordships memories, which have such variety and weight of affairs upon
them, I shall mind you of only two texts; which I would have not written only
on your Matthew. 23.5.
Phylacteries, (as the Pharisees were wont to do) but in your memories, and
that you would constantly repeat them every night when you lie down, and every
morning when you rise; the first is, 2 Chronicl. 19.6, 7. And he said to the
Judges, Take heed what ye do; for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who
is with you in the judgment; wherefore, now let the fear of the Lord be upon
you, take heed, and do it, for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor
taking of gifts. You are God's Judges, you must judge with suitable integrity:
his you are, and he is with you in the judgment; God is in a more special
manner with you on the Bench: Psalm. 82.1.
he sits and judges among the Gods: he is there to be a witness of what
you do, and as a Judge to reward your righteous service, and to avenge your
mis-doings. When you go to the Bench, look well into your hearts, if there be
any thing of fear, or favor, or spleen, or prejudice, or profit, that may turn
you from the path of justice; take heed what you do, Deus videt; That God sees,
who must be your Judge. And as he is there to awe you from false and corrupt
judgment, so to encourage you in upright and just judgment; when you judge
advisedly and justly, you may do it boldly and severely too. God is with you in
the judgment, he will bear you out against the proudest offender; An act of
indemnity is already drawn up in heaven for you; and when you your selves shall
be brought before this Judge in the Text, your entertainment shall be, Euge,
bone serve! Well done, Matthew. 25.21.
thou good and faithful servant, thou have been faithful in a few things;
enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. The next Scripture is that Micah 6.8.
which though in general terms, it reaches all, yet in a more peculiar manner
belongs to you. He has showed thee, O man, what is good, and what the Lord
requires of thee; to do justice, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy
God. Some of the Rabbis say, that this ver. is the abridgment of the whole
Law. If I mistake not, it is the sum of your Commissious, wherein are contained
your duties to man, in the works of the second, and your duties to God in the
works of the first Table: your duty to man in two things: 1. Do justice. 2.
Love mercy. 1. Do justice. Justice is the life blood that quickens and actuates
the whole Body of the Commonwealth. There is a twofold Injustice, whereby this
holy Command of God is broken: 1. Negative, not relieving the poor, not
righting the widow, and the fatherless, when they justly complain; Petit
disner longuement attendu, n' pas donnee, mais cheremens vendu.
not to do them right, is to do them wrong; to delay justice, is a breach of
Magna Charta, as well as to deny it. What the Frenchman says, of a little
dinner for which we wait long, that it is not given, but dearly bought; that we
may truly say of justice. He that did justice at the last, because it was so
long first, and then he did it merely upon importunity, lies under the black
character of an unjust Judge still. Luke 18.2.
A good work impiously managed, merits no more then an evil one; not to do
justice to the oppressed, or to do it only for your own sakes, credit, quiet,
profit, are both sins which you must answer for to the Judge, who stands before
the door. Micah 7.3.
2. Positive Injustice; where evil is done with both hands greedily; the
Prince asks, and the Judge asks for a reward; and the great man utters his
mischievous desires, and so they wrap it up; when through fear or favor of
men, the poor is turned from his right in the gate; when the Judges favor is
cast into one scale, and makes it sink too fast. If not to do justice be a sin,
what a crime is it to do wrong? If not to relieve the distressed in their cause
be injustice, what is it to grind their faces? if you prove not a shield to
protect them, which is your duty, but a spear and sword to wound them; if you
prove not a bush to shelter them from the storm, which is your duty; but briers
and thorns to tear and spile them; how great is such injustice! Men account
themselves less injuriously rifled in a wood, Dan. histor. in the life of King
John.
then in a place where they presume of safety: and grieve not so much when they
are cheated by a Shark, as when they are injured by a Judge. An unjust Judge is
the greatest plague a Commonwealth is capable of; he turns justice into gall,
Amos 6.12.
and righteousness into hemlock; he makes a man's physic, his poison; and
what then can cure him? Master of the Hospital of Jerusalem, to King John.
But he that is an unjust Judge to others, is just against, and does excution
upon himself; he puts himself out of commission, and cancels that authority by
which he sits: for as he said once to the King, So long as you will observe
justice, you may be a King: Dan. bist. p. 168.
but when you once violate it, you cease to be a King. So say I, so long as you
do justice, you are a Judge; when you pervert judgment, you cease to be a
Judge.

The second Branch of your duty to men, is, Love mercy: You must do justice,
when necessity calls for it; but you must love mercy. Mercy is the choice
attribute which God delights to exercise; when he comes to judgment, he comes
slowly, but cheerfully to show mercy; when God is coming to punish Israel,
Isai. 7.20.
it is said, that he will shave with a razor that is hired, as if it were a work
which he came so unwillingly to, that he kept no tools by him to work withal,
but was feign to hire them; God strikes but with his finger; Non debet
dispensator crudelis esse, ubi pater-familias misericors est.
but he saves with his arm. He gives his wrath by weight; but without weight
his mercy: Be ye therefore merciful as your heavenly Father is merciful: you
may possibly meet with some, whose youth, or ignorance, or hopefulnesse of
amendment, may render them the objects of your mercy, without prejudice to the
Commonwealth; in such cases, be tender of drawing blood; Chap. 2.13.
it is a precious thing: Let mercy rejoice against judgment; and remember that
of our Apostle, that he shall have judgment without mercy, who will show no
mercy.

2. As to Godward; Ribera in locum.
your duty is to walk humbly with your God; Solicitum esse ad ambulandum, to
make it your business and your care to walk humbly with your God, in your own
persons, in your families, in your places and offices.

1 In your own persons; Genesis 30.39. Vita Judicis est censura, eaque perpetua,
ad hanc convertimur, ad hanc dirigimur; recte facere, faciendo docent. Plus
exemplo, quam peccato nocent.
Inferiors live more by the eye, then by the ear, and are guided by example,
much rather then by command; they are like Jacob's sheep, which produce fruit
like to that they look upon, speckled and ringstraked; The people look upon the
life of the Judge, as the best commentary upon the Law; they will hardly
believe the meaning of the Law is to punish swearing, or Sabbath-breaking, or
the like sins, whilst they see the Judge practice that himself, which he
forbids in others. Every good Judge, (and it is true too, of every good
Minister, Magistrate, Father, Master,) must be exemplary in goodness: Judges
7.17.
and be able to say in reference to good things, as Gideon did in another case,
As you see me do, so do ye. They should teach those who are under their power
to do good, by doing it themselves first: let it not be in the reformation of
manners, Drant. on Eccles. 11.1.
as it is in the flaying of a beast, where the matter sticks most, when it comes
to the head: let not that proverb be made good in you, that they who hold the
best farms, pay the least rent; that they who are the greatest men, should be
the worst Christians; that they whom Gods special favors engage to be more
eminently good, should be below others in piety and holiness.

2. Josh. 24.15.
In your Families; It becomes you to say as Josuah did, Psalm. 101.6, 7.
I, and my house will serve the Lord: and as David did; He that works deceit,
shall not dwell in my house: He that tells lies, shall not tarry in my sight;
But mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the Land, that he may dwell with
me; he that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me. A riotous and
disorderly servant causes, if not his Masters piety, yet his prudence to be
called in question.

And this your pious care should reach, not only to those meniall servants
which attend your persons, but also to those Ministers, and Under-officers,
whose service you use in the dispatch of public business. As it has been
said, that they who work the greatest mischiefs, are oftentimes the men that
can best repair them: so it may not seldom be seen, that those who come to
redress the grievances of the Country, are the men that work them. I have
heard some men complain, that the fees and bribes, wherewith Mistress Expedition
has been courted, have amounted to more, then the whole portion which the Lady
Justice has brought along with her.

3. In your places and offices; improving all your power to the encouragement
of virtue, the suppressing of vice, and the advancement of the interest of
Jesus Christ, from whom you have received your power, and to whom you must give
up an account of the discharge of your office. The rivers which receive their
rise from the sea, they return their waters back again into the lap of the
Ocean: Your power and authority is derived to you from Christ; and should be
employed by you, and improved to all possible advancement of the glory of
Christ.

My Lords! We willingly pay your Lordships all that respect and reverence,
which is due to your Persons, and places: we acknowledge you, and submit to
you, as Gods; but withal, we beseech you remember too, that you are but men,
and must die like other men; and after death, Psalm. 82.6, 7.
you must come to judgment as well as others; there is a Judge coming, even at
the very door, whose Person, whose Power, whose Train, is greater then yours;
where the Judge, and the poorest prisoner at the Bar, must stand upon even
terms, and receive according to their work.

2. Next to you, the Gentlemen of the long robe, whose Persons and profession,
I am obliged to honor; as one who in the blackest and darkest times of
England's trouble, have found not only shelter and protection, but warmth and
life, under the wings of your profession. The Law of England, is the happiness
of the People of England, against which, no man has yet spurned, but to his
own prejudice; The profession of the Law of England is ancient, and honorable,
and necessary; against which, no man opens his mouth, but such who would have
their own wills a law. Yet remember, I beseech you, that there be them who have
an aching tooth against your profession, as well as others; take heed lest by
your neglect, delays, betraying of your Clients, and mal-practice of the Law,
you give none occasion to those, who are already apt to speak against the Law.

Epistol. l. 1. Epist. 3.
Cyprian conceiving he could read Dives sin in his punishment; because he
suffered in his tongue, conjectured that he had mightily offended with his
tongue; Luke 16.24.
whence some others have been willing to persuade themselves, that Dives was a
Lawyer, because men of that profession many times offend with their tongues;
but they are not the only men who offend with that member; Whosoever offends
not in his tongue, James 3.2.
he is a perfect man: yet it were to be wished, that they would be more
careful how they used it; not to put a fair gloss upon a foul cause, nor to
varnish over an ill business with gilded rhetoric. Let there be no Tertullus
amongst you, Acts 24.1. etc.
to abuse good parts, and a voluble tongue, to plead against God, and the
truth. God has given you those parts, improved by the excellence of your
education, to defend the oppressed, not to wrong them: to assert the truth, not
to stifle, or destroy it. Take heed of being false to your Clients cause, lest
it be said of the Council of both sides, as it was of the Pope, and Henry the
third, In the life of Henry the 3d.
that they were like the Shepherd and the wolf, combined to macerate the flock.

Be not like the Crow, which at first seems to bewail the dying sheep, and then
picks out his eyes: Do not at first compassionate your Clients case, and then
your selves devour him: let that of the Apostle be written upon all, your
studies? 2 Cor. 13.8.
nay, your hearts; I can do nothing against the truth, Dan. histor. in the
life of Edw. the first.
but for the truth. Bruce of Scotland, refused the Crown of that Kingdom,
because he could not enjoy it, without infringing the Liberties of his
Country: take you heed of receiving that fee which you cannot keep, but by
doing prejudice to your conscience. As it is easy for Princes who will break
their faith, to find evasions to fly from the strictest treaties: so it is not
hard for a subtle Advocate to find plausible pretenses to elude justice: But
what though thou could baffle a puny-Lawyer, or impose upon a Judge, or
Jury, to obtain an unrighteous decree; if by this means thou withhold the poor
from his desire, Job 31.16.21.
and causest the eyes of the widow to fail; what will thou do when God arises?
Bolton, Instructions for comforting an afflicted conscience. page 18
and when he comes to visit, what will thou answer him? Cast but your eyes upon
the sad acknowledgement of Francis Spira, who became a spectacle of such woe
and misery to the whole world, that there is not any thing left unto the memory
of man more remarkable. I was (says he) excessively covetous of money, and
accordingly I applied my self to get it, by injustice, corrupting judgment by
deceit, inventing tricks to delude justice: Good causes I either defended
deceitfully, or sold them to the adversary perfidiously. Ill causes I
maintained with all my might; I willingly opposed the known truth; and the
trust committed to me, I either betrayed, or perverted; But what was the issue
of this practice, when God let conscience loose upon him? Hear some rufull
expressions of his desperate state, out of his own mouth* Oh! (says he) that I
were gone hence, that some body would let out this weary soul! I tell you,
never was there such a monster as I am, never was man alive spectacle of such
exceeding misery. I now feel Gods heavy wrath, that burns like the torments of
hell within me, and afflicts my soul with pangs unutterable: the gnawing worm
of unquenchable fire, horror, confusion, and which is worst, desperation it
self, continually tortures me. My state is worse then that of Cain, and Judas,
and the very damned in hell endure not such misery as I do. It would even break
an heart of flint to hear him go on, and to see him tugging with the very pangs
of despair. But I forbear; only I beseech you, among all your cases, forget not
Spira's Case.

3. To the Jury: Oh, that the Bailiff who attends them, could shut out
relations, as well as persons; and keep them as well from partiality, and
passions, as from fire and candle! 'Twas not sure without a mystery, that the
makers of our Law, forbad the Jury, fire and candle. There must be no fire
amongst them; no heat, no passion, no love, no malice, but all must be done
cooly and sedatly, without reflection upon any parties.

There must be no Candle; they must have no light but that of the Sun; they
must be guided only by clear and manifest evidence, and not destroy men's
persons or their estates, upon uncertain, unclear, and glimmering grounds. You
are (especially you Gentlemen of the Grand-Inquest) the Judges eyes and ears,
and the Countries mouth. My Lords the Judges know nothing but what you present:
and the Country (whose representatives you are) rely upon you for the discovery
of their grievances. If mischiefs be not redrest, it is much your fault; and if
you would have your diseases cured, discover them. And among your Presentiments
forget not (what God has enjoined should be remembered) his Day, Stultorum
incurata pudor, malus ulcera celat. Horat.
which is yet desperately profaned, notwithstanding all the good laws made by
the former, and our present Governors: and forget not (which make men so much
and often forget themselves) the Alehouses, in order to their suppression,
which are the Nurseries for the Gaol, the seminary for the Gallows, and the
Suburbs of Hell.

4 To the Witnesses: It Is much in you that Justice be done; it is your evidence
which must guide both Judge and Jury; False witness is an error in the first
concoction, which is not mended in the second, but made worse; it produces a
wrong verdict and an unjust sentence. Let me use the words of the Prophet
Zachary, Chap. 8.17.
Let none of you imagine evil in his heart, and love no false oath; for all
these things the Lord hates. Perjury is a sin which like a sword with two
edges, strikes both against Humane and Divine faith. Among the seven things
which the Lord hates, Prove. 6.19.
one is a witness that speaks lies. He that fears not a false oath is master
of thy good name, thy estate, thy life, thy all: therefore God in a more
peculiar way undertakes to be the avenger of this sin. This is an iniquity to
be punished by the Judges (says Solomon) who are to be strictly inquisitive,
Prove. 19.5, 9.
and severe in punishing this offense. We have an excellent Pattern to proceed
against false witnesses by, where the law injoynes them legem talionis, that
they be mulcted so far forth, Deuteronomy. 19.16.
as their false witness would have prejudiced their neighbor. But if the
Judge cannot find it out, yet God will; you call God to be a witness, that you
speak truth, and to be an Avenger if you speak falsely; God is both a witness
and a Judge: Behold, Mal. 3.5.
I will be a swift witness against the false swearer, whereby the hireling,
the widow and the fatherless are oppressed, and the stranger turned from his
right. And he will be a swift Judge too; it will not be long before he rip up
all your combinations, concealments of truth, your equivocations, reservations,
falsehoods, perjuries, in the face of all the world; he stands at the door, and
sees all; Take heed what you do.

5. To All (in one word) that shall be employed in this business, whether
Judges, Sheriffs, Justices, Jurors, Witnesses, and all inferior Officers; and I
shall wind up all with a short story out of Damascene, which runs thus: There
was a mighty and Puissant King, In Historia, versus principium.
who being clothed in his Royal Apparel, riding in his golden Chariot,
attended with all his Nobles, met (upon the way) with two poor threadbare
Ministers of Jesus Christ; and presently leaping from his Chariot, runs and
falls down at their feet, and kisses them. Which act of his, his Nobles
disdaining, but not daring to reprove, acquainted the Kings own brother with
what had past, and desired him to rebuke his brother the King, for thus
debasing his power and greatness: which accordingly he undertook to do, and
performed his task with sufficient tartness; which yet the King bare with much
patience, and made him no answer at all. It was the custom of that place, that
when the King (whose will was the only law) was resolved to take away any man's
life, he sent one, whose office it was, to sound a Trumpet before that man's
door, whereby he and all his neighbors knew, that such a man must die. At
night the King sends this Trumpeter to blow before his brothers door: who no
sooner heard that fatal sound, but giving up himself for dead, spent the
night in weeping and wringing of his hands, settling his estate, condoling his
wife and children; and in the morning comes to the Kings gate, all in mourning,
trembling and every minute expecting execution. The King being informed that
his brother was thus at the gate, sends for him into his presence, and seeing
him in such a miserable pickle, prostrate at his feet, bespeaks him thus; O
thou foolish and unwise man! if thou thus fear and tremble at the sound of the
Trumpet of thine own natural, brother against whom thou have done no hurt; how
do thou find fault with me for humbling my self before these living Trumpets,
who proclaim the coming of the Great God to Judgment, against whom I have most
grievously offended!

My Lords and Gentlemen! I hope you have prevented me in the application of
this story; and that when (by and by) you shall see the faces of poor prisoners
grow pale, their hands shake, their knees beat together, at the sound of that
Trumpet, which summons them to your Tribunal: You will then be pleased with an
awful Reverence, and a trembling fear, Judex quisque judicii sui sempiternum
sustinebit judicium. Chrysol. ser. 26
to consider that there is another Assizes, another Trumpet, another Tribunal,
where you your selves must (every one) give up an account, as of all other
things, so, of this days work, before this Just and Impartial Judge, who
stands at the door. The Lord touch your hearts with his fear, and direct you
in your work!

FINIS.

