Three Learned READINGS Made upon three very useful STATUTES: The First, By
that Great and Eminent Sage of the Law, Sir James Dyer, of the Middle Temple,
upon the Statute of 32. H. 8. Chap. 1. Of WILLS, and 34. and 35. Hen. 8. Chap.
5. for the Explanation of that Statute.

The Second, By Sir John Brograve, of Grayes Inn, sometime his Majesty's
Attorney of the Duchy of Lancaster, upon the Statute of 27. H. 8. Chap. 10.
concerning JOINTVRES.

The Third, By Thomas Risden Esquire, of the Inner Temple, upon the Statute of
8. Hen. 6. Chap. 9. Of FORCIBLE ENTRY.

LONDON, Printed for W. Lee, M. Walbancke, D. Pakeman, and G. Bedell, 1648.

The Stationer to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
THese three Learned Readings being lately imparted unto me, from the hand of
a worthy Gentleman well versed in the Common Laws; I was very desirous therein
to receive further satisfaction from some grave Sages of that Profession
touching the merit of them, who (with judicious and unpartiall eyes) have with
mature deliberation perused them, and esteemed them very ingenuous, and
profitable; upon whose commendations I have adventured to expose them to
public view for the general good: Touching the first of these great Sages of
the Law, it is well known to the Gentlemen of the long Robe, that he has left
behind him a living monument, being a famous and exquisite Volume of Reports of
Law, wherein fol. 72. a. 6. E. 6. You may read him called to the degree of
Sergeant at Law, and in the same Book, fol. 144 a. by Patent from K. Philip and
Q. Mary you may find him advanced to be a Judge of the Court of Common Pleas,
and in 1 Elizab. he was removed to be Chief Justice of the same Court (being
the next successor in that honorable place to Sir Anthony Brown Knight,) in
which High Court he continued for 24 years and upward, even until his death,
and in memory of him, you may see an ample and eloquent Encomium given by the
honorable Sir Edward Cook Knight deceased, in the end of Dowmans Case in the
ninth part of his Reports, fol. 14. and 15. Concerning the other two judicious
Sages of the Law, the one of Grayes Inn, and the other of the Inner Temple; I
had rather you would please to peruse their polite labors then my weak
Commendations of them, wherein I hope you will find not only pleasant variety
of Invention to delight you, but also great solidity of judgment to benefit
you. I intend not to trouble you with an impertinent and tedious Preface, no
way doubting your riper judgments will find ample content, and much more
profit hereby, then these few lines do promise.

32. and 34. H. 8. The Reading of James Dyer of the Middle Temple, London,
there made upon the Statutes of Dispositions of Lands and Tenements by
Testament, or last Will, or otherwise, made in the year 32. H. 8. chapter the
1. And of Explanations in the years 34. and 35. of the same King, Chapter the
5.
I.
For that, That in the Statute of Explanation, four persons are restrained to
make Wills of their Lands, viz. Women covert, Infants, Idiots, and men of
non-sana memory, it is to be seen what persons are able by the Common Law, or
by the Statute, to make a Will or Testament, and what not.

1. THe King being of full age, may make a Testament of land, parcel of the
Duchy of Lancast. but not of any other Land.

2. The Queen cannot make a Will of her land deviseable, which is her
inheritance, but by the assent of the King she may make a devise to a
stranger, and not to the King.

3 A Bishop of his own inheritance, or of his purchase to him and his heirs,
may make a Will, but not of the Land of his Bishopric, but of arrerages of
rent of the Bishopric, he may make a devise by Testament; the same Law of a
Deane or Parson of a Church.

4. An Abbot, Prior, or Master of an Hospital, cannot make a Will of any thing.

5. A person outlawed of Felony cannot make a Testament, but a person
outlawed only in personal actions, may make a Testament of his Land, but not
of his goods: The same Law of a man attainted of a Praemunire; contrary Law of a
Villain, or of a man excommunicated.

6. An Infant of the age of 16. years seized of Land deviseable, who may alien
it by the custom, yet he cannot make a testament thereof; the same Law of his
goods.

7. An Infant makes a will of his Land within age, and dies after that he
comes to full age, and makes no revocation, this is not a good will.

8. A man born deaf and dumb, may make a Will of his Land by signs.

9. A woman seized of Land, marries with her brother, and after makes a Will
of it, this is not good; the same Law of a woman professed who takes husband.

10 A Lunatic being of a save memory, makes his Will, and after becomes
lunatic, and after recovereth a good understanding, and dies, this is not a
good will.

11. A woman inheretrix of full age takes husband, who is under years
marriageable the woman makes a will of her Land, and dies before the age of
the husband of 14. years, this is good.

12. A man makes his will, and wills that I. S. who is within age, shall
have the disposition of his Land, this is good; The same Law is where a woman
Covert has such Authority.

13. The Husband and Wife are divorced by reason of a precontract, at the suit
of the husband, the woman sueth an Appeal, the which depending, she makes a
will of her Land and dies, this is good.

14. An Alien purchases Land in Fee, and makes a Will, and after the King
makes him a Denizon, after he dies, this is good.

15. A man speechless, lying at the point of death, may make a will by signs;
the same Law of a person lunatic when he has his memory.

16. A man being of sound memory, makes his Will, and before his death he
becomes mad, and so dies, this is not a good Will.

17. A man who has a wife not divorced, takes another wife, who is an
Inheretrix, she cannot make a will.

18. A Villain purchases Lands within the City of London, and after comes
within the City, and there is made a Freeman, and makes a Testament of this
Land which is deviseable by the Custom, and before his death the Lord enters,
yet the Will is good.

II.
What shall be said a good and sufficient Testament, and what not; and what
shall be a Revocation, and what not.

1. A Testament nuncupative is not good for Land; the same Law of a Testament
made in Print, or engraven in Stone, or Timber, or cut, if it were never
written.

2. A Testament bearing date at Antwerp in Brabant is not good, but if it want
date this is good, if made after the 20. day of July, 1540.

3. A man makes a Testament without naming any Executor, this is good for
Land, but not for goods.

4. A Testament for Land without insealing or subscribing, is good enough, so
that it be put in writing in the life of the Testator, although that it be
never proved before the Ordinary.

5. A man makes his Will in such form, Haecest voluntas and intentio A. B.
etc. for the disposition of his Land, it is not good without saying, Vltima
voluntas.

6. A man says to I. S. Inheritor, that if he will not make his will before
such a day, that he will expel him from the Land with force, and for that
menace he makes his will, this is a good Testament.

7. A man makes a Testament of his Land in one County, and long time after
makes a Testament of his Land in another County, these are good.

8. Two men severally seized of Land, make a joint Testament of their Land,
this shall be good and several Testaments.

9. A man is in making his Testament, and had devised a parcel of his Land,
and before the perfection and finishing of it, he dies; this is good for so
much as is devised.

10. A man wills by his Testament, that his Lands shall be sold to pay his
debts, and shows not by whom; this is a good will, and shall be performed by
his Executors or Administrators.

11. A man makes a Will of Land, in which he has nothing, and after
purchases the same Land, and dies, this is not a good Will.

12. The same Law, if a man make a Will of his Land, and after aliens this Land
in Fee, and after repurchaseth; this is not good.

13. A Woman Covert makes a Will of her Land, and after takes husband, who
has issue, the husband dies, the wife dies, this is not a good Will.

14. A man makes a will, and after he makes a new Will, and after in his bed
dying, says that the first Will shall be his last Will, this is good.

15. A man makes his Will in Writing, and after gives diverse Legacies to
diverse persons, and after by word he revoketh all but one; this is a good
Revocation of all but that one.

16. Before the Statute of 27. H. 8. A man makes a Feoffment to the
performance of his will and intent, the which will and intent is declared in a
Schedule thereunto annexed upon the livery which is to the use of I. S. in fee,
this cannot be revoked nor altered by his Last Will.

17. Otherwise it is if the Feoffment was to perform his last Will which is
declared ut supra, this may be altered and changed.

18. A man gives Land by his Will in Fee, and after by another Will he gives
the same Land to another but for term of life; this is a Revocation of the
entire first Will.

III.
What person shall take by a Devise, and what not; and of what thing a Devise
shall be made, and of what not.

1. A Woman seized of Lands deviseable, or in use before the Statute of 27. H.
8. devises this to her husband; this is void.

2. A man devises a Reversion depending upon an estate for life to the Parson
of D. and to his successors, the Parson dies, and after a new Parson is made,
the particular Tenant dies, the new Parson shall have it.

3. A man by the premises of his Will devises his Land to I. S. in Fee, and by
the sequel he devises the same Land to I. N. in Fee, they both shall take by
this Testament, and shall be joint-tenants.

4. A man devises Land to the Deane of Paul's, without naming his name of
Baptism, this is good.

5. Three Brothers are of one Father and Mother, the middle brother seized of
Land deviseable, gives this by his Testament Propinquiori fratri suo, it
seems that none of them shall have it.

6. A term of years is devised to the Churchwardens of the Church of D. and
to their successors, this is not good; but for goods so devised the Law is
contrary.

7. A man who has a term, devises the Land to one and his heirs, the devise
dies, and has Executors, his Heirs shall have the Land and not the
Executors; contrary the Law is if the entire term were so devised.

8. A Devise made Canonicis Ecclesiae Catholicae Pauli Land. in perpetuum is a
good devise to all the Canons jointly in Fee, and the survivour shall have the
entierty; contrary the Law is of a devise made Civitati Land. in perpetuum, the
Corporation of the Mayor and Commonalty shall take by this devise.

9. A man devises Land to one for term of life, the remainder over in Fee, the
Devisee for life refuses, yet he in the remainder may enter; but if the Will
were that the Executors shall make a Lease for life, the remainder over in Fee,
and they offer to make the Lease accordingly, and the Lessee refuses, he in
the remainder shall not have the remainder. quare 29. ass.

10. A man wills that his Executors shall sell his Lands for the payment of
his debts, they all dye but one, he makes the sale, the Vendee shall not have
the Land; contrary the Law if to the Executors to be sold.

11. A man makes two Executors, and wills that they shall sell the Land for
the payment of debts, and they sell it for term of life, the remainder to one
of themselves, the Vendee dies, he in the remainder may enter.

12. I. S. has issue two sons, and dies, the elder has issue a daughter
who has issue a son and dies; Land is given by Testament to one for life,
the remainder to the next Male of the body of I. S. begotten; the second son
of I. S. shall have the Land, and not the son of the daughter; contrary it
would be if the remainder were intailed by need.

13. A man devises his Land to his wife being with child, the remainder to the
issue en Ventre sa feme, his wife in Travail dies, and the son is ripped
from his mother alive, he shall have the remainder.

14. A man devises Land to one for life, the remainder to the eldest son of
the Devisor in Tail, the remainder over in Tail, the remainder in Fee to the
son, he in the last remainder dies without issue, Devisee for life dies,
the son shall take the Estate Tail, Volens nolens.

15. A man devises his Land to Elianor the daughter of I. S. and I. S. has
diverse daughters, whereof one is named Helen, and none Elianor, this is a good
devise to Hellen.

16. A man has two Wive, and he devises his Land to his latter wife in Fee,
the first wife shall have it.

17 So if one has two sons called I, and one of them is a bastard, and borne
before marriage, and he makes a devise to his son I; the legitimate I shall
have it and not the bastard.

18. A man has issue a son, and Land is devised to the Father, Habend. sibi
and hared, de corpore suo legitime procreand. and after the Devisee has issue
another son, the second shall have the Land.

19. Land is devised to one for life, the remainder Ecclesiae St. Andrea in
Holborn, the Parson of the said Church shall have Plowd. Comment 523. cited,
it, 21. R. 2.

20. A man devises by his Will, that after the death of his wife the Land
deviseable shall go to I. S. his wife shall take for life by this devise.

21. Cestui que use before the Stat. of 27. H. 8. wills that his Feoffes
shall execute an Estate to I. S. in Fee, I. S. shall take the use without any
Estate executed.

22. A man devises Land, deviseable to his daughter and Heir being a feme
Covert, and to the Heirs of the woman, the reversion over in Fee, and dies,
the husband refuses to take by the devise, he in the remainder enters, he
shall retain the Land during the lives of the Husband and Wife, but after their
decease the issue of the Wife may enter upon him.

23. A man seized of Land in Fee has issue two sons and a daughter, the
father devises the Land to his wife for term of life, the remainder propin
uioribus de sanguine puerorum of the Devisor, the daughter has issue and
dies, the issue of the daughter shall have this remainder, and although that
the sons have issue after, yet their issue shall not have it.

24. A man wills that after 20. years after the death of the Devisor I. S.
shall have the Land in Fee, the Heir of the Devisor shall have the Land during
the term, and not the Executor.

IV.
What things may be devised.

1. A Man seized of Land deviseable builds a House thereupon, the House is
deviseable; the same Law of a Rent charge de Novo created.

2. A man Disseisee of Land deviseable, devises to the Disseisor in Fee, in
recompense of, a Releas which the Disseisor made unto him, it is good.

3. A man has Land in right of his wife, and he grants parcel of it to
another, and after devises the residue to another, this is good.

4. A man has a Seigniory to him descended of the part of his mother, and
after the Tenancy descends unto him of the part of his father, and both are
deviseable, and he has not any issue, he may make devises to several persons,
(that is) the Seigniory to one, and the Tenancy to another.

5. A Termor of Land which is not deviseable, erecteth a Furnace, and fixes
this in the midst of the House in the Land, he may devise their Furnace.

6. A man seized of Land deviseable, devises totum statum suum to one and his
Heirs, this is good for the Land.

7. A man devises primam vesturam sou tonsuram prati, which is deviseable,
this is good; the same Law of Trees growing, and to grow for ever.

8. Tenant in Fee-simple, or Fee-taile, may devise the Corn although that the
Land be not deviseable; contrary Law is of Trees.

9. A man seized of a Mill, may devise the Runner stone, but not the under
stone.

10. A man has a term for a 100 years, and he devises this to one for term
of life, the remainder over to I. S. this is a void remainder; contrary it is
if the Devise were that the Devisee shall have the occupation of the Land
during his life, the remainder over.

11. Tenant in Fee-simple devises his Charters, this is good; but Tenant in
tail cannot.

12. The King is seized of a Borough where the Burgages are deviseable by
Testament, the King purchases a Burgage in Fee, and grants this to another
in Fee, the Grantee cannot devise it.

13. A man has an annuity to him and his Heirs, he cannot devise this;
otherwise if the annuity be granted to him for term of years.

14. A man seized of a Manner in Fee deviseable, the King grants to him a
Warren in his demean Lands in Fee, the Grantee devise the this Warren it is not
good.

15. A man seized of a Common, grants a Rent out of the Land, although that
the Land be deviseable, yet the grant is void, and by consequence the devise.

16. An Advowson in gross is not deviseable, nor any other thing which lies
not in Tenure, but a mesnalty or seigniory is deviseable, because they lie in
Tenure.

17. The Husband devises the Corn upon his Wives Land, and dies, this is
good, whether they were sowed before the marriage or after.

V.
By what words and by what means a man shall have Fee-simple in Lands,
Tenemints, or Horeditaments, and what not.

1. LAnd is given to a man habend, sibi and haredi suo, this is not Fee-simple,
otherwise it is sibi and duobus haredibus suis tantum.

2. Land is given to a man habend. sibi and haered. with warranty of the Land
sibi and haredibus suis, this is a good Feesimple.

3. Land is devised by Testament to a man by these words, To do with it at his
pleasure, this is a good Fee-simple.

4. Land is given to a man habendum sibi in feodo simplici, and livery made to
him and his Heirs secundum formam and effectum Chartae, this makes Fee-simple.

5. A man bargaineth and sells his Land to another without the word Heirs,
and the Indenture is enrolled accordingly; this is Fee-simple.

6. Land is given to one by Deed for term of life, and Livery and Seisin made
to him and his Heirs secundum formam and effectum Chartae, this is not
Fee-simple.

7. The King gives Land to a man habendum sibi and haeredibus suis masculis,
he has neither Fee, nor Fee-Taile.

8. A man seized in Fee-simple, grants totum statum suum to have to the Grantee
and his Heirs, and makes Livery according to the Deed, this is Fee-simple.

9. A man levieth a fine sur Conusance de droit come ceo que il ad de son done,
the Conusee has Fee simple.

10. A man grants a Rent out of his Land to one for life, and after the Grantor
rehearsing, the first grant grants the same Rent to the Grantee and his Heirs
with clause of distress accordingly, the Grantee has Fee-simple.

11. Two Co-parceners in Fee-simple make partition, and for equality of
partition, a Rent is assigned out of one part to the other without any other
words, the Assignee has Feesimple in the rent.

12. A man makes a Feoffment with warranty for term of life of the Feoffee, he
is impleaded and voucheth the Feoffer, who loses and renders in value other
land, he is seized of it in Fee.

13. Land is given to the Major and Commonalty of London, habendum protermino
vitae eorum, this is Fee-simple.

14. Land is given by Deed habendum sibi and haeredibus suis, vel de corpore
suo, this is not Fee-simple; otherwise if the habendum were sibi and haeredibus
suis, vel suis Assignatis.

15. Land is given to Parson habendum in liberam eleemosynam, it is Fee-simple.

16. A man makes a Lease of 2. Acres of Land for life, the remainder of one of
them (without showing in certain which) to a woman sole in Fee, she takes
husband, and after the Lessee is impleaded in a praecipe quod reddat of one of
the Acres, and prays aid of the Husband and Wife, as of them in remainder;
they join in aid gratis, and cannot bar the demandant, whereby he
recovereth, the Husband dies, the Lessee dies, the Wife has the Fee-simple
in the other Acre if she pleases.

17. A Manor to which a Villeyn is regardant is leased for years, the Lessee
makes Executors and dies, the Executors enter and obtain; the Villeyn who
purchases Land in Fee, the Executors enter, they have not Fee-simple.

18. Land is given in Tail to a Villayn, the Lord enters, he has not
Fee-simple.

19. A Disseisor infeoffeth the King by Deed enrolled, after the King reciting
the ancient right of the Disseisee, grants the Land by Letters Pattents to him
habendum sibi and haeredibus suis masculis, he shall have Fee-simple.

20. Tenant for life of a Seigniory recovers in a Cessavit, he shall have the
Land in Fee-simple.

21. Tenant in Tail of an Advowson grants in Fee by fine, an Ancestor
Collateral of the Tenant in Tail releaseth to the Grantee with warranty and
dies, the Grantee has not Fee-simple; otherwise if one usurp upon Tenant in
Tail in the Church, and his Clerk in by six months, he had Feesimple.

22. Tenant in Tail infeosfeth his brother, recovery is had against him by
erroneous judgment, the Tenant in Tail has issue and dies, the issue within
age, the brother dies without issue, the issue in Tail being his Heir within
age, reverseth the judgment by error and enters, he has Feesimple.

23. The same Law if Tenant in Tail infeoffe his son within age and dies,
and he aliens in Fee, and at full age recovereth in dum fuit infra atatem, he
is seized in Feesimple.

24. Tenant in Tail the reversion to the King is desseised, the disseisor has
not Fee-simple.

25. A man Commits a Disseisin to the use of the Dean and Chapter of Paul's,
and they enter and occupy, they have Fee-simple.

26. A Lease is made to Husband and Wife by Deed pro termino vitae suae,
habendum eis pro termino vitae of the Wife, she dies, the Husband continues
in possession, he has Fee-simple.

27. A man seized of an advowson in Fee, the Church becomes void, the Patron
comes to the Ordinary, and prays him to admit and institute him to the
Church, and so he does, the Ordinary has not Fee-simple, so that he can devise
it.

28. Tenant for years, the remainder in Tail of a Manor join in a Fine of
the Manor, without proclamations sur Conusance de dreit come ceo, etc. the
Tenants attorn, the Tenant in Tail dies, the Conusee has Fee-simple as well
in the services as in the demesnes.

29. Tenant in Tail of a Manor to which an Advowson is appendant,
discontinueth the Manor cum pertinent, in Fee, and at the next avoidance, he
presents and dies seized of the Advowson, his issue shall be said seized in
Fee of the advowson. 5. H. 7. 35. b. Marmadukes case.

30. A man devises Land in perpetuum during the life of I. S. he has not
Fee-simple.

31. A Lease is made to a woman for term of years upon condition, that if she
have issue within the term, that she shall have Fee; the Lessor and Lessee
inter-marry and have issue within the term, and the Husband dies, the term
expireth, the Wife continues in, she is seized of the Feesimple.

32. A man seized of two Acres in Fee aliens, one of them by Deed and by the
same Deed, he obliges the other Acre to warrant, the first Acre to the Feoffee
and his Heirs, the Feoffor aliens the other Acre, the first Feoffee is
impleaded, and voucheth the second Feoffee, and demands the lien, whereupon
he demurreth in Law.

33. A Villayn purchases Land for term of life, the remainder to his son in
Fee, who is a Villayn also to the same Lord, the Lord enters upon the Lessee,
he is not seized of the remainder in Fee without Claim.

34. Tenant in Tail infeoffes his eldest son within age, the son within
age infeoffeth another, the father dies, the son at full age recovereth in
dum fuit infra aetatem, he is seized in Fee-simple.

35. Husband and Wife joint-tenants in Tail, make a Lease for life, the
Husband dies, the Fee-simple descends to his son living the Wife.

VI.
Who shall be said to have a sole estate in Fee-simple so that he may devise
it, and who not.

1. CEstuy que use before 27. H. 8. makes a Lease for life, the remainder to
one of his Feoffees in Fee, he has a sole Estate in Fee-simple.

2. A man seized of Land in Fee, has issue a daughter beyond the Seas, and
after he has another daughter within the Realm and dies, the daughters enter
together, the younger daughter has a sole Estate in Fee-simple.

3. A man is disseised by two, and he releaseth all his right to one of them in
Tail, he is sole seized in Feesimple.

4. A Disseisor makes a Lease for years, the Termor infeoffeth two, the first
Disseisee releaseth to one of them, he is not sole seized.

5. The same Law if two gain a Patronage by usurpation by six Months, the
rightful Patron releaseth to one of them, he is not sole seized.

6. A Manor with an Advowson appendant descends to an Infant, an Estranger
usurpeth, the Infant at his full age infeoffeth the Usurpor, and a stranger in
Fee of the Manor cum pertinent. the Usurper is sole seized in Fee of the
advowson.

7. One joint-tenant releaseth to his Companion upon condition, the Releassee
dies, his Heir enters, the condition is broken, and the Releassor enters
clayming the moity, the Heir shall not be said to be sole seized.

8. Disseisor makes a gift in Tail, the remainder in Fee to two, the Tenant
in Tail has issue and dies, the issue enters and dies without issue, the in
the remainder enter, the Disseisee enters upon them, and they re-enter, and the
Disseisee releaseth to one of them, he shall be sole seized.

9. Two Co-parceners in Fee are impleaded, the one of them disclaimeth, the
other is not sole seized; otherwise the Law is between joynt-tenants.

10. Before 27. H. 8. Cestuy que use enters upon the Feoffees, and infeoffeth
one of them, he is immediately sole seized of the Fee-simple.

11. Deane and Chapter infeoffeth one of the Chapter of Land, which they have
in right of the Church, he is sole seized.

12. A man seized in Fee has issue two daughters bastards, and one daughter
legitimate, the bastards enter, the daughter ligitimate releaseth to one of
them, she is not sole seized.

13. Land is given to a man habend. sibi una cum Alicia daughter of the Donor
in frank marriage, after they are divorced Causa praecontractus at the suit of
the Husband, the Donor dies, the daughter is his Heir; she is sole seized.

14. Disseisor makes a Lease for life, the remainder to the Husband and Wife in
Fee, the Less dies, the Husband and Wise enter, the Disseisee reenters, the
Husband ousteth him, clayming to him and his Wife; the Husband is sole seized,
quare 14. H. 6.

15. Land is given to Husband and Wife in Tail, the remainder to the right
Heirs of the Wife, the Husband dies without issue, the Wife being privement
ensenit, the Wife is sole seized of an Estate in Fee-simple.

16. A praecipe quod reddat is brought of a Rent against the Pernor of the
profits, and the Tenant of the Land, the Pernor disclaymes, the Tenant
traverseth the point of the Writ, and it is found against the Demandant, yet
the Demandant is sole seized of the Rent in Fee.

17. Two Femes joynt-tenants, the one takes Husband and has issue and dies,
the Husband claymes the moity by the Curtesy; the survivour shall be sole
seized of the intirety.

18. Feme Tenant in general Tail has issue a daughter, and her Husband
dies, she takes a second Husband, and has issue another daughter, the
Husband and Wise by fine discontinue, and take back an Estate special Tail
and die, the younger daughter enters to the use of her self and her sister, and
she enters with her, and occupies in Common, the younger daughter shall be
sole seized of the one moity in tail, and of the other moity in Fee. Quaerae

19. The King grants an Office to two in Fee, whereof the one is an Alien, the
Denizen shall be sole seized.

20. A man seized in Fee of a Villain in right of his wife, the Villain
purchases land in Fee, the husband enters, he is not sole seized in Fee.

21. A feme Inheretrix has issue a daughter, her husband dies, she takes a
second husband, and has issue another daughter, the husband and wife exchange
the land of the wife for other land in Fee, and after the wife dies, and the
husband dies, the daughters enter into the land taken in exchange, the younger
shall be said sole seized.

22. The husband makes a Feoffment of the land of his wife upon condition that
the Feoffee shall make an estate tail to the husband and wife, the Feoffee
grants a rent charge out of the land, the Grantee recovereth against the
Grantor in a Writ of annuity, the husband enters upon the Feoffee, claiming to
him and his wife, he shall be sole seized.

23. Two joint-tenants to them and to the heirs of one of them, he that has
but the freehold grants totum statum suum by deed to the other, he is sole
seized of the intierty in Fee.

24. Land in Gavel-kind holden of the King, who releaseth all his right in the
Seigniory to the Tenant, and he accepts this release, and has issue two
sons, and dies, the sons enter, the elder shall be sole seized in Fee-simple.

25. A feme sole makes a feosfment upon condition to be performed on the part
of the Feoffe at a certain day, and before the day they intermarry, the day
incurreth, the money not paid, the husband is sole seized.

26. A Feoffment without deed is made to two, and to their proper use, and
livery of seisin is made to one of them accordingly, he is not sole seized;
otherwise if no use had been expressed.

27. Before 27. H. 8. a man makes a Feoffment to the use of himself and of
that woman that shall be his first wife, and after he marries the Statute is
made, the husband is sole seized of an estate in Fee-simple.

28. The Father disseiseth one to the use of his son and a stranger, the
Father dies, the son and the stranger agree to the disseisin and enter, the
son is sole seized of the Feesimple.

29. A Feoffment is made to two by deed, with a Letter of Attorney to one of
them, to deliver seisin, and he makes livery to the other accordingly, he is
not sole seized in Feesimple.

30. A man is disseised by a Feme sole and a stranger, the feme takes Husband,
the disseisee releases to the Husband and his heirs, he shall be sole seized
in the right of his wife.

31. Two disseisors make a gift in tail, the Disseisee releaseth to one of the
disseisors, he shall not be sole seized of the Reversion.

32. Lord and Feme tenant, she takes husband, the Lord grants the Segniory
to the husband and his heirs, he shall be said to be sole seized in Fee-simple.

33. Tenant for life, the reversion to a feme Covert in fee infeoffeth the
husband and wife to them and to the heirs of the husband, the wife dies, the
husband shall not be said sole seized of the Fee-simple.

34. The Tenant infeoffeth the Lord and a stranger in Fee, the Lord releaseth
to the stranger in Fee all the right which he had in the Land, the Lord is sole
seized of the Seigniory immediately.

35. The husband alone by Indenture alieneth the Land of the wife in Fee,
rendering to the Feoffer and his wife a yearly rent in Fee, the husband sole
shall not be said seized, but jointly with his wife.

36. Before 27. H. 8. a man made a Feoffment with warranty to two, to the use
of one of them, the Feoffees upon a voucher recover other land in value against
the Feoffer, and after the Statute is made, the Feoffees shall be said sole
seized to the use of him to whose use the first Feoffment was made.

37. Before the Statute of Quia Emptores terrarum, a man seized of a Manor by
descent of the part of the mother, makes a Feoffment of part of the Demesnes
of the Manor, and after dies without issue, his collateral heirs of the
part of the father and mother claiming the Seigniory, the heir of the part of
the father shall be said sole seized of it.

38. Two joint-tenants of a Villain, he purchases lands in Fee, and is
disseised, one joint-tenant enters upon the disseifor in the name of himself
and his companion, he is not sole feised of the Fee simple.

39. The Husband inseoffeth a stranger before 27. H 8. to the use of himself
and his wife in Fee, the Statute is made, the husband and wife are
joint-tenants.

40. A man seized of Land in Gavel-kind, makes a lease for life, the remainder
to the right heirs of I. S. who has issue two sons, and dies, the leasee
for life dies, the sons enter, the elder shall be said sole seized.

41. The husband makes a Lease of his wives land for life of the husband, the
Leasee makes a Feoffment, the husband enters for a forfeiture, he is sole
seized of the Fee-simple.

42. A man has issue two daughters, the one being a Bastard, she enters into
the whole, and is impleaded, and recovereth in value upon a Voucher as heir to
the father, the other sister enters in common, she shall be said sole seized.

43. A man infeoffeth two with warranty to one of them, they are impleaded, and
the Gaurantee voucheth, and recovers in value, he shall be sole seized.

44. Two joynt-tenants, one within age, are disseised by the father of the
infant, and the father dies seized, the Infant enters, and the other occupies
in common with him, the Infant is sole seized.

45. Two joint-tenants in Fee, the one bargains and sells by Indenture all his
part, and before the inrollment the other dies, and the Indenture is enrolled
within the six months, the other moity shall descend.

VII.
What persons shall be said Coparceners, or Tenants in common, in Fee-simple,
so that they may devise their parts, and what not.

1. TEnant by the courtesy of land in Gavel-kind, has issue two sons, and
aliens with warranty, and dies seized of assets in Fee-simple, the one son
being within age, both the sons enter upon the Alience, they are Tenants in
Common.

2. Before Quia Empteres Terrarum, a man gives part of his Manor to an Abbor
and Covent, to hold of him as of his Manor in Frankalmeigne, and after he
grants the Manor by Fine, the Grantee has issue two daughters and dies,
the Abbey is dissolved, the daughters enter, They are Joynttenants.

3. A Lease is made to I. S. and I. N. habendum to I. S. during the life of I.
N. Et habendum to I. N. during the life of I. S. the leasor confirms their
estates in Fee, they are Tenants in Common.

4. A man has issue two daughters, and makes a Lease to them for term of
their lives, the Father dies, the daughters are seized in Fee in Coparoenary.

5. Land is given to husband and wife, and to a third person, and to the heirs
of the husband, and the third person releaseth to the husband and wife, and to
the heirs of the wife, the husband and wife are not joint-tenants, nor Tenants
in Common of the Fee-simple, but the husband himself is sole seized in Fee.

6. Two Joynt-tenants of a Manor, the one releaseth to the other all his right
in the services of the Manor, and the Releasor dies, the other makes a
Feoffment of the Manor, he shall be Tenant in Common of the services with the
Feoffee.

7. A man makes a Feoffment of Land in Gavel-kind with warranty to the Feoffee
and his heirs, the Feoffee has issue three sons, and dies, they enter, and
are impleaded, and vouch the Feoffer, and recover in value, they are Joint
tenants of the land recovered in value, if it be land at the Common Law,

8. A man has issue two daughters, and the elder of them holds certain land
of the Father by iiij. d. the father dies, the younger sister shall be
presently seized without any partition of ij. d.

9. Two Coparceners of a Villain, the Villain purchases land in Fee, the
Coparceners enter together, they are Jointtenants, and not Coparceners.

10. Two Coparceners, the one within age, make partition and the part of the
Infant is the lesser, the Infant aliens her part, and after enters upon her
Coparcener in Common, and she enters upon the Feoffee of the Infant in Common,
the Feoffee and she are of that part tenants in Common, and of the other part
she and the Infant are Coparceners.

11. Two Joint-tenants in Fee-simple make partition at this day without Deed,
they are Joint-tenants as before.

12. Two Joint-tenants by Deed make such partition (that is) that the one them
shall have the one moity to him and his heirs, and the other shall have the
other moity to him and his heirs without any metes or bounds, they are not
Tenants in Common.

13. The husband and wife and a third person purchase land jointly in Fee, they
are disseised, the husband releaseth to the Disseisor, and after the husband
and wife are divorced, the husband dies, the third person dies, the wife
enters, she shall be seized of a third part of the land in four parts divided.

14. Three Coparceners are, one of them releaseth to the two others in Fee,
they are Joint-tenants of this third part. Quaera

15. A man makes a Feoffment of two acres of land habendum, the one acre to
one of them and his heirs, and the other acre to the other and his heirs,
they are Joint-tenants.

16. Two joint Lords and Tenant are by Fealty and xij. d. the one of them
releaseth to the Tenant all his right in the Land, saving one penny and fealty,
the Lords are not Joynt-Tenants.

17. The Leasor grants his reversion to the Leasee for term of life and to a
stranger, Habendum illis and haeredibus suis, they are Tenants in Common;
otherwise it is where the Donor grants the Reversion to the Donee, and to a
stranger in Fee, they are Joynt-tenants of the Fee.

18. The Leasor and a stranger disseisee the Leasee they are Tenants in Common
of the Fee-simple.

19. Two Joynt-tenants, one within age, make a lease for life, he of full age
dies, the Infant at full age brings a Dum fuit infra aetatem of the whole,
and recovers, the Leasee dies, the Infant enters into the whole, the heir of
the other who was of full age enters in Common, they are seized in Fee simple
in Common.

20. A Lease is made for life, the remainder over for life, the Leasor
releaseth all his right to them in Fee, they are Jointtenants of the Fee.

21. Two Joint tenants are disseised, the Ancestour collateral of one
releaseth to the disseisor with warranty and dies; the heir upon whom the
warranty descended dies; the other who survives, and the disseisor, are
Tenants in Common.

22. Three Coparceners are agreed to make partition, so that the one has a
several part allot to her in severalty, and that the others shall hold in
Coparcenary, and for equality of partition a rent is granted and allotted out
of the several part to the others in Fee; they are Coparceners of the rent.

23. A Lease is made to a man and a feme sole upon condition, that if they pay
to the Leasor 10. l. at such a day, that they shall have Fee, they inter-marry,
and after perform the condition, the husband aliens the whole, and dies, the
wife enters by the new Statute, she shall be Tenant in Common with the Feoffee.

24. A man makes a Lease for life, and has issue two daughters, and dies,
the Leasee makes waste, the one of the daughters has issue, and dies, the
issue and the other bring a Writ of waste, and recover, and enter, they are
Coparceners as well of the Freehold as of the Fee.

25. Land descends to two sisters from one father, who are of the half blood,
and they enter, and indow the mother of the younger, and after the elder dies
without issue, the younger shall have the entire Reversion.

26. A man has issue a son by one venture and two daughters by another
venture, whereof the one is within age, their Uncle of the part of the father
is disseised upon whose possession, the son releaseth with warranty in Fee,
and dies, the Uncle dies, the two daughters enter upon the disseisor, they
are Coparceners.

27. A Lease is made to two for term of their lives, and to the longer liver of
them, they make partition by Deed, and after they cancel the Deed, and destroy
the partition, and occupy in common as before, the Leasor confirms their
estates in Fee, they are Tenants in Common.

28. Two Joint-tenants are seized of three Manors of equal value, and make a
Feoffment of two of them to two other men, and the one warrants the one Manor
to one, and the other to the other, and after the Feoffees are impleaded, and
they vouch severally the Feoffers, and recover the third Manor in value, for
that they cannot bar the demandant; they shall be several Tenants of this
Manor.

29. Land is given to two, Habendum eis, that is to say, to the one of them in
tail, and to the other in fee, he who has the Fee, devises the whole, and
dies; this is not good for any part.

30. I. S. has a Villain, and I. D. has another Villain, the two Villains
purchase Land jointly in Fee and I. S. and I. D. enter into it together, they
are Tenants in Common.

VIII.
What Devises of Reversions or Remainders, or of Rents, or incidents to
Reversions or Remainders shall be good; and what not.

1. THe Lessor disseiseth his Lessee for life, and makes a Lease for life to
another for term of life; of the first Lessee, the remainder over in Fee, the
first Lessee enters, yet he in the remainder may devise his remainder.

2. The reversion of Tenant for life is granted by fine, the Conusee brings a
Quid Juris clamat against the Lessee, who claymeth Fee, whereupon they are at
issue, and after before the trial, the Lessee waveth his plea, and confesses
etc. the Conusee enters upon him, and he reenters, the Conusee devises the
reversion; this is not good.

3. A Lease is made for life, the remainder for life, he in the remainder
enters upon the Lessee, the Lessor devises the reversion, and the Lessee for
life dies, and after the Lessor dies, this devise is good.

4. A man makes a Lease for years upon condition, that if the Lessor disturb
the Lessee within the term that the Lessee shall have Fee, and makes Livery
accordingly, the Lessor disturbeth the Lessee for Rent where none is arrear and
after he devises his reversion; this is not good.

5. Bastard eigne enters after the death of the Ancest our, and Assigns Dower
to the mother, and dies seized of the reversion, and has issue, the Mulier
puisne devises the reversion of the Tenant in Dower; this is good.

6. A Lease is made for life, the remainder over in Fee, reserving Rent by
Indenture, and for default of payment, that it shall be lawful to the Lessor
to enter, and detain during the life of the Lessee, he reenters for the Rent
arrear, he in the remainder devises the remainder; this is not good.

7. A Seigniory is granted for life, the remainder over in Fee, the Tenant
attorns, after the Tenant is attainted of Felony and hanged, the Grantee for
life enters not into the Land, he in the remainder devises his remainder of
the Land; this is not good.

8. A man seized of a Rent, makes a Deed reciting that whereas I. S. holds
the said Rent of his Grant for term of life, he grants the Reversion of the
said Rent after the decease of I. S. to the Grantee and his Heirs in Fee, and
in truth I. S. had nothing in the Rent, the Grantee devises this Rent; this is
not good.

9. A man makes a Lease of two Acres, reserving Rent, and has issue two
daughters, and dies, the daughters make partition of the Reversion, so that
the Reversion cum pertinent, of one Acre is allotted to one, and the other to
the other, they severally devise the Rent; this is not good.

10. Land is given to two, habendum to the one for life, and after his decease
to the other in Fee, he who has the Fee devises his Reversion; this is good.

11. Land is given to two, and to the heirs Males of their two bodies begotten,
and quod quisquis eorum diutius vivet gaudebit tetam terram sibi and haeredibus
suis imperpetuum, and one dies, the Survivor may Devise the Fee-simple of the
entire Land.

12. Land is given to one for life, and quod post ejus mortem terra praedicta
shall descend to I. S. in Fee, he may devise this remainder.

13. The Husband endoweth his Wife ad ostium Ecclesiae, and after is attainted
of Felony, and dies, the Wife enters, the Lord of whom the Land is holden
devises the Reversion; this is not good.

14. Seignioresse and Tenant, the Tenant makes a Lease for four years, if the
Seignioresse so long shall live, the Termor marryeth with the Seignioresse, and
they have issue, the Wife dies, the Husband continues in the Services
clayming by the Courtesy, the issue devises this Reversion of the Seigniory;
this is good.

15. A Lease is made for life, the Remainder in Fee to the Wife of the Devisor,
she surviveth and devises his Remainder; this is good.

16. A Lease is made dummodo solverit to the Leasor for the life of the Leasor
10. l. the Leasor diviseth the Reversion with the Rent; this is good.

17. An Ancestor Collateral of the Disseisee, releases to the Disseisor with
warranty, and before the death of the Ancestor, the Disseisor makes a Lease for
life, and after the warranty descends upon the Disseisee, he enters, the
Leasee re enters, the Disseisor devises his Reversion; this is good.

18. A Lease is made to an Infant or Feme sole for life, the Remainder in Fee,
the Infant at his full age, or the Feme after Coventure disagree, he in the
Remainder devises his Remainder; this is good.

19. A man seized of two Acres in several Towns in one County, (that is) of
the one for life, and of the other in Fee; and makes a Feoffment by Deed of
all his Lands in the same County, and makes Livery in the Acre in Fee in the
name of both, the Leasor devises the reversion of the Acre for life; this is
good.

20. An Abator indoweth the Wife of the Ancestour of a third part, the Heir
recovers the other two parts against the Abator, the Abator devises the
Reversion of the third part which the Wife holds in Dower: this is good.

21. A man grants a Rent charge out of Land deviseable to one for life, the
Remainder over to the Grantor and his right Heirs, the Grantor devises the
Land to a stranger in Fee, and dies, the Heir of the Devisor devises the
Remainder of the Rent in Fee; this is good.

22. A man seized of two Acres, the one at the Common Law, the other in Borough
English makes a Lease of both, rendering a horse and has issue two sons, and
devises the Reversion of the Acre in Borrough English with the horse; this is
good.

23. A Villain purchases Land in Fee and dies without Heir, his Wife insent,
the Lord of whom the Land is holden enters, and makes a Lease for life, the
Wife of the Villain is delivered of a son, the Lord of the Villain claims
the Reversion, the Lord of the Land devises it; this is not good.

24. Leasee for life makes a Lease to the Leasor for years the Leasor makes a
Feoffment in Fee, the Leasee enters, the Leasor devises the Reversion; this is
good.

25. An Infant makes a Lease for life, the Leasee grants his Estate over with
warranty, the Infant at his full age brings a dum fuit infra aetutem against
the Grantee, who voucheth his Grantor, who enters into the warranty, upon whose
possession the Demandant releaseth in Fee all his right, and is barred in the
action by this release, and after he devises his Reversion; this is a good
devise.

26. A Lease for term of 100 years is made to a Bishop and his Successors, he
makes a Lease for life, rendering Rent to him and his Successors, and after he
devises the Reversion with the Rent in Fee, this is good for the Reversion,
but not for the Rent.

27. A Mayor and Commonalty, have a Corporation to purchase Land for the life
of I. S. and so they do, and after make a Lease for term of life of the said
I. S. and I. N. the Leasor before any entry devises the Reversion; this is
good.

28. The Reversion of Tenant for life is granted in Tail, reserving Rent, the
Grantor devises this Rent in the life of the Leasee, this is good, and if the
Leasee surrender to the Grantee, the Devisee may distrain presently in the life
of the Leasee.

29. Tenant for life makes a Lease for years, rendering Rent, and after the
Tenant for life surrenders to the Leasor all his right, the Leasor devises the
Rent, this is good during the life of the Leasee for life.

30. A man grants his Reversion in Fee, and before attornment, he grants the
same Reversion to the Grantee for term of life only, and the Tenant attorneth
generally, the Grantee devises this Reversion; this is good.

31. Disseisor makes a Lease for life to his son, and after disseiseth his
son, and dies seized, the son enters, the Disseisee devises the Reversion;
this is void.

32. The Husband makes a Lease for life to the Daughter and Heir apparent of
his Wife being Covert rendering Rent, the Wife mother dies, the Husband
devises the Rent; this is void.

33. A man has issue two sons, and they bring a Writ of Covenant against the
Father of two Acres, and they acknowledge the right to the Father, and he
grants and renders to them, that is one moity to the one, and the other moity
to the other; this is good.

34. A man makes a Lease for life, reserving Rent to him and his Heirs, the
Leasor devises the Rent; this is good, otherwise it is if he reserve the Rent
to him and his Assigns.

35. A Lease is made to I. S. for the term of life of I. N. the remainder to
the same I. N. for term of life of the said I. S. I. N. in Remainder releaseth
all his right to the said I. S. and dies, the Leasor devises the Reversion;
this is good.

36. A man who has a Reversion, devises this by the name of all his
Inheritance or Herediments in D. this is good.

37. Leasee for term of 10. years, makes a Lease over for term of 40. years,
the Leasor confirms the Estate, reserving a Rent to him and his Heirs, and
after by his Will he devises the Rent in Fee; this is good after the 10.
years, and not before.

IX.
What shall be said a Gift or Disposition lawfully executed in the life of the
Donor, and what not.

1. TEnant in Fee-simple by Service of Chivalry upon the marriage of his second
son, covenants by Indenture at this day, that he will stand seized to the use
of the son and his wife, and of the Heirs of their two bodies begotten, of
two parts of the Land, and this is without saying that he and his Heirs will
stand seized, and without inrolement of the Indenture, this is a gift lawfully
executed.

2. The younger son brings a Quod ei deforciat against the father, supposing
a gift in Tail to be made by the father to him when no such gift was, and he
recovers by Confession, and has execution; this is good.

3. The Reversion of a Tenant for life is granted to two men in Tail, and
before attornment the one dies, the Leasee attorneth to the Survivor, this is
good for the wholeduring the life of the Survivor, and after his decease but
for the moity.

4. Tenant by the Courtesy of a Seigniory by service of Chivalry, the Heir
grants two parts of it, and the Tenant by the Courtesy attornes in the life of
the Grantor, this is not good but during the life of the Tenant by the
Courtesy.

5. A man grants the Reversion of his Tenant for life, if the Grantee happens
to survive the Grantor, and the Tenant attorneth, this is good if the Grantor
die first.

6. The Father seized of Land in Fee, has issue two sons, and they bring a
Writ of Covenant against the father of the same Land, and he grants and renders
by Fine the one moity to one in Tail, and the other moity to the other for
life; this is not good.

7. A man makes a Feoffment upon condition that the Feoffee shall make an
Estate in Fee to such a one of his sons as he shall name, per and infra
festum omnium sanctorum proximum, and he names one before the Feast, and in
the Feast he names another, and after the Feast the Feoffee infeoffeth the
first; this is not well executed.

8. A woman is in comunication for marriage with a man, and that she will
enfeoffe him of her Land if he will marry her, and after she gives the Land to
him in Tail by Deed, and after he marryeth her, this is well executed, and he
shall have Fee-simple.

9. A man makes a gift in Tail to one of his sons by Deed with a Letter of
Attorney, and the Attorney makes Livery by Dures and Menace made by the Donee;
this is lawfully executed.

10. A man makes a Feoffment with a Letter of Attorney conjunctim and divisim
to three, and two of them make Livery in presence of the third, this is not
well executed.

11. A man grants a Reversion to another, and delivers the Deed to the
particular Tenant, as an escrow upon condition that if the Grantee do such a
thing, that then he shall deliver it as his Deed, the particular Tenant
attorneth to the Grantee, the Grantor dies, the condition is performed and he
delivers the Deed, this is not well executed.

12. The Leasor disseiseth his Leasee, and makes a Feoffment in Fee, and
makes a Letter of Attorney to the Leasee to make Livery, who does it
accordingly, the Fee-simple is well executed in the Feoffee.

13. A man grants a Reversion, and before attornment, the Grantor becomes
of non sane memory, and being so, the Tenant attorneth, this is not well
executed.

14. A man seized of Land in Borough English in Fee, has issue a son, and
the son assigns the Land of his father to his wife ad ostium Ecclesiae ex
assensu patris, and after the son dies, and also the Father dies, his wife
with child with a son, the son is born, the wife shall retain her Dower.

15. A man seized in Fee, assigns his Land to his wife ad estium Ecclestae,
for her Dower, the Remainder over in Fee, and the Land is within the view, this
Remainder is not well executed.

16. A man seized of a Manor, to which an Advowson is appendant, makes a
Feoffement of one Acre with the Advowson, and makes Livery of the whole, yet
without Deed, the gift is not well executed.

17. A Lease is made for life, the Remainder over for life, the Remainder to
the right Heirs of the Leassee for life, he grants his Remainder, this is well
executed without any Attornment.

18. A man grants his Reversion in Fee, and before Attornment he commits
Felony, after which the Tenant attorneth, and after the Grantor is attainted by
verdict, the Grant is well executed in the Grantee.

19. A Leasee for life makes a Lease for years to the Leasor, and after the
Leasor makes a Feoffment in Fee, and the Leasee enters upon the Feoffee, this
gift is not lawfully executed for the Fee-simple in the life of the Donor.

20. Three Joynt-tenants make a Lease for life, after one of the Leasors
releaseth to one of his companions in Fee, and the Leasee does not attorn in
the life of the Releasor; this is not lawfully executed.

21. A man makes a Lease for years, and after he makes a Feoffment thereof,
and Livery, and Seisin, by a clod of earth, without putting out of the Termor,
and without attornment of the Termor; this is not well executed.

22. A man seized in Fee of Land in Possession, and also in use in diverse Towns
within one County, and before 27. H. S. he makes a gift in Tail of his Lands,
and makes Livery of that which he has in Possession in the name of the Land
in use; it is not lawfully executed.

23. A man makes a Feoffment to two, upon condition that they shall make a
gift in Tail to the younger son of the Feoffer and his wife, and the one of
the Feoffees makes the gift; this is not well executed, but that the Feoffor
may reenter into the whole.

24. A man makes a Deed of Feoffment with a Letter of Attorney, to make an
Estate to John S. Knight, and in truth he is not a Knight, and after he is made
a Knight, and then the Attorney makes Livery to him secundum formam Chartae;
this is well executed.

25. A man makes a Deed of Feoffment to one, and comes within the view of
the Land, and says unto him, go and enter into the same Land, and hold it to
you according to his Deed, and delivers it, and in going to the Land the
Feoffee dies; this is not well executed in the life of the Feoffor.

26. An Infant makes an assurance by Fine, and within age brings a Writ of
Error to reverse the Fine, and dies, the Writ depending; this is lawfully
executed and shall not be defeated.

27. A man makes a Feoffment at this day to two, to the intent that they shall
stand and be seized to the use of the Feoffer, until one of the sons of the
Feoffer marries with A. S. the daughter of I. S. and when he does marry the
said A. that then he shall be seized to the use of the said son and A. in
tail, and after they intermarry; this is a good estate tail executed.

28. A. is seized in Fee of Whiteacre, and B. also seized in Fee of Blackacre
in one County, and they are agreed to make an exchange by parole, A. enters
into Blackacre, and makes livery to B. of Whiteacre, and B. dies; this is not
well executed.

29. The heir in Chivalry of Land, holden of the King in Capite, being in ward
by office, at full age before livery sued, makes the gift in tail to his
younger son; this is not lawfully execured.

30. Land is given to two men in tail, the remainder to the survivour of them
in fee, they both join in grant of this remainder, and after the one dies,
and the other dies, this is not well executed.

31. Lord and Tenant, the Tenant makes a Lease for life, the Lord grants the
Seigniory to the Leasee in fee, the Leasor attorneth, the Leasee grants over
the Seigniory in fee, and the Leasor attornes and pays rent to the Grantee,
the Grantor dies, this is not good.

32. A man has a rent-service, and a stranger claiming the rent as Lord,
obtaines the possession thereof, unto whom the Lord releaseth all his right,
this is well executed.

33. A man makes a gift of his Land upon condition rhat at what time that the
Donor shall purchase Rent of 20. s. per annum, that then the Donee shall have
Fee, and the Donor is Joynt-tenant wirh another of the yearly Rent of 40. s.
and he obtains a release from him, the Donee has not the Feesimple well
executed.

34. He in Reversion suffers a common recovery against him, and dies before
the Leasee, this is not well executed.

35. Tenant in Tail to him and to his Heirs Males, the Remainder to his Heirs
Femals, he makes a Lease for life and dies, his issue Male releaseth to the
Leasee in Fee with warranty, and he has issue a Daughter, and dies without
leaving assets; this is well executed for ever, and no remedy for the Daughter.

36. A man seized of a Rent, exchangeth the Rent by Deed with another who is
seized of two Manors, for the one of them at the election of him who has the
Rent, and he enters into one of the Manors, and the Tenant of the Land
attorneth to the Grantee of the Rent in the life of the Grantor, this is well
executed.

Of Tenures. X.
What shall be said a Tenure in chief of the King, and what not, and what shall
be said a Tenure by Knights Service of a common person, and what not.

1. THe King gives Lands to one in Fee to hold of him, this shall be a Tenure
in Chief by Knights Service.

2. The same Law, if he give Land to hold of him as of his Crown of England.

3. The King makes a gift in Fee, To have and to hold, sibi and heredibus adeo
libere prout aliquis Tenere potest, and absque aliquo reddendo seu faciendo,
this is Tenure in chief by Knights Service.

4. The King makes a gift of Land, parcel of his Duchy of Lancaster in Fee
to hold in chief, this is not Tenure in Capite.

5. A man holds of the King as of an Honor or Manor, and the King grants
license to his Tenant to enfeoffe I. S. tenendum de Domino Rege in Capite, and
he does so, this is not Tenure in Chief.

6. A man holds of the King as of a Manor, and the King releaseth all his
right to the Tenant, and he accepts the release, he shall hold of the King in
Capite.

7. A man holds Land of the King, as of a Manor, and has a clause of
warranty, with recompense from the King, and he is is impleaded of the Land,
and by aid prier recovereth in value, he shall hold this in Capite of the King.

8. The King is seized of a Manor, and one of the Tenements escheateth to the
King, and he enters and makes a gift in Fee thereof, he shall not hold in
Capite; otherwise it is, if it came for treason.

9. The King seiseth the Temporalties of a Bishop, and one of the Tenants
commits Felony and is attainted, the King seiseth and alieneth in Fee,
tenendum per servicium debitum, he shall hold of the Bishop by the Ancient
Services and not of the King; the same Law, where the King enters for
Mortmaine after the year and the day in default of the mesne Lord and Alians ut
supra; otherwise the Law is where the King enters for an escheat of treason.

10. The King gives Land in Fee to hold of him, to do suit to his Mill or to
cover his Hall, this is not Tenure in chief; but if the Mili or the Hall fall
down, this is Tenure in chief.

11. The King makes a gift in Fee tenendum de domino Rege nunc pro termino
vitae sua in Capite and post, us mortem, as of such a Manor; this is a good
Tenure in Chief, but not after the death of the King.

12. Lord and Tenant, the Lord grants his Services in Fee to the King by Deed
enrolled, the Tenant shall not hold of the King in Chief; the same Law is if
the Seigniory descend to the King from any of his Ancestors.

13. The King, Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, the Mesne holds in Chief, and after
is attainted of Felony, the Tenant shall hold in Chief.

14. Lord, Mesne, and Tenant by Knight Service, the mesnaltie is a Manor and
Seigniory, also the King grants to the Lord all forfeitures of his Tenants, and
after the Lord Grantee is attainted of treason, and after the Mesne is
attainted of treason, the Tenant shall not hold in Chief.

15. If a Signiory in gross elcheat to the King for treason, the Tenant shall
hold in Chief, quare.

16. Lord and Tenant, a stranger recovers the Land against the Tenant in a
praecipe in Capite, yet this Land is not held in Capite of the King, but by
estoppell.

17. The King, Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, the Tenant makes a gift in I aile to
the Mesne, tenendum de Capitali Domino, the Mesualty is holden in Chief as
before.

18. A man holds a Manor of the King, to which a Villain is regardant in
Chief, and he by License of the King aliens the Manor, except the Villain,
the Feoffor shall not hold the Villain in Chief; otherwise it is of an
advowson appendant.

19. The King seized of a Manor, gives part thereof in Fee, this shall not be
Tenure in Capite; the King gives Land of the value of 10. l. per annum
tenendum per fidelitatem tantum in libero socagio and non in Capite, yet he
shall hold in Capite in Socage.

20. The King makes a gift in Tail to hold in Capite, and after grants the
Reversion in Fee, to the same Donee to hold in equality, he shall hold by two
Tenures.

XI.
Of grand Serjeanty and Knights Service.

1. EVery grand Serjeanty implies Knights Service, sed non e contra, for it is
the most noble and great Service that can be done, for it is a personal
Service of attendance about the King Person, and for that.

2. If the King gives Land in Fee ad custodiendum parcum de Woodstock, this is
not grand Serjeanty nor Knight Service.

3. The King gives Lands to a Woman in Fee, to bear the Standard of the King in
War, or to bear his Sword the day of his Coronation, this is not grand
Serjeanty, for that it does not appertain to a Woman; Vide undecimo
Elizabethae. Dyer.

4. The King gives Land in Fee to lead his Gray-hound or to bear his bow when
he goes in hunting, this is grand Serjeanty, but if it be to find to the King
a couple of hounds evety year, this is pettite Serjeanty.

5. The King gives Land tenendum per fidelitatem, and rendering 10. s. this
shall be Tenure in Chivalrie, if the Patent be not pro omnibus servitiis, etc.

6. The King gives Land ad inveniendum custodem Parci de Greenwich, this is not
grand Serjeanty.

7. The King gives Land to find one man to watch in the night in the Castle of
Dover, this is Knight Service, the same Law to watch a Beacon. The same Law if
he give Land to hold in Cornage, or to keep a Castle or Tower within the Realm.

8. The King gives Land to the Mayor and Commalty of London, and to their
Successors to hold in Franck-almoigne, this shall be Tenure by Knight Service
in Capite.

9. The King gives land to be Sheriff of Staffordsh. for ever, this is not
grand Serjeanty.

10. A Feoffment before the Statute of quia emptores to hold by Escuage was
Tenure in Chivalry; the same Law to hold by Knight Service, or by the Service
of a tenth part of a Knights Fee; the same Law to hold by the keeping of the
Castle of B. or by Cornage of the Marches of Scotland or else where.

11. Otherwise it is, if it be to pay 20. s. for the keeping of a Castle or for
Escuage or for Cornage, this is but Socage.

12. A man who holds by Knight Service before the said Statute makes a
Feoffment, to hold by 6. d. and quod de illis debet solvi scutagium cum etc.
quantum pertinet ad tantam terrans; this is but Socage.

13. A man holds by Knight Service, makes a Feoffment without reserving of
any Tenure; this was Tenure in Chivalry, but if he reserve any Rent, or any
anuall Service, it is but Socage.

14. A man makes a Feoffment in Fee, to hold by one penny pro omnibus
servitiis salvo servitio regali, this was Tenure in Chivalry; the same Law if
it be salvo scutagio Domino Regi quando currerit.

15. Lord Mesne and Tenant, the Mesne holds of the Lord by Knight Service,
and the Tenant of the Mesne by Socage, and before the said Statute makes a
Feoffment to hold by 6. d. pro omnibus servitiis salvo forinseco servitio, this
is not Tenure in Chivalry.

16. A man holds at this day by Knight Service, and makes a gift in Tail
reddendo sibi and haeredibus 1. d. pro omnibus servitiis and faciendo Capitaeli
Domino for the Donor, and his heirs servitium debitum, this is Knight Service;
but if he were Tenant in Fee by Knight Service, and before the Statute he had
infeoffed another faciendum Capitali Domino, for the Feoffer and his Heirs,
this was no Tenure of the Feoffor.

17. Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, by Knight Service, and before the Statute, the
Tenant and Mesne by Deed infeoffe a stranger to hold of the Lord Paramount by
the service due, yet he shall hold of the Mesne.

18. Before the Statute, the Tenant infeoffs a stranger to hold of the Feoffer,
or of the chief Lord, this is a good Tenure of either of them at the election
of the Feoffee.

19. Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, the Tenant infeoffes a stranger to hold off the
Lord Paramount, yet he shall hold off the Feoffer, and not of the Lord, nor of
the Mesne.

20. The Lord in Socage encroacheth Knight Service, this does not make a Tenure
by Knight Service, although that the Seisen has been by prescription.

21. A man holds by Knight Service and was disseised, and before the Statute,
he releaseth all his right to the Disseisor without reserving any Tenure he
should have held of the Releasor by Chivalry, quaere.

22. Two joynt-tenants held by Service of Chivalry, and before the Statute make
a Feoffment to hold of the one of them by 1. d. the Feoffee shall hold the
moity of the other by Chilvalry.

XII.
Where the Heir in Knight Service shall be in Ward for his body, and where for
his Land, and where for both, and where not.

1. LOrd and Tenant by Knight Service, the Tenant makes a Lease for life, and
dies, his Heir within age, the body only shall be in Ward.

2. Tenant in Knight Service is disseased, the Diseasor makes a gift in Tail,
the Donee dies seized, and his issue enters, the Desseisee dies, his Heir
within age shall be in Ward for his body.

3. The Tenant disclaimeth in avowry, the Lord recovers in a Writ of Right of
Disclaimer, and before execution the Tenant dies, his Heir within age, he shall
be in Ward for the body, and Land also, if the Lord please.

4. Two Ioynt-tenants unto the Heirs of one of them, he who has the Fee dies,
his Heir within age, the body shall be in Ward to the King, if the Land be held
of him; but if it be holden of a common person, it shall not.

5. The Tenant makes a Lease for life, the Remainder in Fee, he in the
Remainder dies, his Heir within age, he shall not be in Ward to the King nor
to any other during the life of the Leassee, but after the death of the
Leassee, during his none-age, he shall be in Ward for both.

6. The Tenant makes a Lease to the Lord for life, rendering Rent; the Leassor
dies, his Heir within age, he shall be in Ward, for the body, and the Lord
shall have the Rent by retainer.

7. A man gives Landsholden by Knights Service to one, pro scutagio suo
habendum sibi and harebidus de corporo suo, the Donee dies, his issue within
age, he shall be in Ward.

8. Grandfather, Father, and Son, the Grandfather holds by Knights Service,
and makes a gift in Tail to the Father and dies, the Father dies, the son
within age, he shall be in Ward, for the body, but not for the Land.

9. A man has issue a daughter by his Wife, and the Wife dies, Knight Service
Land descends to the issue being within age, the Land shall be in Ward until
the issue come to the age of fourteen years, and no longer, and the body not.

10. The King grants to his Tenant, that when it shall happen that he shall
die, his Heir within age, that he shall be out of Ward for the body and the
Land, he dies, his Heir within age, he shall not be in Ward.

11. The Tenant in Chivalry accepts a Fine of a stranger of the Land in
Tail, to hold off the stranger by Knight Service and dies, his Heir within
age, he shall be in Ward to the Lord for the body and Land.

12. A man makes a Feoffment in Fee to the use of a stranger in Tail, and for
default of such issue, to the use of the right Heir of the Feoffor, the Feoffer
has issue within age and dies, his body shall be Ward.

13. Seignioresse and Tenant inter-marry and have issue, the Tenant dies, his
issue within age, he shall be in Ward for the body and Land.

14. Lord Mesne, and Tenant before 27. H. 8. by Knight Service, the Tenant
makes a Feoffment to the use of the Mesne in Tail without saying more, after
the Statue is made the Mesne dies, his Heir within age, he shall be in Ward
for his body to the Lord Paramount, and for the Land to the Tenant who made the
Feoffment.

15. A Villain Tenant by Chivalry has issue and dies, the issue within age,
the Lord shall have the Ward of the Land, and the Lord of the Villain of the
body.

16. Lord and Feme Jenanx, the Tenant takes Husband, who has a son by
another Wife, and has issue also by his second Wife, and surviveth the Wife,
and holds by the Courtesy the Heir of his Wife within age, he shall not be
in Ward for body nor land, during the life of the Father.

17. The Lord by Knight Service, grants his Seigniory for life, the Remainder
to the Tenant and to a Stranger in Fee, the Tenant attorns and after dies, his
Heir within age, he shall not be in Ward for the body, nor for the land.

18. Lord and Tenant by Knight Service, and the Tenant makes a Feoffment upon
condition, the condition is broken, the Feoffor dies, his Heir within age, the
Heirenters for the condition broken, he shall be in Ward.

19. The Tenant marries his son infra annos nubiles, and dies, and at the
age of Consent he disagreeth, he shall be in Ward; the same Law if he be
married within the age of seven years at the time of the death of his father,
and his wife dies, he shall be in Ward.

20. A Seigniory in Chivalry is granted in Fee upon condition to be performed
of the part of the Grantor, the Tenant attorneth, the condition is performed,
and after the Tenant dies, his Heir within age, the Lord claims the
Seigniory for the condition performed, the Heir shall not be in Ward to the
Grantor, nor Grantee.

21. Tenant in Tail in Chivalry levies a Fine with proclamations in Fee, and
dies, his issue within age, his body shall be in Ward.

22. Tenant in Tail is disseised, and levyeth a Fine sur Conuzans de driot
tantum to the Disseisor with proclamation, and dies within the year, his issue
within age, he shall be in Ward for the body and land.

23. A Seigniory descends of the part of the Father in Fee, and the Tenancy
descends on the part of the Mother, the son dies without issue, the Heir
of the part of the Mother within age, he shall not be in Ward to the Heir of
the part of the Father.

24. A man holds of a Lord by Priority, and of the King as of a Manor by
Posteriority, the King grants the Manor in Fee, the Tenant dies, his Heir
within age, the Lord by Priority shall have the body and land of him holden,
and the Grantee of the King, but the other land.

25. The Tenant has issue a son, who is made a Knight within age, and his
Father dies, his body shall be out of Ward.

26. The Tenant infeoffeth his son and Heir apparent within age, the Lord,
accepts homage of him, the Father dies, he shall be out of Ward.

27. Lord, Mesne and Tenant, the Tenant holds of the Mesne by Priority, who
holds over of the Lord by Priority, and the Tenant holds of another by
Posteriority, the Tenant forjudgeth the Mesne, and dies, his Heir within age,
he shall be in Ward for his body to the Lord Paramount.

28. The Tenant being within age, or of non sane memory See the first part of
the Institutes, 76. b.
makes a Feoffment and dies, and the Heir within age recovereth by dum non
fuit compos mentis, or dum fuit infra aetatem, and enters, he shall not be in
Ward; otherwise if the Heir recovers in an assise of Mortdaxicester against the
Abator, and enters, he shall be in Ward.

29. The issue in Tail recovereth in a formedon, and enters, being within age,
he shall be in Ward for land and body.

30. Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, the Heir of the Tenant is in Ward to the Mesne,
the Lord releaseth to the Heir, he shall not be out of Ward, Quaere.

31. The Tenant infeoffeth another by Collusion, the Feoffee continuando
Collusionem, executes an estate to the Feoffor for term of life, the Remainder
in Tail to the eldest son, and after the Father dies, the son enters
within age, he shall be in Ward for the body and land, without forcing the Lord
to his Writ of Right of Ward.

32. The Tenant infeoffeth another by Collusion to infeoffe the Heir at full
age, and dies, the Feoffee infeoffeth another bona fide, yet the body and land
shall be in Ward.

33. The Heir apparent is retained in Service in the life of his Father, who
dies seized, the Heir shall be in Ward for the body and land.

34. Tenant in Chivalry makes a Lease for life, the Remainder over in Tail,
the Leassee is disseised, the Donor releaseth to him in the Remainder in Fee,
he in the Remainder enters upon the Disseisor upon whose possession the
Leassee for life releaseth his right, and after he dies, leaving the Leassee
his issue within age, he shall be in Ward to the Donor for body and land.

35. Grandfather, Father, and Son, the Father holds an Acre of the King in
Capite by Knight Service, and a Feoffment is made of Land holden of a Common
Lord before 27. H. 8. to the use of the Grandfather and his Wife, and of the
Heirs of the Grandfather, the Grandfather dies, his Wife living, the Father
dies, his son within age, and this is found by office, the King shall have
the Wardship of the land in use by his Prerogative.

36. The Tenant makes a Feoffment by Collusion to defraud his Lord, etc. and
after the Tenant purchases land which is holden of the King in Capite, and
dies, his Heir within age, the King shall have the Wardship of the body and of
all the land.

37. Grandfather, Father, and son within age, the Father disseiseth the
Grandfather, and makes a Feoffment and dies, the Grandfather dies, the son
shall be in Ward for body and land; otherwise, if the Father survive the
Grandfather.

38. Lord, Mesne, and Tenant by Knight Service, the Tenant dies, his Heir
within age, the Mesne seiseth the Ward, and grants it over, and after the
Mesne dies, the said Heir being also his Heir, the Mesnalty only shall be in
Ward to the Lord.

39. Land is given to the Father and son for term of their lives, the Remainder
to the right Heirs of the Father, who dies, the son shall be in Ward for the
body, but not for the Land, Quaere.

XIII.
Where a Will made of all the Land holden by Knight Service shall be good, and
where not: And where a Will made of all the Socage Land shall be good for two
parts, and where otherwise.

1. A Man seized of three Manors of equal value, the one holden of the King
by Knight Service in chief, the others holden of other two Lords by Knight
Service; he devises the two entire Manors, reserving the Manor holden of the
King: this is good for the whole; quaere the fourth Article of the Statute of
32. and quaere the seventh Article of the Act of Explanation if it be not
otherwise declared, that is, two parts of every Manor.

2. A man seized of Land in Fee holden of a Common Lord by Knight Service, and
has not any other Land, devises the whole, this is void for the whole, for
this case is not provided for by the first act, and it is contrary to the
fourth Article in the Act of 34. H. 8.

3. A man seized in Fee makes a Feoffment by License of the next Lord, to hold
of the Feoffor and his heirs in Socage for 10. years, and after by Knight
Service; the Feoffee within the term declares his will of the whole, and dies
within the term, this is good for all for ever. Quaere.

4. A man seized in Fee in Socage, devises the moity thereof only, this is
good; the same Law of a devise of a third or fourth part of Knight Service Land.

5. Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, and each holds of the other by homage, fealty
and a hawk; and the Mesne devises two parts of his Mesnalty, this is void.

6. A man holds in Chivalry a Manor, to which an Advowson is appendant, and
devises two parts of his Manor una cum advocatione; this is void for the
Advowson.

7. A man holds Land in Socage, and after confesses in Court of Record,
where it is found by office, that the Land is holden by Knight Service, and
after makes a devise of the whole Land; this is good.

8. Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, the Tenant holds of the Mesne by Knight Service,
and he over in Socage, the Mesne grants the Mesnalty to the wife of the
Tenant and to her heirs, the husband devises the whole Land and dies, this is
good for the whole.

9. Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, the Tenant holds of the Mesne by Knight Service,
and he over in Socage, the Mesne grants his Mesnalty to a stranger for the life
of the Tenant, the Remainder to the right heirs of the Tenant, he declares his
Will of the whole; this is good.

10. Lord, Mesne, and Feme Tenant ut supra, the Feme takes husband, the Mesne
releaseth to the husband and his heirs, and he dies, the wife declares her
Will of the whole; this is good.

11. A man holds Land by Knight Service, and makes a gift in Tail to hold
by Socage, the tenant in tail makes his Will of the whole, and after
discontinueth in Fee, the Discontinuee makes his will of the whole, this is
good.

12. Lord, Mesne, and tenant, the tenant holds by Knight Service, and the
Mesne, over in Socage, the tenant declares his will of the whole, and after is
disseised, the Mesne releaseth to the Disseisori, the Disseisee reenters, and
dies, this is good for the whole.

13. Grandfather, father, and son, Lord, Mesne, and tenant by Knight Service,
and the Grandfather holds over in Socage, the son declares his Will of the
whole, and after the Grandfather dies, and the son dies; this is a good
Will for the whole.

14. Lord, Mesne, and tenant, the tenant holds in Socage, and he over in
Chivalry, the Tenant declares his Will of the whole, and after is disseised by
the Mesne who makes a Feoffment, the Disseisee reenters, and dies, this is
not good, but for two parts.

15. A man holds land in two Towns of a man by Knight Service, and he holds
over in Socage, the land in one Town of I. S. and in the other Town of another
stranger, the tenant makes his Will of the whole in both the Towns, and after
the stranger distraineth by I. S. for the Services in the one Town, and
brings a Writ of Mesne against his Lord, and forejudgeth the Mesne, and
dies; this is good for the whole in the said Town, whereof the forejudger
was, and of the two parts of the other.

16. Lord, Mesne, and tenant, the tenant holds by Socage, the Mesne by Knight
Service, the tenant declares his Will of the whole, the Mesne dies, the
tenant is his heir and dies, this is good but for two parts.

17. The King gives Land in Fee Tenendum during the life of the Donee by
Socage, and after his decease by Chivalry, the Donee makes his Will of the
whole and dies, this is good but for two parts.

18. The son holds of the Father by Chivalry, and he over by Socage, the
Father disseiseth the son, and declares his Will (that i,) that the Land
shall be sold by the Executors, and dies, the Will is void for all.

19. A man declares of his Socage Land, his Will in this form, that is, he
gives it to I. S. and his heirs for ever, provided that he shall not give or
devise it by his Will, and if he does that, then this Will shall be void, and
dies, the Devisee gives the whole, this is void.

20. The Tenant in Chivalry devises the whole by his Will, and after the Lord
confirms his Estate to hold in Socage during his life, the Devisor dies,
this is not good, but for two parts.

21. Lord, two Mesnes, and tenant, the higher Mesne holds by Socage, and
every one of the others paravaile hold by Knight Service, the tenant devises
the whole Land, the higher Mesne releaseth to him all his right, the Tenant
dies, this is good for the whole.

22. Tenant of a Manor in Ancient Demesne, which is holden by Knights Service,
devises the whole by his Will, and after levieth a Fine at the Common Law sur
Conizance de droyt come ceo, etc. to his own use, and after dies, this is good
for the whole.

23. Tenant in Socage, where by the custom, the wife is dowable of the moity,
has issue two sons by diverse venters and dies, the eldest son enters and
devises the whole and dies without issue, the wife enters into the moity,
this is good for the whole moity presently, and for the reversion of the Dower.

24. A man holds in Socage, and makes a gift in tail to hold by Knight
Service, the Donee devises the whole Land, and after he brings a Writ of
Mesne against the Donor, supposing that he is distreined for fealty by the Lord
Paramount, and the Donee disclaymeth in the Seigniory and in the reversion, the
Donee dies, this is good for the whole of the reversion in Fee-simple after
the tail expired.

25. Lord, two Coparceners Mesnes, and tenant, holds in Chivalry, the Mesne
in Socage, the tenant enfeoffeth one of the Mesnes, she makes a Will of the
whole Land and dies, this is good for the moity for two parts of the other
moity.

26. Lord, Mesne, and tenant ut supra, the Mesne and a stranger disseise the
tenants, and make a Feoffment, the Disseisee reenters and devises the whole,
this is good.

27. Lord, Mesne and tenant, the tenant in Chivalry, and the over in socage,
the Mesne has issue two daughters, the one purchases the Seigniory, the other
the tenancy, and devises it entirely, the Mesne dies, the Devisor dies, for
the one moity this is good, for the two parts of the other moity.

28. Lord, Mesne, and Bishop tenant, each holds of the other by Chivalry, the
Mesne releaseth to the Bishop all his right in the Seigniory, and also in the
tenancy to hold of him in franckalmoign, the Bishop makes a Feoffment, the
Feoffee devises the whole, this is good.

29. The Mesne holds in Chivalry, and he over in socage, the Mesne releaseth
to the tenant, and his heirs all his right in the Land, upon condition that if
the tenant die without issue the Release shall be void, the tenant devises the
whole and dies without issue, this is not good, but for two parts.

30. The Mesne holds ut supra, and he over in Socage, a stranger gets
seisin of escuage, homage and fealty by the hands of the Tenant, upon whose
possession the Mesne Releaseth, and after the Peinor releaseth to the Tenant,
and he makes a Will of the whole and dies, this is good but for two parts.

31. A man holds two Manors of one Lord in Fee by Knight Service of equal
value, and one other Manor of the King in chief in tail, of the value of one
of the other Manors, and makes a devise of both the Manors in Fee-simple and
dies, this is good for the whole.

32. Land is given to a man, and a Feme sole in Fee, and they intermarry, and
after and before the Statute of Quia emptores, they make a gift in Fee to hold
of them, and of their heirs by Chivalry, the husband dies, the wife confirms
the estate of the Tenant to hold in Socage, the Feoffee devises the whole, and
dies, this is good for all, but the third part of the moity.

XIIII.
Where the King or other Lord shall be forced to take the Land in Tail for
their third part, and where not.

1. A Man seized of Land in Fee simple, and also in tail, amounting to a third
part of the Fee-simple, and holds part of the King in Chivalry in Capite,
declares his Will of all this Fee-simple Land, his heir within age, and
inheritable to the Tail, the King shall be chased to take the Tail Land for
Ward, but if no part of his Land be holden of the King, but of another Lord, or
of diverse Lords, the Lord shall not be compelled to take the Tail Land for his
interest of the Ward.

2. A man seized of Fee-simple, holden of the King by Chivalry, and also of
Land in Tail to him and his heirs Females of his body, and has issue a son
and a daughter, and dies, his son within age, the King shall not be compelled
to take the tail, etc.

3. Tenant of the King of Fee-simple in Chief, purchases land to him, and to
the heirs of the body of the father begotten, his father then being dead, after
he has issue a son and dies, the son within age, the King shall take the
Tail, etc.

4. Grandfather, father, and son, the grandfather seized of land in Fee land is
given to the grandfather and to his heirs of the body of the father begotten;
the father dies, the grandfather declares his will of the land in Fee-simple
and dies, the son within age, the King shall have the land Tail.

5. Grandfather, father and son, the father is seized in Fee of land holden
of the King in Capite by Chivalrie; the father gives land to the grandfather
in Tail, that is, to him and his heirs of his body begotten; the grandfather
makes his will of the Fee-simple and dies; the father dies, the son within
age, the King shall take the land Tailed. quaere.

6. Grandfather, father, and son, the father seized in Fee of land holden of
the King by Knight service, land is given to one for life, the remainder to the
heirs of the body of the grandfather begotten; the grandfather dies, the
Leasee dies, the father makes his will of the whole Fee-simple and dies, the
son within age, the King shall be compelled to take the land tail'd.

7. Father and son, the father seized in Fee holden ut supra, disseiseth the
son of land tailed, and declares his will of the Fee-simple land and dies,
the son within age, the King shall not be compelled to the tailed land.

8. Tenant in Tail seized also of Fee-simple is disseised of the land in
Tail, and gives all his Fee-simple and dies, his issue within age, the King
enters into the land intailed, he shall not be forced to take it for Wardship.

9. A man seized in Fee-simple, and purchases land to him, and his son being
within age, and to the heirs of the body of the father, he devises the
Fee-simple, and dies, the King shall not be compelled to take the Wardship of
the lands in Tail.

10. A man seized of land in Fee holden of the King ut supra, and land is given
to him with a woman in frankmarriage, the remainder over in Fee, and they have
issue, the wife dies, the husband devises the land in Fee-simple and dies,
the issue within age, the King shall not take the land in tail; otherwise if
the remainder of the Fee-simple had been given to the husband.

11. A Feme seized of land in Fee simple holden ut supra, and land is given to
her and to the heirs of her body by the donor begotten, and the donor after
marries with her, and they have issue, the donor dies, the wife devises all
the Fee simple, and dies, the issue within age, the King shall be compelled to
take the land tail'd.

12. A man seized in Fee has issue two sons by diverse venters, and
purchases land to him in tail general, and dies seized of all, the elder
son enters and devises the Fee-simple, and dies without issue, the puisne
within age, the King shall not be chased to take it, etc.

13. Tenant in Tail seized of land in Fee-simple holden ut supra, makes a
Lease of the land tailed for term of his own life and a year after, the
remainder to his eldest son in Fee, and devises the whole Fee-simple and
dies his issue within age, after the year the King shall not be chased to
take, etc.

14. A man seized of land in Fee-holden in Chief, and land is given to him for
life, the remainder to his eldest son in Tail, the remainder to the right
heirs of the father, the father makes a feoffment with warranty, and takes
back an estate to him in Tail, and makes a will of all the Fee-simple land
and dies, his son within age, the King shall not be compelled, etc.

15. Tenant in Tail seized also of other land in Fee holden ut supra, has
issue two sons, the eldest is attainted in the life of the father, and has a
Charter of pardon, and after the father devises the whole Fee-simple and
dies, the eldest son within age, the King shall not be forced to take, etc.

16. Grandfather, father, and son, the grandfather seized of diverse parcels of
land, gives part thereof to the father in tail, and after disseiseth the
father, and makes a feoffment with warranty, and takes back an estate to him
in Tail, the father dies, the grandfather devises all his Fee-simple and
dies, the son within age, the King shall not have this land in Ward.

17. A feme seized of land in Fee holden of the King ut supra, purchases land
to her and her husband, and to the heirs betwixt them begotten, and they have
issue and are disseised of the tailed land, the disseisor dies, his heir is in
by descent; the husband dies, the wife declares her will of all the
Fee-simple and dies, the issue within age, who enters presently, the King
shall not have the tailed land in Ward.

18. I. S. seized of land in Fee holden ut supra, land is given to one for term
of life of the said I. S. the remainder to the heirs of the body of the said I.
S. begotten, I. S. purchases the estate of the Leasee and devises the entire
Fee-simple, and has issue and dies, the issue within age, the King shall not
have this land inatiled.

19. A man seized of land in Fee holden of the King in Capite, has issue a son
and a daughter and land is given to the father, and to the heirs males of his
body begotten, the remainder to his heirs females of his body begotten, and
dies seized, the son enters into all, and devises the whole Fee-simple, and
has issue a daughter within age and dies, the King shall not have this land
intailed.

20. A man has issue two sons and dies, the eldest son is seized in Fee, and
land is given to him and to his heirs of his body begotten, he devises the
whole Fee-simple, and dies, the younger son within age; the King shall not
have it, etc.

21. A man seized of land in Fee has issue a son and a daughter by one venture,
and a son by another venture, makes a Lease of a third part of the land to one
for term of life of the eldest son and dies, the eldest son enters into the
residue, and makes a release to the Leasee of all his right in the land, and
devises the entire land residue and dies, the daughter within age, the Leasee
dies, the King shall not have this land for his part.

22. Tenant in tail is seized also of Fee-simple holden, etc. and
discontinueth the Tail to another in Tail, the second donee dies without
issue, his wife privement insent, the donor devises his Fee-simple land, and
dies, his son within age, the issue of the donee is borne, the King shall have
the land tailed.

23. Grandfather, father and son, the grandfather gives part of his
Fee-simple land to the father in tail; the father grants all his estate to a
stranger, upon whose possession the grandfather releaseth in Fee with warranty
accordingly, and dies, the father devises all his Fee-simple, and dies, the
son within age, the King shall have it.

24. A woman seized of land in Fee-simple, takes husband, and they have issue,
and land is given to the husband and wife in tail special, and after by Act
of Parliament it is inacted, that all estates made to the husband shall be
void, the husband dies, the wife devises her entire Fee simple which is
holden of the King and dies, the issue within age, the King shall not be
compelled to take etc.

25. A man seized of land in Fee-simple holden, etc. has issue a son, land
is given to the father and son, and to the heirs of the father, and they join
in a lease for life, the remainder to the son in Tail, the Leasee dies, the
father devises all the other land, and dies, the son within age, the King
shall not have this land, etc.

26. A man is seized in Fee, and land is given to him and his wife, and to
their heirs between them lawfully begotten, the remainder to the right heirs of
the husband; the wife dies without issue, the husband takes another wife, and
has issue, and devises the whole Fee-simple and dies, the issue within age,
the King shall have this land as intailed, and not the Fee-simple.

XV.
Where the King of other Lordin Knight service shall have recompense out of the
two parts devised by reason of Eviction, or determination of their interest in
the third part, and where not; this division is grounded upon 34. H. 8. c. 5.
of Explanation: Article the 18th.

1. LAnds which were first in Ward to K. H. 8. are in Ward to the King that now
is, and are recovered against the infant by default in a formedon or other
action-reall upon a good title, and execution sued accordingly; the King shall
have recompense according to his loss; but if the heir within age, or the true
Lord of whom the land is held tender a Traverse to an office which has found a
false Tenure for the King, and this traverse is found for the party, the King
shall not have any recompense.

2. A praecipe quod reddat is brought against the heir for the land which is
assigned to the lord, and no Town is mentioned in the writ, but the land is
well put in view, and the demandant recovereth upon a good title and enters,
the guardian shall not have recompense.

3. A man recovereth in the common place the lands of the Ward where no
original writ thereof is brought, and enters, the guardian shall have
recompense.

4. A formedone is brought against the heir of the lands in Ward upon a good
title of an ancestour in tail being discontinued, and the demandant recovereth
by trial, and before execution he dies without issue, the donor or his heir
enters upon the guardian, he shall not have recompense.

5. The Guardian in Chivalry grants all his interest in the Ward to another,
against whom the wife of the ancestor of the heir in Ward recovereth in dower,
and has execution; the Grantee shall not have recompense for that he is not
Lord, for the statute gives recompense only to the Lord.

6. A man recovereth against the heir by formedone in the descender, where it
should be in the remainder, but upon good Title, or by writ of Entry in the
post, where it should be within the degrees, and sueth execution, the Lord
shall have recompense.

7. A man recovereth in ancient Demesne by Writ of Right Close, in the nature
of a Writ of Right at the Common Law by default upon a good title, but
sovereignty was taken away, where in truth the land lies out of ancient
Demesne, and sueth execution, the lord shall not have recompense.

8. Land lies in Wales and Durham, and is recovered in the Common Place at
Westminster, and execution sued, the Lord shall not have recompense.

9. A praecipe quod reddat was brough for land in Ward against the father of
the heir, and he voucheth to warranty, and at the summoneas ad warrantizandu^
returned served, the vouchee makes default, whereupon the grande Cape ad
valentiam issues, and the writ returned served; but the Sheriff returns
that the Tenant was dead, and yet judgment was given for the demandant at his
peril, and he enters upon the Guardian; he shall not be recompensed.

10. The land in ward is parcel of a Manor which lies in Bristoll, and out
of it; and Bristoll has a Charter from the Kings Progenitors, that the
Burgesses shall not be impleaded out of the Town for any freehold within the
Town, but shall be impleaded thereof before the Bailiffes there, and the heir
is one of the Burgesses, and is impleaded for the whole Manor in the Common
Place, and a recovery by default, and execution sued; the Lord shall have
recompense.

11. A widow has title of Dower against the Guardian, and she releaseth to him
all the right, and contrary to her release she brings a writ of Right of
Dower against him, and recovereth; he shall not have recompense.

12. A praecipe quod reddat is brought against the heir he voucheth the
Guardian by reason of a warranty mad^ (...) himself, or his ancestor, the
Guardian enters into the warranty; and after the demandant releaseth all his
right to the Tenant, and to the Vouchee, and delivers it to the Vouchee; and
he does not plead it, but acknowledges the action of the demandant, and he
recovereth and enters; the Guardian shall not have recompense.

13. The King has land, for his part, which is holden of another by Chivalry,
and heretofore the Lord brought a writ of Cessavit against I. S. then Tenant
upon a Cesser, and hanging the writ I. S. inseoffeth the father of the Ward,
and the demandant accepts homage of the father, and notwithstanding
recovereth against I. S. and now he enters upon the heir in the possession of
the King; he shall be recompensed.

14. The Lord has a Manor in Ward which extends into two Counties, and
recovery is of the whole Manor in one County, only against the heir or
against his father, and the recoverour enters into the whole; the Lord shall
have no recompense, but for the part well recovered; otherwise it is where an
Assise is brought in D. and makes a Plaint of a Manor, and parcel of a
Manor which lies in S. is put in view, and after the plaintise recovereth and
enters in the land in S. he shall be recompensed.

15. Before the statute of 27 H. 8. the Feoffee to an use was impleaded in a
formedone hanging which writ Cestuy que use enters, and makes a Feoffment to
another to the use of the same Tenant in Fee; and the demandant pursues and
recovereth by default after the statute, the Tenant dies, seized of this and
of other land in Fee, and this land is assigned to the Lord in Ward, upon whom
the recoverour enters; he shall not have recompense.

16. The Tenant in a formedone infeoffeth the father of an infant hanging the
writ, and after the demandant releaseth to the Tenant, and nevertheless he
recovereth by Verdict and Confession; after the Feoffee dies, his heir within
age, and in Ward for this land, into which the recoverour enters, the Lord
shall have recompense.

17. A (...) in a Pr^cipe quod reddat, was had by Verdict against father of an
infant, who was seized in the right of his wife without naming the wife, and
the recoveror enters upon the guardian to execute the recovery; he shall not
have recompense; otherwise the Law is if the recovery were had against the wife
without naming the husband, and she appears and pleads as a woman sole.

18. The father of an infant being by the curresie of the inheritance of the
infant, grants his estate to another upon condition, and after a recovery is
had by default against him in a pracipe quod reddat by a faint title, and after
the condition broken here enters, and dies, and this land is assigned to the
Lord upon whom the recoverour enters; he shall not have recompense.

19. A formedone is brought by an infant upon a discontinuance against the
father of an infant in Ward, hanging which writ a Collateral ancestour of the
demandant releaseth to the Tenant after Verdict, and after the Judgment given;
the ancestour Collateral dies, the Tenant dies seized of other land, and
this land was left to the Lord for Ward, upon whom the demandant enters; he
shall have recompense.

20. A pracipe quod reddat is brought against the father of an infant, who
appears and pleads, that the demandant and a stranger entered into the land,
hanging the writ to the use of the stranger, judgment of the writ; to which
the demandant faith, that the Tenant re-entred, whereupon the Tenant demurreth
in Law, and adjudged for the demandant, and immediately judgment given to
recover, and after the father dies seized: and this land was assigned in Ward,
upon whom the recoverour enters; he shall have recompense.

21. The Guardian in Chivalry has lands in Ward which are holden of him by
several Tenures, and he does wast in one of them, and the heir recovereth
against him in wast, and enters into the whole; the Guardian shall have not
recompense, but he may enter, or have an action for the Tenure which is not
wasted.

22. The heir in Ward is a Bastard eigne, and has a brother maher pursne, a
recovery in a praecipe was had against a Tenant for term of life, by default
where the remainder in Fee was in the father, and before execution the Tenant
for life dies, and the father enters and dies seized of other land, and this
land was assigned to the Lord, upon whom the Recoveror enters, the Lord shall
have recompense.

23. A Cessavit was brought against the Father, the Infant in Ward and he
tenders the arreares, and judgment given that for the Cesser after, the Land
shall incur to the demandant, the Father dies seized of this Land, and
devises all his other Land, and this Land was in Ward, and the services are
not done for two years, whereupon the Lord enters, and ousteth the Guardian,
he shall not have recompense.

24. A Cui in vita, was brought against the Father, the Insant in Ward, he
pleads to the issue, and found for the demandant, and thereupon the Tenant
renders the Land to the demandant in Fee by fine, and after the father dies,
seized of other Land, etc. and this land is assigned to the Lord, and the Widow
enters upon him, he shall not have recompense.

25. A man recovereth against the Father of an infant in a Warrantia Chartae
pro loco and tempore, the Father then being seized of the Land now in Ward, and
after the death of the Father a stranger who has good Title to enter into the
Land which was warranted, enters, upon whom he who recovereth pro loco and
tempore sueth a scire facias to have in value, and by extent recovereth and
enters, he shall have recompense.

26. Tenant in Tail of a Common certain, brings a Quod permittat, against
the Heir, and recovereth against him in the Land which is assigned to the Lord,
and the Reversioner uses the Common, the Lord shall have recompense; yet this
is not any eviction or determination of his interest.

27. A Father of an Infant, by Indenture grants to I. S. and his Heirs, a way
over his Land in eschange for an acre of Land, the Father enters, and the
other uses the way, the Father devises all his Land, relinquishing the acre
eschanged to the Lord, and dies, the Lord enters for the Wardship, the
Grantee is disturbed of the way, and enters upon the Lord, he shall have
recompense.

28. If the part assigned to the Lord be decayed, or surrounded by the sea, yet
the Lord shall not have recompense; the same Law, if the two parts devised be
bettered by improvement in any Manner, so that the part of the Lord is not at
the value of the third part of the whole inheritance, yet the Lord shall not
have recompense.

XVI.
For what Alienation the King shall have a sine for alienation, and for what
not, and where the King shall have a fine for alienation, notwithstanding a
license of alienation, and where not.

1. THe Son and Heir apparent of Tenant of the King in Capite, assigns
Dower of the Land of his Father to his wife ad ostium Ecclesia ox assensu
patris, and after the son is attainted of Felony, and is executed, and the
widow enters upon the Father into the Dower, the King shall have a fine.

2. Tenant of the King in Capite, is sound a Lunatic by Office, whereby the
land is seized, and after he alieneth the Land in Fee by Fine, the King shall
have a Fine for the alienation.

3. Tenant of the King in Capite, dies seized, his heir of full age, which is
found by Office, whereby the Escheator seiseth to the use of the King, after
Primier seisin and before Liver^ sued, he enters and makes a Feoffment, the
King shall not have a Fine for alienation, but after inquisition; otherwise it
is, if the heir alien by Indenture of bargain and sail, enrolled according to
the statute.

4. Tenant of the King in Capite is disseised, and releaseth to the Disseisor,
the King shall have a fine.

5. Tenant of the King, makes a Lease for life by License, and after the
Leasee makes a Feoffment, the Feoffee inseoffeth his Father who dies seized,
and the Feoffee as heir enters, and inseoffeth the Feoffor who was tenant of
the King, the King shall not have a Fine.

6. After the death of the Kings Tenant in Capite, it is found by Office, that
an alien is his daughter, and heir, and of full age, whereby the Land is seized
for the Primier seisin, and before Livery, the heir takes husband, and they
have issue, the wife dies before Livery sued, the King shall have Primier
seisin of the husband as Tenant by the Courtesy, but shall not seize for
alienation.

7. Tenant of the King in Capite alieneth in Fee, and before Office found, he
dies, yet the King shall have a Fine: but if he alien, and the Alienee also
dye before Office found, the King shall not have a Fine.

8. Two joynt-tenants of a Manor holden of the King in Capite in Fee, the one
releaseth to the other, the King shall not have a Fine.

9. Tenant of the King in Capite grants Common out of the Land in Fee, the
King shall not have a Fine.

10. The King, Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, the Mesne releaseth to the tenant all
his right in the Land for years, the King shall have a Fine.

11. Tenant of the King, of a Manor, to which an Advowson is appendant, has
issue three daughters, and dies seized, the daughters make partition of the
Manor, and also of the Advowson, that is, that they shall present by turn, and
this is found by Office, the King shall have a Fine.

12. Tenant of the King in Capite, makes a Lease to one for years upon
condition, that if he within the term kill I. S. who is a Person Outlawed of
Felony, that he shall have Fee, and Livery is made accordingly, and after he
kills I. S. within the term, the King shall not have a Fine.

13. Tenant of the King in Capite, accepts a Fine of a stranger sur Conusaens
do droit come ceo, etc. and continues in possession, the King shall have a
Fine.

14. The heir in Reversion of Tenant by the Courtesy of Land holden in Capite,
grants his Reversion, and before attornment, the Tenant by the Courtesy, by
License grants his estate, and after he attorneth to the grant of the
Reversion, the King shall have a Fine.

15. Tenant of the King in Capite, of an Advowson, grants to one and his
heirs, the rumination of two Clerks, to be made to the Grantor, and (...) heirs
at every avoidance of the Church, the King shall not have a Fine.

16. Tenant of the King in Capite, makes a Lease for life by License, the
Remainder for life, the Remainder over in Fee, he in the Remainder for life,
grants his Remainder to another, and the Tenant attorneth, the King shall not
have a fine, because neither freehold nor inheritance is thereby aliened.

17. Tenant of the King, devises his Land to his wife quandiu sola vixerit,
the King shall have a fine, otherwise, if he devise until she has levied 10.
l. out of the Land.

18. Two Joynt-tenants to them, and to the heirs of one of them in Capite, he
who has the Fee, grants his Reversion in Fee, the King shall not have a fine.

19. Tenant of the King of a Manor, to which a Villain is regardant, alieneth
the Villain in Fee, the King shall not have a fine.

20. The Tenant of a Common Lord, makes a Lease to one for life, the Remainder
to the King by Deed enrolled, the Leassee grants his Estate to another, the
King shall have a fine.

21. Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, the Mesnalty holden of the King in Capite, the
Mesne, and the Tenant eschange the Mesnalty for the Tenancy by Deed, the King
shall not have a fine, and yet the eschange is good.

22. Cestuy que use of Land holden in Capite, infeoffeth one of the Feoffees,
before the Statute, the King shall have a fine.

23. The King grants Land to one in Fee, at this day upon condition, that he
shall not alien without License, he does alien, and this is found by the
Escheator virtute officid, the King may re-enter, or have a fine at his
election.

24. Tenant of the King, suffers himself by Collusion to be impleaded in a
real action, by one who has no title, who recovereth by faint pleading, the
King shall not have a fine, but if the Tenant of the King loses his land by a
recovery in value upon a voucher (...) him, the King shall have a Fine.

25. Two Joynt-tenants in Capite, the one Leaseth his moity for years, the
Remainder for life, or in Fee to his Companion, the King shall not have a Fine.

26. Two Coparceners of the King in Capite, the one infeoffeth the other, the
King shall not have a Fine.

27. Tenant for life, where, the Reversion is in the Tenant of the King in
Capite, surrendreth his estate, the King shall have a Fine.

XVII.
Where the King shall have a fine for Alienation, and what shall be said a good
Pardon for alienation, and what not.

1. KIng H. 8. grants License to his Tenant to alien, and before alienation
he dies, and after he alieneth, the 21 H. 7. 7. b
King shall not have a fine.

2. The King licenceth his Tenant to alien to I. S. in Fee, and he alieneth to
I. S. in Fee Tail, or to the use of the Feoffor, the King shall have a fine.

3. The King licenceth his Tenant to alien twenty Acres, and he alieneth ten
Acres only, the King shall have a Fine.

4. The King licenceth his Tenant to alien in Fee by Deed, and he alieneth
without Deed, the King shall have a Fine.

5. Tenant of the King in Capite, leaseth for years, the Leasee is Outlawed in
a personal action, the King seiseth, and licenceth his Tenant in Reversion to
alien his Reversion, and he does it during the term, the King shall have a Fine.

6. Two Joynt-tenants of the King, and he gives to them license to alien, and
before execution thereof, the one of them dies, the survivor alieneth, the
King shall not have a fine, but if the survivor die, and his heir alien, the
King shall have a fine.

7. The King licenceth his Tenant to alien in Fee, and he alieneth in Fee upon
condition, the King shall have a Fine.

8. Tenant of the King in Socage in Capite devises his Land by Will without
license, the Devisee dies before a Pardon sued, his heir shall not sue a
Pardon without paying the whole value of a year and a half of the third part.

9. Tenant of the King, disposes his Land according to the Statute by Act,
executed in his life without license, the Donee shall not have a pardon of
course for the third part of the value of a year, but he shall pay the value
for a year and a day, by the words of the Statute.

10. The King Lord, Mesne, and Tenant in Capite, the King liceneth the Mesne to
alien the mesualty, and after the tenancy escheateth, the Mesne enters and
alieneth the tedancy, the King shall have a Fine.

XVIII.
What gift, estate, or Conveyance shall be intended to be made by fraud or
Covin, and what not: And where the fraud and Covyn are well found by Office, or
in the Writ of right of Ward, and where not.

1. A Feme sole Tenant of the King in Capite in Knight Service, makes a gift
in Tail to a married man, pro causa matrimonii praelocuti, and the Wife of the
Donee dies, and the Doneresse and he inter-marry, and have issue and the wife
dies, this shall not be intended Covin.

2. Tenant of the King in Capite in Tail, the Remainder over in Fee, they
eschange this Land in Fee for other Land of Tenure, which is of much less
value then the other Land given, which is conveyed to them as the other Land
was; this is a good eschange, and no Covin.

3. Tenant of the King in Capite, being constrained by poverty, infeoffeth his
son and heir apparent in Tail, the Remainder to his second son, the
Remainder to the right heirs of the eldest son, to the intent to find him
sustainance, or for money to the value of the Land; this is not Covin.

4. A man holds Land in Socage only of a Common Lord, and he conveyeth this
by fraud to defraud the Lord of his Relief or Herriot, the Lord shall not take
advantage of this Covin.

5. Tenant of the King seized of diverse parcels, some whereof are holden in
Knight Service, and some in Socage; and not knowing of his Tenure, conveyeth
fraudently an Estate of his Land in Chivalry, thinking that this was his Socage
Land; this shall be said Covin.

6. A man purchases Capite Land at this day, and to the intent to defraud the
King of the Wardship, he joyneth his son and heir in the purchase with him,
in the Remainder in Tail after his decease, with the Remainder in Fee to his
heirs; this is not Covin.

7. An Infant purchases Land holden of the King in Chivalry, and he by fraud
and Covyn suffers a recovery in a Writ of Right upon the Common Voucher, and
the recoveror makes an Estate again to him, with Remainder over to him, who
shall be his heir contrary to the intent of the first Estate; this shall be
Covin.

8. The husband seized of Land in the right of his wife holden in Chivalry, and
he at this day conveyeth Estates in fraud, of this Land, and after the wife
surviveth the husband, an Ancestor collateral of the wife, releaseth to the
Feoffee with warranty, and dies, the Feoffee conveyeth an Estate to a stranger
agreeable to this practice; this shall not he fraud.

9. The Tenant contriveth an Estate in Fee upon Condition, and takes back an
Estate to him for life, the Remainder to his eldest son in Tail, and for
default of such issue, the Remainder to the heirs of the body of the father
begotten, the Remainder over in Fee, to the Lord of whom the Land is holden,
yet this is Covin at the pleasure of the Lord.

10. Tenant of the King in Capite, intending to defraud the King of the
Wardship etc. obtains license of the King to make a Feoffment to two in Fee,
to the use of the Feoffor himself for term of his life, without impeachment of
wast, the Remainder over to his eldest son for life, the Remainder over to
his younger son for life, the Remainder over to the Right heirs of the
father, and these Estates are conveyed accordingly, this shall not be Covin;
but if there be more Lands conveyed in the Deed of execution of the Estate then
are contained in the License, then the Covin shall be averred in the whole.

11. Tenant in Chivalry intending fraud infeoffeth the Lord himself, being an
Infant upon condition, that he shall Convey fraudulent Estates back with the
Remainder over, whereby he shall be defrauded of the Wardship, and the Infant
makes estates accordingly, yet he shall have an averment to this Covin.

12. A man infeoffeth two of his servants bona fide to their own use, for good
service done and to be done, and they by Covin convey diverse fraudulent estates
to their Master with Remainders over, etc. and the Master knowing of their
intent rejoices at it, yet this shall not be fraud.

13. Tenant in Chivalry by Covin etc. makes a Lease for term of a Month to the
Lord by Deed, the Remainder over to diverse others in Fee, upon condition that
they in the Remainder after the Month, shall make fraudulent estates and
Conveyances back, etc. and to this purpose, the Lord is not privey, and the
Deed is read to the Lord, as only to the use of him in the Reversion, and
Livery and Seisin is made to him accordingly, he shall never avoid this by
Covin.

14. The Tenant intending fraud, infeoffeth diverse persons, and puts the
Lord in trust as Attorney to make livery and so he does, yet the Lord shall
avoid this Covin.

15. The Tenant makes a Lease for years to the Lord, and after by fine
conveyeth fraudulent estates, etc. and after the Lord within the term, makes
his Executor and dies, and the executor enter into the term, and after the
Leasor dies, his heir within age, and the term continues, the heir of the
Lord shall not avoid this Covin.

16. Tenant in Chivalry leaseth to the Lord for life, and after grants the
Reversion in Fee to the Villeyn of the Lord, upon condition that he within the
year shall regrant an estate by fraud with the remainder over, etc. the Lord
attorneth to the Villeyn, and after makes wast, and the Villeyn recovereth the
place wasted, and conveyeth the states within the year accordingly, and dies,
his heir within age; the Lord shall not avoid this Covyn.

17. Tenant in Chivalry infeoffeth his son and heir apparent in Fee, being
within age, bona fide and the Lord accepts homage of him, and after the
father dies; yet the Lord may aver this feoffment to be by coven in a writ
of right of Ward: but if the heir were of full age at the time of the
feoffment; and he accepts homage of him in the life of his father, an he in
avowrie for heriot or relief shall not be received to aver Covin.

18. Tenant in Chivalry devises his whole land to his eldest son in Fee, bona
fide, upon condition that he shall pay to his executour the value; yet the Lord
shall have the Wardship of the whole.

19. It is found by Office, that the Tenant of the King by Knight Service in
Capite (for that his eldest son is an Idiot, Lunatique, or who has committed
some unnatural act of ingratitude to his father) assures in his life all his
inheritance in Fee-simple or Fee-Taile to his second son, by estate lawfully
executed, whereby the King has part: the Ward of the King shall not be
entitled to any part thereof by this office, but the assurance is good in law
for the whole.

20. The same law it is, if it be found by office, that for that the eldest son
was Riotous, and of lewd Demeanor; the father in his life gives the land
freely to a stranger in Fee, to the intent to disinherit him and his heirs, and
his blood for ever, without any hope to have the land again.

21. The issue in a right of Ward, is if the conveyance were made by Coven to
defraud the Lord of the Wardship, and it is found by verdict, partly to the
intent to defraud the Lord, and partly for affection, which he did bear to the
Feoffee, the ancestor in his life executes an estate accordingly; this Coven
is not well found.

22. Tenant of the King of Knight service in Capite seized also of other land,
holden of another Lord in Chivalry, and it is found that he made a fradulent
conveyance of the land holden of the other Lord, to the intent to defraud the
right Lord of this Wardship; the King by that shall have the Wardship of the
whole inheritance.

23. Coven is found for the King in one County, and lands in other Counties,
depend upon the same conveyances, and so found; yet this is not sufficient for
the lands in other Counties.

24. Tenant in Chivalry enfeoffeth another by Collusion, the Feoffee in
accomplishment of the Collusion executes an estate to the Feoffor for life,
the remainder in Tail to his eldest son within age, the Feoffor dies, the
heir within age, the Lord may enter in this case without being compelled to his
writ of right of Ward, Quaere 33. H. 6. 14. B. Andrew Woodcocks case.

25. Tenant in Chivalry enfeoffeth another by Collution to the intent to
enfeoff the heir at full age, and dies before the estate executed, and the
Feoffee enfeoffeth another bona fide, yet the Lord in right of the Ward shall
aver this Covin, and recover the whole land.

26. Tenant in Chivalry of a common person enfeoffeth one by Collusion, and
after he purchases land holden in Knight service in Capite, and dies, this
matter is found by office; the King shall have the Wardship of the whole.

27. Tenant in Chivalry seized also of Socage land holden of the same Lord
makes a feoffmenr of the Socage by Collusion, to defraud the Lord of the
relief, and after declares his will of the whole land in Chivalry and dies;
the Lord shall not avoid the will of the whole land by this Collusion but only
of a third part, and of this part the heir shall have the Fee-simple at his
full age, otherwise it is, where the estate is executed in the life of the
Devisor although that it be by Covin.

28. Tenant of the King in Capite conveyeth diverse fraudulent estates to the
intent to defraud the King, etc. And the King grants a pardon for the
alienation, yet the King shall aver the Covin for the Ward.

29. Tenant in Chivalry by fraud infeoffeth one, the Feoffe is disseised, and
after the disseisin he gives notice of the Covin to the disseisor, whereupon
the disseisor and disseisee by deed with a letter of Attorney convey the estate
to the Feoffer with remainder over, etc. this is not Covin.

30. Tenant in Capite by fraud enfeoffeth his daughter upon condition, she is
ravished, and consents to the ravishour, whereby the son and heir of the
Feoffer being within age enters, and the father dies, this is not Collusion.

31. Tenant in Chivalry procures a stranger who has good title of action to
the Land, (but his entry is taken away) to the intent that he shall recover,
and that after the recovery and execution had, he shall convey an estate by
fraud and a recovery is had by confession accordingly, and execution sued, and
estates conveyed accordingly, this cannot be intended and averred for Covin.

32. Tenant in Chivalry by secret Covin enfeoffeth a Villeyn to the intent to
convey fradulent estates etc. the Lord of that Villeyn enters as in land
purchased by his Villeyn, and after the Feoffer himself notifieth the intent
of the feoffment to the Lord of the Villeyn, requiring him to execute the state
accordingly, and so he does, this is not Covin.

XIX.
Where the King shall have the reversion of Tenant in Dower or of the joint
tenant, who surviveth if they die during the minority of the heir of the
Devisor, and where not.

XX
Where the Reversion and title of the Donees, Feoffees, Leasees and Devisees
shall be saved after the interest and title of the King, or other Lord
determined.

XXI.
Where the Donce or Devisee, who has lost the Lands or Tenements to him given
or divised or part thereof, by reason of wardship shall have contribution by
bill in the Chancery against the other Donces or Devisees, and where not.

1. BAstard eigne enters after the death of the ancestor, and being seized
also of other lands by purchase, devises these by his Will to diverse persons,
and the land descended he devises to the Mulier puisne, and dies, his issue
within age, the Lord takes for Wardship part of the land purchased and
devised, and sueth the Mulier for contribution; he shall not have it.

2. An insant makes a feoffment by letter of Attorney: the Feoffee seized of
other land by indeseasible indefeasible title, devises all to several persons
and dies; the land by indefeasible title is devised from the devisee for
Wardship, and after the insant at his full age releaseth all his right to the
devisee of his land, the other shall have contribution.

3. A Disseisor seized also of other land by good title, devises the whole to
several persons and dies, and one of the devisees has part of his land taken
for Wardship, and the devisee of the land whereof the disseisin was made, is
disseised by a stranger, upon whose possession the first Disseisee releaseth
all his right, the other devisees shall have contribution against him.

4. A feoffment is made with warranty to the Feoffee and his Assigns, the
Feoffee is seized also of other lands, devises the whole to driverse persons
severally and dies, the devisee of the land which is warranted is impleaded,
and by voucher recovereth other land in value against the warrantor, and after
one of the other devisees loses by writ of right of Ward, he shall not have
contribution.

5. Leasee for life grants over his estate upon condition, the condition is
broken and the grantee alieneth the land in Fee, whereupon the Leasor enters
for forfeiture, and after he being seized of other lands, devises them to
another and dies, his heir with in age, the devisee enters, and the Guardian
takes part from the devisee, and he sueth for contribution against the Leasee;
he shall not have it.

6. Two joint Tenements, and to the heirs of one of them, he who has the Fee
devises this land to his companion in Fee, and devises his other land to
others who lose by Wardship, he shall not have contribution.

7. A Leasee for life, the remainder for life, the remainder to the right heirs
of the Leasee, the Leasee reciting this estate, grants his Fee-simple by fine
to him in the remainder, etc. He gives and disposes other land to others, and
they lose by Wardship after the death of the Devisor, and he in the remainder
enters, he shall be contributory.

8. A Feme is disseised, the father releaseth to the disseisor with warrantie
and dies; the Feme being inseint, and after is delivered of a son, the
disseisor by deed executed in his life gives this land to the daughter, and
gives other land to another and dies; the other loses his land by Wardship,
and sueth the daughter for contribution; he shall have it.

9. One of the Devisees is impleaded in A pracite quod reddat, by one who has
good title and he disclaimeth whereby the demandant enters and re-enseoffeth
the Devisee; he shall not be contributory.

10. A Lease is made to one for life upon condition, that the Lesee may alien
the land in Fee for the profit of the Leasor, the Leasee alieneth in Fee upon
condition that the alience should immediately enseoffe the alienor for life, the
remainder to the Feoffer in Fee of land of greater value, and so he does; the
alience gives this land in Tail and dies, and the Leasor enters upon the
Donee and re-enseoffeth him, he shall be contributor to the other devisees.

11. A man has issue a son, and a daughter by one venture, and a son by
another, and makes a Lease for life, proviso that the Leasee shall not make
wast, the leasor dies, the leasee makes wast, the eldest son dies without
issue, the younger son enters for the condition broken, and devises this
land amongst other lands and dies, the daughter enters upon the Devisee, and
reenseosseth the same Devisee, he shall not be contributory.

12. An Abator devises his land and dies, the heir within the view, makes
claim to the land, and dares not enter for doubt of Maiheme, and after he
releaseth to the Devisee, he shall be contributory.

13. The Devisee cease for two years and is disseised, the Lord releaseth to
the Disseisor all actions, the Disseisee re-entreth, against whom the Lord
brings a Cessavit, and recovereth the release being pleaded, and enters and
re-enfeoffeth the Devisee, he shall not be contributory.

FINIS.
The Reading of Mr John Brograve of Grayes Inn, made in Summer 1576. upon part
of the Statute of 27. H. 8. C. 10. of uses, concerning Jointures, beginning at
the twelfth Branch thereof.
Division the First.
What shall be said, a puchase of Lands to the husband and wife, and to the
heirs of the husband, by the husband for the Jointure of the wife, by this
Satute, and what not.

1. A Praecipe is brought against Tenant in Fee simple, who prays in aid of
the husband and wife, the husband being attainted of Felony, for that, that the
Reversion is to the husband and wife, and to the heirs of the husband and wife,
the husband barreth the Demandant and dies, the wife agrees, yet this is not
such a purchase etc. which may be for a Jointure.

2. A Mine is given to three men, and a Feme sole, one of them marries with
the Feme, she being excommunicated, one of the others releaseth to the husband
and wife, and to the heirs of the husband, the husband dies, the wife
assenteth; this is a good purchase, etc. and yet the wife is not Tenant for
life.

3. A Reversion depending upon an estate for years, charged with a Rent, is
granted to the King and his wife, and to the heirs of the King, the Tenant
Attorneth to the Queen, the King dies, the Deed is enrolled after the six
Months, the Queen distraineth the Leassee for the Rent; this is a purchase etc.

4. An Alien and I. S. purchase Land in Fee, I. S. dies, this appears of
Record, the Queen reciting this matter, grants the Land to the heir of I. S.
and his wife, she being but ten years of age, the Remainder to the heirs of the
husband, the wife at the age of Consent refuses, and after marries, the
husband dies, this is a purchase etc.

5. Vestura terrae is granted to I. S. and a woman sole I. S. marries a wife
of seven years of age, the Feme grants her part to I. S. and his wife, and a
letter of Attorney to make Livery, the Feme leaseth for years which is expired,
the Attorney makes Livery to the wife, I. S. dies, the wife enters; this is
such a purchase etc.

6. Land is given by a Dean and Chapter of L. to I. D. I. S. and his wife, the
Remainder to I. S. and haeredi suo, the Deane dies, the Attorney makes
Livery, I. S. dies, the wife enters; this is not etc. but if the Deane had not
been named by his name of baptism, although that another had been chosen, when
the estate was executed this should have etc.

7. Father and son, the son purchases a Mill and dies without issue, I.
S. abateth, the Uncle dies, the father enters and pays the Rent to the Lord,
and devises the Mill to the Lord and his Wife, and I. D. and wills that the
Lord shall pay 5. s. to his heir, he enters, the Lord dies; this is such a
purchase etc.

8. Bastard eigne, and mulier puisne, the father dies seized of two Acres, the
mulier enters in one, and the bastard in the other, who dies, his issue
indoweth his mother, who dies, the issue lesseth to the Wife of the mulier for
100 years, si ipsa tam diu vixerit, for etc. the mulier takes another wife,
the issue releaseth to the mulier and his wife, and to the heirs of the mulier,
who dies, the wife enters, this is etc.

9. Husband and Wife, the husband is a lunatic, they bring an action of waste
against Tenant in Tail (with the Fee expeciant) as Tenant for life, supposing
the waste to the disherison of the husband, he pleads the general issue, no
waste is found, Tenant in Tail dies without issue, the husband dies, the
wife enters; this is not etc.

10. I. S. disseiseth one of Land to the value of 20 l. per annum, to the use
of I. D. and his Wife, and the heirs of the Husband, for etc. I. S. grants a
Rent charge of 30 l. the husband enters, the Disseisee releaseth to the Husband
and Wife for a jointure, also the Husband dies, the Wife enters; this is not
etc.

11. A Divorce is betwixt I. S. and his Wife, an appeal is sued, depending,
which Land holden in Capite, descends to I. S. he after Office levyeth a fine
to I. N. and his Wife, and I. N. to I. S. and his Wife for life, etc. and to I.
N. for 10 years, and after to the heirs of I. S. the Divorce is repealed, I. S.
dies, the Wife enters; this is etc.

12. Tenant for life of a Wood, I. S. takes to wife the niece of the Queen,
the Reversion is given to them, and to the heirs of him who shall first
purchase 10. l. per annum, the Reversions of the Manors of D. and S. each of
such value is given to the Husband and Wife, the one to the one, the other to
the other, the Tenant surrendreth to the Husband and Wife, Tenant for life
dies, the Husband dies, the Wife enters; this is a Jointure in the wood
within etc.

13. A. and B. Joynt-tenants in Fee, A. becomes King, to whom B. releaseth to
have and to hold the Land in Fee, the King grants it to Husband and Wife, and
to the heirs of the surviror, the Husband dies, the Wife enters; this is etc.

14. A. and a Feme Joynt-tenants of a Villain for years, intermarry, the
Villain purchases a Reversion depending upon an estate for life. A. grants
this to I. S. and a Feme, for etc. in marriage with I. S. the Remainder to the
heirs of I. S. he marries the Feme of I. D. a Tenant for life, and I. S. dye,
the wife of A. and I. S. enters, this is etc. and yet she shall not have Dower.

15. The King Tenant in Tail grants Land to I. S. in Fee, with Warranty, with
words of recompense, the King dies, his issue grants it to the husband for
life, the Remainder to the Wife for her Jointure, the Remainder to the heirs of
the Husband who dies, the Wife enters; this is not etc.

16. Disseisor of the Manors of D. and S. leaseth the Manor of D. for years,
the Disseisee makes a Lease for years to the Wife of the Manors, the
Remainder to the Husband and Wife, and makes Livery in the Manor of S. and
after releaseth to the husband and Wife, and to the heirs of the husband for
etc. the husband dies, the Wife occupies, this is etc. in both the Manors.

17. Two Joyntenants of an Isle are disseised by A. and B. one releaseth to B.
who wills that his Isle should be sold for payment of his debts, and makes
no Executors, the Ordinary felleth to the Husband and Wife for life, the
Husband dies, the Wife enters, this is etc.

18. Tenant in Tail of the Ville of D. leaseth to his eldest son for life,
and dies, the son grants it to I. S. who has a daughter, Tenant in Tail
dies, I. S. gives the Ville to I. D. who dies, this is pleadable in bar of
Dower, but not averrable for a Jointure.

19. A deaf woman Tenant for life, ^^keth Husband, the Leassor levyeth a Fine
to the Husband and wife, Come ceo etc. the Husband dies, the Wife infeoffeth
the Heir of the husband of parcel, this is etc.

20. Disseisee is married in a chamber, the Disseisor gives in Tail, the
Remainder in Fee, the Disseisee enters upon the issue of the Donee, and makes
a Feoffment upon Condition, the issue enters, the Condition is broken, the
issue dies without issue, he in the Remainder enters, and grants the Land to
the Disseisee and his Wife, and to the heirs of the Husband, the Husband
dies, the Wife enters; this is etc.

I. S. being Contracted, martyeth another wife, and after marryeth her with
whom he was Contracted, he and this Wife exchange Land, which he had in the
right of his Wife, the Husband dies, she agrees to the exchange; this is not
a Jointure although it be averred, etc.

II.
What shall be said an Estate made in Tenements to the Husband and Wife, and to
the Heirs of their bodies, or to the Heirs of one of their bodies, by this
Statute, and what not.

1. A Windmill is Leased to a Woman for years, who takes Husband, he grants
the term upon condition, and for the condition broken enters, the Leassor
releaseth to them and haeredibus suis omnibus masculis, and if they die without
such an Heir, that this shall remain to the Heirs of the Husband, this is etc.

2. A Reversion upon an Estate for years, is devised to the Husband and Wife in
frank-marriage by the Father of the Husband, the Remainder to I. S. in Fee,
Tenant for years surrendreth to the Husband who dies, the Wife enters, this is
etc.

3. An upper Chamber is granted without Deed to A. for life, the Remainder for
life, the Remainder to A. in Fee, A. grants his Estate to him in Remainder and
his Wife and to their Heirs, and if they die without Heirs Males of their
bodies begotten, that then this shall revert, the Husband dies, the Wife
enters, this is etc.

4. An Advowson is given by act of Parliament to Husband and Wife, the
Remainder to the Heirs of the body of the Husband begotten of his Wife, the
Remainder to the Heirs of the body of his Wife begotten by the Husband; this
is etc.

5. The Reversion of Tenant for life, is granted to husband and wife, and to
their heirs males; and if they die without heir of their bodies, that this
shall revert with warranty; Tenant for life surrenders, they are impleaded, and
recover over, and enter, the husband dies, the wife enters; this recovery in
value is not within etc.

6. Father and son, A. devises the Castle of B. to the father in Fee and
dies, I. S. enters and dies, the heir of I. S. devises the land to the
father and his wife, and to their heirs begotten of the body of the wife, the
father enters and dies, the wife enters; this is etc.

7. A Seigniory by Knight Service is given to a Feme Covert, and haeredibus
suis masculis of her body; a Tenancy escheateth, I. S. intrudeth, and dies,
the husband enters and dies his wife takes another husband who enters, this
is etc.

8. Land is given to the husband and wife during the life of A. the remainder
to the heirs of the body of the husband, they infeoffe I. S. rendering Rent to
them and to the heirs of their bodies, and if it be arrear that they shall
enter and detein, the Rent is arrear, the husband dies, the wife enters, this
is not a jointure in the land, nor in the Rent, etc.

9. A Seigniory is given to husband and wife for life; the remainder in Tail
to husband and wife for etc. the Tenant leaseth for life, the remainder to a
Parson and his Successors; the year and day expire; Tenant for life dies, the
Parson enters, the husband ousteth him, and I. S. dies without issue, the
husband dies, the wife enters; this is an estate Tail, etc.

10. Disseisor is disseised, the first Disseisee brings an Assise, the Tenant
voucheth the Disseisor, who enters into the warranty; the demandant releaseth
to him, the Tenant devises the land to him to whom the release is made, and to
his wife in tail without expressing what Tail etc. the husband enters and
dies, the wife enters, this is etc.

11. I. S. By Indenture bargaineth and sells a Dovehouse to husband and wife,
and to their heirs tam diu as they have issue of their bodies; whereas he has
no Dovehouse, I. S. builds one, the husband enters and dies, the wife
enters; this is no Tail in jointure, etc.

12. Disseisee releaseth to the Disseisor of a Rectory upon condition, the
disseisor dies, the condition is broken, the disseisee enters and infeoffeth
I. S. who dies; his heir gives the land to the heir of the disseisor being an
infant, and to his wife, and to the heirs of his body begotten by I. S. the
husband dies, the wife enters; this is etc.

13. A Feme Covert is possessed of a Several piscary for years, the reversion
to the Queen, the husband is outlawed in a personal action, which is
reversed; the Queen reciting this matter grants this land to the husband, and
after releaseth to the wife, and to the heirs of her body for etc. this is etc.

14. Disseisor of a Manor to which a Villeyn is reguardant gives the Manor
etc. to husband and wife, and to their heirs; the Villeyn purchases land in
Tail, the husband enters, the Disseisee enters, the husband dies, the wife
enters, the land purchased by the Villeyn is not etc.

15. Father and son, the father gives land to the son and his wife, and
liberis suis, with warranty to the son and his wife, and to the heirs of
their body for 10 years, they are impleaded within the 10 years, and lose, and
have in value, the years expire, the husband dies, the wife enters, this is
not an estate in Tail for jointure, but for life.

16. Tenant in Tail leaseth by deed to a woman for 40 years, and has issue
and dies, leaving assets, the issue enters, the woman recovereth by writ of
Covenant, she enters and takes husband, the issue releaseth to the husband and
wife, and to their heirs begotten etc. the husband dies; this is not etc.

17. I. S. gives land to A for life, and after to the right heirs of the body
of I. D. who is executed for felony, Tenant for life dies, I. S. enters, the
issue of I. D. recovereth the remainder, by indenture after it is declared that
the recovery was to the use of the recoveror and his wife, and to the heirs of
the body of the recoveror begotten upon his wife and A. G. the recoveror dies,
the wife enters; this is not etc.

18. Disseisor makes a gift in Tail, Ann. 1. H. 8. the Donee has issue and
dies, the issue in 12. Eliz. grants pasture for 10 years to the Disseisee and
his wife, and haredibus duobus of their body, for the jointure of the wife in
consideration of a release from the Disseisee, the issue and the husband die,
the wife uses the pasture; this is not etc.

19. Land is devised to I. S. for life, the remainder to a husband in
frankmarriage for etc. I. S. and the Devisor die, the husband enters and dies,
the wife enters, this is not an Estate made etc.

20. Five acres of land adjoining to the Sea are devised to husband and wife,
and haeredibus suis maseulis for etc. Five other acres adjoining thereunto the
Sea forsakes into which the husband and wife enter; this is not any estate
made in the five acres newly gained etc.

III.
What shall be said an Estate made to the husband and wife for their lives, or
for the life of the wife in hereditaments for a jointure intended by this
statute.

1. LAnd is given to A. and B. and to the heirs of B. B. leaseth this to a Feme
sole for life, the Leasor grants to the said Feme and I. D. common for 10 years
out of the said land during their lives for the jointure of the Leasee, and
after marries her: A. and D. die; this is an estate conveyed for life as an
Hereditament etc.

2. I. S. seized of the Manor of D. a Tenant of the Manor is attainted of
Felony, I. S. grants 10. l. out of the Manor in Fee, and enters into the
Tenancy, and leaseth this to the grantee for life, he grants the Rent to I. S.
and his wife for life for etc. that is to the wife during the life of the
husband, and to the husband during the life of the wife; the husband dies, the
wife agrees to the Rent; this is not etc.

3. The Queen grants a Rent charge of 20. l. out of the Manor of D. to I. S.
in Fee, and bargaineth and sells the Manor to I. D. I. S. grants the Rent to
the husband for life, the remander to the wife, upon condition that the wife,
after the death of the husband, shall pay 10 l. to the grantor for etc. the
husband dies, the wife assenteth; this is etc.

4. A Villeyn is granted by bargain and sale not indented, but omnibus ad qu^s
etc. to the husband and wife during coverture, and after to the survivor for
etc. the husband dies, the deed is introlled within six months, the wife uses
the Villeyn; this is an estate for life etc.

5. I. S. seized of a seigniory in the right of his wife, grants it to the
Tenant, the remainder to husband and wife quans diu se beue gesserint, the
Tenant I. S. and the husband dye, the wife distreineth for the Rent; this is
not etc.

6. A Manor imparked is devised to one and his heirs semales, the Devisor
dies; the Devisee has issue two daughters and dies, the Park is allotted to
the elder, the Manor to the younger; liberty to hunt and to kill a Buck and a
Do is assigned for equality, the younger grants this liberty to the husband
for life, the remainder to the wife until I. S. be promoted to a benefice for
etc. the younger and the husband die, the wife uses this liberty; this is not
etc.

7. Two grant an annuity of 10 l. jointly and severally to I. S. in Fee, who
grants it to husband and wife; to the husband for the life of I. D. to the
wife until one of the sons of I. S. accomplish the age of 21 years for etc.
the husband dies, the wife accepts this annuity; this is etc.

8. I. S. constituteth the Custody of his Park to be an office, and grants
the same office to I. D. for 10 years, the grantor confirms this estate for
20 years, the remainder to his wife for her jointure until he pay to I. S. 20
l. the 20 years expire, the husband dies, the wife uses the office, this is
not etc.

9. The Queen makes livery of a Manor, to which an advowson is appendant cum
pertinent. to the heir being within age, the heir presents, and gives the
advowson to husband and wife in special Tail for etc. the husband dies
without issue, the wife presents; this is not an estate etc.

10. The Master and Scholars of Saint John's in Cambridge grant a Rent charge of
40 s. out of their College, to husband for life, the remainder to the wife for
so many years as she shall live for etc. and after infeoffeth them of the
Manor of D. the husband recovereth in a writ of annuity and dies, the wife
enters, and demands the Rent; this is etc.

11. A. and B. seized of a Rectory, give it rendering Rent, and if it be arrear
that A. shall enter and detein for his life, and after his death the remainder
to his wife, until I. S. takes a wife for etc. I. S. and the husband die, the
wife enters; this is not etc.

12. Lord and Tenant by fealty, and a horse; the Villeyn of the Lord disseiseth
the Tenant, who brings an assise against the Lord and Villeyn; the Lord
disclaimeth, the Tenant enters, the Lord gives his seigniory to the Tenant and
his wife for a year, and sic de anno in annum during their lives, the husband
dies, the wife distraineth; this is not etc.

13. I. S. seized of land of the part of the mother, makes a feoffment
reserving a Corody certain, and dies without issue, the heir of the part of
the mother devises the Corody to I. D. and his heirs, during the life of I. N,
the remainder to his wife in perpetuum to her own use, I. N. and the husband
die; this is an estate made for life etc.

14. Bastard, and mulier, the Bastard enters and grants a Rent charge to the
husband for 10 years, and if the Bastard die during the term, that this shall
remain to the wife for a jointure, the Bastard dies during the term without
issue, the Mulier enters; the husband dies, the wife accepts the Rent, this
is not etc.

15. I. S. has wreck of Sea in the Manor of I. D. by prescription, he grants
this for two years to I. D. and after grants it to Feme Covert, and I N. for
their lives for etc. and before attornment grants it to another, the Tenant
attorneth to the two grantees, the husband dies, the wife claims it, this is
etc.

16. A Prebendary makes a lease of a hundred to Baron and feme and their son
for life, rendering the accustomed rent with a condition for non-payment for
etc. they make partition; the Prebendary, the son, and the husband die; the
Rent is arrear, the successor enters, the wife enters; this is not etc.

17. The Queen reciting, whereas she has manumitted a Villeyn, where in truth
she had not, confirms the manumission, and further does manumit him, and
after grants him to the husband for his life, the remainder to the wife in
forma praedicta, for etc. the husband dies; this is not etc.

18. Son, Tenant for life, the remainder to the father, grants to husband
and wife, that they shall distreyn during their lives for 10 l. annually for
etc. the husband purchases parcel of the land of the father; the father and
the husband die, the wife agrees; this is etc.

19. The Chief Justice of the Common Place being non compos mentis, grants
the office of pregnotoriship to husband and wife for etc. the Chief Justice is
removed, the husband dies, the wife assents to use the office; this is not etc.

20. View of frankpledge is granted to a feme during the life of I. S. she
marries; the grantor grants the said liberty to the husband and wife for
etc. the wife surrendreth her interest, this is etc.

21. Husband and Wife joynt-tenants make a gift in Tail to A. and B. to have
the one moity to A. the other to B. reserving Rent to them and to their heirs
for etc. Livery is made accordingly, the husband and B. die, the wife enters
into the moity, and accepts the Rent; this is not an Estate made for life in
the Rent for a jointure.

IV.
What shall be an Estate or purchase to the Husband and Wife, or to any other
person to the use of the Husband and Wife, or to the use of the Wife in manner
before expressed, and what not.

1. I. S. and I. D. joint-tenants, I. S. releaseth to I. D. in Fee, during the
life of A. S. to the use of I. D. and A. S. who shall be his wife for etc. they
intermarry, I. D. dies, the wife enters; this is etc.

2. Before the Statute of 27. H. 8. I. S. makes a Feoffment by Deed to two,
and to the heirs of one to the use of his last Will, which is annexed to the
Deed, and is to the use of himself and his wife for etc. and after to the use
of I. S. in Fee, the Statute is made, he who has the Fee and the husband die,
the wife enters; this is not etc.

3. Tenant for years rendering rent, the Reversion is granted to I. S. in Tail
to the use of husband and wife, and his heirs begotten of the wife for etc.
before the Statute of 27. Tenant for years grants his Estate to the wife before
attornment I. S. being attainted of Felony, the Statute is made, the husband
dies, the wife claims the rent; this is etc.

4. Land is given to the Bishop of E. in consideration of 20 l. paid by him to
hold to him, his heirs, and successors to the use of I S. and after to the
right heir of I. D. who is in life, and after to the use of the wife of I. S.
for her life for etc. I. S. dies, the wife enters, I. D. dies; this is not
etc.

5. A. and B. Disseisors, the Disseisee releaseth to A. and wills that he
shall take the profits, and deliver them to B. and his wife for her jointure,
the Statute is made, B. and A. die, the wife enters; this is not etc.

6. Cestuy a que use of the Manors of D. and S. wills that his Feoffees
shall make an Estate to I. S. and his wife of the Manor of D. for their lives
for etc. and makes no Executors, after he makes another Will of the Manor of
S. and wills that they shall make an Estate thereof to I. S. and makes
Executors, the Statute is made, I. S. dies, the wife enters into the Manor
of D. this is etc.

7. A Villain is granted to I. S. in Fee before this Statute to the use of
husband and wife for etc. until I. D. grant 10 l. rent to them I. D. dies,
the Villain flies into another County, and is attainted of Felony, and
purchases the Manor of D. I. S. enters, the Villain is executed, the husband
dies, the wife enters into the Manor; this is not etc.

8. Tenant in Tail bargains and sells his Land to I. S. for life, and after
teleaseth to the said, I. S. in Tail to the use of his wife, for her life etc.
the Statute is made, the Tenant in Tail Disseiseth I. S. and makes a
Feoffment, I. S. and the Tenant in Tail dye, the issue of the Tenant in Tail,
and the wife inter-marry, she enters, this is etc.

9. A. recovereth against I. S. without consideration, after it is declared in
an Indenture, that this recovery shall be to the use of A. and she that shall
be his wife for their lives, for etc. A. marries; I. releaseth to the husband
and wife in special Tail, the husband dies, the wife reciting that she is
Tenant in Tail makes a Lease for years; this is not etc.

10. A Seigniory is given to I. S. being attainted of Felony, to the use of the
husband and wife during the life of the wife, for etc. the Tenant is disseised,
the Disseisor cease, I. S. recovereth in a Cessavit against the Disseisor,
and enters, the Statute is made, the husband dies, the Disseisor being within
age marryeth the wife; this is etc.

11. A Villain by assent of the Lord, is inseoffed to the use of the husband
and wife, for etc. before this Statute the Lord enters, and infeoffeth the
Villain, the Statute is made, the husband dies, the wife enters; this is not
etc.

12. I. S. Covenanteth at this day, in consideration of a release made by I. D.
to him not enrolled, that he will stand seized of Lands, which shall be to the
value of 20 l. per annum to the use of I. S. and his wife during their lives
etc. I. S. dies, the wife enters; this is not etc.

13. Husband and Wife levy a fine to two, the husband intends it to the use
of I. D. for life, and after that he shall marry, then to the use of his wife
during her life, for etc. the wife intends it to her self for life, and
after to I. D. he who has the wife dies, I. D. marryeth, the Statute is made,
I. D. dies, the wife enters; this is etc.

14. I. D. is indebted to I. S. in 100 l. payable at Michaelmas, I. S. in
consideration that he shall pay the 100 l. at Midsommer covenanteth by Deed
enrolled that he shall be seized to the use of I. D. for ten years, and after
to the use of the right heir of her whom he shall marry, the ten years
expire, the heir apparent marries, the husband dies, the wife enters, this is
etc.

15. Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, an Infant by Knight Service, and a Hawk yearly;
the Mesne disseiseth the Tenant, and devises the Mesnalty to the parson of D.
to the use of the husband and wife, and the heirs of their body begotten for
etc. and dies, the Tenant enters, the husband dies, the wife distraineth for
the service; this is not etc.

16. I. S. inseoffeth I. D. to the use of the husband and wife, and the heirs
of the husband, for etc. and before the Statute of 27. I. S. enseoffeth the
husband and wife, the Statute is made, the husband dies, the wife enters; this
is etc.

17. I. S. in consideration of affection which he bears to his son,
covenanteth that he and his heirs shall stand seized of Common, which he has
pro omnibus averiis to the use of the son for five years, and after to the
use of the wife of I. D. for life, and after to the use of I. D. her husband
for twenty years, I. D. dies, the wife uses the Common; this is not etc.

18. I. S. covenanteth with I. D. in consideration of a marriage, to be betwixt
A. his son and B. that his Manor of D. after his death shall remain to A. his
son, and B. his wife in Fee, for etc. the Father and A. die, the wife enters;
this is not etc.

19. Husband and Wife, I. S. inseoffeth the husband to the use of the husband
and wife in Tail, for etc. and has issue a bastard, his wife being priviment
insent, and dies, the bastard enters, the Statute is made, the wife enters in
the name of the heir of her husband, and claims her jointure; this is etc.

20. Land is given to a Feme covert in Fee before this Statute, to the use of
I. D. and his wife for their lives, for etc. the wife has issue, and is
attainted of Felony, the King pardons her, the Lord releaseth to the husband,
the wife dies, the Statute is made, I. D. dies, the Lord and Feme intermarry,
the Lord enters; this is not etc.

21. Lord, and Tenant, the Lord grants the Seigniory to the Tenant, and I. S.
to the intent to grant it to husband and wife during their lives, for etc. they
grant it, and deliver the Deed to the wife, the husband disagreeth and dies,
the wife claims it; this is etc.

22. A. Cestuy que use, the Feoffees bargain and sell the Land to I. D. the
Statute is made, A. gives the Land to I. D. in Fee, so long as I. S. has
issue of his body to the use of him self and his wife during their lives, for
etc. I. D. dies, the wife enters; this is etc.

23. Land is given to husband and wife in Fee rendering Rent, to the use of the
husband and wife during their lives, the husband makes a Feoffment upon
condition, and enters for the condition broken, the Statute is made, he dies,
the wife enters; this is etc.

V.
Where the Wife shall have a Jointure and also Dower, notwithstanding this
Statute, and where she shall not have Jointure, neither Dower, notwithstanding
the words of the Statute, that is, any Law, or provision made to the contrary
thereof notwithstanding.

1. I. S. has Land in borough English, and has issue two sons, Land is given
to the elder son and his wife, for their lives rendering rent for etc. and after
the wife of the son is endowed, ex assensu patris, the son dies, the wife
shall have her jointure and this Dower.

2. Dower is assigned ad ostium Ecclesiae, and after Land is given to the
husband for life, the remainder to I. S. and his heirs during the life of I. D.
the remainder to the wife for life for etc. the husband dies, the wife
occupies the Dower, I. S. dies, the wife enters, she shall have this
jointure and Dower also.

3. A Villain is given to husband and wife in frank marriage, the remainder in
Fee to the husband for etc. the father of the husband dies seized of Land in
Fee, I. S. abateth, the husband dies, the wife shall have this jointure, and
Dower of the Land.

4. Land is given to husband and wife for 200 years, if they live so long, for
etc. after which Land is given to the husband in Tail, upon condition that if
he die without issue, the Donor shall enter, the husband dies without issue,
the wife shall have this Land and Dower also.

5. Tenant in Tail of a rent, and Disseisor of the Land, out of which etc.
grants the rent and Land to I. S. with Warranty, the Sheriff extends a I.
ease for years by virtue of an Elegit, as a chattle and devises it to I. S.
and his wife, and I. D. for years, the Disseisee enters, he in reversion
confirms the Estate of the wife for her life, for etc. I. S. and I. D. die,
the wife shall have both Jointure and Dower.

6. Grandfather, father, and son, the father disseiseth the grandfather, and
takes a wife, the father surrendreth certain Coppy-hold land to the use of
himself and his wife, and the heirs of the husband, for etc. the father dies,
the son enters, the grandfather dies, the wife shall have this Jointure and
Dower, but not of this Land.

7. Disseisor grants a rent charge in Fee, to I. S. and is disseised by A. I.
S. takes a wife, the first Disseisee releaseth to A. who pays the rent, I. S.
devises all his Tenements to his wife for her Iointure, having no Tenements
but the rent, and after purchases the Manor of D. and dies, the wife shall
not have this Iointure nor Dower of the rent.

8. Land is devised to A. upon condition that he shall grant a rent of 10 l.
per annum out of it, to I. S. and his wife, for etc. he grants it and dies,
I. S. makes a Feoffment reserving the first 20 years a Rose, and after 20 l.
and dies within the 20 years, the wife brings a Writ of Dower, the Tenant
pleads unques seisique dower, this matter is found, the wife shall have
Iointure and Dower.

9. Land is given to husband and wife in Tail with Warrantie; they loose and
recover in value against him, who has nothing, the husband and I. S. being
Ioint-tenants agree by Deed, that after 5 years ended, they shall hold in
severalty, the husband dies within the 5 years, the wife has Dower assigned,
she shall have both.

10. Disseisor makes a Lease for years, to I. S. the Disseisor and Disseisee
release to him and his heirs so long as D. has issue of his body, Land is
given to I. S. and his wife, and to the heirs of the survivor, for etc. with a
grant that if they are evicted that they shall enter into the Manor of D. and
detain it until they assure so much in value, for etc. the jointure is
evicted, the husband enters, and dies, the wife enters, she shall have this
Land and Dower, and so she should if other Land were assured to her for it.

11. A. grants a rent in Fee, to I. S. who takes wife, the father of the wife
is Disseised, the Disseisor dies, a Collateral Ancestor releaseth with
Warranty, and dies, the father dies, the heir grants the Land to I. S. and his
wife, for etc. the husband dies, his heir brings a Writ of Annuity, the wife
shall have this Land and Dower of the rent.

12. Tenant for life, and he in the Reversion grant a rent charge of 10 l. to
I. S. in Fee, a Seigniory by fealty, and rent is granted to I. S. and his wife,
for etc. the wife elopeth from her husband, the husband dies the Tenant
atturneth to the wife, this is no jointure, and yet she shall not have Dower.

13. It is enacted by Parliament, that all Lands which I. S. purchased, shall
be to the use of I. S. and his heirs; Land is given to I. S. in Fee to the use
of himself, his wife, and his heirs, for etc. the father of I. S. is disseised
and dies, I. S. enters, and dies, the wife shall not have this Jointure nor
Dower of the Land; but Dower of the Land purchased.

14. Lord, and Tenant, the Tenant is attainted of Felony, and commits
treason, for which he is attainted, the Lord enters, and gives the Land to the
Tenant and his wife for years, upon condition that if the Lord does not pay 20
l. to the husband and wife at a certain day, that they shall have it in Tail,
for etc. the husband dies before the day, the money is not paid, this is a
Jointure, and the wife shall not have Dower.

15. A. enseoffeth I. S. and B. and makes Livery to I. S. who takes a wife,
Land is given to them in special Tail, for etc. they levy a fine, I. S.
dies, a pracipe is brought against B. he disclaimes, the heir of I. S. enters,
the wife shall not have Jointure nor Dower of the Land, but of other Land she
shall have Dower.

16. A Signiory is given to husband and wife for their lives, for etc. the
Tenant aliens in Mortmaine, the husband enters and dies, the wife enters, and
challenges Dower, the heir assigns Dower, the wife shall have this Land and
Dower to her assigned.

17. Two Infants enseoffe the husband of one to the use of the wife, for etc.
the other to the use of the husband of her who did limit the use to the other,
the husband dies, the other releaseth to the husband and wife in tail, the
husband dies seized of Land in Fee, the wife brings Dower, he pleads unques
accouple in loyal Matrimony, the Bishop certifieth the contrary, she shall
have Dower and Jointure.

18. A seized of Lands in Gavil-kinde, takes a wife, Tenant for 40. years,
grants his Estate to the wife for 21. years, the Lessor releaseth to the wife
for life upon condition, that if he pay 10 l. at a certain day, that then etc.
the husband dies, she takes another husband, they bring a Writ of Dower, and
are barred, the Lessor pays the money and enters, the wife shall not have
Iointure nor Dower.

19. I. S. disseiseth one to the use of A. Tenant for life, and he in Remainder
in Fee, grant Land to I. S. in Fee, Tenant for life to the use of his wife for
her life, for etc. he in Remainder to the use of I. S. in Fee, I. S. dies, the
heir of A. enters, the wife shall have this Iointure and Dower also.

20. A rent charge issuing out of Lands in several Counties, and in the hands
of several persons is granted to husband for life, the Remainder to his wife
for her life for her Iointure, the husband dies, the Tenant attorns to the
wife, she shall not have this Iointure nor Dower.

VI.
What shall be said a Lawful expulcion or eviction of a Jointure, or any part
thereof by Lawful entry without fraud, or covin, intonded by this Statute,
and what not.

1. Disseisor grants a Rent Charge to husband and wife for their lives etc. and
is disseised, the husband disseiseth A. of 20 Acres, and has issue an Infant,
and dies, the wife assents, A. enters, and dies, the first Disseisee of the
Lands out of which the rent is issuing releaseth to the second Disseisor, this
is an eviction etc. but the wife shall not have Dower of the 20 Acres, but of
the other Land.

2. Land is given to A. and B. and to the heirs of him who shall first marry.
A. grants a rent to husband and wife for their lives etc. before marriage, A.
takes Feme. B. and the husband die, A. dies, the heir of the husband levies a
fine of Land which he had by descent; 5 years passes, the heir of A. denies
the rent, this is not an eviction etc. and if it were, she should have Dower.

3. Land is given to the husband, and I. S. for their lives, for etc. rendering
rent, and if it be behind by the space of one quarter of a year, that then etc.
the husband dies, the wife enter; the rent is demanded the 91 day after the day
of payment, the money is not paid, the Leassor enters, this entry is lawful,
but no such eviction etc.

4. Tenant in Tail Remainder in Fee, grants the Land to Baron and Feme
before marriage for life etc. he in the Remainder disseiseth the husband, an
Ancestor of the wife releaseth with WArranty, Tenant in Tail dies without
issue, the husband and Ancestor die, this is etc.

5. Husband seized in right of his wife of a Manor, to which an Advowson etc.
gives the Manor cum pertinent. to I. S. and his wife in Tail, for etc. the
Tenants do not attorne, the husband, and I. S. die, the Church becomes void,
the wife of the Donor distraineth for the Rents, and presents to the Church,
this is not an eviction whereby she shall have Dower.

6. A man makes a gift in Tail rendering Rent upon condition, a common recovery
is had against him, he who recovereth, opens a Mine, and grants it to the
husband and wife for etc. the rent arreare, the husband dies, the wife agrees,
the Mine is expended, the Donor enters, this is not an eviction etc.

7. A Rent is granted to husband and wife, and to the heirs of the husband, out
of the Land of two Joint-tenants, the one attornes, the other dies, the husband
grants the rent to I. S. and his wife, and to the heirs of the body of the wife
before Marriage, the husband dies, Tenant and his wife intermarry I. S. dies,
this is an eviction etc.

8. Tenant in Tail gives a Message to husband and wife, and I. S. Successive
for etc. according to the Statute, the husband dies, the wife assents, and
after the Message is consumed by tempest, Tenant in Tail dies, the issue
enters, this is not an eviction etc.

9. A recovery is had by I. S. which recovery is had to the use of I. S. until
he shall make a Lease to Baron and Feme for their lives, for etc. and after to
the use of another in Fee, I. S. makes the Lease, the Baron dies, the wife
agrees, part of the Land is gained by the Sea, and a year after, the Sea
forsakes it, the Lessor enters into it, this is not an eviction etc. and yet
the wife shall not have it again.

10. An Infant Tenant in Tail, remainder for life, the remainder in Fee gives
the Land to husband and wife in Tail, for etc. and dies without issue, the
husband dies, the wife agrees, an Ancestor of him in remainder in Fee releaseth
with Warranty, and dies, Tenant for life claims the Land and dies, he in
remainder enters, this is not a lawful entry, and yet the wife shall have
Dower, but she shall have but an Estate for life, and not an Estate Tail.

11. The son disseiseth his Father of Gavel-kinde Land, and Land at the
common Law, and grants it to husband and wife, for their lives etc. the husband
dies, the wife enters, and marryeth the son, the Father and son dies, his
issue enters, this is an eviction, and yet she shall not have Dower but for
parcel of that which is evicted.

12. Disseisor bargains and sells Land to husband and wife, and to the heirs
of the husband for the Jointure of the wife by Indenture, the Disseisee
releaseth to the Disseisor upon condition, the Deed is enrolled, the wife
elopeth from her husband who dies, the wife enters and makes a Lease for
years of part without any rent, the condition is broken, the Disseisee enters,
this is an eviction, but she shall not have Dower.

13. Grandfather, father, and daughter, the daughter disseiseth I. S. and
enfeoffeth the grandfather who dies, the father grants the Land to the
daughter and I. D. her husband for their lives, for etc. the remainder to A.
for life, the father and I. D. die, I. S. marries the daughter, and claims
the Land, this is an eviction, and if she be newly endowed, and this is
evicted, she shall never have Dower.

14. Land is given to A. S. and husband and wife in Fee, the husband before
this Statute gives the Land to A. D. and his wife in Tail, for etc. the
husband and wife die, I. D. dies, the wife enters, this is an eviction for all,
but the wife shall have Dower for no part.

15. Three Joint-tenants, the one releaseth to one of his Companions, he to
whom the release is made grants his part to husband and wife for five years,
and if the husband pay 20 l. at the Feast of Easter, that then they shall have
it for their lives, for etc. he dies before the Feast, the husband tenders the
money and dies, the wife enters, the third Ioint-tenant claims all, this is
not lawful.

16. A man devises Land to I. S. and by the same Will devises it to I. D. and
his wife in perpetuum during their lives for a Iointure etc. and dies. I. S.
releaseth to the wife, the husband dies, the wife enters, I. S. dies, the heir
of the Devisor comes upon the Land, and says that he will sue them for the
Land; this is not an eviction, and she shall not have a Writ of Dower.

17. A man seized of Land of 20 l. per annum takes a wife, A. gives Land to
the value of 20 marks per annum to the husband and wife as long as I. S. has
issue, the husband dies, the wife enters, I. S. dies without issue, A.
marries the wife, this is an eviction, and she shall have a Writ of Dower.

18. A. makes a Lease for life, of 100 Acres parcel of a Manor, and after
enfeoffeth I. S. and his wife of the Manor without Deed. I. S. and his wife
grant the Manor to I. D. for life, the remainder to his wife for her life,
rendering rent for etc. I. S. dies, the wife enters, the wife of I. S. enters,
into the 100 Acres, this is no eviction whereby she shall have a Writ of Dower.

19. Two Ioint-tenants give Land of the value of 20 l. per anuum, to husband
and wife in Tail, for etc. upon condition, that if one of them pay 20 l. at a
certain day, that then he shall enter; the other Ioint-tenant and the husband
build upon the Land, whereby it is improved to the value of 30 l. and die, the
money is paid, he enters, this is an eviction, etc. and the wife shall recover
her Dower to the value of 15 l.

20. Land is given to husband and wife, for their lives before marriage, for
etc. they marry, a praecipe is brought against them, the husband prays in aid
of a stranger, the Leassor enters, the husband dies, this is not such an
expulsion whereby she shall have Dower.

21. A. makes a Lease for years, and after ousteth the Termor, and gives the
Land to a Feme for life before marriage, for etc. the husband and wife are
disseised, the husband dies, the Termor enters, this is a lawful eviction
whereby she shall have Dower.

VII.
What shall be said an expulsion or eviction of her Jointure without fraud or
covin by lawful action, or discontinuance of the husband, and what not, within
the fourteenth Branch of this Act.

1. A Lease for life is made to the husband, the remainder to his wife, and I.
D. successive for their lives, for etc. the husband felleth Trees and (...),
the wife enters, the Vendee cuts them, the Leassor recovers in a Writ of Waste,
and has Execution, this is an eviction by lawful action, and yet the wife
shall not have a Writ of Dower.

2. A Signiory by fealty, and rent is given to Baron and Feme in Tail before
marriage for etc. the remainder in Fee, a Tenancy escheateth, the husband
leaseth the Signiory to A. who recovereth in a Cessavit, and dies, his heir
enters, the husband dies, this is an eviction by lawful action, and the wife
shall recover but an Estate for life to the value of the Tenancy.

3. An Infant having a Reversion, depending upon an Estate for life, disseiseth
Tenant for life, and makes a Feoffment, and at his full age, the Feoffee
gives the Land to him and his wife in Tail for etc. Tenant for life brings
a Writ of entry sur disseisiu and recovers, the husband dies, Tenant for life
releaseth to the wife, this is not an eviction by action, whereby etc.

4. A Lease is made to a Feme for life before marriage, for etc. the remainder
in Fee, a praecipe is brought against the husband and wife, they pray in aid
of a stranger, he in remainder brings entry ad communem legem by covin of the
wife, and recovereth, the husband dies, the wife enters, he who recovereth,
enters; this is not etc.

5. Tenant in Tail of a rent, purchases the Land, out of which etc. in Tail,
and gives it to Baron and Feme for their lives, for etc. 50 years expire,
Tenant in Tail and the husband die, the wife enters, the issue brings a
Formedone of the rent, and recovereth, and is put in execution, this is an
eviction, and the wife shall have to the value of the rent.

6. Land is granted to Feme covert for life, for etc. he in reversion grants it
by fine, the Conusee brings a scire facias, the husband claims Fee, and it
is found against him, whereby judgment is given, the husband dies, the wife
enters, the Recoveror enters, this is not an eviction etc.

7. Tenant after possibility of issue extinct, the remainder for life, is
disseised, and releaseth to the Disseisor, who dies, his heir gives the Land to
husband and wife in Tail for etc. Tenant for life brings a consimili casu,
and recovers, the wife enters; this is not an eviction etc.

8. An Infant gives a Park to a Feme covert for life, for etc. without
impeachment of Waste, the remainder to two men and the heirs of their bodies,
the game is destroyed, the husband dies, the wife enters, they bring a Writ of
Waste, the wife pleads null Waste etc. whereby they recover, this is a lawful
eviction, but she shall not have a Writ of Dower.

9. Land of the value of 20 l. per annum, is granted to a Feme for life,
rendering 10 l. per annum etc. she marryeth, he who has right, recovereth the
Land by Covin of the husband, and has execution, the husband being Tenant in
Tail dies, having Land to the value of 10 l. per annum, the wife shall have it
discharged of the rent.

10. Leassee for life rendering rent, the Leassor disseiseth him, and makes a
Feoffment, the Feoffee dies, his heir gives the Land to the Leassor and his
wife in Tail, for etc. Tenant for life brings a Writ of Entry in the Post,
and recovereth, and has execution, the husband dies, the wife shall have Dower
and shall, recover for her life, the rent not recovered in value.

11. I. D. has issue two sons and dies, the elder son makes a Lease for
years, and has issue a daughter and dies, the younger son ousteth the Termor
and dies, his issue gives the Land to husband and wife for their lives etc.
before marriage, the Termor brings an ejection firm and recovers, and enters,
this is not an eviction by lawful action, but yet the wife shall have Dower.

12. Disseisee gives Land to Husband and Wife rendering Rent, and for
non-payment a re-entry for etc. a praecipe is brought against them by a
stranger, they vouch a stranger, the Disseisee releaseth to the Vouchor, the
Demandant is nonsuit, the Disseisee brings an action by Covin of the
Husband, and recovereth and has Execution, this is a lawful eviction etc. and
the Wife shall recover only for life discharged of the Rent and of the
condition.

13. Land is given to I. S. and to her who shall be his wife before marriage,
they marry, the husband dies, the Wife enters; this is an eviction etc.

14. I. S. seized of Land grants a rent out of it after this Statute to a woman
in Tail, for etc. they marry, the Sea 32. H. 8. cap. 28.
husband bargains and sells the Land to the King who dies, the husband dies,
this is not a discontinuance, and yet the wife shall have an action to recover
Dower.

15. Land is given to I. S. for life, the Remainder to her who shall be his
wife for life, for etc. before this Statute, they inter-marry, the Husband
gives the Land to a stranger in Fee, who dies, the husband dies, this is an
eviction by discontinuance, and the wife shall have Dower.

16. Land is given to Baron and Feme before this Statute in Tail, for etc. the
Husband before this Statute enfeoffeth the Donor, and I. S. the Donor, and the
Husband die, this is an eviction by discontinuance, wherefore etc.

17. Land is given to I. S. and a Feme sole for their lives, for etc. the Feme
marryeth, I. S. makes a Feoffment upon condition, and enters for condition
broken, the husband purchases the Reversion. I. S. dies, the husband enters,
and grants a moity to one for years, and if he pay 20 l. at Michaelmas, that
he shall have Fee, the Husband dies before the day, the money is paid, this is
etc.

18. Land is given to a Feme before Coverture for life, for etc. the Remainder
to the right Heirs of I. S. who is in life, the Husband being an Infant, gives
the Land to I. D. for the life of the Wife, the Remainder in Fee, the Husband
dies, this is no eviction by discontinuance, whereby, etc.

19. Land is given to a Feme before coverture for life, for etc. he who shall
be her Husband disseiseth her, she marries, the Husband makes a Lease to A. for
life, and grants the Reversion to B. in Fee, who grants it to C. A. and the
Husband dies; this is etc.

20. Land is given to I. S. and his wife before coverture, in Tail, for etc.
the Remainder to the King, the Husband is non compos mentis, and levieth a fine
before this Statute, and dies, this is an eviction by discontinuance.

21. Land is given to I. S. for life, the Leassor disseiseth him and gives the
Land before coverture to the wife for life, for etc. a stranger confirms her
Estate with Wartanty, I. S. brings a praecipe and recovereth, the wife has
in value, the Husband and he in Reversion make a Feoffment before the Statute,
the Husband dies; this is not an eviction by discontinuance of the Jointure,
and yet she shall recover Dower.

VIII.
What shall be said a Jointure assured before Marriage, and what shall be a
Jointure assured after Marriage etc.

1. A Signiory by fealty, and rent before Marriage is granted to Baron and Feme
for etc. they marry, a Tenancie escheateth, the husband enters and dies, this
is a Jointure in the Tenancy assured before marriage.

2. I. S. contracts with A. and before marriage concludes with B. that he will
recover the Manor of D. and that this shall be to them in Tail for etc. B.
brings a Writ of Entry which is returned, they marry, B. recovereth, and
enters, this is a Ioynture after marriage.

3. I. S. Leaseth to two for years rendering Rent, and grants the Reversion to
Husband and Wife for their lives for etc. one Attorneth before marriage, and
the other after marriage, this a good Ioynture before marriage.

4. I. S. Gives Lands in Tail to Baron and Feme before marriage with Warranty,
for etc. they are impleaded and loose and have in value after marriage, this is
a Ioynture assured before marriage in the Land recovered in value.

5. I. S. enfeoffeth I. D. to the use of himself until he marry, and after
that he marries, then to the use of her who shall be his wife for her life,
for etc. this is a Ioynture after marriage etc.

6. I. S. grants Land to a Feme for 10 years, and if he after marry her, then
she shall have it for her life, for etc. they marry; this is a Ioynture before
marriage.

7. I. S. in consideration of a marriage to be had betwixt him and A. S.
covenanteth, that he shall be seized to the use of him and the said A. for
their lives, for etc. they intermarry, the Deed is enrolled; this is a Ioynture
before marriage.

8. After affiance betwixt I. S. and A. S. they conclude that a fine shall be
leavied of the Manor of D. for etc. the Note is acknowledged before the Chief
Justice, they marry, and after a Writ of Covenant is brought, and a fine
levied, this is a Ioynture after marriage.

9. I. S. and A. marry before years of consent, Land is given to them for their
lives, for etc. at the years of consent they agree, this is a Ioynture after
marriage.

10. I. S. makes a Deed of Feoffment to A. with a Letter of Attorney, which
Feoffment A. does express to be to the use of himself, and her who shall be
his wife for their lives, for etc. they marry, the Attorney makes livery, this
is a Ioynture after marriage.

11. I. S. disseiseth one to the use of A. and B. whom he intends shall marry
for a Iointure etc. A. and B. enter, and after the Disseisee releaseth to the
wife for her Ioynture, this is a Ioynture after marriage.

12. Land is given to A. S. and her who shall be his wife, for etc. they marry,
the wife enters, this is a Ioynture in the moity, which she shall have by
survivor, and before marriage.

13. A. devises that his Executor shall give the Manor of D. to I. S. and A.
D. who shall be his wife for their lives, for etc. they intermarry, the
Executor grants the Manor accordingly, this is a Ioynture before marriage.

IX.
What shall be said a refusal of her Jointure intended by the Statute, and
what not; what shall be said an agreement etc. and when the refusal to the
agreement shall be peremtory to the party, although an Infant or a Feme Covert.
Refusal and agreement ought to be certain, and cannot be by implication where
it stands indifferent.

1. LAnd is assured during the coverture to Baron and Feme for their lives, for
etc. the wife enters not, a praecipe is brought against her, she disclaimeth,
or pleads non-Tenure; this is a refusal of the Ioynture.

2. Land is given to husband and wife for their lives, for etc. the husband
dies, the wife brings a Writ of Dower, and appears in person, or by
Attorney authorized; this is a refusal; otherwise if she does not appear in
person nor by Atterney, and if she sue the Writ, and the Tenant is not
summoned; this is no refusal; otherwise if the Tenant were summoned.

3. Land is assured to husband and wife for etc. the heir comes to the wife,
and demands if she will have her Ioynture, and she says that she will not have
it; or if she say so to a stranger, this is not a refusal peremptory, but if
she says so upon the Land whereof she is Dowable to the heir, and prays him
that he will assign her Dower; this is a refusal peremtory to the Ioynture etc.

4. A house is assured to a husband and wife for etc. the wife immediately upon
the death of her husband, departs from the house which was assured, to
another house; this is no refusal.

5. Land is given to husband and wife, rendering Rent for etc. the husband
dies, the Rent being arreare is demanded, the wife refuses to pay it, yet
this is not a refusal of the Ioynture.

X.
What is an agreement, and how this ought to be after Coverture.

1. LAnd is given to Husband and wife for their lives etc. the husband and wife
levy a fine to a stranger, the husband dies; this is no agreement etc.

2. Land is given to Husband and wife being Infants, for etc. the husband dies,
the wife being within age takes another husband, she takes the profits, or
makes a Lease before Entry, or grants a rent out of it; this is etc.

3. Land is given to husband and wife for etc. he dies, the wife before entry
grants a Rent out of all her Land in D. where she has no other Land, but her
Iointure there, yet this is no agreement. But if she grant a Rent out of her
Jointure specially; this is an agreement.

4. Land is given to husband and wife for etc. the husband dies. The wife
before Entry surrendreth to the heir of the husband; this is an agreement etc.
so an Attornment is an agreement, etc.

FINIS.
The Reading of Thomas Risden in the Inner Temple, made in the 20th year of the
Reign of our late Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, upon the Statute of 8. H. 6.
chap. 9. of forcible Entry etc.
AT the Common Law before the making of any of the Statutes of forcible Entry,
every man might have entered into Lands or Tenements with force, and might have
also detained them with force upon good title, and no way punishable, as well
as a man at this day upon good title may take and detain his goods and
Chattels out of the possession of a stranger with force, and the effect of the
issue in Trespass thereupon brought, was upon the title of the Parties, and if
found for the Plantiffe, he was by that excused of the force; but then if any
man were found guilty of any such Entry with force, the Justices would assesse
a greater fine in that Case, then for other common trespasses: And the same Law
also was before any Statute thereof made, that if any man were killed, maimed,
or grievously wounded, upon such forcible Entries, Constables and other
officers of the King might arrest them, and carry them to prison: but if no
such act done as murder, manslaughter or the like mischief, then had not the
officers any thing to do with the matter, although they were present at the
same time: And thereupon comes the Statute of 5. R. 2. cap. 7. which Statute
in a manner prohibiteth, that it shall not be lawful for any man to enter into
any Lands or Tenements with force, although his Entry be lawful; and this
Statute makes force material in any action thereupon brought: but yet this
Statute does not give any power to the Justices of Peace to meddle with any
such forcible Entry, except by a general enquiry thereof made in their
Sessions of Peace, and not otherwise; whereupon came the Statute of 15. R. 2.
chap. 2. and thereby it is ordained, that if any man enter into Lands or
Tenements with sorce, and detain also with force, that after this Entry, the
Justices or one of them within the same County come with the power of the
County, and view the place of such forcible Entry made, and if the same
Justices find any men holding the same place with force, that then they shall
take them and commit them to the Goal as persons convicted of forcible Entry
by their Record, there to continue until they have made a fine at the
discretion of the same Justices: which Statute notwithstanding, there remained
diverse other defects not remedied thereby; for no remedy was given against them
by the said Statute who enter peaceably, and after their Entry detain with
force; neither is there any remedy given if the persons who entered, be gone
away before the coming of the Justices, nor no pain ordained by this Statute
against the Sheriff, if he will not execute the precept of the Justices when
they or any of them will inquire of any matter: neither was the party by the
said Statute to have any manner of restitution, whereupon this Statute of 8. H
6. chap. 9. was made, which provideth remedy as well for those defects before
remembered, as for the matters here ensuing, as it appears by the letter of
the same Statute, the which Statute also makes the force material as by the
Statute of 5. R. 2. as well by way of inquiry, as by action; so every Party
ought to mention the force in their several Pleas, but yet in any action
brought thereupon, if the parties join their issue upon their special
pleading, then such issue shall be always upon the title, and not upon the
force, and for that if the title be found for the Plantiffe, the Defendant is
ipso facto convicted of the force, and if it be found for the Defendant, he is
also excused of the force, and in none of the said Cases the force is
inquireable, but the title found with the one or other makes an end of all as
to the parties, or for any thing which accrueth by the using of such an action,
wherein it varieth in some thing from the Statute of 5. R. 2. but yet he that
commits the force shall make a fine to the King notwithstanding this title,
and also in the same action, if it be in a general issue, the force shall be
inquired, although the title be found for the one or other, and so the
diversity is; but now this Statute of 8. H. 6. c. 9. that from henceforth if
any make such forcible Entry etc. by which words in the first branch of this
Statute, there was no only like Law for the Entry and also detainer with
force, as is by the statute of 15. R. 2. but also for Entry, which is made in
peaceable manner, and after detained with force etc. upon which words in the
first branch of this Statute, I intend with your patience to show to you my
simple conceit.

I.
What shall be said a forcible Entry by this first branch of this Statute, and
what not; what also shall be said a detaining with force within the purview of
this Statute, and what not; and then who shall be said a Party grieved to make
complaint, and tender the costs by this first branch etc. and who not.

1. IF two men or more be in harnish, and having also in their hands sundry
weapons, who enter the house of another, to have the possession thereof;
whereupon the party departs a far of without any other violence to him
done; this is a forcible Entry within the purview of this Statute, See 11. H.
4. 14.

2. But if two men or more being arrayed in harnish, and weapons, enter the
house of another by the door being open, and it is not known to what intent,
and thereupon the parties aforesaid notwithstanding the Tenants are remaining
in quiet without violence used, this is not any forcible Entry etc.

3. If two or more enter the house of another in peaceable manner by the door
being open, and upon their Entry, with force and violence against the will of
the party put him out of possession, this is a forcible Entry by this Statute.

4. If one sole person break the house of another, and enter by the windows
against the will of the Owner, and thereupon he threatens the party, whereby
for doubt he forsakes the house; this is a forcibly entry.

5. If a forcible Entry be made in the house of another for to fight with the
party there dwelling, whereupon he for doubt departs thence, and his enemies
also; this is not a forcible Entry etc.

6. If a man make a Lease for life, and after grant the Reversion to the same
Lessee upon condition, which is broken on the part of the Lessee and thereupon
the Leasor enters with force to gain the possession of the Land; this is a
forcible Entry etc.

7. The same Law is, if one alien in Fee, and the Lessor dies before any entry
made, his son and heir enters with force for this condition broken in the
life of his father; this is also a forcible entry etc.

8. But if the Lessor enter with force to see if waste be made by the Lessee;
this is not forcible entry by this Statute, although that he remain there all
the day and night after.

9. The same Law where the Lord distraineth for rent, where none is arrear, and
that notwithstanding with force; yet this is not any forcible entry etc.

10. If two or more are fighting in a house the door being shut, whereupon
others enter, and break it to see the Peace kept; this is not any forcible
entry within this Statute.

11. The same Law is, if they are so fighting in the street at large, whereby
one of them is hurt, and in jeapordy of his life, whereupon he who hurt him
flies into a house, and shuts the door after him, others there present
pursue him, and break the house to take him; this is not a forcible entry
within this Statute.

12. But if no such jeapordy of his life be, then they cannot break the house
to imprison him, although it be done upon fresh suit; otherwise it is in the
same Case if the door he open.

13. If the Jailer, or the Sheriff bring the Prisoners out of the common Prison
to his own house, and for the safeguard of them he keeps a force within his
house; this is not any keeping with force etc.

14. If the Justices of Peace upon complaint to them made, come to the place
where the force was, and find the door shut, and within the house there is but
one sole person, who will not open the door, and suffer the Justices to come
in; this is a detainer with force etc.

15. But if the Justices of Peace come to the house where the force was, not
coming for that, but for other business, who view the force, and the door of
the house is shut when they come, and they within the house will not suffer
them to enter, yet this not any detaining with force within etc.

16. If the Justices of peace come to the place where the force was, and there
find some persons arrayed in harnish; this is a force by the Statute.

17. The same Law, if they are not so arrayed in harnish, but the harnish lying
with them within the same house; this is a detainer with force etc.

18. If a man has two houses near adjoining, the one by a good title, the
other by a defeasible title, he keeps a force in the first house to beat
them, who would enter into the house by defeasible title; this is a detaining
with force within etc.

19. If a man puts another out of his house by force, and thereupon puts
in one of his servants in peaceable manner, and holds the party so put out of
possession in prison; this is not a detainer with force within etc.

20. If a man claims Common to any Land, and the Land is detained with force
when he would use his Common, or distraine for his rent; this is a detaining
with force.

21. But if a man has a Warren in other Land, and the Land is detained with
force when he would use this Warren; this is no detaining etc.

22. If a man hear that certain Fellows will come to his house to kill, beat,
or rob him, whereupon he assembleth a force to assist him, in safeguard of his
person or his goods; this is no detaining with force within etc.

23. But if he hears that they will come there to take possession of his
house, whereupon he assembleth a force to defend his possession; this is a
detaining with force within this Statute.

24. If a man will enter the Park of another, to distraine his game there,
whereby the Owner of the Park keeps him out with force; this is not a
detainer with force etc.

25. If Tenant by Knight Service makes a Feoffment upon condition and dies,
his heir within age who performs the condition, and enters into the Lands,
whereupon the Lord seiseth him for his Ward, and defends that house where the
Ward is, with sorce against others who claim him for their Ward; this is no
detainer with force, etc.

26. If in time of War a man enters into the Land of another adjoining to the
Sea, and there remains with force to defend the Realm from Enemies; this is
no detaining with force etc.

27. If a man has a rent issuing out of the Land of another, which Land is
detained with force when he would distrain for his rent arrear, he who is so
disturbed of this rent, is no party grieved by this first branch of this
Statute.

28. A man seized of certain Land, to which Common is appendant, is disseised
of the Common, and then aliens the Land to his son and dies, after which the
Land out of which this Common is issuing is detained with force; the son is
not a party grieved by this Statute.

29. If after the death of the father, a stranger enters by abatement into the
Land, and holds with force, the son is not a party grieved within etc.

30. If a man be seized of Land in which such a forcible entry is made, and
after dies before any complaint thereof made; his son and heir is not a
party grieved by this Statute to make complaint etc.

31. If a man make a Lease for five years upon condition, that if within the
first two years, the Leassee pay to him 10 l. that then he shall have Fee, and
Livery is made accordingly, there if any such forcible entry be committed
within the five years, although that the condition be not performed; yet the
Leassee is a party grieved by this Statute.

32. A man possessed of a Term, makes the heirs of I. S. his Executors and
dies, the said I. S. being also then dead, leaving issue a daughter, his wife
inseint with another daughter, the first enters into the Land, after which the
other is born, and then such a force is committed; both the daughters are
parties grieved by this Statute.

33. A man devises Land by his last Will and dies, and before any entry made
by the Devisee, such a forcible entry is made; the Devisee is not a party
griveved by this Statute.

34. If a man enter by disseisin to the use of another, who after agrees
thereunto, and a forcible entry is made, neither the one, nor the other is a
party grieved by this Statute.

35. If one enter by disseisin to the use of an Infant, who thereunto agrees,
and then such a forcible entry is made; yet the Infant is not a party grieved
by this Statute.

IN my first Reading, I have showed unto you upon the words in the first branch
of this Statute, what shall be said a forcible Entry by this Statute, and what
not, and also what shall be said a detainer with force within the purview etc.
and what not, and then who shall be said to be a party grieved to make
complaint, and who not: And for that, that the Statute in the first branch
goes further, and Ordains, that the Justices of peace, or one of them, upon
such forcible Entry, or detainer with force shall duly make Execution of the
said Statute of 15. R. 2. for if they do not come with sufficient power, that
then they shall take to them the force and power of the County to view the
place where the forcible Entry was made, and there finding any men holding the
same place with force, that then they shall take them and commit them to the
Jail as persons convicted of forcible Entry by their Record, there to continue
until they have made a fine at the discretion of the same Justices, upon which
words in the first branch, I intend with your patience to show unto you this
day my conceit.

II.
What manner of persons are bound to go with the Justices to remove the force,
and what not, and how they shall be required and taken to do it, and their
punishment upon refusal; and where upon the view of a force detained within
this Statute, the Justices may remove them, and where not; then where the
Justices upon such a view may arrest and commit the offenders to prison, and
where not; and who shall be said offenders, and punishable by this Statute, and
who not; and also upon a force committed within the purview of this Statute,
the Justices may Record it, and where not, and of what force such a Record
shall be, being so made.

1. A man attainted of Felony, or convicted of Heresy, upon request made, is
compellable to go with the Justices to remove a force.

2. A man who is condemned by judgment in a praemunire, and who has abjured
the Realm, yet he is not bound to go before request with the Justices to
remove etc.

3. But if he who has abjured the Realm goes not to the Port with speed as he
has abjured to do, then upon request he is bound to go with the Justices to
remove a force by this Statute.

4. An alien born, and not made a denizen, or a man who is of non-sane memory,
is not bound to go with the Justices to remove a force by this Statute.

5. An Infant within the age of 14 years, or any woman sole or covert, are not
bound by this Statute to go with the Justices to remove a force.

6. Every Apprentice, Servant, Villain or in guard, are also bound upon lawful
request to go with the Justices by this Statute to remove a force.

7. Dukes, Earls, Barons, and all manner of Lords are also bound to go with
the Justices by this Statute to remove a force.

8. A man who is in prison, or let out by bail to others for debt, or
trespass, is not bound by this Statute to go etc.

9. But he that is let out by Maine-prise before request, is bound to go with
the Justices etc.

10. If Hue and Cry be made at one end of the Town, and the justices require
them at another end of the Town, they are bound to go with the Justices to
remove a force by this Statute.

11. But if they have taken a Fellon upon such a Hue and Cry, or that they are
in pursuit of a fellon at the time of the request, then they are not bound to
go with the Justices to remove a force hy this statute.

12. If the Sheriff, Constable, or Bayliffe, by commandment of the Justices,
without any Warrant, Process, or Precept in writing, require any person to go
with the Justices to remove a force, they are not bound to do it by this
statute.

13. An officer (although that he has sufficient authority so to require them)
yet he cannot arrest or imprison them upon theit refusal by this Statute.

14. But the Justices themselves may require them being in their presence by
word only, without matter in writing, and upon their refusal imprison them,
and assesse a fine etc.

15. If a forcible entry, and detainer with force be made upon the possession
of a Justice of Peace, he himself upon the view of it, cannot remove the force.

16. But if upon such a force committed, they also assault the Justice
himself, then he may upon such assault commit them to prison.

17. If one part of the house which is detained with force, be in one County,
and the other in another County, and when the Justices come to remove the
force, and before they can arrest them, they go into the other part of the
house which is in another County, there they cannot remove the force, by this
etc.

18. If a man enter the house of another with force, and thereupon as they are
fighting together with the owner of the house which of them shall have the
possession thereof, the Justices come to remove the force, there they may
remove the force with the Owner of the house, but not the house.

19. If a man enters the house of another, and expels the Owner of the
house, to one of part or end of the said house, and he who so enters detaineth
the house with force, the Justices being there, may remove the force, and
commit the offender to prison by this Statute.

20. The same Law is, if a house be in one County, in which there are men in
harnish to beat them, who will enter into a house which he had also near
adjoining in another County, the Justices upon the view thereof, may also
remove this force by this Statute.

21. But if both houses so near adjoining are within one and the same County,
then the Justices may remove upon the view, and commit the offenders to prison
by this Statute.

22. If the Justices are present in the same place upon other business where
such a forcible entry is to be made, the Justices when they are informed
thereof, and before any detainer cannot arrest them, and commit them to prison
by this Statute.

23. If the Justices come to remove a force, and upon arrest made the offenders
escape into another County, the Justices cannot arrest them, nor commit them to
prison by this Statute although it be upon fresh suit.

24. But if the Justices upon their coming to remove a force, and before any
arrest made, the offenders escape into another County, the Justices there upon
fresh suit may arrest them, but not commit them to prison: but if they were in
a Fortelet or Castle within the same County, then the Justices upon fresh suit
may arrest, and commit them to the Goal by this Statute.

25. If Justices come to remove a force, and the offenders before any arrest
make an escape for that time, but the morning after they are brought back
again before the same Justices to the same place by virtue of their precept,
yet they cannot commit them, by force of this Statute.

26. The same Law is, if the offenders before arrest escape for that time, and
after on the same day, the Justices meet them in another place yet they cannot
commit them to prison by this Statute.

27. If the Justices in going to remove a force meet some of the offenders by
the way in harnish, yet the Justices cannot arrest them, nor etc.

28. The same Law, if the Justices meet some in harnish which are going to the
said place to detain with force, yet they cannot arrest them, nor commit them
etc.

29. If the Master with his Servants come to the house of another, the Master
commits a forcibly entry, his Servants not knowing his intent before the
fact, he is an offender by this Statute, and none of his Servants.

30. If an entry with force be made to the use of another who agrees
thereunto, yet he to whose use the entry is made, is no offender by this etc.

31. The same Law, if one make a forcible eutry into the house of another, and
thereupon imprison the party in the same house, and he himself also remains
there with force, the Justices may remove it by this Statute.

32. If a forcible entry be made in the Land of another by the commandment of
one who is not present, yet he who made the commandment is not any offender by
this Statute.

33. If diverse in company assemble, and some of them without the others make a
forcible entry, and thereupon the others without them who made the entry
detain this with force, there all together are offenders as well for the
entry, as for the detaining.

34. If the Justices come to remove a force, and before that they can arrest
the offenders they escape from thence, upon that the Justices may well Record
this detainer with force by this Statute.

35. If a Justice come to the place where the force was, and before any Record
thereof made, he is put out of Commission of the peace, he cannot then make any
Record by this Statute.

36. If the Sheriff is made Justice of peace, and after in the same year that
he is Sheriff, he comes to the plac where the force was, he cannot make a
Record of this by the Statute.

37. A woman being Sheriff by inheritance, marries with a Justice of Peace,
and upon a force made comes to the place to remove it, and before that he can
take them they escape, he may Recod this by the Statute.

38. If the Justices upon their coming to remove the force, make a Record
thereof, and commit the offenders to prison, and although that it appears by
the same Record, that it was not a force upon the matter, yet no remedy for the
party so convicted.

39. If the Justices make a Record that they did see, where indeed there was no
such matter, yet the parties cannot traverse it.

40. If the Justices come to remove a force, and a rescusse is made to the
officers, and others there present to remove them, they may Record that as well
as the force.

41. But if the Justices upon the view of the force there, record a murder,
maime, or manslanghter, this is no Record by this Statute.

I Have showed unto you in my last Reading, what persons are bound to go with
the Justices to remove a force, and what not, and how they shall be taken and
required to do it, and the punishment upon refusal: And whereupon the view of
a detainer with force within the purview of this statute the Justices may
remove it, and where not; and then where the Justices upon such view may arrest
and commit the offenders to prison, and where not; and who shall be said an
offender, and punishable by this Statute, and who not; also where upon a force
committed within the parview of this Statute, the Justices may remove it, and
where not; then what things they may there Record and what not, and of what
force such Record shall be being so made: And for that, that Statute in the
first branch goes further and Ordains, That although such persons making
such entries are present, or avoided before the coming of the said Justices or
Justice etc. by which branch is remedied one of the mischiefs or defects
remaining before, not remedied by the Statute of 15. R. 2. touching the
departure of the Offenders before coming of the Justices, to whom power and
authority is given by this branch to inquire by all of the same Commission as
well for such forcible entries in Lands or Tenemems, as for the detainer of
them with force, and then by another clause there ensuing, it is ordained, That
if it be found before any of the Justices, that any do the contrary etc. by
which clause the party so ousted shall have his remedy by way of restitution as
it appears by the letter thereof: and upon these two several branches of
this Statute, I intend this day with your patience to show unto you my conceit.

III.
What shall be a good and sufficient Enquiry by this Statute, and what not; and
by what inquest or inquiry restitution shall be made, and by what not: and then
by whom it shall be made, and whether by Writ, or without Writ.

1. IF the Justices of Peace go to remove a force, and before their coming,
the offenders are avoided, by force of which other Justices then those who had
the view, make inquiry, this is a good enquiry by etc.

2. If the Justices go to remove a force, and before their coming, the
mis-feasors are avoided, whereby the same Justices a Month after or more make
enquiry, this is a good enquiry by this Statute.

3. If the Justices of Peace, upon a force committed, and complaint thereof
made, make enquiry thereof without going to the place it self, where the force
was, this is also a good inquiry by this Statute.

4. If the Justices go to remove a force, and before their coming to the place
where the force was, they make a Record of it, and at another time they make
also enquiry thereof, which agrees with their Record before made, this is a
good enquiry by this Statute.

5. But if the Justices upon the view of the force, make a Record thereof, and
their Record contains that the force was made with twenty persons, and the
enquiry found it but with ten persons, this enquiry is not good by this
Statute.

6. If several enquiries be made by several Justices upon the forcible entry,
every one of them is a good inquiry by this Statute.

7. If the Justices in their enquiry of force present an inquest by persons not
sworn to do it, and yet the enquiry makes mention that they were sworn, then
this is a good enquiry by this Statute.

8. If the enquiry be made under the number of twelve, this is not any good
enquiry by this Statute.

9. If any of the Jurors by whom such inquest is taken, are persons attainted
of a false oath, or in decies tantum, or are ambo-dexters, this is not a good
enquiry by this Statute.

10. But if the inquest be taken by twelve in number above the persons
attainted, then this shall be a good enquiry by this Statute.

11. If one of the Jurors by whom the enquiry is taken, has not Lands, or
Tenements, but to the value of 40 s. per annum, and that jointly with another,
yet the enquiry so taken is a good enquiry by this Statute.

12. If one of the Jurors had but a Rent of 40 s. per annum, issuing out of
Land which is worth no more, but 40 s. per annum, yet the enquiry made is a
good enquiry by this Statute.

13. If it be found by inquest, that I. S. was seized until by I. D. disseised
with force, by this enquiry I. S. shall have restitution.

14. The same Law is, if it be found that I. S. was seized until by I. D.
disseised peaceably, which I. D. holds with force; in this Case I. S. shall
have restitution.

15. If the father die, and a stranger enters by abatement, and detaineth it
with force, all which matter is found by enquest, yet the son shall not have
restitution by this Statute.

16. The same Law is, if it be found by inqnest that I. S. was seized until I.
D. entered upon him with force, I. S. in this Case shall have restitution by
this Statute.

17. If it be found that the father made a Lease for years, and dyed, the
years expired, and before any entry made by the son, such a force is
committed, the son shall not have restitution by this Statute.

18. A man seized of Land has issue a daughter and dies, his wife grossement
inseint with a son, the daughter is ousted with force, and after the son is
born, and all this matter is found by inquest, yet the son shall not have
restitution, but the daughter shall have it.

19. If it be found by inquest that I. S. was seized until by I. D. disseised,
and that I. S. ousted I. D. with force, in this Case I. D. shall have
restitution.

20. If it be found that I. S. was seized until I. D. ousted him with force,
and also that I. D. was so seized until by I. N. disseised with force, there
I. D. the first Disseisor shall have restitution by this enquiry against I. N.
and thereupon I. S. shall have restitution also against I. D. and all upon the
same verdict.

21. If it be found by several enquiries, that a man is ousted with force by
several persons, at sundry times of one and the same thing, each inquest is
good, and he may have restitution upon any of them at his pleasure, but if he
had restitution upon one of them, then he shall not have restitution upon the
other of them by this Statute.

22. If it be found by several enquiries, (that is to say) by one inquest,
that I. S. is ousted with force, and by another inquest that I. D. is ousted
with force, and all of one and the same Land, there each of them may have
restitution by these enquiries etc.

23. If it be found that I. S. was seized for the term of A. and he is ousted
with force by B. and that A. is now dead, yet I. S. shall have restitution by
this inquiry.

24. If it be found that two Ioynt-tenants were ousted with force, the one may
have restitution upon this enquiry without his companion.

25. If it be found that the father was seized until ousted with force, and
dyed before any entry or restitution, yet the son shall not have restitution
by this Statute.

26. The same Law is, if a man be possessed of a Lease for years, and is ousted
thereof with force, and dies before restitution, yet his Executors shall not
have restitution by this enquiry.

27. If Leassee for life, the remainder over in fee be, and the Leassee is
ousted with force, and all this matter fouud by inquiry of the force, he in the
remainder shall not have restitution by this enquiry.

28. If it be found by inquest, that I. S. was seized until by I. D. he was
ousted by force, but the enquiry is not made at the request of I. S. yet he
shall have restitution by this enquiry, 7. E. 4. 18. a.

29. If the Sheriff return the Jurors impannelled in 40 s. lesser issues then
is comprised within the Statute, yet the enquiry is good, and the party ousted
shall have restitution by this Statute.

30. If the Jurors by whom the inquest is taken have not Lands, or Tenements,
to the value of 40 s. per annum, yet the enquiry is good, and the party shall
have restitution, etc.

31. If it be found by enquiry upon this Statute, that the Land out of which
one has rent or common issuing, is detained with force, so that he cannot
have this rent or common, yet he shall not have restitution by this enquiry.

32. If the Lord loose his Ward, for that that he married him within the age of
14 years to his disparagement, and after during the minority of the Heir, the
Land is detained with force, whereby he cannot distraine for his Rent, and all
this matter is found by enquiry, yet the Lord shall nor have restitution by
this enquiry.

33. The husband and wife before issue had, are ousted with force, and then
have issue, the wife dies, the husband by enquiry shall have restitution etc.

34. If Leassee for life be ousted with force, and the Leassor enters for the
condition broken, and all this matter is found by inquest, yet the Leassee
shall have restitution by this enquiry by etc.

35. The same Justices of Peace may before that enquiry be taken, put the party
in possession again without any Writ, but no other Justices can do it without
Writ.

36. The Justices of the same County the record being before them, may award
Execution by Writ, although they be not the same Justices before whom the
enquire was taken, but not without the same Record.

37. If the Justice who took the inquest be dead before restitution be made,
yet the Justices having the Record, may award Execution by this Statute.

38. The Justices of the Kings Bench having the Record before them removed, may
award Execution by this Statute by Writ, but not otherwise.

39. If it be found that such a one is ousted with force, whereby he is
restored to the possession, and after is ousted with force again by the same
party, he shall not have restitution again by the same enquiry.

THe Statute goes further, that if any person be ousted or disseised of any
Lands or Tenements, or ousted peaceably, and after detained with strong hand
and arms out etc. This branch as it appears, Ordains, That if any person
be ousted with force, or peaceably, and after holden out with force, he shall
have an Assise of Novel disseisin, or a Writ of Trespass against the
Disseisor, and this being so found, the party grieved shall recover treble
damages; upon the words in this branch of this Statute, I intend this day with
your patience to show unto you my conceit.

IV.
What shall be said an ousting or disseisin with force within the branch of
this Statute, and what not; what shall be said also a detaining with force
within this branch, and what not; and who shall be said a party grieved to use
any action, and who not; by this branch of the Statute, and then how and by
what action he shall have his remedy so given by this branch of the Statute.

1. IF a forcible entry be made in the Land of another, whereupon he waveth the
possession without any violence to him made, this is a disseisin with force by
this branch of the Statute.

2. If the Disseisee enter upon the Disseisor, and oust him with force, this is
not any entry with force by this branch of the Statute.

3. The Disseisee brings an assise, and depending the assise the Disseisor
dies seized; his Heir enters, upon whom the Disseisee enters with force, this
is an entry with force by this branch of the Statute.

4. If the Tenant of the Land pays the Rent to a stranger by compulsion of
distress taken with force, this is a desseisin with force.

5. But if a man be disseised of any rent by the Tenant of the Land as by
rescous with force, this is not any disseisin with force by this Statute.

6. If a man with force put in his Cattle, and depasture the several Land of
another against the Statute of Westminster. the 2. yet this is not any disseisin with
force by this Statute.

7. The same Law is, if the Lord distraine his Tenant more often then Rent or
Service are arrear, yet this is not any detaining by force by this Statute.

8. But if the Lord improveth the Wastes with force, not leaving sufficient
Common for the Commoners, this is a disseisin by force within the purview of
this Statute.

9. If a man distrain the Termor of another so often with force that the
Leassee forsakes his term, whereby the Lord cannot have his rent reserved, yet
this is not any disseisin with force within this Statute.

10. If Tenant by Statute Staple, or by Statute Merchant be ousted with force,
this is a disseisin with force by this Statute.

11. If Leassee for years, with the remainder over for life be ousted with
force, this is not any disseisin with force by this Statute.

12. If a man has Common of Pasture in the Land of another, and a stranger
with force disseiseth him of his Common, this is not any disseisin with force
by this Statute.

13. If a man has a way appendant over the Land of another, and is disseised
of his way by a stranger with force, this is not any disseisin with force by
this Statute.

14. A man has Esto^ers appendant to his Manor, and after a stranger cutteth
all the wood, and takes it with force, yet this is not any disseisin with
force by this Statute.

15. If a man makes a disseisin with force and Riot against the Statute of
Westminster. 2. c. 50. this is not any disseisin with force by this Statute.

16. If a man claims a Rent, or Common, out of the Land of another, which is
detained with force, whereby he cannot have his Common, this is not a detainer
with force by this Statute.

17. If a man will enter the Park of another to distraine his Game there,
whereby the other defends with force, this is not a detainer with force by
this Statute.

18. If after continual claim duly made, the Disseisor continues in with
force, this is a detainer with force by this Statute.

19. If the Disseisor, after that he has continued in quiet Possession for
three years detaineth with force, yet this is not any detaining with force by
this Statute.

20. If the Disseisor, after that he has continued Possessiou quietly for
three years, and then the Disseisee makes continual claim, and
notwithstanding that the Disseisor continues Possession with force, this is
not any detaining with force by this Statute.

21. If a man by good Title continues Possession in quiet for three years, and
then is disseised whereupon he re-entreth, and detaineth with force, yet this
is not any detaining with force by this branch.

22. If two Joint-tenants are disseised with force, they both together are the
parties grieved by this branch, and none of them apart.

23. But if after such Disseisin made, one of them releaseth to the other, or
dies, then the other by himself is a party grieved by this branch.

24. If the husband and wife seized of Lands in right of the wife, are
disseised with force, and the husband dies, the wife shall be a party grieved
by this Statute.

25. If a man seized of Land, to which he has Common appendant, is disseised
thereof with force, and then he alieneth the Land, and takes back an Estate
again, he is not the party grieved by this Statute.

26. If a man be seized in right of his wife, and disseised with force, and
after they have issue, the wife dies, the husband is a party grieved by this
Statute.

27. If the Lord be disseised of his services with force, and after the Tenancy
escheateth, the Lord is not the party grieved by this Statute.

28. Disseisee and Disseisor being both upon the Land, the Disseisee releaseth
to the Disseisor, and then such forcible entry or ouster is made, the Disseisee
is a party grieved within the purview of this Statute.

29. A man seized of certain Land is outlawed in a personal action, and then
a stranger depastureth the Land against the Statute of Westmin. 2. after that
he had his Charter of Pardon, yet he is not a party grieved by this Statute.

30. If the Tenant pays the Rent to a stranger who no right has, whereupon
the Lord brings an assise and is nonsuit, and then the pernor of the Rent
dies seized, and after the Tenant pays it to another by distress with
force, the heir of the first pernor shall be the party grieved by this Statute.

31. If a man be ousted with force, and thereupon he reentreth, yet he is the
party grieved to have an assise by this Statute upon the first entry with force.

32. If a man be ousted with force, and the Land is also detained with force,
the party so ousted is the party grieved by this Statute.

33. If the father makes a Lease for life to his eldest son, and is
disseised with force, after which he dies, the son is the party grieved by
the purview of this Statute.

34. Land descends to two daughters, and the one enters generally, and a
stranger enters who has no right, and ousteth her with force, she so ousted,
may have an assise by this Statute.

35. The party grieved by this statute shall have an assise of Novill
disseisin, and by that he shall recover troble damages.

36. The same Law is, if an action of Trespass be brought upon this Statute in
which he shall make mention of this Statute.

37. So also if a Writ of Entry sur disseisin in nature of an assise, if the
disseisin be found with force etc.

38. But in an action brought upon this Statute, if the Jurors find for the
Defendant by false oath, whereupon the party reverseth it by Writ of Attaint,
in this case he shall recover treble damages in this Writ of Attaint.

IN my last Reading, I have showed unto you upon the branch of this Statute
touching the using of any action by the party grieved, what shall be a
disseisin with force by this branch of this Statute, and what not; And what
shall be also said a detaining by force, and what not; then by what action he
shall have his remedy so given by this branch of this Statute: This Statute
goes further, Provided all ways that those keep by force their Possessions in
Lands or Tenements etc. and upon these words in this branch or proviso, in the
end of the Statute, I intend to show unto you this day with your patience my
conceit.

V.
What shall be said a continuance of Possession by three years within the
proviso of this Statute, and what not; Then where he who has so continued
possession by three years within the proviso of this Statute, may justify the
detaining of it by force, and where not: And against what persons such
justification shall be made, and what not.

1. IF a Disseisor continue Possession quietly for two years, and then is
disseised by his eldest son, the Father dies, and the son therein
continues the Possession for one year more, this is not any continuance of
Possession for three years within this branch or proviso.

2. The same Law is, if the father disseiseth his eldest son, and continues
in Possession for two years, and the son after his death for one year more;
yet this is not any continuance of Possession by three years within this
proviso.

3. But if the Disseisor continues the Possession for two years in his own
life time, and dies seized, whereby his son and heir enters, and continues
Possession for one year more, this is a continuance of Possession etc.

4. The same Law is, it the Disseisor continue Possession for two years in the
life of the Disseisee, and one year after his death, this is a continuace for
three years by this proviso.

5. If the Disseisee make continual claim within three years, then this is
not a continuance of Possession by three years within this proviso.

6. The same Law is, if the Disseisor continue Possession by two years, and his
Feoffee by one year this is a continuance of Possession by three years within
the proviso.

7. If a man recovereth against one in a pracipe quod reddat by Covin, and he
against whom he has recovered, has the Possession thereof in quiet by three
years, this is a continuance of Possession by three years within this proviso.

8. If a man makes a Lease for another man's life, who continneth Possession by
two years, and then he for whose life etc. dies, and the Leassee continues
Possession one year after the death of he whose life etc. yet this is not any
continuance of Possession by three years within this proviso.

9. But if he had continued Possession by three years after the death of he
for whose life etc. then this should be said a continuance of Possession by
three years within this proviso.

10. If the Disseisor makes a Lease for life, the remainder over in Fee, and
the Leassee holds in for a year and dies, after whose death he in
remainder enters, and continues the Possession for two years more, this is
not any continuance by three years within this branch etc.

11. If Leassee for years continue Possession by two years, and then his
term expireth, after which he holds in for another year, yet this is not
any continuance of Possession by three years within the proviso.

12. If a man makes a Lease at Will, and dies, after whose death the Leassee
continues Possession by three years, this is a continuance of Possession by
three years within this branch.

13. If the Disseisor continue the quiet Possession by one year, and then
makes a Feoffment, and takes back an Estate again, and then he continues
Possession by two years more, this is not any continuance of Possession by
three years, within the branch of this Statute.

FINIS.

