A Case of Conscience CONCERNING Ministers meddling with State Matters in or out
of their SERMONS resolved more satisfactorily then heretofore.

WHEREIN Amongst other Particulars, these matters are insisted upon, and
cleared.

1 How all Controversies and Debates among Christians ought to be handled
Regularly, and Conscionably to edification by those that meddle therewith. 2
What the proper employments are of Christian Magistrates, and Gospel Ministers,
as their works are distinct, and should be concurrent for the public good at
all times. 3 What the way of Christianity is, whereby at this time our present
Distractions, and public Breaches may be healed: if Magistrates and Ministers
neglect not the main duties of their respective callings.
Where a ground is laid to satisfy the scruple of the Demurrer, and of the
Grand Case of Conscience.

Written by JOHN DVRY, Minister of the Gospel, to give a Friend satisfaction:
And published at the desire of many.

October. 3. Imprimatur, Joseph Caryl.

LONDON: Printed by Francis Neile for Richard Woden^the at the Sign of the
Star under Peter's Church in Cornhill. 1650.

A Case of CONSCIENCE Concerning Ministers meddling with State Matters in or out
of their Sermons resolved more satisfactorily then heretofore.
Honored Sir:
WHen I wrote to my Friend about intermedling with State Matters in the Pulpit,
I intended only in a plain and familiar way, to satisfy his desire: therefore
as in a subject clear to my thoughts, I did not much forecast the Matter and
Method; but festinante calamo and carelessly; I did allege, both to justify
mine own practice, and to answer that which is objected against it; those
truths, which I thought he would most readily entertain. But seeing you have
told me your observation, that some do not acquiesce in those plain
conceptions, but intend to wade deeper in that Subject then I seem to have
done; and that from such, I must expect to be contradicted, and should do well
to prepare for a Controversy. Seeing (I say) this intimation has been given
me, both from your self at first; and since also from others: I think it not
amiss to reflect a little deeper upon this matter; that if needs there must be
a Controversy, it may not be a wild one (as now adays many are) but
regulated unto edification.

The occasion of this Discourse.
For mine own part, I have made it my work hitherto, to compose Controversies
amongst those of my Profession, so far as God has given me address thereunto:
therefore I have not provoked any to strife; nor have I entertained any
provocation given me, as others are wont to do: but my way has been to follow
Peace. Yet I am not afraid of any Controversy; for how else should I be able
to deal with Controverters? therefore if I shall be drawn forth, and set upon
in a contentious way, for speaking my conscience, when I have given no
particular offense unto any, but plead only for the justifying of mine own
practice; I hope I shall neither want resolution to stand up for
righteousness; nor that in such a case, the strength which God has given me
to maintain a truth for his glory, will fail me. And as for that which (I am
told) is given out by some concerning me, that I had a private end to gain to
my self preferment, by writing that Discourse, in seeking thereby to favor a
design of the State. I can call to witness upon my soul him, who shall one
day reveal the secrets of all hearts, and the hidden things of darkness; that
when I wrote at my friends entreaty upon that subject, I had no worldly aim
for my self: but my whole design was only his spiritual edification, and the
building up of those, to whom by him the Discourse might be imparted: nor do I
know, that ever I was told by any, but by your self, and that after the
Discourse was published, and since by one or two more, that there was any
design in the State, to make an Act to regulate that matter; so far was I from
favoring such a design, that I was utterly ignorant thereof; But it is
natural to men to judge of others, by that which they use to do themselves.
Therefore it is with me a very small thing, that I should be judged of men set
in such a way; nor shall I for this set my self to grieve any of them, or give
them occasion of discontent: but I shall take from hence rather an opportunity
to prevent a needless debate, if any should seek it, about this business: and
if a needful one ought not to be avoided, I shall endeavor that it may be so
ordered, as not to increase any breaches, confusions and animosities amongst
us; but rather heal, redress, and allay the same.

If then any shall think himself or his cause much concerned in that which I
have said, and shall in the trouble of his mind, passionately fall either upon
me, or upon my handling of that subject: I shall not at all perhaps take notice
of him; or if I do, it shall only be with meekness to right the wrongful
constructions, which happily will be made of my words and actions.

But if any shall with a sober mind seriously take into consideration the
matter it self, whereof I have declared my judgment; and shall endeavor to
show me some error in my way; I shall heartily thank him, and fairly meeting
him be very willing to confer in a brotherly manner about that which shall be
found doubtful between us; that the truth, which is useful to edification in
this matter, may be found out.

The scope of the Discourse.
And to this effect (because I am glad of any opportunity, to meet as in the
presence of Christ, with the spirit of strife and bitterness, to cast it out
from amongst Christians; and conjure it by the counsels of Peace and Truth,
which he has taught his disciples) I shall offer some Rules to be considered
by him, that will as a professor of Christianity enter into any debate, that
not only superfluous and needless matters of debate (whereunto Satan lies in
wait to draw us) may be prevented: but also that the things which shall be
found forth the disquirie, may without confusion (whereunto our nature is bent)
be discussed understandingly; and in an orderly way for edification. For I will
neither be obliged to spend my time upon trifles, and venting of private
passions (as some delight to do) nor will I in a serious matter, suffer my
thoughts either to walk at random by trusting to my self, or to be led up and
down in a disorderly manner, after the humor of any man whatsoever: and this
course I take both with mine own spirit, and for others sake, cautiously; that
within my self, I may discover the snares and plots of Satan against me, which
my corruptions might close withal: and that if others will take upon them to
meddle with matters of duty toward God and Men, either under a Religious or
Civil respect; and presuming to play the masters (as now almost all do) will
not enter into the lists of Conscience and Reason to walk by a Rule therein;
they may be discovered to be Hypocrites and Fools, and consequently unworthy of
the conscionable and rational entertainment, which is due unto the ingenuous
professors of Christianity and Morality.

The subject of the Discourse.
Give me leave then to acquaint you, or rather him (whosoever he is, it makes
no matter to me; God accepts no man's person) who is preparing to take up the
bucklers in this Cause, with the way wherein I purpose, God willing, to meet
him: that he may fit himself, either to go along with me in it, or to show me a
more direct path to walk in Love and Truth, wherein I shall promise to follow
him; because the Prophet says, that two cannot walk together except they be
Amos 3. 3.
agreed. Give me then leave (I say) to acquaint him, that to prevent needless
controversies, and vain jangling, and to find out Peace and Truth in a just
debate, my way shall be determined, and circumscribed by two sorts of Rules;
which if he cannot except against and rectify, he will be obliged to observe.

The parts thereof.
By the first sort of Rules, I prepare and order my thoughts before I suffer
them to enter upon a Debate: By the second, I direct them in a right way of
proceeding after they are entered thereupon.

The Preparative Rules toward a Debate are mainly four: whereof,

The first is concerning the Subject, whereof the Debate is to be undertaken.

The second is concerning the end, for which it is to be prosecuted.

The third concerning the point of difference, wherein the doubt does lie.

And the fourth is concerning the way of handling the point of doubt to find a
decision thereof.

Of these I shall briefly show you what I conceive my self obliged to observe.

What to be considered concerning the subject of a Debate.
First, concerning the subject, whereof a Debate is offered, the main thing
which I look upon therein is, the natural worth of the matter, with the
effects and accidental consequences of the handling thereof: that I may know
whether it be operae-pretium, and that it deserves to be handled yea or no. And
that I may make a true estimate hereof, I use to consider chiefly three things.
1. The nature and kind of things whereunto the subject does, or does not
belong. 2. The recommendation which it has, or has not from God unto my
conscience. 3. The ordinary or extraordinary influence, which the right or
wrong handling thereof may have upon the spirits of men, to affect them to good
or evil with powerful motions.

If then I find, that the subject in its nature and kind does not belong to the
sphere of my profession; that it has no recommendation from Gods Word, either
in general or particularly, and in express terms to be laid to heart: and
that it has no powerful influence, either upon mine own spirit, or upon the
spirits of others, to affect the same one way or other, I use not to meddle
with it, for I judge it not worth the handling; but if it has any of these
properties, or all of them, and I find that doubts are rationally raised about
it, I think my self bound to discuss the same when they are offered unto me;
and it is seasonable so to do.

Now the reason why I think myself obliged to make this, or some such like
estimate of every subject, before I entertain it, is, lest unawares I might
become as one of those, of whom the Apostle in his days warned Timothy, who
turned aside 1 Timothy 1. 6, 7
unto vain jangling, and desiring to be teachers of the Law, understood neither
what they said, nor whereof they affirmed. And we see that since his days,
many of the Schoolmen, and other brainsick controverters in our Age have done,
and still do the like.

What to be considered about the end for which a Debate is taken up.
Secondly, concerning the end, for which a Debate is to be prosecuted; I judge
thus, that except I can perceive the conference to be intended toward the use
of edifying, whereunto we are commanded to direct all our communication, I
shall not Ephesians. 4. 29.
meddle with it, but rather protest against it: and that I may not be mistaken
concerning that which is intended toward 1 Cor. 10. 31.
the use of edifying, I take the measure of mine own and other men's aims by
two Rules: the first is, If either the matter in it self is not fit to manifest
some part of Gods glory: or if the aim of those that handle it, is not set
professedly to show forth that part of his glory which the matter offers; then
I conclude, that the handling of it is not intended for edification.

The second is, if the matter it self, is fit to be reduced to the end of the
commandment, and those that handle it profess to advance that end by it; Which
is charity out of a pure 1 Timothy 1. 5.
heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned: then I conclude that
it is intended for edification, because Charity does edify: 1 Cor. 8. 1.

And the exact observation of these two Rules in reflecting upon our own
spirit, to examine and set our heart aright by them, is so absolutely
necessary, that in all matters of debate, wherein men pretend to knowledge, it
will be impossible for any man to avoid the snares of his own natural pride,
except he can take up this course, to quiet and wean his spirit from it: for
the natural use of all knowledge does puff us up. Whence it is, that without
this spiritual restraint, 1 Cor. 8. 1.
we shall unavoidably fall into the condemnation of those, whom the Apostle
does characterise to be proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions, and
strifes of words; of which comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings,
perverse disputings: the proper works of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of
the truth. From such, and such practices, he exhorts us to withdraw our selves:
for we see daily by doleful experience, that the profane and vain bablings,
whereby men study only to 2 Timothy 2. 16.
please themselves and discredit others, do increase unto more ungodliness. If
therefore the end of the debate should not be clearly determined by the
forenamed Rules, and considerately taken up in the fear of God, ( seeing the
beginning of Prove. 17. 14.
strife is like the letting out of water) I can foresee, that I might be
heedlesly hurried, into a labyrinth of endless controversies; as I find some
others are, whose hands are against every body, and every bodies hands are
against them. Except therefore he that shall take up the Debate, will
conscionably and rationally show to me, as I shall do to him, where he will
rest, and at what mark he will shoot, I will not be obliged to run after him,
as uncertainly; or to fight with him as one that beats the air.

Why the point of difference is to be carefully stated.
Thirdly, concerning the point of difference, how to state the Question
rightly, which is to be debated, I take it to be one of the chiefest rational
expedients that can be used, to prevent the inconveniencie of an endless
controversy: nor is there any one thing that does more entangle and increase
the multiplicitie of needless Debates, then the mistake of the point of
difference either wilfully or ignorantly entertained. By this means Satan does
enable and ingagemens spirits to make their contestations inextricable,
endless, and irreconcilable: for when the Question is not distinctly stated,
and men are entered as it were blindfold upon contradictions, they will rather
shift the point of debate twenty times, then seem to be found in an error
once; and will rather show a willingness to dissent in every thing, then have
any thing determined by their adversary, as a Truth against them. And because
in the ordinary Debates we see, that men labor to state the Question only as
they please, which commonly is to the prejudice (although it be clearly against
the sense) of their antagonist; it is evident hereby, that they are led by
Satan to affect rather this, that their adversary may be thought guilty of
heinous errors and practices; then to endeavor this, that his true meaning may
be discussed, and thereby some profitable truth, and rule of practice held
forth unto all: and from these roots of bitterness it is, that almost all the
books of Modern Controversies, are stuffed throughout with clamors, railings,
injuries, and ^eproaches; so that to lick up the vomitings of drunken men, or
to hearken to the hideous howlings of wild beasts, is not more loathsome or
irksome to an ingenuous spirit, then to be entertained with the filthy
belchings, and load brawls of men drunken and mad with passion, whereby they
foam out their own shame.

How it is to be stated.
Therefore to prevent the mistakes which lead men into such distempers; the
first occasion thereof is to be avoided, which is an inclination to be partial
for our selves, to get some advantage by framing of the Question. But to avoid
this snare, the true knot and center of the difference ought to be proposed as
a doubtful Question, and not as an accusation, or a charge; that is to say,
the thing to be debated is to be laid down, in the name of both parties, as
they shall agree to understand it; and not as any one of them would have it
understood.

Therefore I do offer to walk by these Rules in this matter.

First, let a Question be framed by him that will enter upon the Debate,
expressing that which he conceives to be the matter of doubt between him and
his antagonist to be decided.

Secondly, let the Question be opened, and all the parts and terms thereof
explained, to show in what sense every word is taken, by him that offers it
unto the Debate.

Thirdly, let that be showed, wherein he conceives there is an agreement
between himself, and the party with whom he is to debate.

Fourthly, and lastly, let the precise point of difference be distinctly
declared, as a doubt to be resolved.

And when this is done, let the Question thus stated (before any arguing pro or
contra, be entertained about it) be imparted to the party with whom the Debate
is intended; that he may declare his sense thereof, whether yea or no, the
point of difference in his mind does lie there where the other has placed it.
For if it does not, and I should have entered upon the Debate before this is
known, all my labor would be lost, and in vain as to him: because he will
neither deny what I intend to prove, nor affirm what I refute; but something
else perhaps which I have not at all mentioned, or thought upon.

What to be done to handle the Question stated, so as to come to an orderly
debate thereof.
Fourthly, the way of handling the point of doubt, to find e a decision
thereof, ought to be predetermined before the Debate be undertaken: and to this
effect when ever I shall intend to enter upon a Debate with any body, I shall
proceed with him after this Method.

First, I shall write unto him as a Brother, letting him know the offense which
his Doctrine or Practice does give; and how prejudicial it is to the Gospel in
public. Here I shall state the Question between me and him as I shall
understand it, desiring him to rectify my thoughts concerning his opinions or
practices, if I mistake either of them: and if I mistake them not, to give me
leave for his own and the public good to endeavor the rectifying of that
wherein I shall conceive him to be out of the way.

This entry is to be made upon the business both in conformity to Christ's
rule, by which scandals are to be taken away from amongst brethren: Matthew. 18.
15. And also because it is necessary to prevent prejudicate affections, to
beget love, to try the ingenuity of our Brother; and to waken the sincerity
which ought to be in him, to walk answerable to the rules of the Gospel.

If upon this offer he does give a fair Answer, he will either state the
Question otherwise then I did to rectify my mistake, and so perhaps decline
the Debate: or by altring the Question he will give a new rise to deal further
with him; or by allowing that state which I have proposed, he will accept of a
conference thereupon.

But if he does give no fair Answer, or no Answer at all, to that which is
offered; then I shall give him a second admonition, and acquaint some friends
with it to join with me, to make him sensible of his duty by two or three
witnesses, according to Christ's rule in this case, Matthew. 18. 16. And if this
second admonition does not draw him on, to any effect of Christian ingenuity,
the whole narrative and process of the business may be offered to the Society of
those under whom he does stand, that by them he may be dealt withal according
to Christ's direction, Matthew. 18. 17. if they bring him to the sense of his
duty, well and good: if not, he is to be left unto himself as an Heathen and a
Publicane, whom the Christian Magistrate ought to restrain from disorderly
wilfulness, and offensive irregularity.

But supposing him to be ingenuous, and willing to justify unto me that which
I think to be a miss in him, a conference will be accepted, either by word of
mouth, or in writing, or both ways jointly; for both ways may concur at once.
Then,

In the second place, I shall make an offer of the Principles, from whence I
shall conceive the decision of the doubt should be taken: and of the orderly
way of applying those Principles, that by consequences drawn from them, the
point of doubt raised between us may be determined. If we agree upon the
Principles, and upon the orderly way of inferring thereupon conclusions
applyable to the doubt in hand; then we shall proceed affirmatively, and
negatively, to seek out the determination of the point. But if we agree not
upon the Principles at first proposed, neither can we agree upon the way of
applying the same to any thing in hand. Therefore we must rise higher, and
propose other Principles which are more common and remote, wherein a full
agreement may be found; and then also the way to proceed thereupon, to regulate
the application of truths following from thence to decide the point of doubt,
is to be determined; which being done, nothing remains but to come to the
Debate it self.

The cause why the preparatives are to be observed.
Thus you have a prospect of the method both to enter upon a Debate in an
orderly way, and to prevent that which may be hurtful in the first approaches
thereunto: for if Satan does not entrap us, by some part of our own corruption
in the preparatives of our way, we shall be less obnoxious to his snares, in
the following course of the Debate. And although the greatest danger of erring,
is to fail in these beginnings of the work; and the greatest difficulty
incidert to the beginnin^s of a Debate, is to prevent uncharitable
forestalements in our own spirits, which insinuate themselves under the
pretense and color of necessary pre^tions, or rise up with the forecast of
prudentiall observations; so that to distinguish between that which is lawful
in the one, as wisdom; and unlawful in the other, as jealousy, is in ^^spect
of our thoughts like the cutting of an hair in the breadth thereof: although (I
say) this is the greatest danger and difficulty of the business, yet it is
not invincible to a plain dealing Christian, who is acquainted with his own
spirit, and has accustomed himself to observe the motions thereof, and to
bring them home to the Rule, which is the testimony of Jesus, to walk after his
Spirit in all his aims and undertakings. For this is the anointing which
teaches The benefit and effect of the observation thereof.
the true disciples of Jesus Christ all things, and leads them in all orderly
ways of knowledge, righteousness, and holiness, of charity, meekness, and
sobriety within themselves, and toward all men: for he that has not attained
to the observation and demonstration of these ways within himself, and to the
exercising of his own spirit thereunto, by and from the example of Christ, can
never exercise them effectually toward other men.

Therefore if a Christian that can look into his own heart, will as in the
presence of God reflect upon his business, and before he undertakes a
controversy, first consider and discern the matter offered, whether yea or no,
it does belong to him to meddle with it; and if he finds himself obliged to
undertake it, if then he will settle his purposes within himself (in reference
to the aim which Christ teaches, and the means of prosecuting the same
suitable to Christ's rules:) and lastly if he will look upon his neighbor, with
whom he has to deal, with such an eye as Christ (if he were in the flesh) or
the Apostle Paul (becoming all things to all men) would look upon 1 Cor. 9 19.
24.
him: if (I say) he will thus consider his business at the first entry
thereupon, lifting up his spirit unto God, for help and direction to order his
ways aright; he shall not want light to discover, and power to cast off all
the snares of Satan, which may take hold of him in his way: for it is only for
want of this forecast within our selves, for want of orderly carriage in
respect of the business, and for want of ingenuitie, and of humility toward
our neighbor, (which things are no where taught but in the school of true The
inconveniencie of the want thereof.
Christianity) that all our Debates are become mere hostilities; all our
distractions mere confusions; all our doubts inextricable difficulties; all our
differences of judgment, breaches of brotherhood; and all our breaches
irreconcilable hatreds; because our passions are full of malice, and our evil
surmisings devilish, and abominable: so that from hence, and the controversies
agitated by these motions, all manner of disturbances to the public Peace have
broken in upon us, and overwhelmed the state of Christianity both in Church and
Commonwealth: and if no remedy can be used to redress these evils, or
weapons found, neither in the storehouse of the Spirit, which is the Word of
God, nor in the storehouse of Humanity, which is Reason backed with Power and
Authority, which should encounter with these monsters to subdue them: our ^ine
will be unavoidable, and our desolation sudden; because it is evident, that
Hell is let loose upon us. But we hope, that as in the holy Scriptures there is
no spiritual furniture, nor armor of righteousness wanting for the warfare,
which is mighty through God to the pulling down of Satan's strong holds in the
thoughts of all men; so in the rational constitution of Humane Societies for
common safety, there will be no just power wanting for the suppressing of
wilful unrulinesse in the actions of all men: for as the word which is gone
Isa. 55. 11.
forth of Gods mouth, shall not return void, but prosper in the thing whereto
he has sent it: So his presence standing in the congregation of the mighty,
and judging among the gods, shall bring the foundations of the earth into a
right course; because he shall inherit Psalm. 82. 1, 5, 6. 1 Cor. 2. 6.
all the Nations thereof, when the rulers of this world who come to naught,
shall be at their end. Therefore we have no cause to despair as yet of the
redress of our miseries, seeing all means and helps are not yet taken from us;
but we ought rather to set our selves in the way, and expect a blessing upon
the right use of these lawful means, by which the Lord has appointed to bring
the salvation of his Israel out of Sion, and return the captivity of his
people out of Babylon: and because the Lord has promised to bring these things
to pass he certainly will support those that faithfully work for his ends in
his own way: now I am very sure, that none can set himself to work by way of
Debates, for his ends, otherwise then by preparing his mind, thus to enter
thereupon.

When therefore the entry is thus made toward a necessary Debate, by these
preparative Rules; the second sort of Rules are to be observed in the
prosecution thereof, to make our way straight before us: that in case any thing
has been neglected in the preparation, it may not be made worse, but rather
corrected in the future proceedings.

Concerning the Rules of Arguing in a Debate.
And to this effect, to regulate the Debate it self in the discussion of
doubtful matters, I shall offer four other Rules which relate to the point of
arguing, that it may be rational, and without offense.

The first is, concerning arguments to be taken from the Scripture.

The second, concerning arguments to be taken from Reason.

The third, concerning arguments to be taken from the words of men.

The fourth is, concerning arguments to be taken from humane actions.

For seeing our Debates with conscionable and rational men, should tend only
to rectify their thoughts and ways in things pertaining to their duty toward
God and men; nor is there any other way to do this effectually and savingly,
but by argument to convince their conscience and reason of that which they owe
unto God and men: therefore I conceive, that none other arguments are to be
used, but such as are directly convincing, that is, binding of the Conscience
and Reason over, to a belief of that which they offer: nor are they to be used
in any other way, then such, as may make that belief most ready, most free,
most full, and most constant: and if we can so regulate the way of arguing both
for the matter offered, and the manner of proposing the same, that nothing
shall be disproportionate or destructive to these aims: I suppose, we shall
gain the purpose for which all Debates are to be entertained, which is the
manifestation of a truth by the decision of that which was doubtful. For when
this is done fully, as to the matter, and inoffensively as to the manner, then
all that man can be isntrumental in, is done; the rest of the work, which is
to cause that truth to be received in love for the conversion of the soul, is
Gods own immediate work, and not man's: for humane debates may reach to the
conviction of the understanding, but not to a conversion of the heart; as we
see in Christ himself, who oft-times convicted the Jews of a truth, but they
were not always converted to the love thereof by his Doctrine.

Now the Arguments which to me are only convincing, and able to manifest a
truth or an e^ro^, whereof I may be in doubt, are no more but these four
Scripture rightly understood: Reason rightly applied: Mine own words taken in
my sense: and mine own actions taken to the end for which (...) them: by these
a man may take hold of me; and by these, and none else, I shall deal with
others.

And that the way to manage each of these Arguments in particular, may be more
distinctly known; I shall offer the Rules which I observe therein, which in
brief are these.

Concerning the holy Scriptures.
1. In things determinable by Scripture authority, I shall neither allege, nor
admit of the allegation of any other Authority. 2. In places of Scripture,
whereof the meaning shall be doubtful, to find out the interpretation
thereof, I shall proceed not conjecturally, nor traditionally, nor by any
pretended private inspiration, (which is but imagination, and commonly proves a
delusion) but rationally observing these Rules. 1. In case the proper, that is,
the ordinary grammatical sense of the words, is not repugnant to the undoubted
Analogy of the common Faith, or the clear Analysis and coherence of the
Context; I shall neither give nor receive any other sense but that which is
proper and grammatical. 2. But in case the proper and ordinary grammatical
sense of the words is repugnant either to the Analogy of Faith, or the clear
Analysis of the text, then they must be taken in another sense, either
figurative or spiritual, which is most agreeable to both. 3. By the Analysis
of the Context, I understand a right dividing of the whole Discourse into its
periods, according 2 Timothy 2. 15.
to the several parts of the matter contained therein; of the periods into
their sentences; and of the sentences into their single propositions by their
proper joints and articles. 4. The Analysis or Division of every Context may
not be contradicted, if it is not disproportionate to the General Analogy of
the Common Faith. 5. Nor is any Prophecy, that is, proposal of Doctrines, 2
Pet. 1. 20, 21
Exhortations, and Comforts otherwise to be admitted, but as it is Analogicall,
that is, proportionate to the principles 1 Cor. 14. 5.
of the common Faith, and the undeniable consequences of truth following
thereupon. Romans 12. 6. 6. No Rules of scripturall interpretation are to be
admitted, but such, which rationally direct us to compare spiritual things
with spiritual things, that their proportional standing together, and their
agreement may be understood, as the Spirit of God did utter them. 1 Cor. 2. 13.
and 2 Pet. 1. 21.
Concerning the use of Reasoning in Divine and Humane matters.
1. In matters of Divinity, I cannot be obliged to believe any thing, which is
contrary to sound Reason; although I am obliged to believe that, which I reach
not by my reasoning. 2. I allow nothing to be sound Reason in Divinity, but
that which is proportionate to the common principles of revealed truth in the
Scriptures. 3. I shall therefore oblige no man to believe any thing to be a
Divine truth; but that only, which from common scripturall principles is
demonstrable. 4. I conceive, all revealed truths to be rationally uttered, and
nothing irrationally expressed in the Word of God; and therefore a most fit
object for the rational faculty of man to be employed in. 5. By the rational
faculty of man, I understand the ability of his mind, by which he can think
understandingly of things to be understood; and compare his thoughts after an
orderly manner together, to take notice of the proportion or disproportion
which they have to each other. 6. In matters of Humane disquisition, that is,
which may be understood without any special revelation; I shall not admit that
any thing should be determined by custom, or humane authority, which is
determinable by a true reason to be found in the nature of the thing it self.
7. Nor shall I acknowledge any thing to be a true Reason found in the nature of
any thing, which is not proportionate either to the common notions which all
men have of things sensible, and practicable by themselves; or to the maxims
of reasoning concerning the same which all men make use of, and none have
denied, but such as were professedly Scepticks, or resolved to spend their
thoughts by doubting of all things.
Concerning Arguments to be taken from the sayings of men.
1. I shall oblige no man, nor will I be obliged by any man, to build any
matter of Faith upon a bare humane testimony. 2. In matters of fact, where none
other proof of a truth can be had, but the testimony of man, it shall be
pressed no further, then it is found probable, and not liable to any credible
exception. 3. The sayings of other men in matters of Doctrine, whether few or
many joined in opinion, shall be taken for no proofs further then their reasons
are found valid; or then he to whom they are alleged, has declared his
approbation thereof; for then they are to be considered as his own. 4. Mine own
words in the sense wherein I speak them, shall be valid proofs against any
thing which I shall assert contrary to the tenor of the truth contained
therein. 5. I shall not press upon any body the interpretation of his words,
which he does not allow to be conformable to his meaning; but shall yield him
the privilege of being the truest interpreter of his own mind: nor shall I
raise a contest about the sense of another man's words; to make him be thought
guilty of shifting his expressions; for that tends only to vain jangling. 6. I
shall not apply my self at any time so much to refute as to Assert; but I shall
deliver mine own mind concerning all matters in themselves affirmatively and
negatively rather, then to stand upon the scanning of other men's opinions to
find fault with them: But if I needs must, to clear the matter, allege the
expressions of him with whom I am in debate; I shall build no inferences
thereupon; but by way of supposition, that is, if I have rightly understood his
meaning.
Concerning Arguments to be taken from humane Actions.
1. shall consider no man's actions to upbraid him therewith; or allege them as
a matter of reproach to insult over him, and grieve him: for that can proceed
from nothing but from pride in my self, and malice against my neighbor. 2. No
failings shall be aggravated to the worst sense though they be manifest, but I
shall be willing to excuse them so far as probably they may bear a good
construction, without doing wrong to truth and righteousness. 3. I shall not
interpret any man's intention to have been otherwise in his actions, then he
shall declare it to have been: nor shall I charge faults otherwise upon him,
then as Hypothetically gathered from clear circumstances; which shall be noted
rather to give warning, and admonish him to take heed, lest a root of
bitterness might be found in them; then to make them a positive charge against
him, or the poison thereof his guiltiness. 4. No matters of mere suspicion or
hearsay shall be further named; then to clear my self from the guilt of the
wrong that may be in them: But of things clearly confessed, or openly known to
all; that which their properties manifestly utter, as contrary to the undoubted
profession of Christianity, shall with meekness and zeal be opened; that he
who is guilty thereof may be pulled out of the fire, and made sensible of the
dangerous unevenness of his way; that he may recover himself from the snares
wherein Satan has caught him. And thus I shall also desire to be dealt withal
by those, who shall have occasion to observe my actions to redreise that which
may be found amiss in them.
Now if any of these Rules shall be excepted against by any; and showed to be
prejudicial to the discovery of truth; or all of them together insufficient
to the finding of a resolution in lawful doubts; or defective to lead us by a
profitable debate in the way of Truth, Peace, Love, and Righteousness; I shall
be willing to add, and alter, and upon conviction receive better directions
from others, if offered. But if those who intend to deal with me, upon the
Subject which has occasioned this discourse: shall except nothing against
these Rules; and yet not observe them in their dealing with me: I may happily, if
God permit, be able to let them see the injustice of that manner of
proceeding; and the grounds of that natural corruption whence it proceeds:
which we by yielding unto have fomented; and by exercising have increased
amongst our selves; which has made all this spiritual disorderlinesse to
break in, as a flood upon us; and which will infallibly become our utter ruin,
if we persevere therein. And because it will somewhat serve to our present
purpose, to discover the originals, and observe the progress and the
characters of our corruption, I shall now reflect a little thereupon, before I
enter upon a more especial application of these Rules unto the present debate;
to prevent the irregularitie which may be incident thereunto, if no caution be
used.

Who the men are that inntagle the work of Remation by Controversies
I suppose it is not difficult to foresee and conjecture, who the men are, and
what their way will be, which intend to appear in this controversy. For that
none of our Modern controverters will be forward to enter into these regular
courses, whereby debates are made void of offense; may be easily gathered from
hence; that no Spirits unaccustomed to a yoke, will be willing to take i(...)
upon them.

Now we find two sorts of men (to whom all others may be reduced, as partaking
more or less of their Principles and ways) who are accustomed to judge and
debate of matters in these our times, who being unacquainted with this yoke,
entangle affairs by different ways of proceeding into disorders of a contrary
nature.

The one sort is full of confidence, relying only upon themselves in the high
conceit of their singular opinions. The other look more to the consent of a
combination in the declaration of their joint opinions.

The first think themselves strong, because they pretend wholly to the
direction of the Spirit in their way. The second, although they contradict not
the truth, of the Spirits direction promised to the children of God, (as some
others do) yet they put their strength rather in a humane then in a Spiritual
way of acting. But the truth indeed is, that neither the one, nor the other in
matters of debate, hold forth to any, or follow themselves, either in
Theoreticall or Practical debates, any approved Rules, by which they govern
themselves to edification about the division of spiritual or rational doubts;
and although this is truly said of both these controverters; yet it cannot be
denied, but that the second sort of these for the most part is more capable of
entertaining rules, when offered, then the first: because many of the former
take up, under the pretense of a spiritual liberty, the principles of such
unrulinesse both within themselves and toward others, that it is almost
impossible to fix them to any thing; whereas the latter are rather too much
inclined to fix upon insufficient rules, and humane reasonings: but yet in
both, this is evident, that whenever either of them set themselves to contest
for any supposed truth, or against any error; they follow for the most part
nothing so much, as the flashes of wit, or the motions of passion whiles they
rely upon the strength of their natural and acquired abilities: for the one,
viz: the first, are led chiefly by their natural; the other by their acquired
notions.

These that walk in the strength of their natural conceptions, The first sort
of Controverters pretending to be spiritual.
which they raise to some extravagant height by the apprehension of spiritual
objects; use to confound all things under the special notions, which they have
pitched upon; and without any distinction of matters, as supernatural from
natural; of humane from divine, of inward from outward, or even of God himself
from the creatures, they cast all things into some imaginary frame of their
own moulding, wherewith they are so prepossessed; that they can conceive of
nothing else, but that which is wrested and made consonant to the thoughts,
wherewith they have racked their own understandings out of frame. With these
men (if once high flowen) there can be no rational dealing: for they have
cracked their brain, and despise all things as below themselves: Magistracy,
Ministry, Ordinances, Scriptures, nay and Christ himself, is by some made a
matter of small or no concernment at all, in respect of that which they account
themselves to have attained unto.

From these and such as join nearest in Principles with these, none other
controversy (as I conceive) can be expected, What controversy is to be
expected from them.
but that which these two questions do offer: as first, whether yea or no the
Christian Magistrate has any thing to do at all, with the visible affairs of
the Churches? And secondly, whether yea or no the Rule and Government of all
things does not belong properly unto the Saints, and to none but them? Whom
they mean by Saints, and what by rule and government, is not now time to
enquire after; but it is apparent, that their Principles and thoughts lead them
rather to lay aside all Rule, and all Magistracy, at least in reference to the
pretended Saints; then to think that they ought to be limited in any thing. But
by reason of the extravagancies whereunto some have licentiated themselves, and
of the strange pretensions which are made to a Fantastical perfection, whereof
none other account can be given, but their own bare saying of themselves,
that it is so and so with them: (I say) by reason of this and their other
impertinencies; these men have not only made themselves a grievance unto the
Godly, and a laughing stock unto others, that are morally sober and rational;
but for their sake the mouths of the profane in the world are opened against
Religion, Atheists are confirmed in their impiety; a disrespect and scandal
is raised against the spiritual profession of Christianity amongst single
hearted formalists: and the politic adversaries of our settlement and
Reformation triumph and exult at it over us.

Now as I do not expect, that any of these who make themselves so eminent in
their spiritualitie, as to have cast off all morality, should debate this
matter: so nothing which from their Principles can be drawn, is to be much
regarded. But such as are not strangers to a life truly spiritual, although
they are not found to walk up to it; but rather follow the way of humane
reasonings, such as have The second sort of Controverters who are men of Reason
and Learning.
improved their natural with acquired abilities, of sciences and experience by
study, and conversation: and such as have interessed themselves hitherto in
State affairs, to become isntrumental for the designs of one, or against the
proceedings of another party; such (I say) as these may perhaps speak something
to the purpose, worth consideration, and deserving an Answer; chiefly if
without prejudice and passion, and with due respect unto conscience and reason,
they weigh the matter, whereof they shall offer a debate discreetly.

With these I shall not be unwilling to go along to search out a doubtful
truth in this or any other matter. Only before I come to speak of this
particular subject, to show what I conceive the debate may be with these,
according to the forenamed Rules; I shall in two or three words, briefly
entreat, by way of warning, the causes of disorderlinesse whereunto our
ordinary course is accessory to entangle our affairs.

If we reflect then upon our ways, we may observe that the aim of ordinary
controverters is set rather to uphold What way of controverting is used by most
of them.
(and that professedly) the outward interest of a party; either to vindicate it
from some aspersion, or to gain some advantage to the proceedings thereof; by
aspersing others, and by getting themselves into power over others; then to
make a discovery of profitable duties, and of naked Truths, that the
necessity of the former, and the evidence of the latter, may become
recommendable indifferently unto the consciences of all men: or that the
conscience of those who have strayed from the same may be brought back again
unto the acknowledgement thereof, whence also we see, that the course taken to
debate differences, even in spiritual matters, and far more in outward
concernments does almost savor nothing else; but the affectation of natural
wisdom, of subtilty, and of eloquence, and the venting of passions proper to
men depending upon this world. And herein we find a pride moving men to
outstrip one another, either by showing their parts; as wit, language, reading,
Philosophy, History, and other learning; or by lashing and smiting one another
with the tongue: to seek a conquest rather by the infamy of others, then by the
armor of righteousness on the right hand, and on the left. By these
unchristian and unconscionable ways of considering matters, and dealing with
persons, the more able, and naturally rational the men are that take them up,
the more destructive they make themselves unto the comforts of their brethren;
and the nearer their Debates thus agitated relate unto Religion, the further
off they set themselves and others from the kingdom of Jesus Christ: the
respect which is had to gain credit with men, to loose no ground in the Debate,
and to be thought a leader in the cause, together with the fear, lest we should
seem to be foiled in any thing; chiefly after we have owned the title of a
Doctor of Divinity, and think our selves in some repute for Learning; does
strip us of all Christian simplicity, and moral ingenuitie: for when we come
to a close fight, and in danger to be convicted of some error, our passions are
inflamed, and we choose rather, to make our contestations endless and
inextricable, then that our Antagonist should seem to have gotten any advantage
against us. Thus we strive not for Truth and Righteousness, how to find it
out (for the unpartiall way to seek it, is not once thought upon) but for our
selves in comparison to others, that we, and we only may be thought to have
it; and this makes the Debates tedious, full of trifling circumstances, and so
large and voluminous; that to read only the heads of matters agitated in this
way, will require more time, then a wise man will afford thereunto, or a godly
man can take pleasure to spend thereupon.

Upon these rocks of contentiousnesse and irregularitie, the excellent gifts of
many able (and otherwise godly) men, are oft-times shipwrackt. For Satan by
their zeal for themselves, The evil effect of this way.
and private ends, has blinded them in that which is truly public; and by this
means (for it is from the failings of godly men on all sides, that our misery
does chiefly arise) a fire is kindled amongst us of prejudicacy and jealousy,
which never will be quenched by humane power, or persuasion: only God is able
to put forth his hand in some extraordinary way to lead us in a path which yet
we have not known, a path which godly men will be capable to discern from his
word, wherein it is revealed; and which by his Spirit will be The hope of a
remedy to be found in it. Isa, 35. 6, 7. and chap. 43. 19, 20. Isai. 51. 3.
manifested graciously unto them. For the promises upon which I raise this
hope, are large and plain, and oft-times repeated: For it is said, not only
that he will make a way in the wilderness (where no path is) and give streams
of waters (that is, comfortable refreshments) in the deserts; but that he will
make the wilderness of his Sion (his Church) and her waste places, like unto
Eden, and her Desert like the Garden of the Lord. The failings therefore, and
humane frailties of the people that seek him in truth, shall not bring upon
them a perpetual desolation; as the backsliding of the wicked shall do unto
hypocrites: but when their wilderness is Isai. 41. 18, 19, 20.
become a poole of water, and their dry lands springs of water; the Lord will
plant the Cedar, the Sittah and the Mirtle-trees together with the Firre-tree,
the Pine Tree and the Box therein; that all may see, and know, and understand,
that the Lord has done it, and the holy One of Israel has created it. Then
also shall the weak hands (of the inhabitants of Jerusalem) be strengthened,
and their feeble knees confirmed, the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and
the ears of the deaf be unstopped, and the lame shall leap like an Hind, and
the tongue of the dumb shall Isai. 35. 3, 5, 6.
sing. But before this can come to pass, which is the effect of the binding up
of the breach of his people, and the healing of the stroke of their wound, it
is evident, that the Towers shall fall, the Isa. 30. 25, 36. Isai. 40. 4, 5.
valleys shall be exalted, and the mountains and hills made low in the frame of
the world; that both in the Church, and in the World, the crooked may be made
straight, and the rough places plain; for the glory of the LORD shall be
revealed, and all flesh shall see it together.

Seeing then, notwithstanding all the failings which have overtake^ us, whether
on the right, or left hand, we have still this door of hope opened, to support
our spirits, that if we walk and work with God in his way, he is able and
willing to restore us; let us lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble
knees, and prepare a straight way, even a high way in this desert for our God.
And to this effect, among all the Proposals that can be made to the spirits of
ingenuous men, and uprighthearted Christians; I know none more necessary for
our case, and seasonable at this time, than to determine how at all times, the
Ministers of the Gospel ought to behave themselves in their charges toward
their Magistrates, for the public good: which is the advancement of Gods
glory, by the redressing of things amiss, and out of frame, in Church and
Common wealth. For except this matter be made clear to our conscience, and the
truth cleared made our practice; there will be no judgment found in our
goings: justice will stand a-farre off, and we shall never know the way to
peace; because true peace and lasting quietness Jer. 32. 17.
is only the work and effect of righteousness.

The Application of the Rules of the debate unto the present controversy.
To come then to a more special application of all this, to the point in hand;
I say, If a debate concerning my judgment ( That Ministers ought not to meddle
with State-matters in their Pulpits,) shall be offered by any, with a desire to
dig deeper than I have done, and go to the root of the controversy, I shall
not wave a conference with them: only I shall desire that it may be agitated
according to the Rules which I have mentioned, or by some others, if better can
be showed to edification: Therefore in conformity to what, has been said
heretofore, I shall offer the question to be stated indifferently thus:

The general question, or subject of debate.
Whether yea or no it does belong to the Ministers of the Gospel of Christ, to
declare concerning the affairs of State, which are the Magistrates employment,
their opinions in their Sermons touching the Gospel.

The aim which I shall set before mine eyes in taking this subject into
consideration, shall be only this:

To find out what the Rules of Love, of Righteousness, and of Peace are,
which at all times are observable mutually, between the Ministers of Christ,
and their Christian Magistrates, in the respective discharge of their duties
toward the people over whom they are set.

The end for which it is to be considered, and what the usefulness thereof is.
For seeing the Magistracy and the Ministry are the two great and
Master-wheeles, of all the public States of the Christian world; therefore we
see, that by the motions thereof, if regular upon their own Axle-trees, and
duly correspondent one with the other, all the affairs of humane societies are
carried on successfully, for the attainment of their eternal and temporal
felicity, both toward God and men: But if their motions be either irregular
within themselves, or inconsistent with each other, it is evident in all Ages,
that from thence the affairs of all societies, become unsuccessfull, and tend
only to the misery and desolation of mankind. If then it be, (as no doubt it
is) expedient for us, to discuss at this time, that subject, wherein both
these are at once concerned; to clear our doubts therein, that we may know
what is just, lawful and commendable in the behavior of the one toward the
other; and if we should intend to do this satisfactorily; it will be requisite
that we should make a true discovery of the general nature of the duties
belonging to both their places, as well in the respect of the mutual
relations, as in respect of the outward actions of their charges; which lead
them respectively to the true ends of all their motions. For by this general
discovery we shall find grounds to come to the decision of any question in
particular, what ever it may be, depending thereon (for with other questions we
have nothing to do) but if we take not the light which from thence may be
gathered, along with us, our thoughts in every thing will be full of darkness;
nor shall we find any path to walk in, made plain before us.

I conceive therefore, that this aim to seek out these Rules, is to be taken up
in this debate, not only that we may know what is necessary foredification in
the main works of both administrations; and that we may find a directory
thereby, leading us toward the resolution of our present doubt, which is wrapped
up in the ignorance of those fundamentals; but also that we may circumscribe
and determine our thoughts in the debate it self, lest they miscarry, and be
suffered to wander upon use less and by-matters, uncertainly, as it happens
unto others in the debates of this and of some other kinds, therefore I declare
beforehand, that my resolution is unalterably to wave every thing which shall
be offered, that has no direct or collateral tendency and subordination
toward the discovery of these Rules: for to find out a clear demonstration
of the truth of these, is the whole fruit of all this Disquisition.

The terms of the Question explained.
Thus having determined the end of the debate, let us come to look upon the
point of difference which may be between us: And here I cannot definitly say
wherein others differ from me in a positive opinion (I see what the positive
difference of their practice is from mine, but men oft-times do more then they
think they do) but that they who allow at large (which I do not) Ministers to
meddle in matters of State, may judge wherein I do differ from them; I shall
follow the method formerly set down, and first open my sense of the question,
and then declare both the agreement and the difference which I conceive to be
therein between us.

The terms of the question I understand thus:

1. By the Ministers of the Gospel of Christ, I understand certain men who
(take not upon them at their own hand; but) are called in an ordinary and
orderly way to teach other men the knowledge of Christ, to persuade and exhort
them to receive him, and walk in him by faith and love, for the salvation of
their own souls, and the enlargement of his kingdom toward others in the
world, to pray for and with them, and to oversee their ways, that they may be
found conformable to their profession. And this I conceive is the whole
substance of their employment.

2. By the Gospel of Christ I understand the glad Tidings of Gods free Grace
offered to us in the new Covenant made with mankind in Christ, that we may
entertain it by faith.

3. By the Sermons of those Ministers teaching this Gospel, I mean their
ordinary speeches to their hearers concerning this subject, by which they ought
to bring them to the obedience of faith.

4 By the Magistrates I understand certain men whom God has exalted, and set
over the visible Societies of men for their good; to over-see their ways, and
order them in righteousness by power and authority to make them conformable
unto his known will.

5. By State-affaires, which are said to be the employments of the Magistrate,
I mean all things which concern either the visible societies, or the single
persons of men, as relating to their outward state and condition of life in the
world, wherein power and authority can be exercised for the ordering of the
same.

6. By Power I mean the forcible means of constraining through fear, those
that are in subjection, to do that which their superiors will have them to do.
This is that which the Apostle calls the Sword, Romans 12. 4.

7. By Authority I mean a right to administer a charge, and to bear rule
therein over others for the government of their ways; whereunto those that are
to be governed, owe respect and submission: And this is that which the Apostle
calls to be subject for conscience sake, Romans 12. 5.

These are the things whereof the question does speak; but

The thing questioned, or the matter of doubt.
The question it self, or the thing questioned concerning these things is
this, Whether yea or no it does appertain to the calling and charge of those
that are employed in the service of Christ for spiritual matters; when they
are about that service, to utter in public their particular thoughts
concerning worldly matters, which appertain to the calling and charge of those
who are set in power and authority over the Commonwealth?

To this question whether we should say absolutely Yea, or absolutely No,; or in
some respect yea, and in some respect no, and how far yea and how far no,
in each respect; is the matter of doubt, which by a friendly conference and
debate, fitted to search after hidden Truths, may be resolved. And that we may
endeavor this so, as to bring the matter to an issue, without distractednesse
or confusion, let us first consider that wherein we agree, as a known and
determined truth; then view that which remains yet unknown, as an
undetermined doubt, that by the help of some principles, and the right
application thereof unto the point of difference, we may make a way for our
understanding to determine the same.

The matters of agreement
The matters wherein I suppose an agreement will be found, are these:

1. That the terms of the question as they have been opened, are truths, viz.
That by Ministers and Magistrates, and their employments; such men, such
things, and such actions are to be understood, as were described in the opening
of the question: and that the point of doubt in general does lie there, where
it is said to lie: For if either these terms, or any of them, be otherwise
understood, or the point of doubt otherwise placed than has been now
mentioned; although in words we may seem to agree upon the stating of the
question, yet the thing it self is not agreed upon: therefore this must needs
be presupposed to be so, before we can proceed to any other points of
agreement; and then I shall offer this further.

2. That Jesus Christ who is now at the right hand of God, having all power in
heaven and earth, has ordained in this world, both these kinds of Officers,
some to preach the Gospel unto men, as Ministers of his Word and Mysteries, 1
Cor. 9. 14. and chap. 4. 1. with Tit. 1. 7. and 1 Pet. 4. 10. and some to rule
the Societies of men, to keep them in good order, as Magistrates endued with
power to punish the evil, and reward the good. Romans 13. verse. 1. till 8. and 1
Pet. 2. verse. 13. till 18.

3. That the employments of these two Officers although they are coexistent
under Christ, toward the same men who are to be governed by them, and
concurrent toward them, for his ends upon them; yet they are distinguishable
the one from the other, chiefly in respect of their different objects, of their
different immediate ends, of their different fundamental rights to their
charges, and the properties thereof, and of their different ways of
administering their charges.

4. That the object of the Ministerial administration is nothing else but the
truth and will of God in the Gospel, as it is revealed in the Scriptures; and
that the object of the Magistraticall administration, is the Truth and Will of
God, as in the Principles of right Reason, and the Law of Nature it is revealed.

5. That the immediate end of the Ministerial administration of their object,
is to bring men's souls to have communion with God in Christ by his spirit; and
that the immediate end of the Magistraticall administration of their object, is
to bring men in soul and body to live together in the plentiful enjoyment of
all good things, honestly, peaceably, and safely one with another.

6 That the fundamental right unto a Ministerial administration, is to be
called thereunto as Aaron was, Heb. 5. 4. And that the fundamental right unto
a Magistratical administration, is to be in the place of power, and obliged to
look to others, and see right done among them, as Moses was, Exodus 2. 11, 12,
13. 14. compared with Acts 7. 23, 24. 25.

7. That the properties of the Ministerial right unto the administration of
their object in their charges, are chiefly twofold, their due qualifications
for their employment, and their lawful entry upon the charge of souls
committed unto them. Their qualification for their employment must be such as
the Apostle does require it to be, 1 Timothy 3. v. 1. till 8. and Tit. 1. v. 6.
till 10.

And their entry upon the charge of souls committed unto them, must be such as
Christ does require it to be, John 10, v. 1, 2, 7, 8, 9.

8. That the properties of the Magistraticall right unto the administration of
their object in their charges, are chiefly a threefold preeminencie, viz. a
preeminencie over the persons of all men, that all souls must be subject unto
the higher powers, Romans 13. v. 1. A preeminency over the might and strength of
all men, that none may resist the higher powers, Romans 13. 2. and a preeminencie
over the goods and possessions of all men, that every one is bound to pay them
tributes and taxes, Romans 13. 6.

9. That the ways of the ministerial administration of their Charge, are
mainly three and no more, Instructive, Persuasive, and Declarative. Instructive
to work upon the understanding, that which is rational to manifest truth unto
it. Persuasive to work upon the will and affections, by entreaties promises and
threatenings, the sense of good and evil, to cause it embrace the one, and fly
from the other. Declarative to denounce in Gods name from his undoubted word
his expres will, to move the Conscience to yield obedience thereunto, that is
either to be comforted, or to be afflicted, as the Kingdom of Heaven is either
opened or shut upon it, by the declared will of God toward it.

10. That the ways of the Magistratical Administration of their Charge are
Directive, Legislative, and Coercive, to order the ways of their Subjects in
righteousness.

Directive, by Council and Instructions to set subordinate Officers a work
toward their Subjects, to lead them unto the performance of their duties, and
prevent disorders.

Legislative, by Laws and Ordinances, to let all men know the just duties
which are to be observed toward all men, in all cases, relating the safety of
the society, and the indemnity of every one belonging thereunto, from each
other.

Coercive, to right all things that are amiss, by distributing rewards and
punishments to every one as they do deserve.

11. That this Magistratical function may be in a Heathen man for the good of a
Commonwealth; and although it may be in the hands of such a man, or men, that
Christian Ministers and Professors, ought nevertheles to acknowledge him or
them, in the place to be their lawful Magistrates, to respect them, to pray for
them, and to submit themselves unto them, either actively or passively, as
their Commands shall be consistent with a good Conscience under the rules of
Christianity.

Hitherto I have offered that wherein I suppose an agreement will be found in
respect of the coexistence and distirction of the employments: now I shall go a
step further, and offer that also wherein I suppose we shall agree, in respect
of the concurrence of the employments under Christ for his ends upon Mankind;
here then I suppose it will be granted.

12. That it is as lawful for a Christian man to be a Magistrate, as it is
expedient for him to be rational, and necessary to be a true sociable man by
nature; for as the profession of Christianity does neither make void the use of
reason, nor abolish the true life of nature; but sanctifies the one and the
other and exalts both to an use wherein God is glorified by them: so the rules
of Government in a sociable life, and the rational principle of good order in
nature, are no ways cast off, or neglected by the Rules of Christianity, but
exalted and made subservient to the highest way of happiness.

13. That in a whole society of men every thing is proportionably to be
allowed, which in one man cannot be disallowed: as therefore the life of right
reason, and true nature are not inconsistent in one single man, but concurrent
with Christianity to make him truly happy; so in a society of men, to become a
State, and to be governed by Magistrates according to the Rules of reason, and
the principles of good order in nature, is no ways inconsistent, but wholly
concurrent with the frame and life of a Christian society; although
Christianity abstractively in it self, is nothing else, but the Rule of a
spiritual life, whereby we are directed to follow Christ's footsteps, that we
may come to God by him, as new Creatures, separate from the world.

14. That a Christian being a Magistrate in a Christian State, although all his
Subjects in respect of Christ, and the way of the heavenly profession; are his
Brethren, and in that respect his equals; yet by this, he does loose nothing of
the natural right and properties of this place, which God has given to a very
Heathen over Christians; but gains rather thereby an enlargement of his
preeminency, and an additional right and gracious privilege to his place,
which is at least threefold First, the right to be more beloved and honored
than if he were a mere Heathen. Secondly, the privilege to become a nursing
Father to the Church of God; to provide for it all things outwardly
comfortable, and to protect it. Thirdly, the preeminencie of being Christ's
Vicegerent in the outward frame of the society, by which means, he has an
influence to see things ordered according to his known will in the
Commonwealth, and to sway things to the best frame in the public profession,
for the body of the society; and an obligation laid upon him; not to see and
suffer Christ's name to be dishonored; and his Ordinances blasphamed: so far
as by his place he can hinder it, without constraining and persecuting any man;
for the enjoyment of his Conscience, whereby he does not give any public
offense.

15. That a Christian being a Magistrate, although his profession does ad these
privileges to him in his Magistracy, yet his Magistracy does not exalt him
above the Church of Christ, that he should have a right to command any thing
therein after his own will, as in humane affairs; for Christ only who is the
head, has authority to command in the Church, and those that either teach for
Doctrines the Commandments of men; or impose those Commandments upon others,
to teach them, or observe them being taught and imposed, worship God in vain.
Matthew. 15. 9.

16. That the greatest honor and privilege that can befall to a Magistrate,
as being a Christian, is, to become a Member of the mystical Body of Jesus
Christ, and so to be under the spiritual inspection, and care of the Ministry
of the Gospel, and the dispensation of the mysteries and graces of the Kingdom
of Heaven.

17. That a Christian Magistrate being a fellow-Member of the Body of Christ,
is obliged not only as a Magistrate to oversee them in outward things for their
good; but as a Professor and Brother to watch over their souls, considering
them in love, to provoke them, and stir them up to all good works.

18. That a Magistrate being a Christian; although he is set over all men, in
respect of the outward and visible Government of the society; yet in respect of
the inward and spiritual Charge of souls committed to the Ministers of Christ,
he is under their care and inspection, to be watched over, that he should walk
worthy of God in the Heavenly profession.

19. That although a Magistrate as a Christian, is thus under the inspection of
the Ministerial function, as to his personal behavior and walking in the holy
profession, and may lawfully be admonished in case he does any thing contrary
to the rules of his profession; yet his Magistratical function is not under the
inspection of the Ministers of the Gospel: for their line does go no farther
than their Stewardship; and their Stewardship does go no further than the
Mysteries and the house of God: therefore as the Ministers are not set to
oversee and direct him in his Magistracy; So he is not accountable to them of
his proceedings in State-matters.

20. That although the Ministers of the Gospel depend not upon the Authority of
any men in the duties of their spiritual function; yet they are accountable,
not only to the civil and Christian Magistrate of the reason and manner of all
their proceedings in their administrations; but to any other, that shall desire
to know what their way and purpose of walking is in any thing belonging to
their profession: because 2 Cor. 4. 2. and 1 John 1. 7.
they are bound to reject all the hidden things of darkness, to walk in the
light, and approve their ways unto the Consciences of all men, as in the sight
of God.

21. That a Concurrence of the Christian Magistrate with the Ministry by way
of Council and cooperation of countenance and protection in all things
belonging to the advancement of the Kingdom of Christ, is not only lawful, but
very expedient and commendable, and a concurrence of the Ministry with the
Magistracy, to teach both them and their Subjects the duties which God has
Commanded all of them toward one another is necessary; because it is a part of
that Charge which God has given to the Ministry. Tit. 3. 1. 2.

22. That the Councels, the Resolutions, the Laws, and the executions of
State-Government, which are the proper works of the Magistrate; whereupon
according to his best understanding he does attend, ought not publicly to be
controuled by any of his Subjects; or in a private way resisted.

23. That the conjunction of endeavors in the Magistracy and Ministry ought
to be only for the public good, either of Church or Commonwealth, or of both;
and by each of them his work is to be done distinctly in the way of his own
Calling, wherein Christ has set him and not otherwise.

24. That the Ministerial Function and Stewardship of the Mysteries of God,
which Christ has appointed to be dispensed for spiritual and eternal
concernments, in foro interiori, may not be employed for bodily and temporal
and State designments, as subordinate thereunto in foro exteriori.

25. That Ministers as private men, and living as Members in a State, may and
ought to contribute their natural Talents, to further the public good thereof
in subordination to the Magistrates lawful desires, and to give example to
others of their duty.

26. That Magistrates professing Christianity, if they make a fair show and
pretense to advance a public good, but in effect be found manifestly to seek
nothing but their own private ends in their places, they may and ought
discreetly to be admonished of their duty, and warned of the danger of
Hypocrisy; whereunto their passions, their pride, and their covetousnes may
lead them.

27. That Ministers as they ought not to refuse lawful employments; wherein as
Members of a Commonwealth they may be called to do the public some service: so
they may not entertain that employment after such a manner as to be taken off
thereby from their spiritual Function; or to confound and mix the use and end
thereof with matters of a different nature to serve and please themselves or
other men thereby: for if I sought to please men (says Paul) I should not be
the Servant of Christ. Gal. 1. 10.

28. That all Conjunctions and Concurrences of the Magistratical and
Ministerial Functions which are not undertaken for their own direct ends and
uses respectively; but either by the neglect of those ends, or by indirect
means or commixture of Relations, tend to other ends, are unwarrantable,
because they take away the boundaries and right uses of Christ's Ordinances, and
so apply them not to his service.

29. That if Ministers deal with a people, of matters which are the proper
concernment of their particular Magistrate, with that people which is his
Subject, they do manifestly set themselves with him in his Charge, and whether
they meddle with his matters toward his Subjects willingly and in love to him;
or without love to him, and that either unwillingly as by command and
constraint, or of their own accord, as by jealousy and competition of
interests: which way soever this is done, in all, or any of these cases, it is
evident they apply themselves to their hearers, not as spiritual men and
Disciples of Christ, to spiritual men and to Christ's Disciples, but as
interessed men to men of interest in this world; whether therefore the
Magistrate be pleased or displeased, as a service or disservice is done unto
his Authority and designs thereby, the service of Christ Jesus in all this is
not regarded.

The matters of disagreement how to be thought upon. What they are in this
controversy.
These Positions I hope will find no contradiction by any that I shall have to
deal withal; but if any of them be excepted against, it may either be laid
aside or regularly discussed by it self, if it deserve to be handled by it
self; or if it has any fundamental relation to the point of doubt, it may be
brought in as one of the particulars afterward to be decided, when the Question
is fully stated, which now is to be done.

If then after all these material points of agreement there be any, that to
maintain the practice of some, held at large, that Ministers may meddle with
State-matters, in their Pulpits, directly or indirectly, as of State-matters,
to declare their judgment thereof unto their hearers; I shall declare that
herein I do dissent from them, and think it altogether unlawful, in the
Ministers of the Gospel, and no ways appertaining to the calling wherein
Christ Jesus has set them over his people, to acquaint them with their own or
other men's judgments, concerning the affairs and interests of their
Magistrates, whether to commend or discommend the same unto them.

I say then two things.

First, that although Ministers living in a State as private men (for in a
State they are nothing else; though in the profession of Christianity they are
public persons as a City set Matthew. 5. 14.
on a hill) may take notice of State proceedings and interests, and hear and
observe what others think thereof, and judge with themselves (as Members
concerned) what is to be thought thereof: yet I say, that it is unlawful for
them to publish those thoughts with Reference to their Ministerial employment,
to make it any way instrumental, to deface the same into the thoughts of the
people, as to give them notice thereof by way of public intelligence. Nay it
is a very great Question with me; whether any other men being private and
Subjects, may lawfully publish their own or other peoples thoughts, concerning
their own State Affairs any other way; except only in times of general
deliberations, wherein all are privileged to propose by their Trustees what
their desires and grievances are to have them redressed.

Secondly, that it is far more unlawful for them upon such observation of State
matters to use any persuasions or insinuations to sway this or that way the
vulgar affections to or from those that are in Authority; for the suggestions
by which Ministers ought to engage Subjects affections toward their
Magistrates are not to be raised from any private observations (which are
deceitful, and no true grounds to oblige the Conscience unto any duty) but
from the manifest will of God commanding the duty; and the nature of the
Relation which God has settled between Magistrates and Subjects which is
grounded upon love, and does partake of the conjunction which is between
Parents and Children; whence it is, that as our Parents are to be beloved of us
their Children; not so much because they do this or that particular favor unto
us; but because they are our Parents, and next unto God over us, because God
has made them to be Authors and Protectors of our life and being, and
conduit-pipes of all blessings toward us; so Magistrates are proportionally to
be respected by all dutiful Subjects upon the same grounds, and not upon any
particular contemplations which their observation of State-contrivements may
lead them unto, and to the performance of this duty the faithful Ministers of
the Gospel should become both leaders and monitors toward their flocks: And
therefore as they ought to do nothing that may any way corrupt the simplicity
of their mind from this ground of respect due unto their Rulers: So they should
use none other motives or arguments to persuade them thereunto, but such as are
powerful in this kind.

The Question then is not with me, whether faithful Ministers may dogmatically
from the word of God, and the nature of humane society speak in the Pulpit of
the righteous ways of governing States in Thesi and Antithesi? and whether yea
or no they may instruct, warn and exhort Statesmen, concerning the duties of
their Calling toward God and men, that they may know how to keep a good
Conscience therein according to the will of God revealed in his word? I say the
Question is not with me concerning these things: for I am clear that the
Ministers of the Word may handle and apply all humane and divine matters thus.
But the Question is concerning particular matters of State done or to be done
hic and nunc, relating to our selves or our Neighbors, wherein some of our
interests lie: I say concerning such matters, either to make narratives for
information, or to apply those matters to move the peoples affection to any
humane Resolutions, is a thing utterly unlawful in the Ministerial Function as
I conceive.

What the distinct State of the Question is.
Thus I have stated the Question, and separated it from that which is not the
Question; and I hope showed therein my meaning sufficiently.

If now this assertion of mine should be debated between me and such as allow
at large in Ministers the handling of State-matters as some use to do; it ought
to be offered as a doubt, and made a Question indifferently thus.

Whether yea or no it be lawful for the Ministers of Jesus Christ in their
Sermons or Testimonies concerning the Gospel, to declare their opinions also
concerning State-Interests, wherein the Magistrate is concerned; to make
Narratives to inform their hearers of the condition of State-affaires, and of
their Rulers ways and designs, and to sway directly or indirectly their
Subjects affections this or that way in compliance to this or that worldly
design? To this I say no, and if any man does think otherwise, who does not
except any thing material against that which has been said hitherto; I shall
willingly discourse the matter with him, and sift it to the brain. That it
therefore may be known, by what rule I will submit the matter to a trial; I
shall after these two Principles, which no rational man will deny or except
against, as I suppose.

The Principles by which it is to be decided.
1. That it is not to be counted lawful for any Servant to do his Masters
service, that which his Master does not only not allow, but forbids to be
done therein.

2. That it is not to be counted lawful for any Servant to do in his Masters
Service, that which is wholly contrary to the nature of the employment and does
frustrate the true end and effect of the work which is to be performed thereby;
although his Master does make no inhibition concerning it.

I take these principles to be so evident, that none who has common sense can
deny them: Therefore I shall come now in the last place to propose the orderly
way of applying these unto the matter in hand; that if no exception be taken at
this also; then the particular dec(...)sion of the doubt may follow thereupon,
in case any shall enter upon the debate thereof.

The Application of the Principles to the Doubt.
I propose then the application of these Principles to be made in this order.

First, let us consider whether yea or no, the Ministers of the Gospel are to
be accounted Servants to Jesus Christ? if yea, then whether he is not their
Master? and his will in his service their law? if no, then whose Servants they
are, and who else is their Master?

Secondly, Whether yea or no to preach the Gospel, or to bear witness concerning
Christ Jesus, be the service wherein they are employed?

Thirdly, What properly this service is? and whether yea or no Christ does
allow them in going about it, to bear witness to any thing else than to himself
and his truth; according to the Commission which is given them. Luke 24. 46,
47, 48. Act. 1. 8. and 26. 18.

Fourthly, whether yea or no the Ministers of the Gospel are not expressly
forbidden, to apply themselves to any other testimony or doctrine, then that
which is according to the words of our Lord Jesus Christ; by these places of
Scripture 1. Tim. 4. 6, 7. and 6. 3, 4, 5, 20, 21. and 2 Timothy 2. 14, 15, 16,
17. and 1. Tim. 1. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

Fifthly, whether yea or no the Narratives, Insinuations, and Applications,
which are made of State matters in the sermons of some, are not another kind
of testimony, then the words of the Lord Jesus? and whether those that deliver
them, in delivering the same, speak the oracles of God? which in the Church of
God alone ought to be delivered. 1 Pet. 4. 10.

Sixthly, supposing there were no such commandments and prohibitions limiting
the service of Christ in the Gospel; yet it will be granted, that Ministers
ought to understand the nature of their own office and employment, and ought
not to do that which is contrary thereunto: and if so, then we ought to reflect
upon the positions, which have showed the coexistence; the distinction and the
concurrence of the Ministerial and Magistraticall offices under Christ,
together with the properties of the Charge, of the Administrations, of the
objects, and of the fundamental Rights of the Function, to see whether yea or
no such a meddling with State matters is not wholly contrary thereunto?

Seventhly and lastly, the proper end and effect of the work at which Christ
does aim, by the Ministry of the Gospel; and the direct means, by which he
has appointed the end to be gained, are to be considered; and compared with
the proper end and effect of this practice, to see whether this practice does
not make void the efficacy of those direct means, and overthrow that end? and
if so; then by the dictate of our Principles, we may conclude this Practice to
be utterly unlawful.

Thus I have done with the Rules of Regulating this controversy, and the
method of bringing the doubt to a decision: I think it not needful nor fit at
this time, to descend any further to the particulars of the application; but if
any thing be offered in a sober way inducing thereunto, I shall not be a verse
from that which shall tend to edification.

Now I shall come to another kind of application, both of the whole, and
especially of the latter part of this Discourse unto our present state, to see,
what from these grounds, and this way, both of searching after truths, and of
discovering duties, may be gathered, to redress our disorders, and prevent the
increase of our calamities. For I told you, partly in the beginning of the
whole Discourse, partly at the entry upon this last part thereof, (wherein I
apply the Rules of debatement, unto the subject in hand) the aim which I have
in handling these matters thus, which is distinctly this.

The Application of the whole Discourse foregoing to such as pretend to debate
matters learnedly.
First, in the whole I intend to meet with the spirit of confusion and strife,
which has taken possession of the minds of very many of my brethren in the
profession; whom notwithstanding I love, and respect for that Truth which is in
them; I reverence and embrace for their many good parts, and godly
inclinations; and for their humane failings and infirmities, I heartily
compassionate them in the bowels of Christ. For many of them, pretending to
Learning, to a bookish knowledge of other men's opinions, and to a censuring
faculty of all, that is not agreeable to the notions which they have taken up
in point of Theorie; and to the interest of that party which they have embraced
in point of practice, are pitifully snared in holes, and shut up in
prisonhouses, and can look upon nothing in a straight line, but one way, they
see all things through a multiplying glass, another through a diminishing
prospective. Toward these men my scope is upon this occasion: first, to
prevent a needless controversy: secondly, to let them see a Model and true
Method, without by a sing (if they can take it up so) how to order their
thoughts spiritually, and rationally, to find out truths in a profitable
Controversy: for indeed this is that which is most seriously to be recommended
to the Ministers of the Gospel above all other men: for seeing they are the
men, above others, by whom the thoughts of all men are ordered in doubtful
cases, therefore they ought to find themselves obliged in conscience above
other men, not only to be rightly and exactly ordered in all their thoughts
and proceedings; but also to be able, in all things, to give a satisfactory
reason to their own conscience, and to all conscionable and reasonable men, an
exact and full account, of the Rules by which they order those thoughts, and
intellectual proceedings, by which they have so great an influence upon the
spirits of other men. He that must answer one day unto the Father of spirits,
for all the impressions which he works upon the spirits of his children, ought
to be very careful, and watchful over his own spirit to discern the motions
thereof, that they may not be irregular: this insight therefore in the ordering
of our thoughts, as in the presence of God, chiefly in matters of debate, (for
God is the final Judge of all Controversies) is one of the chiefest
concernments that can be recommended unto Ministers, in these times of disorder
and confusion, that they may be found faithful in their places, without blame,
and in peace before him who tries the hearts: and this is indeed the
principal aim which I have in the Body of this Discourse, to put my Brethren
upon the search of the Rules, by which they should walk in their hearts with
him, and to draw them forth to give us an account thereof, before they take
upon them to be many Masters, lest they receive the greater condemnation. I
have a third aim also in the whole of that which has been hitherto offered,
which is this; to show by the bye, and collaterally, the nature of our
disorderly constitution, and courses, with the evils which we beget, and foment
in one another thereby, both against the truth of Christianity, and against
the ways of Peace and Righteousness in the Commonwealth: and herein my full
design is by a clear example of a regular and orderly way of meditation, to
let some of those that have an high conceit of their own sufficiency and
Doctoralitie, see, how ignorant most men are of the highway and plain path to
real wisdom; and of the direct and easy method to resolve rational doubts;
and consequently how little cause many have (who think themselves no small
Clerks) to presume upon their bookish knowledge, which yet I do not despise as
unprofitable in its own measure; but this I must say of it, that it will be
found in end to be comparatively, but a blockish, scantie, stinted, and
partial way of learning, which does not contain the ten thousand million part
of that knowledge which is attainable by another way, which is plain, easy to
be followed, and demonstrable to those, that look upon the holy Scriptures as
Christians ought to do, to see Christ therein, and Gods ways toward man in
him; and that look upon the works of God in the world, as rational men ought
to do, to see the ordering of the creatures, of their faculties, and of their
works toward their true ends, whereby they relate unto God in Christ; and the
disordering of them as they are taken off from their true ends, by missing of
this Relation. If this way of attaining to true learning, and the method of
searching into these veins of knowledge, and of drawing waters out of these
Wels, were discovered; the other way, which is now so much followed, and does
occasion most of our disputes and contestations, would be found rather a matter
of show then of substance: I do not deny, but that the way of Collections and
Reading has its own usefulness, if it be accompanied with the exercises of
sound meditation, and directed to its true end thereby; but to make so much ado
about it, as some do, to take upon them great matters by it, and to stir up
much dust and strife in it, is one of the distracting vanities of our Age,
which leads us from the way of Truth and Peace. Only of pride comes
contention: (says Solomon) but with the well advised is wisdom. Prove. 13. 10.
And in another place, With the lowly is wisdom, whereas from pride comes
shame. As pride and folly, so contention and Prove. 11. 2.
shame are inseparable companions. And as the way to wisdom is to be well
advised; so nothing makes a man so capable of good advise, as the lowliness
of his spirit. It would be an easy matter, to show the truth of these Proverbs
verified, in the management of our ordinary course of learning, wherein there
is no lowliness of spirit, nor good advice to be found, toward the attainment
of wisdom, but mere pride in things of no value, which lead us through
contentiousnesse unto shame. I shall not now take into consideration the
Principles, the strains, and the pinacles of the height, whereupon the
literature, the Philosophy, and the Divinity of the Schools is set, and does
exalt the Doctors and Disciples thereof, to a conceit of their own sufficiency
above those that are counted illiterate, it were an easy matter to show
comparatively to the plain and lowly way of seeking knowledge, the foolish
emptiness of those toilsome strains, and the shameful vanity which is in the
affectation of, and a pretension to a titular esteem of learning before men,
by a Science falsely so called: at this time it will be enough to say that which
Christ said to the Pharisees, when they derided his simplicity; That which is
highly esteemed amongst Luke 16. 15.
men, is abomination in the sight of God. For these self-conceited ways of
learning, are so far from making men either wiser or better then others, that
for the most part (except God over-act and overpower them with special grace)
it makes them so much the more unserviceable to others, by how much they strive
to be set above them, and at a distance from their capacities; and so much the
more incapable of the truth of wisdom and virtue for themselves, by how much
it sets them nearer to their own wit, and further off from the simplicity and
humility which is in Christ Jesus. This matter is a larger subject then now I
am willing to enter upon; nor is it yet seasonable to undertake it: perhaps God
will show a way to meddle with these matters, and offer occasions, which shall
be more free from offense then these times seem to afford: for I am not
willing, either to join hands with the persecuters of learned men, because
they are learned, or to be thought a favourer of those, who now adays are mad
against all that looks toward or like Learning, (a generation of men, that
knowing nothing, and yet presuming without Learning to know all; think it their
reproach, that any should be thought more knowing then themselves; and being
led without any grounds or principles, by their own mere whimseys, can endure
nothing that is like a settlement, and looks toward the Regulating and
composure of men's spirits.) For I confess, that upon the name of Learning too
much dirt and contempt is cast already, though wrongfully as from such men,
yet deservedly as from God: for by reason of the ambitiousnesse of those that
unprofitably have walked in a vain show of Learning, and under a pretense
thereof have sought nothing, but ease, plenty, and pre-eminencie, and by
reason of the self-conceitednesse of those that partially walk still in strife
about it, and have made their Learning a seed of gall and wormwood, to embitter
and embroil the spirits of all Christendom, for certain private opinions. (I
say) by reason of these abuses of the ways of Learning, which still continue
amongst those that strive to be thought Masters of it, God does justly pour
contempt upon them, and will not cease to stain the pride of all their glory,
and their greatness, by a full discovery of their shame, till they show
themselves willing with all their devises, and shows of greatness to be
reformed; and till all the monopolizing practices, and covetous encroachments,
whereby the enlargement of common helps to true Learning toward all, are
enviously obstructed, be taken out of the way, and forsaken. And in hope that
this may be done, we shall endeavor without partiality, to sow the seed which
God has put in our hand, upon all waters Isa 32. 20.
(upon all sorts of people, and upon all objects of knowledge) Gal 6. 9.
for we may expect, that in due time we shall reap the fruit thereof, if we
faint not: and this is the first part of my aim in the whole, even to provoke
such as are capable of these thoughts, to peaceable and orderly meditations,
and humble thoughts concerning themselves in all matters of Debate.

The application of the latter part of the foregoing discourse is to all that
in the Magistracy and Ministry pretend to walk by the rules of Love, of
Righteousness and of Peace.
Secondly, in the last part of that which I have formerly insisted upon, where
I speak of the difference and concurrence of the Magistraticall and
Ministerial functions; my purpose is by a search into the nature and
Properties of both offices, as in subordination unto Christ they relate each
other; to discover the Rules of Christian Love, of Righteousness, and of
Peaceablenesse observable between them, for the good of humane societies: to
the end that such as make conscience their Rule, may see the path of
Christianity, wherein they ought to walk; and that such as pretend to walk by
the rule of Reason, and yet make their own will indeed rather then any thing
else a rule to themselves and others; may either be rectified by that which
they pretend to walk by, or brought to the light and discovered to be
self-willed and unreasonable; and that such as against both Conscience and
Reason are evil affected to the welfare of the public; may be prevented in
the mischief which their practices may work against the safety and quietness
of the state, and of those that are peaceable in the land. For in these
doubtful, distracted and troublesome times; the greater our confusions are,
the more it is necessary to settle our judgment by a rule; that in matters of
clear duty, where Gods will is known, a good conscience may see where it ought
to rest, and in matters of Debate, wherein circumstances are to be weighed, the
common grounds of reason by the true method of reasoning may take place: for
there is none other way imaginable to deal effectually and to meet with the
spirit of self will, of ignorance, and of presumption (the great traitors of
all humane societies) then to act thus, by undeniable Principles and Rules; and
to oblige those with whom we act, and our selves also; to go no further then
these direct us; for I suppose all will grant this freely, that thus far all
men, in all places are bound to deny themselves; nor shall it be required, that
any man, in any place should deny himself further, then to exalt above his own
apprehensions and purposes the common grounds of Truths and Righteousness: and
this we hope they whom we deal withal will readily yield unto.

That therefore the turbulent inclinations, which with some are in the dark;
with others are apparent, may be convicted and cast out of all; I shall
endeavor to show briefly the rules, by which the Christian Magistracy and
Ministry in their several places respectively, for the good of the people
committed to their charges, ought to walk in Love, in Righteousness, and in
Peace toward each other; that that which is observable at all times as a
direction to our happiness, may by Gods blessing at this time be applied unto
our present condition, as a restoration from our miseries, and a preservation
from the ruin wherewith otherwise unavoidably we are threatened.

To come then to that, which is the fruit of all these considerations, and that
which ought to be the final result of all the Debates which may be undertaken
about these matters. Let us set our thoughts in a way to discover three things;
which being laid to heart, may by Gods grace rectify our miscariages.

The heads of this application. And the Reason why to be considered.
First, let us reflect upon the proper works of the Magistracy and Ministry
more distinctly, as they relate unto the ends for which Christ has ordained
them in the world.

Secondly, let us consider the natural properties, and proper acts of true
love of righteousness and of peaceablenesse; as they are duties proper to
Christians more then to other men; and above all other men most observable by
the leaders of Christian societies.

Thirdly and lastly, let us see how at this time these duties may be applied,
by those that are in place amongst us, to fulfill the ends of their
administrations, and to cure the distempers of our present condition.

For except we rationally understand both what our work is, and how we are to
go about it conscionably, as it becomes Christians; how can we undertake it
so as to expect a blessing upon it? but if we know clearly, both the work,
which is to be done, and the Rule by which we are to govern our selves in
doing it; then as by following that Rule we may expect a blessing; so by
neglecting it we shall be inexcusable.

Of the proper works of Magistrates and Ministers jointly.
Concerning the proper works of the Magistracy and Ministry, as they relate
unto the ends for which Christ does employ them in his service; they must be
discovered by looking upon the aim which God has in making them that which
they are, and which they ought to have in taking their places upon them.

The end which God has in making such officers amongst men is mainly this, to
manifest the glory of his own goodness and his supremacy in all things over
mankind. For the Lord has made all things for himself first; and Prove. 16. 4
Psalm. 8.
then also for man, that in the right use of all things under God, man might
show forth his glory; and thereby attain to true happiness: for happiness in
man is nothing else but to partake (so far as he is capable) of the goodness
of God, which is his glory toward us. Now the goodness of God in the hand of
his Supremacy dispensing all things, runs in two Channels, which answer to
the twofold faculties of the life of man; to the two sorts of Creatures which
God has made in the world, and to the twofold way of putting forth his
infinite virtues: the two faculties of the life of man, are Bodily and
Spiritual; the two sorts of creatures which God has filled the world with,
are some visible, and some invisible; and the twofold way of putting forth his
virtue is, by Nature and by Grace. In these channels the glory of God is
conveyed by the creatures unto the faculties of man; that all may partake
thereof and become happy therein, and that one creature in the way of God may
conveigh the same to another. Now that man, who is borne like a wild asses
colt, may be directed by the right Job 11. 12.
use, both of his faculties, and of the creatures, to attain to his
happiness; God has appointed some instruments, to lead him toward the way
thereof, which are called Magistrates and Ministers: and lest these, who by
nature are neither wiser nor better then all the rest, should be ignorant of
the true way wherein they ought to direct others, he has given to them both,
one Supreme head and director, his only begotten Son Jesus Christ, by whom the
worlds visible and invisible were made; by whom the Father has brought back
all things unto himself again, which were at a distance from him, by reason of
the curse: by whom all things bodily and spiritual in man are restored to
their integrity, and enabled to act toward God: by whom all the creatures
subsist, and are made again the receptacles of Gods goodness in nature and
grace, and by whom, and in whom alone all the manifestation of Gods goodness
is apparent, and the way to happiness by giving God his glory, is made plain
in the nature of man: and therefore he is set as the head of all things over
mankind, and given as the Sovereign Director of those who are to direct others
in the way to felicity, as well Bodily as Spiritual, as well by Nature as by
Grace. Thus then Gods aim is to glorify himself in his Son; and to glorify
his Son over all, and to glorify mankind by making it happy in conformity to
his Son: and that the life and virtue of his Son, which is the fountain of
Glory, and the spring of living waters, may as a river flow out and be
dispersed to all that stand in need of comfort: he has set instruments under
him, as conduit pipes in the two channels of his virtue, to conveigh the same
unto others. These Instruments are the forenamed Magistrates and Ministers, who
are set to receive from Christ all that which is dispensable unto humane
societies for their happiness.

Between these two the Magistrate is first, for the Apostle says, that was not
first which is spiritual, but that which is natural, and afterward that which
is spiritual. 1 Cor. 15. 46. the Minister therefore is the second in order:
for all his administrations presuppose a man to be under the government, and in
the right channel of nature; or at least capable of the administrations
belonging thereunto: so then God has made the Magistrate to stand by himself
under Christ in the dispensation of the means of natural felicity, that he
may Psalm. 2. 10, 11, 12.
learn of him as his disciple, how to manifest the glory of Gods goodness unto
all flesh.

Of the Magistrates work by himself.
The aim therefore which the Magistrate, as he is a Christian, ought to have
in taking his place upon him, is to set himself under Christ, as his servant
and instrument, to conveigh to the societies of men by natural means the
enjoyment of all Gods goonesse, that he may be glorified therein, and they may
be happy thereby in this world: and to this effect his more immediate aim and
design should be, to employ the power and authority of his place, to order the
outward societies of men in unity, to oversee, and rectify all their actions,
which are contrary to the will of God in nature, and by his conduct to settle
men together in a condition of life, wherein Godliness and Honesty 2 Timothy 2. 2.
may be maintained and advanced, and safety with Peace and Plenty enjoyed
without disturbance.

From this description of his aim, as it arises naturally from Gods end in
giving him his employment, we may gather two things, both what his proper works
are, and what the property of his way is in going about them.

His proper works are, to set a foot all the means which he can use in his
place, by which these ends may be brought to pass: and the property of his
way in going about those works is, to carry himself sutably to the nature of
men, with whom he has to deal, to the eminency of the place wherein he is
set, and to the quality of the means whereof he does make use; here then, if
we will reflect upon particulars, we shall find these to be his proper works.

1. Togather and unite men's minds and persons together under some common
relation for their mutual help, unto that which is good for all, as their
joint interest: whence it is, that all corporations in a State depend naturally
upon the Supreme Magistrate, as the branches of a tree upon their root.

2. To take notice of all men's ways and walkings, to see that nothing be found
therein prejudicial to the common good; and to call those that do any thing
amiss, and contrary to the laws of nature, or of the Commonwealth, to an
account concerning their proceedings, to right the same.

3. To set up and maintain indifferently toward all, the public means of
common happiness, wherein all are concerned, that every one may enjoy the
comforts of the life of nature. Here then his work will be so far as outward
helps can reach the effect, and counsel give address thereunto, to intend
these things.

1. First, to provide for the life of Godliness by the protection and
advancement of the Christian Religion, and of the professors thereof, to show
himself a Nursing Father of them, and of the ways of Gods worship in the State
to countenance it with Authority.

2. Secondly, to provide for the life of Honesty; by the erecting, ordering,
and overseeing all manner of Schools, for the education of all sorts of youths,
in good manners, and in all manner of Learning, chiefly that, whereof every one
shall be found most capable to become serviceable unto the society of mankind
thereby.

3. Thirdly, to provide for the subjects safety by the management of their
strength for public defense, and the just use of power, to punish all
offenders, and to right particular wrongs: that the wicked may stand in awe and
fear.

4. Fourthly, to provide for the Subjects peace, by the settlement of good
order in all things of a public nature, and between man and man, by wholesome
laws and constitutions in matters of right and wrong; and by public
Judicatures in controversall cases, wherein by the law of nature none ought to
be his own judge: that every one may know his duty, and behave himself
blamelessely therein, or be reproved, shamed, and corrected in judgment for
his faults.

5. Lastly, to provide for the Subjects plenty, by the setting up and
encouragement of all manner of industry by Sea and Land, in the ways of
Husbandry, of Fishing, of Merchandise, of Manufactures, and of every thing
else, that may bring a lawful benefit to the particular or general societies
of men, amongst themselves or toward foreigners.

I conceive these to be the maine and full substance of his proper works, as he
is a Magistrate, and a Christian in his place: and that these things should
stand thus in his design, although in the prosecution thereof, the order of
his proceeding may be quite retrograde in some respect, and in some other
variously changeable: As for the property of his way in doing these things, I
conceive thus.

Of the property of the Magistrates way in doing his works.
In reference to the nature of men, with whom he has to deal, his way must be
rational, and the nearer it comes to flow from the grounds of Common right and
equity, the more effectual it will prove.

In reference to the eminency of his place, his way should be Authoritative and
backed with Power. I understand a way to be Authoritative; when by a lawful
office, which none else can, may or will attend and discharge for the public
good, a necessary duty is prescribed to those that are in subjection, and that
it is backed with power, when there is strength enough to enforce obedience to
that which is commanded, and break all opposite resistance to the execution
thereof. There is no power (says the Apostle) but of God, and the powers
(says he) that be, are ordained of God. Rom 13. 1. and we may say, that there
is no Authority (as it is distinct from power) but of men; because the
dispensation of right to it, is in the hand of God, by the ordinance of men, or
in the hand of men, by the ordinance of God: by men in this place, I mean the
elders and heads of the people: by the ordinance of God, in the hand of men; I
mean the fundamental rights, which by nature are inherent in all humane
societies, to provide for their own safety and well-being: and by the
ordinance of men in the hand of God, I mean the resolutions and agreements of
the people, which are settled upon those rights in order to their wellbeing. And
how far they should attend each other ordinarily, or extraordinarily do beget
each other, as God intends Judgment or Mercy toward a people; I shall not now
search into, but this I say for the Magistrates way of eminency, that if
matters be set a foot Authoritatively without power, especially in
extraordinary administrations; those that act them, expose themselves unto
contempt: and if they be set a foot powerfully without Authority, either in
ordinary or extraordinary administrations, those that act them, make themselves
odious as oppressors: therefore nothing should be done either Authoritatively
without power, or powerfully without Authority.

In reference to the quality of the means, which are made use of, his way is
to act by Commission and Deputation of Authority, of right and of power unto
subordinate officers, who may act in the name of the Supreme; and may not be
lawfully resisted, in that which they have commission to perform. And thus much
concerning the Magistrates work, and his way of going about it.

Of the Ministers work by himself.
As for the Ministers of the Gospel, Gods end is to glorify his spiritual
goodness toward the souls of men by their service, making them conduit-pipes
of his grace toward the same; that by faith in Christ men may receive the
forgiveness Act. 26, 18.
of sins, and an inheritance amongst those that are sanctified. And to this
effect; Christ does appoint them as his messengers to be witnesses of his
Truth, which is the Covenant made between God and man in himself, and to be 2
Cor. 4. 5.
servants to the societies of believers, the public professors of his truth,
for his sake: they are also made subjects for the 1 Pet. 2. 13.
Lords sake unto every ordinance of man, as all other men are, that they may
give others a good example of orderly walking, and of harmlesnesse in the life
of nature.

And of his way in going about it.
Now by this appointment of God concerning them, it is evident, that they in
their places are not properly over men as Magistrates are in humane affairs, to
command, and compel obedience to that which they inioyn; but only toward men
in Divine affairs, to let them know the will of God, and to entreat them to
yield obedience thereunto for Christ's sake; and in case men will not hearken to
them, they have no more to do, but to shake off the dust from their feet, and
declare the judgment of God unto them.

And as they have no masterly or commanding power over either the outward
concernments, or the faith of those to whom they are sent, so they have no
right to share any way with the Magistrate in his employments, no more then his
meanest Subject, nor to meddle with the administration of any of his works, nor
to incroach upon any part of his Authority, nor to make any mixture of his
employments with their own under any public pretense whatsoever; but in all
outward and visible concernments, to be as it becomes mere Subjects, and under
the Supreme Power, without any exemption, or any privilege (by the title of
Ecclesiastical persons) to be free from his jurisdiction, as the Man of Sin
pretends his servants should be.

Therefore the aim which the Minister of the Gospel ought to have in taking
his place upon him, is to set himself under Christ in his employment, as his
servant and instrument toward the spirits of men; that by grace he may
conveigh the testimony of Gods spiritual goodness to them, that they by
entertaining the same may glorify God, and become happy both in this world,
and in the world to come. And to this effect, his more immediate aim should
be, to teach those that know not Christ to know him, and persuade them to
believe in him, and to profess his Name: and those that profess him, to walk
by the Spirit of Christ with God in the Covenant, entertaining and observing
the tenor thereof through conformity to the cross of Christ, in hope Romans 8.
17.
of being glorified together with him.

Of the difference of the Magistraticall and Ministerial ways of
administration
And from this description of his aim, and the appointment of Christ
concerning him toward his employment, we may see that his proper works, and
the property of his way in going about the same, are, as far different from
that of the Christian Magistrates works and way, as the life of Nature is from
the life of grace, as visible things are from invisible, as mere reason is from
revelation, as ruling is from doing service, as coaction is from supplication,
as commanding is from being in subjection, as the outward man is from the
inward, as this world is from that which is to come, as to be dead, and
crucified unto this present life, is from seeking after the enjoyment of
happiness therein, and as bearing witness concerning the will and Word of
God, to incline the conscience to yield it self willingly thereunto, is from an
injunction brought forth by the will and word of man, with a purpose to see it
actually performed, and personal obedience yielded thereunto, whether it be
done willingly or no. So that except men will purposely set themselves to go
beyond their line, and neglect their own work, to take another man's work out of
his hand; there can be no interfaring of the employments; and yet they may be
as intimately coordinate, concurrent, and subservient to their joint end of
humane happiness, and the glory of God in Christ, as sense is coordinate,
concurrent, and subservient unto Reason; or right reason unto Conscience, or a
good conscience unto the motions of the Holy Ghost, and to the testimony of
Jesus in the word of prophecy.

And of the limits of their intermedling with each others affairs.
Thus we have briefly seen the proper works of these employments, as they
relate unto the ends for which Christ has appointed them. We shall not need to
descend unto the particulars of the Ministerial works, it suffices for our
purpose in hand, to have discovered this, that by the appointment of God, for
the glory of his Grace in Christ Jesus, as crucified unto the world on the one
hand; and for the glory of his Supreme power in Christ, as exalted over the
world on the other hand: the several, proper and immediate ends and aims of
the Magistraticall and Ministerial employments, are put in two peculiar
channells; and accordingly that their works are so distinct, as the work of the
mind is from that of the body, and their ways of going about them so
different, as the way to frame and beget inward thoughts toward God, is from
the way to order men's outward actions in a society toward men. For to attend
the latter belongs wholly to the Magistrate, as to attend the former is
wholly peculiar to the Minister. And although the Magistrate, as a Christian,
may intend as occasion is offered, to help, by the Spiritual Talent which God
has bestowed upon him, his Brethren in the way of setting their hearts aright
toward God (nor is this any prejudice, but rather an advantage to the Minister
of the Gospel) yet he cannot be obliged to give attendance unto that
employment, as to a function of his Magistracy: nor is that to be reckoned as
any part or act of his ruling office: but to the Minister it is his whole
office to attend this continually, by laboring in the word and prayer for it.
Nor is it lawful for him as a Minister of the Gospel, either to attend or to
intend any thing else but this: it is true, that as a neighbor in humane
societies, he may occasionally advise (being called thereunto) that which is
most expedient to be done in the outward actions of men: (nor is any prejudice,
but rather an advantage to the Magistrate in the State,) but if his aim should
be to intend or attend, the regulating of men's natural ways; or the judging
of men by their actions authoritatively or powerfully as an overseer of their
outward behavior; he has forsaken his own employment, he has usurped the
station and place of his Magistrate, he has brought the state of Nature, which
is single, under the intanglement of a twofold government, he does confound the
conduit-pipes of the Spiritual and Natural administrations, wherein Gods
goodness shall appear and run, though jointly, yet distinctly; and he does
lay in the spirits of men, and in the frame of their association, the
foundations of Babylon, and builds up the Mystery of Iniquity thereupon,
whereby worldly interests are covered with religious pretenses, the consciences
of believers enslaved to the wills of men, and the Truth and Ordinances of God
perverted to serve humane policies and deceitful practices. For indeed this
corruption of the aim of the Ministerial function, is the very Cornerstone of
that mystery, which the man of sin has maintained against the profession of
the truth, ever since Christian Societies have appeared in the state of the
world to be considerable.

The Rule by which the true property of humane actions is to be discerned.
For seeing the natural and true end of everything does determine and discover
what goodness is therein, and what is right or wrong in the properties, in the
parts, in the faculties, in the actions thereof: for as these are, or are not
subordinate and fitted for the attainment of their natural uses and ends, so
they are to be accounted good or bad, right or wrong: (as a hand, a foot, and
an eye, so far as they are fitted or not fitted to handle, walk, and see, so
far are they to be counted good or bad in their own kind) therefore in the
rational judgment, and estimate of the nature of humane actions, the
knowledge of the true aim whereunto they should tend, does show the
straightness or the crookedness thereof: for as they are subservient or not
subservient by their innate properties, to produce the effect which ought to be
aimed at; so they are to be judged good or bad, straight or crooked. If then
according to this Rule we should reflect as we ought to do upon our selves as
well as upon other men, to bring all our proceedings to this test of Reason and
Conscience, we may judge somewhat more particularly of our affairs thus:

The application of this Rule to the perverse designs of Magistrates and
Ministers.
1. If any called a Christian Magistrate, or a Minister, be ignorant or
unmindfull of the subordination of his Office unto the Sovereignty of Jesus
Christ, and does not lay to heart these ends which Christ has set before him,
to be followed in his employment, to make the course of his administrations
directly subservient thereunto; we may conclude of such a one, that as his
heart is not right with God, so he will not be able to walk acceptably before
God, or uprightly toward men in his Office.

2. If any called a Christian Magistrate, or a Minister, does set himself to
get into the employment, as into a place of ease, of plenty and profit, of
honor and respect, of power and authority, that he may live at ease, and have
power over, and respect above others; we may conclude, that therein he has
forsaken his interest in Christ, and his aim to serve him; and has made his
own eye (that is, his intention in the administration) which should be single,
(that all his proceedings may be full of light) evil, corrupt, and full of
darkness. If therefore the light that is in him (his very eye and aim) be
darkness, how great is that darkness, says Christ Jesus? Matthew. 6. 22. 23.

3. If any called a Magistrate, does in his place set himself to keep people in
Divisions, that he may rule at will between their partial humors and
passionate follies: to keep people in blindness, that they may not discern his
way,, nor know their own, but be led at his pleasure: to keep people in
Poverty, by getting all the riches and power thereof into his own hand, rather
to make all men his servants thereby, than to serve the public therewith: to
keep people in a slavish fear, and awful terror, that he may rule them rather
like beasts, than rationally and conscionably by love like men: and to keep up
a show of greatness and outward appearance of glory, to make fools gape and
gaze upon them, rather than to seek the honor which comes alone from God, by
doing real service in his way to the Commonwealth of Israel; if (I say) any
man does follow these politic subtilties of State. yet professing himself to
be a Christian; we may conclude, that he has not only forsaken Christ's way
and aim, but has drunk deep, and is drunken with the cup of the abominations
Rev. 17. 2. 3, 4.
and filthiness of the great Whore, who rides upon the scarlet-colored
Beast; and with whom all the Kings of the earth have committed in this kind
vile fornication: and so far as he uses any of these ways to compass his own
ends, and neglects the means, ways and ends for which Christ has put him in
his place, so far is he a part of her mystery, and shall accordingly receive
his reward with her,, if he repent not.

4. If any called a Minister, does set up a formality of Religiousnesse,
leading people to worship God this or that way therein, and to cast their
conscience at rest thereon: if he does not wholly apply himself to manifest
Jesus Christ crucified unto his hearers, to bring them to be conformable to his
death, as new creatures by the covenant, and to rest there alone upon free
grace: if he does help to persecute any in their bodies or states for outward
relations and interests, rather than study to address and convert their souls
to God: and if he does set himself in a state-way, either to gain power and
authority in his own hand, to share it with the magistrate, or to subordinate
his ministerial employment unto wordly ends of State-government, to cover the
tricks thereof with a cloak of Conscience and Religion, that people should
worship the Image which he sets before them: if (I say) any man does pervert
the use of his ministry thus, yet professing himself to be the servant of
Christ; he does play the part of the false Prophet, who does work miracles
before the great Beast, and exercises all his power over men. And the Rev. 13.
11, 12, 13, etc. and chap. 19, 20.
greater the natural and acquired parts and gifts of this man are, and the
more revealed and spiritual truths, or mystcall shows thereof he does mix
with this kind of service, the more fire he does cause to come down from
heaven, and the more deeply he does deceive; and therefore he shall accordingly
receive also with the false Prophet so much the more of his reward, if he
repent not.

5, If therefore such as are in power look upon religion only as Jeroboam did,
in order to their own interests, and will suffer none to stand in places of
employment, but men of their own creating, that will serve turns toward the
people: and if ministers that are in places of employment, look only upon
their Magistrate, as the Jewish Priests did upon Pilate, when they delivered
Christ up to be crucified by him, and affect him no further than he will act
their designs: whether they agree or disagree upon their matters together, it
is apparent that by so doing, they conspire to make the people that are led by
them, miserable and desolate, because neither of them follow either the true
work, or the right way of their employment, neither toward the multitude, or
toward one another: but if they do openly disagree, they conspire then by
tearing them in pieces, and setting them in factions against one another, to
make their misery and desolation sudden and without remedy. For except God turn
their hearts to a right course, and set them upon the works of their calling
wthout partiality, and direct their counsels in a loving, righteous and
peaceable way, (as Christ has appointed his Disciples to walk for his glory)
toward the good of those that are under their charge, and for their own
mutual happiness, they shall never be able for fear of one another, to
intend, or attend any other designs but such as are acted by power and
violence; whereupon the great Dragon their master in these courses does set
them; and whieh for want of Christian love and compassion, can end in nothing
else but in merciless cruelties, equally ruinous to each other, and to the
Commonwealths of humanesocieties.

Of the duties of Love, Righteousness, and Peace jointly.
Hitherto we have seen both what the proper works and ways of the Magistracy
and Ministry are, as they relate unto the ends for which Christ has ordained
them; and what the error and deviation is from those works and ways. And
lastly also what this deviation does produce in all societies, where the duties
of Love, of Righteousness and of Peace, are not thought upon, to refer the
whole state thereof unto Christ, as Christians ought to do. Let us now come to
the second point of our Disquirie, which is to discover what the natural
properties and proper acts are of true Love, of Righteousness and of
Peaceablenesse, which Christians, and chiefly their Leaders unto happiness,
ought to intend toward all men, but especially toward each other in the
works of their employment, and above all in times of distress.

Now to speak of these duties ingenerall, as to commend their worth, their
necessity, their usefulness, and such like, I conceive it needless: for
certainly it is not so much for want of knowledge of that which we ought to
do, that we run into errors, as by reason of our perturbation, and of our
by-respects, which beget in us a disregarding of these, and an observation of
other matters; and are begotten in us through partiality in our selves, and
fore-stalment of thoughts concerning others: For it is by reason of these
things that we play the hypocrites, and lie against the Truth; for which cause
our sin is the greater: For to him that knows to do good, and does it not,
to him it is sin, says the Apostle, Jam. 4. 17.

Of the duty of Christian love by it self.
Therefore as concerning the duty of Christian Love, it cannot be supposed in
probability, that any in the Ministry, or in any other charge amongst
Christians, should be ignorant of the nature thereof; because it is known to all
that have been taught the first Principles of the knowledge of Christ, that the
duty of Christian love is twofold: First, the affection by which we cleave to
God as to our Father in Christ: And next, the affection by which we embrace our
neighbor for Gods sake, as Christ has embraced us. Now concerning our love to
God, and friendship to Christ, it is evident that it stands only in this, That
we keep the commandments of the Father, and that we do whatsoever Christ does
enjoyne us to perform, John 15. 14. and 1 John 5. 5. whence it is further
manifest, that to neglect the known will of God, and to set our selves in a
course which is contrary to his commandments, is openly to renounce Christ's
friendship, and plainly to become a hater of God, and hateful to him. And as
for the commandment wherein God will have us to show our love, and Christ our
friendship to himself, it is known by all, to be none other but the Law of
Love, whereof the whole substance has been delivered unto us in the new
commandment which Christ has given us when he sairh, John 13. 34, 35. A new
Commandment I have given you, That ye love one another as I have loved you,
that ye also love one another: by this shall all men know that ye are my
Disciples, if ye have love one to another. The true evidence then of our love
toward God, is this, That we love the Brethren: For he that says he loves
God, and hates his brother, is a liar, says the Apostle, 1 John 4. 20, 21.
For he that loves not his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom
he has not seen? And this Commandment have we from him, That he that loves
God, love his brother also.

The end (for this always is to be looked upon as that which does manifest the
nature and property of every thing) of love, is to seek the good of that which
is beloved; Now our goodness Psalm. 16. 2, 3. 1 Cor. 10. 24. 1 Cor. 13. 5.
cannot extend unto God, therefore God has appointed us to bestow that good
which by us is communicable, upon men, our brethren, that bear his image: For
love seeks not his own, but the good of others. And in Christian love the
good which is to be sought, and the way of seeking and imparting it unto
others, is no where so discernable as in the example of Christ's love unto us:
for he procured and imparted unto us that which in it self was the only good;
and to us that whereof we stood in greatest need: For nothing it self is good,
but God, and that which advances his glory: Now we were separate from God, and
came short of his glory, Romans 3. 23. but Christ brought us near unto him, and
received us into his glory, Romans 15. 7. Ephesians. 2. 13. Whence it is that the
Apostle exhorts us, to receive one another, as Christ also received us to the
glory of Goll, Romans 5. 7. The end then and aim of Christian love, does tend to
that good alone, which makes us partakers of Gods glory: for it aims at the
real perception of Gods kindness, of his mercy, of his truth, of his
faithfulness, and of all his goodness toward us; that all may find it, and
in the covenant of Grace through Jesus Christ embrace it: for this is that
glory whereinto Christ did receive us. As for the way of seeking and imparting
this good unto others, we see by Christ's example, a most excellent property of
this love, that it does humble and deny it self, and forsakes its own
interests and conveniences for the good of others, and that even to the
utmost: For Christ through his love to us, though he was in the form of God,
and thought it no robbery to be equal with God, yet made himself of no
reputation, but took the shape of a Servant upon him, and became obedient even
unto death, and laid down his life for us. Whence it is also, that we are
exhorted by the Apostles, to have the same mind which was in Christ Jesus, Phil,
2. 7. And to lay down our lives for the Brethren, 1 John 3. 16.

We see then that the natural properties, and proper acts of Christian love,
tend wholly to engage the heart first to a perfect obedience unto the will of
God in all things, and then particularly to obey his will in this, That we
should procure the good of our neighbor, even as Jesus Christ did procure for
us that which was our good. Thus then through love to him, to do to others
that which he did to us, is the true Being of Christian love.

Of the duty of Righteousness by it self.
As for the nature and proper acts of Righteousness, all do know, First, that
nothing can be accounted right in Christianity, which is not conformable to a
Rule. Secondly, that no such Rule can be accounted absolutely good, straight
and perfect, but Gods will, Romans 12. 2. Thirdly, that this Will is revealed in
his Word. And fourthly, that this Will and Word are the way of holiness,
wherein we ought to walk with God: for without holiness no man shall see his
face, Heb. 12. 14. 1 John 4, 16.
The proper act of righteousness therefore, is the straightness of our will
in subordination unto Gods will, to walk with him. Now as God is Love, and he
that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him: so it follows, that
he that walks in love, walks with God, and God with him. Whence it is, that
the whole Law is fulfilled in the duty of love; because all the straightness
of the spirit of man, is the integrity of his love, in subordination to the
will of God So that as the law of love is found to be the main principle of
righteousness, so all the acts of righteousness are nothing else but the
fulfilling of this law. Whence it is that the proportion (which is the measure
of the straightness) of all actions between Man and Man, is taken from the
natural principle of love which every one has to himself: for by the law we
are commanded to love our neighbor as our selves, Levit. 19. 18. Matthew. 22.
39. And Christ makes the Rule plainer to us when he says, that all things
whatsoever we would that men should do to us, we should even likewise do unto
them, for this is the Law and the Prophets, Matthew. 7. 12. And according to this
Rule God shall right all things that are out of frame; for with what measure we
mete unto others, it shall be measured unto us again, Matthew. 7. 2. Now the
cause why Love is the root of Righteousness, is, because it engages the
affection to be harmless, and to pay willingly unto others all things which
are due unto them for their good. Whence it is also clear, that hatred is the
root of all unrighteousness, because it engages the affection to the quite
contrary motions. Now as Righteousness is the daughter of Love; so it is the
mother of Peaceablenesse: for by giving to every one his due, contentedness is
begotten, which preventeth the cause of strife, and maintains peace. So then
the end of Righteousness is to direct our way to live with God by the
uprightness of our spirit and actions, in conformity to his will.

As concerning Peaceablenesse, the nature and property of it, is inwardly, that
quiet and meek disposition of the mind, which is of great price in the sight of
God: and outwardly, that sweetness 1 Pet. 3. 4.
and gentleness of the carriage toward men, which neither takes nor gives
occasion of offenses.

Of the duty of Peaceablenes
The end of Peaceablenesse is to maintain, increase, and restore the joy which
comes from the enjoyment, the augmentation and recovery of that which is
good, appertaining to us in the way of righteousness. And to gain this end, two
things are in the life of Christianity to be observed, namely, what the proper
acts of Peaceablenes are in our selves, and toward others; and whence the
disposition of the soul which does beget them, is begotten in us,

The proper acts of Peaceablenes in our selves are, to study to be quiet, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11. not to mind high things, but to condescend to things of low
degree, Romans 12. 16. for of Pride comes nothing but contention, Prove. 13. 10.
and to behave and quiet our selves as a child that is weaned from his mother,
Psa 131. that is, to wean our souls from the lusts of the flesh; for wars
and fightings come from nothing else but from our lusts that war in our
members, Jam. 4. 1. if therefore we have Salt within our selves to mortify
these lusts, we shall be able to have Peace one with another, as Christ
commands us. Mark 9. 50.

The acts of Peaceablenesse toward others are, in respect of all men, to show
all meekness unto all men: Tit. 3. 2. in respect of those that are of a quiet
disposition, to be of the same mind toward them: Romans 12. 16. endeavoring to
keep the unity of the Spirit with them in the bond of Peace. Ephesians. 4. 3. not
envying them, nor provoking them, nor being desirous of vain glory toward
them: Galat. 5. 26. In respect of those that are of an unquiet disposition, to
follow Peace, and ensue it toward them: 1 Pet. 3. 11. and that even so far as
it is possible, and as much as in us lies. Romans 12. 18. to do all things
without murmurings and disputings against them, in a blameless and harmless
way, that they may have no cause to murmr at us, or to dispute with us. Phil.
2. 14, 15. And to this effect, to lay aside all malice, and all guil, and
hypocrisy, and evil speakings, and surmisings, 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2. And lastly, in
respect of those that are injurious, to recompense no evil for evil, nor to
avenge our selves, but to give place unto wrath. Romans 12. 17, 19. Not to be
overcome with evil, but to overcome evil with good. Romans 12. 21. And to that
effect, with all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering, to forbear them
in love. Ephesians. 4. 2. And to forgive them as God in Christ has forgiven us.
Ephesians. 4. 32.

Now the original and immediate cause of this Peaceable disposition of the
soul, is to suffer the Peace of God, whereunto we are called, to rule in our
hearts; Col. 3. 15. for when this (by the new Covenant in Christ) does possess
the spirit, the soul is quieted within it self; because it enters with Christ
into that rest which he has purchased and prepared for it. Hebr. 4. 10, 11.
And it receives the Peace which he has left with it, and given to it; so that
the heart is not troubled, neither is it afraid at any thing which in this
world can befall unto it, Joh. 14. 27. for the promise of the Lord, wherein he
has caused us to hope, does sustain us, which says, that he will keep him in
perfect Peace whose heart is stayed on him, because he trusts in him. Isa.
26. 3. But on the other side, those that have no interest in the Covenant of
Peace which Christ has made with us, can have no rest nor quietness within
themselves, or toward others; because my God has said, There is no Peace to
the wicked: but his heart and his whole course is, as the troubled Sea, which
cannot rest, but casts forth mire and dirt perpetually. Isa. 57. 20, 21.

The ends then of these duties show the perfection whereunto they lead us, and
their proper works the way, by which we attain the same. For by the law of love
we are taught how to aim at that which is truly good; by the law of
righteousness, how to order our way in prosecuting of it; and by the law of
Peaceablenesse, how to attend the delightful possession of it. The first sets
our mind upon God; the second directs us to him, and the third fits us to
enjoy him.

What is proper to a Christian in these duties more then to other men.
Thus in brief we see what these duties are, and whence in a Christian more
then in other men they proceed; for other men know nothing herein but the
principles of Reason and Morality, by which they look more upon the material
outside of the works, then upon any thing else; because natural men cannot
raise their minds unto the apprehension of spiritual truths, which beget in
the soul a new life, and far less can they act any thing thereby without
special grace: yet if the Intellectuals of a man truly rational in nature
(which is not altogether impossible) be raised so far, by the right use of
common illuminations, as to perceive the proportion which is between such
performances, as these are, and the principles from whence they flow, he will
find no just cause to contradict any thing therein, although his heart will not
be able thereupon to close with the duties themselves: for a true Christian is
a spiritual man, is not enabled to close heartily with these duties, either
because he is convicted of the rationalitie thereof; or because he does
understand the excellency and worth of this way, above the way of Morality
(for these are only preparative inducements inclining his affection thereunto)
but he closes therewith only because his conscience is enlightened by the
truth, and purified by faith: and therein is bound over, and given up to walk
thus with God in Christ by the covenant of grace: for through the law of the
spirit of life and love which is in Christ Jesus, whereby he is freed from the
law of sin, and of death, he is made conformable unto the image of the Son of
God; and the righteousness of the Law of God through faith and love being
fulfilled in him, he has peaceable communion with the Father, and with the
Son, wherein he does set himself to walk with joy, and unspeakable comfort in
the light of their countenance, by which he is daily transformed from glory to
glory, as by the Spirit and presence of the Lord.

The rule then, and the way of a Christian is to walk in these duties toward
all men, and for these ends; not with humane wisdom, and the reasonings of his
natural understanding, (although he does nothing irrationally) but according
to the direction and manifestation of the Spirit of grace: that is, according
to the testimony of Jesus, revealed unto his spirit, which obliges his
conscience to follow affectionately the rules of these duties, in all
simplicity and godly sincerity; through love to the life of Jesus Christ, and
the grace of God in him; and not for any other obligation, or by any other
consideration whatsoever: and whosoever does walk after this rule, Peace be
upon him, and upon the Israel of God. And because we have not hitherto walked
after this rule, we have not as yet found the way to Peace; for to find Peace
out of this way, is as impossible as to miss of it, within it.

How universal they are, and inseparable from Christianity. And chiefly in
leading men, and times of greatest need.
From hence we may observe, that these duties have an universal influence upon
all the ways of Christians; for as Christians, they are essential to them in
all the works of their several callings; and if they study not to do all
their works by these rules, they cannot be said to do them as Christians; for
as Christians we are commanded to do all our matters with charity, 1 Cor. 16.
14. for we are obliged by the love of God to us, as his dear children to be
followers of God; and to walk in love, as Christ also has loved us. Ephesians. 5.
1, 2. And if we walk not thus, it is evident that we are none of his children,
but have renounced his love, and are destitute of the life of God in all our
undertakings; for he that loves not, knows not God, for God is love. 1 John
4. 8. And again, as Christians we are bound to serve God, and Christ in his
kingdom; and if we serve him not, how can we truly bear his Name? Now the
kingdom of God, wherein we are appointed to live, and wherein all our works are
to be done as a service unto him, is righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy
Ghost: and he that in these things does serve Christ, is acceptable to God, and
approved of men: says the Apostle, Romans 14. 17, 18. If then we serve not
Christ in these things, or intend them not at all; how can we be called his
servants, or said to live in his kingdom? The end of the whole profession of
Christianity, as to us men, within our selves, and in reference to one another,
1 Ioh. 1. 4.
is the fulfilling of our joy. This end is attained, when we partake of the
righteousness and peace which is in Christ Jesus; and when through his love,
we are moved and enabled, to impart that which we do partake unto one another,
that by the enlargement of grace, there may be a fullness of joy in all. For
all that profess the name, and partake of the life of Christ, have an interest
in one another; and as by their right and privilege to him, they may challenge
from each other the consolation that is in him, and the comfort Phil. 2. 1, 2.
of his love, and the fellowship of his spirit; so it ought to be one of their
chief aims, in the common profession, and indeed is the main of their duty
therein, to intend, and to impart these things effectually toward one another:
which if they do not, they neither serve Christ, nor seek their own good in his
kingdom; but in very deed, renounce him, and his service, and their interest in
each other, and the whole truth of the profession. And if in all men's actions,
and at all times these Rules are so necessary, and fundamentally essential to
Christianity, that nothing can be acceptable to God, nor profitable to men
without the observance thereof; then we must needs conclude, that they are most
of all necessary in the chiefest actions, of our chiefest men that are leaders
in the profession; and at the times of our greatest extremities and
difficulties. For if in such times we take not counsel at the mouth of the
Law, and of the testimony; we can expect no dawning of the day of salvation,
nor morning Isa. 8. 20. 22.
light arising to us: but in all our doubts we shall meet with easelesse grief
and trouble, in all our deliberations with endless confusion and disorder; in
all our difficulties, with dimnesse of anguish and pain: and by our own
undertakings and counsels, we shall be driven into darkness, and despair at
last.

Now to the end, that at this time, and in the straits whereunto God has
brought us, partly for our finnes, partly to fit us for his Kingdom, we may not
miscarrie, and fall into such sad inconveniences: and that by the neglect of
our duty, let us come unto the third and last point of our disquirie, which is
to be the fruit and conclusion of all that has been said hitherto. And that is

How these Rules are to be made use of to cure our diseases viz. By the
discovery of our present condition.
To see in our present condition how these Rules should be observed, by those
that are in place to cure our distempers.

And to this effect I shall, as briefly as may be, look upon our present
condition, upon our distempers therein which are the causes of our disease; and
upon the Method of the cure, by the application of the Remedy thereunto

I am not ignorant, that our present condition is differently understood, by
the several parties whereinto we are fallen; some look this way, some that way
upon it: but all that can discern any thing which is to be seen; or judge of
the reasons of what they see: may discern this of our condition, that we are
neither settled in, nor much inclined to entertain, peaceable affections: that
we are strangely biased, and broken to pieces in our ways and actings: that
most of us are beset outwardly with difficulties, (burdens on the one hand,
wants on the other;) and many possessed inwardly with scrupulous perplexities
about the way to be eased thereof. And those that can judge, may judge, that
the reason why our condition is thus at present is twofold.

First, because we are many ways discontented one with another, in reference
to that which is past on all sides: Secondly, because there is no agreement
amongst us, about the way of future settlement, in expectation of what is to
come: and whatever any may think, or hope upon spiritual grounds, concerning
the event of these evils: (whereof I can entertain, I bless God, as great hopes
as any,) yet sure it is, that none can look with the eye of a Christian upon
our present condition, referring it unto God; but he must confess that we are
under a visible judgment, which may as well end in our utter destruction, if
God in mercy prevent it not; as in a happy settlement, nor can any rational
man be so senseless, as not to perceive this to be a Truth: nor is it credible
that any true Christian will be so stupid, as not to lay this Truth to heart.

And our behavior therein before God to make it our happiness.
If then, in this case of dangerous unsettlement, wherein the Master Builders
are at variance, and most that are under them, seem willing rather to pull
down what others have built; then by counsel to uphold jointly what ought to
be settled, (which is a sad presage,) we should every one seriously consider
what becomes us in our places: lest we be given over to delight in each others
destruction, let us reflect upon our ways, and order our behavior rightly
therein toward God and men; that upon the discovery of that which is a miss,
we may henceforth labor to make them such as beseems Christians. For if we set
our selves to murmr at the changeableness of humane affairs, this is
nothing else but to control Gods counsel, whereby he has appointed that to
be one of the special means of our felicity: if we murmr and fight against
the afflictions, which our outward man must suffer under these changes: this is
nothing else, but to kick against the pricks, and to strive in vain against the
unalterable law of nature: and if we set our selves to discover, and condemn
the faults of other men under these changes, to trouble our selves and others
at the supposed causes thereof, rather then to find out a way to redress the
same, this is nothing else but maliciousness and madness: but if in all these
trialls and changes, we study the constant and equal rule of Christianity, to
order our ways therein before God and men, without partiality, this is that,
which will make us truly happy in all our unsetlements: for as concerning the
state, wherein at the present we are, (seeing it is evident that God by an
extraordinary hand of judgment has cast us into it) as it is now unavoidable,
so to be under the changes thereof, is not to be counted our sin, but rather
our trial; and through the lot of our affliction, the way to a blessing, if we
behave our selves as Christians ought to do therein. For if all the good or
evil, of every outward condition as to us, does wholly depend upon the frame of
our spirit, and upon the way of our behavior before God therein; then it does
follow, that according to our spiritual temper or distemper, and our orderly
or disorderly carriages in this condition, the event thereof will be our
happiness, or our misery; for if our spirits are distempered, and our course
disordered against the rule of our profession, it is evident that this will
redouble the evil of our affliction, inwardly and outwardly, making it both
ways sinful, and thereby miserable: but if our outward changes take us not
off from the way of Christianity, which is unchangeable, we have just cause to
believe, that by the increase of virtue and grace, they will become our only
happiness, because we have a promise, that in all these things we shall be
more then conquerours through him that loves us: Romans 8. 37. And we are
further taught, that as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our
consolation also shall abound by Christ. Now the 2 Cor. 2. 5.
sufferings of Christ are said to abound in us, when in all our afflictions we
walk sted fastly with him in the profession of his way: for then whiles the
outward man does decay, the 2 Cor. 4. 16.
inward is renewed day by day: is there any thing even in the midst of greatest
distresses, that can obstruct the enjoyment of this consolation, but the
discomposure of our spirits, and the disorderlinesse of our behavior in the
work of our employment. And lest by these means we may be deprived of our
comforts, and lose the fruit of our labors which are undertaken for the
reparation of that which is laid waste among us; let us point at the chief
distempers and disorders which obstruct our work, that they may be removed, and
the course suitable to the Rules of our holy profession, heretofore set down,
seriously taken up, and sincerely followed.

I have already given you my sense of several distempers and disorderly
carriages of some particular men, in their distinct ways, which have a
special influence upon our spiritual affairs, to make us, as the confused
builders of Babylon, the authors of our own dissipation and ruin: I shall now
mention a few disorderly courses, which are incident unto all men more or
less, and seem to discompose the healthful constitution of our whole
society, in the management of all outward affairs: and here, although I am
not ignorant, that the distemper of the spirit, and the disorder of the
behavior are things very far distant in their nature, and distinct in their
properties: yet because in matters of outward concernment they are seldom
separate, and going hand in hand, they beget interchangably and are begotten by
each other; therefore, and for brevities sake, I shall not heed their
distinction at this time; but leave it to every ones thought in that which I
shall offer: here then let me speak of the distemper and disorderlinesse
proceeding from these following roots of bitterness, viz: from envy, from
jealousies and fears; from tale bearing and private censuring; and from
revenge, which I conceive to be the chief causes of our present diseases: and
of all these this is to be said in the general, that as no man can exempt
himself from the danger of these sinful motions, so those that are most
remarkably engaged either by their places or proceedings in the management of
public affairs, are most liable to the temptations thereof, which are so much
the more hurtful to the Societies of mankind, by how much the persons upon
whom they seize are found more eminent in parts or places: and the affairs
upon which they reflect are more important; and by how much the complication of
these distempers in those that are acted by them is more powerful, less
corrigible, and less discernable.

By the chief causes of our diseases.
But let us come to the particulars of these evils, to see the symptoms of our
public maladies therein, and find the cure thereof.

Whereof envy is the first.
First concerning envy; the spirit of God, by the Apostle James discovers the
nature of it unto us in his 4. Chapter, where he shows, that all our wars and
fightings come from our inbred lusts. Chap. 4. v. 1. that these beget an
extreme disorder in all our carriages toward God and men ver. 2. 3. that the
object, our lust is conversant withal, is nothing else but this world, and
that the end whereat we aim thereby, is the enjoyment and friendship of the
world, in the satisfaction of an adulterate affection, which is enmity unto God
ver. 4. then he confirms this last assertion by the testimony of the Scripture,
and declares furthermore, that the root of all our lustful disorderlinesse is
nothing else but envy v. 5. The testimony of Scripture is alleged thus: or do
ye think (says he) that the Scripture speaks in vain? viz: when it calls you
adulterers) intimating that by this denomination our lustful friendship with
the world, is branded to be a defection and breach of Covenant, and
consequently enmity with God. Then the root of all these lustings, and of our
disorderly behavior therein is expressed in the following words by another
question thus. Does the Spirit which dwells in us lust to envy? as if he had
said; it is evident, that your friendship with the world is enmity with God,
seeing the Scripture does not call you adulterers and adulteresses without a
just cause: and as for us, that make profession of Christianity to serve God in
Spirit and truth, do ye think that the Spirit of Christ which dwells in us,
has any lust to envy? no certainly, there is no such lust in this Spirit:
therefore you ought to judge your selves, that in all these irregular
proceedings, whereof the root is nothing but envy, you are not led by the
Spirit of Christ, but by the adulterous spirit of this world: from which
Analysis and interpretation of the Apostles words we may gather evidently three
conclusions.

The nature of it as opposite to Christianity.
1. That the original of our distemper and disorderlines is enviousnesse. For
he says, the spirit does lust to envy: that is, desires to fulfill the
motions of envy; if then the satisfaction of our envy, be the end of our
lusting, envy is the root whence lust proceeds: for in the immediate end of
every thing the principle of the being thereof is to be found.

2. That the Spirit which dwells in the Saints, does not lust to envy.

For the assertion in it self is clear and undeniable; and that in the Apostles
words it is intended, is evident by the adversative Particle of the following
words, which joyneth them unto the latter end of the 5. verse, and the whole
context and coherence of the matter does evince, that in the 5. verse there
must be instead of one (which in our ordinary translation is expressed) a
double interrogation: whereof the latter must run in this sense. Does the
Spirit dwelling in us lust to envy? as if he had said, by no means.

3. That the Spirit which is in the friends of the world does lust to envy.

For it is clear, that all worldlings are bent to lust, after that which they
would have, so as that they envy others to have it it besides themselves: and
that is the thing, which the Apostle here does presuppose, whereupon the
question, denying it to befall unto the spirit which dwells in the Saints, is
raised. We must observe then, that as the Spirit of God, and the spirit of the
world are opposite, so their lusts tend to different ends, and what is denied
of the one, is affirmed of the other: Whence we must further observe, that the
corruption and infection of our spirit in nature; making our lust disorderly
and contentious, is originally self-love, as it takes us off from the love of
our neighbor: that is, as it perverteth our intention from desiring, that he
may partake of that good which we wish for our selves; for self-love is not
otherwise vicious, but as it confineth our intentions within our selves alone.
It is no sin to love ones self, if we love our neighbor as our self.

The object of it.
Now the imaginary good thing, which naturally between all parties, as they are
parties, is the object of their mutual envy: is the Preeminencie, for which
they strive in comparison one of another, that either they may subject others
unto their will; or at least exempt themselves from being subject to the will
of others, both which are most opposite unto the spirit of Christianity: which
does not at all affect any dominion over others, but rather does set it self to
serve and please others through love. Even as Christ Jesus served us, and
pleased not himself but others to their edification. Gal. 5. 13.
Romans 15. 3. Therefore his way and aim was, was, when he walked amongst men,
not to join himself to any of the parties, that then were a foot amongst his
country men the Jews; but to walk indifferently and by one Rule toward all.
Nay, he was not averse from conversing with the Samaritans themselves, whom all
other Jews did abhor: (as is apparent by I(...)h 4. v. 5. till 45.) that he
might impart himself unto all freely, in that which was good, without envying
the enjoyment thereof unto any. It is therefore evident, that if professors
live in envy, strife and division one with another: they are not to be counted
Christians, that is spiritual, but carnal. And at the best they are no more
but babes in Christ: because therein they walk not as his disciples, but as
men: all parties 1 Cor. 3. 2(...).
and partialities are amongst men, as men of this world; and not amongst men as
Christians: and their aim in the world is, to deprive others of that good
which they pretend to possess, as due unto themselves, rather then to others.

Now as I said before; the Imaginary good which a party, as a party, does
pretend unto in comparison of others, who do oppose it; is nothing else but to
have the preeminencie in that where it is opposed. Nor can men as men walk by
any other rule but this: because they can see no reason why they should deny
themselves, to give others the preeminencie above themselves: none but
Christians as Christians can understand, that they ought to deny themselves,
take up a cross, and prefer the benefit of others to their own
conveniences, only because Christ did so toward us; because this is the
badge of his disciples, and because by the new covenant we are bound to be
conformable unto his image and to follow his footsteps. Therefore no natural
man can say from his heart, as the Apostle did to the Corinthians. 1 Cor. 4. 8:
Now ye are full, now ye are rich, ye have reigned as Kings without us; and
would to God ye did reign: and again, I pray to God that ye do no evil; not
that we should appear approved, but that ye should do that which is honest,
though we be as Reprobates: for we are glad, when we are weak, and ye are
strong. 2. Cor. 13. 7. 9. And again. To the weak I became as weak. 1 Cor. 9.
22. But it is otherwise amongst men; for all strive to get strength in their
own hand and make others weak: all strive for the preeminence, as in riches and
in glory; so for that which does bring these things with it, which is the trust
to manage power and government in this world: and truly if we look upon our
selves, as in the presence of God, to see what we have been doing as men in
this kind: we cannot be so senseless of our natural inclinations, as to think
that we have not acted as parties one against another: nor so unconscionable as
not to be convicted, and willing to confess, that in such actings the object
of our partiality and envy has been, the gaining of preeminencie, to manage
the trust of power and government above others, or at least before them.

Our practice about that object
It is not my work to judge of State affairs, I am directly endeavoring to
take off others (to whom it does not belong) from the partial judgments which
they make thereof: nor do I intend to please or displease any party in the
State, (for I hate partiality with a perfect hatred, as by that which I have
here said may appear) nor do I for any private design seek to humor any body:
(behold God is my witness) in that which I shall say; but intending at this
time, to drive this nail to the head, I must not seem so stupid and brutish; as
not to take notice of Gods work and hand over us, and not to see what the
changes are, which the Almighty has brought upon this Kingdom and State,
which have given occasion to the spirit of envy, to become active among us.

We cannot then but see, that God has permitted him, in whose hand before
these troubles the chief trust of government and power was, to be deprived of
the same; and by what means this is come to pass, is apparent unto all: for
first the management of affairs which he used, being judged very prejudicial
to the safety of the State by those, unto whom the public Reformation thereof
was entrusted: it then fell out, that the trust of Government and Power, was
devolved by degrees, upon those whom God did suffer in their places to act
against him. How this fell out, I think none can be ignorant, who has been
able to observe any thing. For after that God had set up those, who acted
against him in their places, by a right which the King himself conferred upon
them, to sit as long as they thought fit, to manage their trust; after that
they were engaged by the Law of Nature to act for their own safety, by the
Power and Authority which they had in their hand, and after that their whole
management of power became without humane contrivances by Gods supreme conduct,
as miraculously successful for their advantage, as their adversaries
management became with all humane contrivances, unsuccessefull for their
disadvantage; it pleased him, who does all things according to the counsel of
his own will, so to change the Government, that from one entrusted in chief, it
fell into the hands of many, and that it became a consequence not of a free
transaction, but of prevailing power; unto the rule whereof, the trust of
governing was on all sides given up and committed, by the drawing of the Sword.
After (I say) that these things by degrees happened thus, it fell out amongst
those many, into whose hands the management of affairs did fall (as naturally
it needs must amongst those that think themselves equal one to another, when
they take up different interests) that none would yield the privilege of
pre-eminencie unto his neighbor: but every one did strive to get possession of
it for himself. In this contest, as formerly the King had lost his hold of the
Government for want of power, so that party which without having hold of power
would have settled the Government by his means, with reference to some of his
desires; and against the sense of the powerful party, has for his sake, and
for the necessity where into the powerful party thought it self, the whole
cause it had prosecuted, and the state of the kingdom, reduced, lost the place
which it had in the Government; and is now made subordinate unto the party
which has prevailed.

Thus all along the object of strife has been the trust of power and
government; and the pre-eminencie in this trust has been the object of envy,
and is still in the spirits of those who are passionately moved either at, or
about, the change of outward affairs.

The effects of it.
Now the spirit of envy does work ordinarily upon us, when we find our selves
in want of some thing which we desire, and others in possession thereof, whom
we love not. And it is hardly to be determined, whether the grief for ones own
want of that which is desired, or the enjoyment thereof by others that are
hated, be the greater vexation to an envious spirit; nor can it otherwise be
determined, but by the discovery of two other passionate distempers, Pride and
Hatred, whereof this evil humor is made up, and wherewith it is from time to
time fermented to fall into its paroxismes. For if pride be predominant, then
the fit of our vexation is more for our own want, then for others enjoyment:
but if hatred be predominant, then we are more vexed that another has it, then
that we do want it: and this makes an envious man, when he is out of hope to
gain what he would have for himself, to bend his thoughts, that it should be
transferred rather to any other hand whatsoever, then that it should remain
with him that has it, nor does he think any thing unjust which may bring this
to pass, though it be unto others never so grievous and injurious: and when he
can neither gain it to himself, nor transfer it to another, his last endeavor
will be to spoil it, and make it miscarrie in the hand of him that has it: as
in the Gospel Matthew. 13. 25.
parable, the Enemy that sowed tares among the good wheat, did it, because he
envied him, to whom the wheat did belong: So do all those that make no
conscience to obstruct good and lawful enterprises; only because they are set
afoot by those whom they affect not, or whom they envy to have the honor of
doing that which is commendable. And how far upon those distempers this kind
of disorderlinesse has broke forth from time to time, or still does reign in
the spirits of some of us, and who have been the chief actors for Satan
therein, I shall not make my self a Judge. Nor do I mention these things, as
the custom is comparatively to justify one, and condemn another side; as one
pussed up for one party against another, (which the Apostle forbids, 1 Cor. 4.
6.) but herein I show the nature of our disease, as in the presence of God whom
in his judgments over us, I adore: therefore I shall leave unto him whose
ways are unsearchable, and who searches the hearts of all men, both the
discovery of the chief authors, and the judgment of the particular actors of
the sinful miseries which has overtaken us, for he will certainly in his own
time and way find them out.

The end for which this is spoken to.
And yet withal, I intend by this representation of our disease, to recommend
and refer the consideration of these causes of our public grievances, to the
consciences of those, who on all sides have had least amiable compliance with
their brethren, and ingenuity for the best designs; or have been most active
in partial counsels and undertakings toward others, and most unsettled within
themselves; that they should lay the matter seriously to heart, and consider
the sphere wherein they have walked; that at least in their present and future
undertakings; they may be awakned unto moderate and amiable ways of
righteousness, which I shall beseech the Lord in mercy to their souls to grant
them grace to do, that henceforth none may enviously obstruct, but every one
sincerely, faithfully and lovingly join to help forward our settlement, in the
course of a perfect Reformation.

This then is the first root of bitterness, from whence the rest of our
distempers are sprung up; and if this were thoroughly cured, none of the other
would greatly annoy us: but this being the head-spring and heart of all the
rest; the other are subordinate thereunto, as lesser streams of gall and
wormwood, to diffuse the poison thereof, through all the veins of our Body
politic; for so much malice as envy does infuse in them, so much is their
bitterness heightened, and their distemper inflamed to work the effects of
mischief.

Concerning State jealousies and fears.
That which most immediately does follow envy, is jealousy and carnal fear;
of which I need not say much, only in a word or two I shall discover somewhat
of their nature, that such as are able to see, may observe the influence which
they have upon their own spirits in public affairs, and the distempers
occasioned thereby amongst us.

What they are.
State Jealousies and Fears go hand in hand; for they beget reciprocally each
other, and are begotten of each other; and although all jealousies are fears;
yet all fears are not jealousies: for jealousies are the suspicions which men
have of other men's intentions of their affections, and of the delignes of their
affairs; but fears are properly the apprehensions of evils, which may befall
unto us by their means. Those reflect upon the counsels, these upon the actions
of men, and upon the events of businesses. Now the difference between envy and
jealousy is this; that we envy those whom we love not, because they enjoy the
good which we want: but we are jealous over those whom we are obliged to love,
lest we be deprived by them of that which we pretend to possess. This passion
may be harmless, if the love upon which it is grounded be pure; but if pride
does mix it self therewith, then we are jealously affected toward others, but
Gal 4. 17. with Gal. 6. 13.
not well, as the Apostle terms it: because it makes us willing to exclude
others from that which is their advantage and privilege, that they may be
brought under our power to affect us; and that we may glory over them.

How far lawful and commendable. Wherein unlawful and discommendable. And
what effects they work upon the Subjects.
Now therefore there may and ought to be in Magistrates and Ministers a
commendable, and lawful jealousy and fear, which is for the good of the
society over which they are set: this is a prudentiall care to watch for the
good, and prevent the evil, which may befall to those whom they love, and over
whom they are set. Thus the Apostle was jealously affected toward the
Corinthians: I am (says he) jealous over you with godly jealousy; for I have
espoused you to one husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin to
Christ: but I fear lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve through his
subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in
Christ. 1 Cor. 11. 2. 3. His jealousy was not a fear lest he should lose
somewhat of his esteem amongst them, or his particular interest in them be
lessened; (for elsewhere he renounces this design, and gives up his whole
esteem to their advantage, when he says, I pray to God that you do no evil;
not that we should appear approved, but that you should do that which is
honest, though we be as reprobates. 2 Cor. 13. 7.) But lest they should lose
somewhat of their neernesse toward God, and their common interest in Christ be
lessened. And according to this pattern not only Ministers, but faithful
Magistrates ought to be prudentially watchful, and jealously fearful, not so
much for their own interest in the affections of those that are under them,
lest they seem to be lessened therein; but for the good, and advantage of those
that God has committed unto their charge; lest they come short of that
felicity which they are bound to procure unto them. Thus an uprighthearted
Magistrate will be careful to prevent the seeds of Mutiny, of
Discontentednesse, and of Division, lest thereby the public Peace, and welfare
of the people be lost and disturbed, rather then that he should lose his
pre-eminencie, and the advantage of his place therein. For if he does love
them, and is faithful to the trust committed by God unto him for them, he will
wholly quit this of his own, for the purchase of that unto them, chiefly when
otherwise it cannot be obtained: and this he ought to do, because he is bound
to know, that God has set him in his place for the good of the people, and not
made or given up the people to the pleasure of his will, and merely for him to
be a Ruler over them; the Court flattery which has darkened this truth, has
caused the Leaders of the Nations to err, and destroyed the way of their
paths. For the great ones that have power in the world, being flattered into
pride and selflove, and forgetting that they are servants of the Communaltie
for the public good thereof, make use of their places, and abuse their trust,
to satisfy private passions; they look upon all men, and things as made to
serve their wills; and whatsoever is not subordinate unto the way of that
pleasure and greatness, wherein they delight to appear above others, is made
an object of their jealousy and suspicion; as if all that are not slaves unto
their appetites, were opposites unto, or competitors of their greatness. When
this imaginary suspitiousnes has put the spirits of those that are in
supremacy out of frame, they pervert the course of their Government, setting
themselves rather to vex and grieve those that disagree from their sense in any
thing (only because they go not their way, to humor them in all things;
though they be otherwise harmless and quiet in the Land) then to oblige every
one indifferently, in every thing, to all common duties of mutual
serviceablenesse, of love, and of faithfulness to a public interest, which is
the only true work, and ought to be the whole and single aim of those that
are in places of Authority: but when this is not their true aim and work, as
tending to the good of others, they can do nothing else but mind themselves
ambitiously; and then their jealousies must needs run in this strain, because
they can reflect upon nothing but in order to themselves: in which snare when
once they are taken, whether they be Magistrates or Ministers, according to
their dealings with those that are under them, the reward of their hands is
justly given to them; for the Lord, who cannot be mocked, does cause every man
reap that which he does sow: if therefore such as rule, sow the seeds of
perverse jealousies and fears upon the grounds of ambition and self-will, in
the minds of those that are in subjection, they must expect to reap nothing
from their affections but the fruits of gall and wormwood: and when their
spirits are once embittered, their fears being restless, and their
discontentednes easelesse, they put themselves upon the causes of troubles, and
disquietnesse unto themselves, and to those that are over them; for seeing they
are made to conceive by that which they find in a vexatious government, that
they cannot confide their safety any longer unto the hands of those that seek
to enslave them: they are naturally inclined, and easily brought over to set up
to themselves new interests, that are not only different, but opposite to
those, that are entrusted with the management of public affairs. Whence it is,
that they hearken readily to such, as augment their fears, and foment the evil
impressions which they have taken up against their superiors: by which means,
as the fire devoureth the stubble, and the flame consumes the chafe; so the
root of the greatness, of the Grandees of the Earth, becomes rottenness; and
their blossom goes up as dust, and this justly, because they have cast away
the law of the Lord of hosts, which is the law Isa. 5. 24.
of humi(...)itie, and love, to serve others with their talents for a public
good; and despised the word of the holy One of Israel, which is the word of
Righteousness and of Faith, teaching all men to live unto God, according to
the simplicity of the Gospel. For because that law, and this word, is not
entertained by the Rulers of the Earth, and those that are ruled by them;
therefore the Laws of evil surmisings, and carnal fears, by the just
judgment of God are set to overruled them in all their ways, to their mutual
destruction; and the words of tale-bearers, and of whisperers, of railers, and
of private and public censurers, are appointed to be the fuel of that fire,
which their own distempered passions does kindle to consume them.

How far these effects have broke forth amongst us. And how far Ministers have
been faulty in contributing thereunto.
Thus we see what the effects of carnal jealousies and fears are, in the minds
of earthly men, how they are propagated from the head to the members of a
society; and how they return from the members upon the head, to fructify unto
its own perdition: the experience which we have had of this is beyond all
discourses; and how far the humors of the parties have been overcome by these
distempers, how deeply their mutual jealousies and fears have wrought; what
effects of disorderlinesse have followed thereupon, to the dishonor of
Christianity from time to time; how like unto the waves of the Sea in a
tempest, one fear is come upon the back of another; and how through evil
surmifings, all parties have heightened each other in their animofities, even to
desperate resolutions; this should rather be lamented in secret, then publicly
laid open to our shame. Especially seeing it cannot be denied, but that even
they, who should have quieted the spirits of all men, and set them right
toward one another; who should have begotten and maintained mutual love and
confidence between brethren; who should have inclined those that are in
subjection to trust God with the Trustees that are over them: who should by not
meddling in temporal matters, have endeavored to keep the Trustees in
Christianity amongst themselves; who should have made it their chief work
toward all men, to take off the edge of their carnal passions and fears, by
persuading them to make the holy One of Israel their fear, and their dread
alone; Seeing (I say) those who should have been active to do this, have been
too forwardly isntrumental to do the contrary of all this; they being
themselves for the most part partially engaged, and as full of sinful
jealousies, and no less fearful of outward concernments then any, therefore
we have cause silently rather to deplore our calamities, then to mention them
openly: lest they be told in Gath, and mentioned in the streets of Askelon;
lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice to see our nakedness; and lest
our watchful Enemies, who lie in wait for our haltings, be instructed how to
foment our confusions, how to add daily fuel unto the fire of our
animosities, and how to increase the fearfulness of our misprisions, to the
height of our utmost ruin.

Concerning tale-bearing, and private censuring.
And this much in brief of the second cause of our disease, found in the
distempers of Jealousies and Fears; the third which I have placed in
Tale-bearing, and Private-censuring is as briefly to be looked upon.

As then jealousies and fears answer the spirit of envy, so Tale-bearing and
private censuring answer the spirit of carnal fear and jealousies: and as the
former two diffuse the infection of envy whence they are begotten, so these
latter propagate and foment in the spirits of men, both the root of
enviousnesse, and the branches thereof, perverse jealousies and fears: And
lastly, as jealousies and fears go not only hand in hand, but beget one
another reciprocally; so tale-bearing and private censuring not only accompany
one another inseparably, but increase and multiply each other infinitely: and
become the proper seeds of all our disorderly passions and carriages, which our
cunning adversaries sow with much art amongst us, to make our evil humors
break forth into the effects of our final overthrow.

The effect of tale bearing is shedding of blood. And how censuring does come
in thereupon. For what end and how talebearers set themselves a work. How far
these evils have prevailed over us.
For tale-bearing and shedding of blood, are forbidden by the Lord, and
condemned by the Prophet as concomitant sins, the former being the cause of the
latter. Levit. 19. 16. The Lord says, thou shall not go up and down as a
Talebearer among thy people, neither shall thou stand against the blood of thy
neighbor, I am the Lord. And the Prophet Ezekiel reproving the transgression
of this law in Jerusalem, says, in thee are men that carry tales to shed
blood. Ezech: 22. 9. For as Solomon says, The words of a talebearer are as
wounds, and they go down to the innermost parts of the belly. Prove. 18. 8. They
wound the reputation of him who is defamed thereby: and the affection of him to
whom the tale is told, nor can strife and contention cease till the talebearer
be removed. Prove. 26. 20.
For where no wood is, the fire goes out; so where there is no talebearer the
strife cease: But as the fire cannot go out when fuel is added to kindle it;
so cannot strife cease, so long as slanderers and tale-bearers are entertained.
And to kindle this fire a main; the pride of our censorious and railing
dispositions, does come in as a pair of bellows, to blow the coals which the
talebearer has kindled, and to make the flame thereof break out, the
tale-bearers work is under the color of friendship, either to make him that is
suspected and hated, more odious; or to make him that is fearful, and
suspicious more perplexed, and under the pretense of giving him advice and
making discoveries, less reconcilable to his adversary; the spirit of malice
and hatred covers it self with a cloak of zeal, and is vented in the way of
censuring, upon the reports of a talebearer, which are greedily embraced to
make an adversary odious: but men that are fraught with jealousies and full of
fears, make naturally of their own apprehensions, upon slight grounds tales,
with these they fright others, and because they are inclined to misinterpret
what ever is done by those whom they suspect and look upon with fearfulness,
they are frighted themselves at every thing which they understand not. Nay and
without any ground of surmises or any appearances of evil, envy will devise
and raise slanders, malice will disperse them; fearfullnesse in matters of
danger will take them up and feed it self thereon; and if it be a matter of
shame and reproach, hatred will triumph therein: and take delight to become
injurious to him that is slandered: which is done some time by private, some
time by public censuring, and sometime by actual wrongs, and wilful
provocations unto enmi(...)y and animosity; these are the symptoms, and this is
the perverseness of our nature, as it is acted by these causes of our disease;
and how far hitherto, in the course of our confusion, and disturbance of all
our affairs, these evils have been predominant over the humors of men, in their
partial fits and paroxismes of uncharitableness, I shall surcease to mention;
the thing is, alas, too evident to an indifferent eye; and that which makes the
case more lamentable, and less susceptible of a cure is, that all this
distemperature is incident to those that are not ignorant of their duty, and of
the rules, by which these evils ought to be avoided: it is a sad case when the
spirits of men are so far discomposed, that although they can pretend no
ignorance of the will of God, yet they transgress the same presumptuously. But
above all this disorderlinesse whereunto men may be carried, and are carried
apparently through their homebred passions, there is yet another most
pernicious incentive of these evils brought in from abroad, and practiced by
Machavilian Statesmen; which is a divellish policy to encourage and
strengthen the hand of liars; to set tale-bearers awork, to furnish them with
false reports, and send them up and down to spread the same; to reward the
authors of calumnies and reproaches, and hire them to invent abominable and
hateful accusations, and opprobrious crimes against the innocent: which in
effect is to employ men to fetch fire from Hell, to set on fire the course of
nature.

Concerning Revenge what sort of passion it is.
And when all these forementioned distempers of spirit, and disorderlinesses of
behavior, have wrought their utmost effects to multiply injuries, and heighten
wrongs excessively: then to right our selves of the same we naturally
entertain, the thoughts of revenge: which thoughts, although they are nothing
else but the consequences of the sense of evils which we have suffered: yet as
they take hold of our affections, and therein center into a Passion, which can
have no rest but in requital unto those that have wronged us, of evils equal
to those which we have suffered by them, or greater then the same; in this
respect they are somewhat more, then a bare result of the sense of former
sufferings: for they contain a resolution of acting, which is wound up to the
highest pitch, that the powers of nature can reach unto in working mischief:
This Resolution of requiting evil for evil does eminently comprehend, in one
act, all the iniquity of the former distempers; and so does become by and in it
self, a new fountain and cause of embitterments: by raising up and confirming
upon our spirits, all the evil dispositions which make our disease both
habitual and epidemicall: and that unalterably as to man.

How incorrigible it is
For to all the former sinful distempers of the soul, the spirit of Revenge
does add this peculiar qualification, that by it they are made remediless and
past cure, as to humane industry and persuasions. Est vindicta malum vita
jucundius ipsa. Therefore Samson having an opportunity to be revenged of the
Philistines; did rather choose to die, then let Judge. 16. 30.
it slip: Let me dye (said he) with the Philistines, for this, that he could
slay more at one blow in his death, then he had done in his own life, was that,
which made him take comfort in the losing of his life. By this we see that this
passion aims at nothing but destruction, and that with desperate resolutions
which hearken to no disswasive reasoning: yet they fortify themselves by
perswasives taken from the pretense of justice, eye for eye, and tooth for
tooth: from the motions of courage, to think it a shame to sit down Exodus 21. 24.
with any injury without full satisfaction: as Samson, although the
Philistines had righted him in the wrong done to him so far as they could,
yet his courage would not be satisfied, except he took vengeance with his own
hand: Judge. 15. 6, 7, 8
though you have done this (says he) yet will I be avenged of you, and after
that will I cease. And from the suggestions of pride, of self-love, and of vain
glory; Thus Lamech boasted himself, I have slain a man to my wounding, and a
young man to my hurt: if Cain shall be avenged seven fold truly Lamech seventy
and seven fold. Genesis 4 23, 24. This passion taking a pride in the height of
enmity and destruction, by striving to exceed others therein; does tend to an
irreconcilable breach of Love, to an endless abolition of Righteousness, by a
pretense of right to multiply injuries: and to a despair of Peace for ever.
And how far some of our spirits are acted by this passion already, as I am
unwilling to judge, so I shall pray, that many of us may not be given over to
it: lest the quarrels of private Revenge, with the guilt of innocent blood shed
throughout the Land, by the deadly feuds of families, be multiplied, and
entailed from one generation upon another, to the breach of public Peace, and
the disturbance of the whole Commonwealth. And because the experience of
former Ages; especially in our neighbor nation, has showed our forefathers
sad examples hereof: we ought, at least so many of us, as make it our maine
interest, to uphold the life of Christianity, whether we be Magistrates or
Ministers, or private men of other stations: to entertain in our respective
places and callings: the counsels of healing these distempers both in our
selves and in others: according to the rules heretofore mentioned, of Love, of
Righteousness, and of Peaceablenesse: which are altogether fundamental unto
our holy profession. I am therefore bound, by the Law of love, a good
conscience, in the Ministerial profession of the Gospel of Peace, upon this
discovery of our diseases: to offer, so far as the Lord shall enable me, at
the discovery of the Remedies also, which now I shall intend to do.

Concrning the Remedies of our distempers. That they are twofold.
As then the causes of our disease have a twofold influence, one which is
particular of each several cause upon the single persons, in whom they are
more or less predominant, and by whom they affect the whole Body of the
nation: another which is universal of all the causes jointly, in their
coherence and complication, upon the whole State, wherein their deadly effects
threaten it with inevitable ruin, if they continue as they are begun; so the
Remedies must have a twofold application, the one to the singular and distinct,
the other to the general and complicated distempers of our spirits: the single
Remedies apply able to the several and distinct causes, come first into
consideration, because every one must make use of them, for himself and by
himself, and without these the universal cure can not be obtained: and they
are to be taken in that order, wherein the causes of our distempers lie and
work their mischief: first then we must intend the cure of the root which is
envy, and afterward of the branches of our distempers in their subordination
one upon another as heretofore they have been mentioned.

The Remedies of envy
given by the Apostle James
Concerning the spirit of envy, the same Apostle James, who did discover the
nature of it unto us, does also give us the cure thereof in the same place,
from ver. 5. till 11. of his 4. Chapter. And it is twofold, the one proceeds
from the consideration of Gods ways of dealing with us: the other from the
practice of certain, duties wherein we deal with our own souls and with God, to
be set in a right frame totowards him.

Gods way of dealing toward us, is considered as he is Liberal, Just, and
Merciful toward us v. 6. But he gives more grace, wherefore he says, God
resists the proud, but gives grace unto the humble.

Our duties in dealing with our own souls and with God, tend first, to free us
from the temptations, and from the inclinations unto our envious disposition,
and from the guilt of sinfulness lying on us thereby: and secondly, to restore
us unto a comfortable condition in Gods presence.

The duties which will free us from the Temptations unto envy are, v. 7. Submit
your selves therefore unto God, resist the Devil, and he will flee from you.

The duty which will free us from the inclinations unto envy, is v. 8. Draw
nigh to God, and be will draw nigh to you.

And the duty which will free us from the guilt of sinfulnes, which the spirit
of envy does bring upon us, is Repentance described v. 8. and 9. Cleanse your
hands ye sinners, and purify your hearts ye double minded; be afflicted and
mourn and weep, let your laughter be turned to mourning, and your joy to
heaviness.

And lastly, the duty whereby we are restored to a comfortable condition in
Gods presence, is humility before God. ver. 10. Humble your selves in the sight
of the Lord, and he shall lift you up.

These are the ingredients of this Remedy, which the Spirit of God has
prescribed; and that they may become unto us an effectual cure, let us
endeavor a more special application thereof unto the distempers of our humor.

How the consideration of Gods dealing with us does remedy envy.
As concerning the consideration of Gods way toward us, the Apostles words do
intimate; that if we have any respect unto him to observe what his dealing is
with us, either to imitate his goodness, or to fear his justice, or to hope
for his mercy; we should not give way to this distemper of envy: for the
Spirit of God, by which he dwells in his Saints, is no way envious of the
good which befalls unto any: but he gives more grace. ver. 6.

In respect of his bounty to add grace
That is, Gods Spirit is willing that grace should be increased and multiplied:
God does add grace to grace; for of the fullness of Christ we all receive, and
grace for grace: he gives unto all men liberally and upbraideth not; James 1.
5. And of this we have a clear example in Moses, when Joshua was envious at
Eldad and Medads prophesying in the Camp: because they came not to the
tabernacle, to be set about it in their order, as the rest of the Elders were;
he desired that they should be forbidden to prophecy in the Camp, as a place
not fit for that exercise, but Moses reproved him, and said, Envyest thou for
my sake? would to God all the Lords people were prophets, and that the Lord
would put his Spirit upon them. Number. 11. 29. As if he had said, far be it
from me to envy in them the grace of God, which is free to him to bestow
wheresoever he pleases: far be it from me to restrain the gift of
prophesying bestowed upon any, because they are not here about the tabernacle,
as if Gods Spirit were limited to this place, and none might exercise their
gift elsewhere: no, I shall desire rather the increase and enlargement of the
gift, and of the exercise thereof unto all.

This was Moses Spirit, and would to God the prohibition which then was
intended by Joshua had never broke forth actually amongst us, into the
uncharitable designs of an undue restraint of our Brethren from the exercise
of their gifts. If Moses desire had been in our hearts, a way might easily have
been found how to regulate the course of universal prophesying unto the
edification of all, as the Apostle does direct us 1 Cor. 14. 13. But now all
our prophetical exercises, and we amongst our selves thereby, are fallen into
confusion, strife and disorderlinesse, which God has suffered to come upon us,
because of the iniquity of that enviours spirit, which brought an universal
restraint upon all that came not up to a formal standing about the tabernacle;
which was but a mere outward constitution whereunto the conscience could not be
brought into subjection. If then we had enlarged the exercises of the spirit of
prophecy in an orderly way, as the Apostle would have that matter regulated, 1
Cor. 14. 29. till 34. no doubt God would have blessed us with more peace then
hitherto we have enjoyed; but the pride of some to be alone in the prophetical
eminency; and their envy against others, who were as well worthy of respect,
in that behalf as themselves; and the licentiousness of others who keep to no
Rule of God or Men in their pretended walking by the Spirit, has brought all
this disaster upon us, and that justly; for seeing we would not every one in
our places imitate God in his goodness (who does add more grace) to enlarge
by the communion of Saints, and freedom of his Spirit, the use of his
blessings and gifts among us, as he does appoint; therefore it is just we
should now fall under the hand of his justice; and by his righteous
dispensation suffer that from others, which by our dealing with them, we have
deserved; which according to the Apostles Doctrine in this place, is the reward
which God does render unto the proud.

In respect of his justice to resist the proud.
For the second thing which the Apostle offers to be considered in Gods way, is
the act of Justice, That he resists the proud: v. 6.

The proud are properly such as seek to exalt themselves above others by their
own way: and God does resist them, when he disappoints the effect of the
enterprises which they follow for their own ends. The designs therefore
whereby a foundation of greatness was intended to be laid, with coercive or
restrictive power (which in all humane Societies belongs only to
Magistrates) in the hands of the Ministry; to maintain and impose humane
constitutions in matters of Gods worship, to the prejudice of those who
undoubtedly had a right to some freedom of prophesying, no less then they
that could pretend most unto the gift thereof. These designs (I say) God has
broken, and justly disappointed, because it is altogether contrary to the rule
of the profession of Christianity, and a discredit to the service of love in
the Gospel, that the eldership of the household of Faith, should endeavor to
exalt themselves by their own way above their brethren. We have cause therefore
(so many as have stood for that way of greatness and preeminencie, in order to
the suppressing of others by mere power in our own hands, because they would
not act in spiritual matters by our Laws) to lay our hand upon our mouth, and
to be silent, because the Lord has done it; and henceforth giving him the
glory of his righteous judgments, not to envy one another any more, nor to
study how to exalt our selves above others; because the Lord does know the
proud afar off, and without respect of persons he does judge all men according
to their works.

In respect of his Mercy to the Humble.
The third way of Gods dealing with every one, considerable in this case, is
the dispensation of his mercy, that we should take notice, who they are to whom
it is extended: the Apostle says, he shows mercy unto the humble. The Mercy
of God is the affection of his love to Man, as he is miserable: to show this
affection is to ease him of his misery, by removing the causes thereof which
are sin, and the punishments of sin: the Humble are they, which in lowliness
of mind esteem others better then themselves, Phil. 2. 3. such cannot bear
envy unto any body, for any good thing, but think others more worthy of it then
themselves; and to these God has in a special manner engaged his Mercy. We
see then what the condition of the promise is whereunto we may trust, to find
some ease from the Miseries which have beset us under the mighty hand of God;
which is, that we should be found in this way of love, by which in honor we
prefer others to our selves, as the holy Ghost commands us, Romans 12. 10. For
the Apostle makes the ground of that preferring one another in honor to be,
the kindness of affections with brotherly love, ibid: By this means then we
became objects of Gods Mercy, and we may confidently hope for the enjoyment
thereof; because it is certain that Gods dealing will be toward us, as our
heart is in his presence, and our behavior is toward our neighbor: for with
the merciful he will show himself merciful, Psalm. 18. 25. and consequently to
the loving he will be kind; but to the froward, he will show himself froward:
ibid: v. 26. and to such as are contentious, that is, who have bitter envy and
strife in their hearts, he will render indignation and wrath, tribulation and
anguish, which in justice is their due, and to all that take pleasure in
unrighteousness. Romans 2. 8, 9.

How the performance of our duties remedy envy.
From these considerations of Gods way toward us, the Apostle does not only
endeavor to let us see how far the spirit of envy is opposite to his Spirit,
and to our happiness; but he infers our duty toward him, which in reference
to the effects for which it is to be performed, is a fourfold Remedy to our
disease, and miseries under the same. The first is a Remedy to the temptations
which from without provoke us to enviousnesse. The second will rectify the
perverse inclinations which from within make us susceptible of those
temptations, and resist the Remedy thereof, lest it be effectual toward us.
The third will free us from the guilt whereinto we fall by the sinfulness of
our way of envy. And the fourth will set us upright again in a comfortable
condition before God: and as by these degrees of the cure, all the causes of
our misery will be removed, so by the last act thereof, the full cure will be
accomplished, and our happiness perfected.

The Remedy of temptations unto enviousnesse.
First to Remedy the Temptations provoking us to envy and pride, (the great
roots of all our evil) our way is, to submit our selves to God, and to resist
the devil: which if we uprightly endeavor, we have a promise that he (the
tempter) will flee from us, v 7.

To submit unto God, is not only to acknowledge his supremacy, that he has
power over all, and does dispose of all things in heaven and earth, (this the
devils must do, and tremble) but willingly to give our selves over unto him;
counting that which he disposes over us, to be the best that can befall unto
us for his glory, and our good.

To resist the devil, is not to suffer the suggestions which proceed from his
nature and spirit in us, to prevail with us, to lead us to impatience, to
murmuring, to lusting, and to envy.

And the devil is said to fly from us, when being foiled in these attempts, he
does leave off to provoke us thereunto: which does fall out as soon as his
suggestions are discovered, and we armed with a resolution not to yield unto
the same. For all the advantage which he has against us in times of affliction
to lead us into temptation, is the unsettled and troubled frame of spirit
wherein he finds us: for when Gods hand is upon us, and we do not give up our
wills in quietness unto his will, but fret and murmr at the things which do
befall unto us; then Satan can take hold of us, and we have no power to resist
him, by reason of our distempers; but as soon as we give up our turbulent
affections as a sacrifice unto the will of God, by submission thereunto; and
deny our selves that his dispensation may take place, as well in our will, as
over our outward man: Satan is disappointed of his hold, because when we are
contented with Gods dispensation, the love of God is shed abroad in our heart,
which begets hope, and strengthens our faith in the promises; and by this
means all the devils fiery darts are quenched. Now when he finds a soul thus
armed, and in a posture of defense, he never assaults further, but as a proud
coward, is afraid to be shamed, and flies from us. Satan deals with the souls
of men, as Amaleck did with Israel when Deuteronomy. 25. 17, 18.
they came out of Egypt, he lies in wait in the way, he assaults our hindmost
parts where we are weakest, and watches his opportunity both to come behind
us, and also to find us in a faint and weary condition: he dares not appear
to our face when we are in a posture of defense; but he is gone as soon as he
finds himself discovered, and we set our face against him: now we never turn
our face against him, but when we turn it by submission unto God, to rest and
acquiesse in his will, as in that which alone is most perfect, good and
acceptable. This then is the only Remedy of all the temptations which provoke
us from without, unto the distempers of this kind: but because this Remedy
(though known as a duty) is not always effectual as a cure, by reason of the
inclinations of our nature resisting the use and application of the same;
therefore in the second place the Apostle does add a further means to rectify
these inclinations.

The Remedy of perverse inclinations, which make the temptations prevalent,
and disappoint the cure thereof.
For the perverse inclinations, which not only make us susceptible of those
temptations, but resist the remedy thereof, are our pronenesse to be separate
in times of trial from God, and to look after, and fly unto, secondary
causes: The means therefore to rectify these is, that we should draw nigh unto
God: for if we do so, the promise is, that he will draw nigh unto us: v. 8.
which is our cure. For by his drawing nigh unto us, we become partaker of his
virtue and nature, which alters our inclinations. Here then the Apostle does
presuppose, that when the soul is under the trial of a temptation, it does put
it self at a distance from God, and that Gods presence is not with it: for if
he were present with it, Satan could neither appear, nor prevail against it:
but now our natural inclinations being to wander, and go astray from him, (as
it is written, Hebr. 3. 10. They err always in their heart, and have not
known my ways,) therefore Satan does find the soul as a lost sheep out of the
way, and is ready, if God should not restrain him, to devour it: for whiles we
are at a distance from God, we neither are, nor indeed can we be, subject to
his will; and consequently cannot with submission accept of his dispensation
over us. That therefore we may be brought about to submit our wills unto Gods
will, and by that means resist the devil, who dwells in the turbulencie of our
envious spirit; we are exhorted and instructed to draw nigh unto God in our
spirits, that he may meet us, and draw nigh unto us by his Spirit.

We draw nigh unto God, when we come to Christ in the Spirit of prayer and
faith, to be reconciled to the Father, by the redemption which is in him, and
to be united to him through the covenant, that we may live by his word. For
Ioh. 146.
Christ is the way, the truth and the life: and because none can come without
him, therefore all must come to the Father by him: and live in him according to
his word.

And God does draw nigh to us, when for Christ's sake he does accept of us
graciously, and testifies his acceptance of us by the spirit of Adoption, by
which he bears witness to our spirits that we are the Sons of God; and by
which he sheddeth abroad his love in our hearts, sealing us up unto himself,
until the day of our Redemption. To draw nigh therefore unto God is in a word,
when we want his presence to call upon his name as our Father in Christ,
knowing that whatsoever we ask in his name shall be granted: for Christ has
said that he will do it: Ioh. 14. 13. This Communion with God in Christ, and
nothing but this, is able to alter the perverseness of our inclination, which
resists the will of God, and hardens our hearts from submitting thereunto: for
being in Christ we become new creatures, and the law of the spirit of life
which is in him does free us from the Law of sin and death, which is in our
nature Romans 8 2. Gal 5. 16.
(whereby Satan takes hold of us) that we may be enabled to walk after the
Spirit, and not to fulfill the lusts of the flesh: whereby Satan does work in
us, and lead us captive after his own will.

The Remedy of the guilt of sinfulness, which is Repentance. Having two
parts. And several Acts answerable to the iniquity of our courses. In what
sense repentance is said to take away the guilt of sin.
The third duty which the Apostle does offer as a further remedy to this our
evil, does tend to free us from the guilt under which we lie by reason of the
sinfulness of our envious courses: for as the perverseness of our nature
hindering us from submitting our wills to the will of God; is cured only by
Gods drawing nigh unto us, when we draw nigh unto him by calling upon his name,
that we may be saved in Christ; so the guilt of our sinful ways, which is the
maine hinderance of our drawing nigh unto God; and the cause of our distance
from him, is cured only by the grace of repentance when we entertain it as our
duty: and that we may so do, the Apostle does lay open to us the parts of this
duty; which we find to be two, in his words; the one relating to our selves;
the other unto God: for as the nature of our guilt does stand in the iniquity
of our course; and the dishonor done to God thereby; so repentance by which
this guilt is to be wiped away, must relate unto both these, that every thing
amiss may be righted in that whence the evil does proceed; and so the causes
of our separation in all respects removed. Now the iniquity of our course is
twofold, the one is outward, the other inward; the outward defilements of the
flesh going along with all our natural actions, bring us under the guilt of
the Law: and to free us from this, the Apostle enjoins us, to cleanse our hands
from sinfullnesse, ver. 8. but the inward pollutions are from the heart, when
it is destitute of Faith, and sincerity toward God and man; and to remedy
this, the Apostle enjoins us, to purify our hearts from double-mindednes, ver.
8. The dishonor done to God by the iniquity of our course, does make us liable
to wrath in respect of the Supreme Majesty, which by our offense is made void;
and to free us from this part of the guilt, the Apostle enjoynes godly sorrow
in the inward affections, and a behavior suitable thereunto in the outward
expressions. In respect of our inward affections, we should be afflicted; In
respect of our outward expressions, we should give way to grief, Mourn, (says
he) and weep, and we should abstain from mirth. Let your laughter (says he)
be turned to mourning, and your joy to heavines, ver. 9. For the sacrifices of
God, (which are accepted from us for sin, that we may be freed from guilt) are
a broken spirit, a broken and a contrite heart, O God thou will not despise,
(says David) Psalm. 51. 17.

The proper effect of guiltines, is to keep us back from the presence of God,
and deprive us of the freedom of spirit, without which we cannot draw near unto
him; this is by these means taken away, and we are fitted by the sincerity of
true Repentance, both to come with boldness to the Throne of Heb. 4. 16.
Grace, and also to obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help our misery in time
of need; Not that our acts of Repentance are any satisfaction unto Gods Justice
for our sins bypast; that is, for the uncleanesse practiced, and the spots
contracted upon our souls, which is our misery, or for the Orders and Rules of
righteousness broken, and disturbed by us in his Kingdom, which is our
rebellion; and for the wrongs and dishonor done to the name of God thereby,
which is our Treason; as if he should in consideration of the worth of such
performances as done by us, remit the guilt which we have incurred; and account
such actions a compensation for the same. No, that is not the Apostles meaning,
in prescribing these Duties, nor my scope in pressing the practice thereof, as
a cure to our spiritual distempers; but the Apostles meaning and my scope is,
to show that by these performances some new qualifications of the soul, and
alterations of the frame of the Spirit are wrought in believers, to fit them to
the enjoyment of that which does actually free them, from all guilt both in
Gods account and in their own Conscience: For by these means our souls are
qualified to become susceptible of the Grace which Christ has purchased for
us; for whose sake alone, we are delivered from the guilt of wrath in the
Fathers account, and the frame of our spirit is altered, to enable us to
perceive the remission of the guilt, by the testimony of the Spirit of
Adoption, by which we cry Abba Father, and find effectually, that God is in
Christ reconciling us unto himself, and not imputing unto us our sins for his
sake. I say, these acts of Repentance and our performance of the same, are
necessary means to take away the guilt of our sinfullnes; not as to the
Justice of God, (for that is Christ's work through the Redemption in his blood)
but as to the qualification and frame of our spirit, to make it susceptible,
and sensible of the Redemption which is in the hand of Christ, to be applied
unto every one, who by the conviction of his Conscience is drawn over, and does
yield himself obedient unto God in these duties; For as long as we are
impenitent and hardened in our way, through the overruling deceitfulnes of sin,
we remain under the guilt of wrath, and can have no confidence in God through
Christ, because the Promises are made unto none, but unto those that repent,
and believe in the Gospel; but when we change our course, or are rather changed
in our course, upon the change of our mind with a new frame of heart toward
God, then the spirit of bondage, which is to fear is removed, and the free
Spirit of Christ which testifies unto our spirit our Adoption, is given to us:
for till this be done, the spirit of bondage does stand with a flaming Sword
between us, and the way of the tree of life in Paradise: that is, between our
soul and the Covenant of life in Christ by the Peace of a good Conscience. Now
the flaming Sword standing between us and the way to this tree, is the evidence
of Gods wrath, as it is due to sin, and of our own guilt, as we are liable to
wrath and under sin; it is then in this sense, and by the dispensation of the
grace of Repentance to this effect, that the guilt is taken away, and rest is
given to the wearied soul.

The Remedy of the punishment of sinfulnes.
The fourth and last Duty, does tend to a full restitution of our estate, by
the enjoyment of al things pertaining unto life and godliness, that we may
attain to the glory, and virtue whereunto we are called by the profession of
the Gospel; And to come to this, the Apostle does show that our way is, to
humble our selves in the sight of God, which if we do, the promise is, that he
will lift us up.

To humble our selves, is to esteem meanly of our selves, and to behave our
selves as such, as are low and mean in their own sense.

To humble our selves in the sight of God, is in respect of God reflecting upon
our selves to acknowledge our selves to be nothing at all; and as to other men
the least of all.

To be lift up by God, is to be made something by his Grace; for to the humble
the Lord does give Grace, says the Apostle, ver. 6. And those that humble
themselves have a promise here that they shall be lift up; If we see our want
of Virtue, and are sensible of it in the presence of God, he will graciously
supply our wants, and exalt us to find what we are in him. Now God does lift up
men from a low to a higher condition of Grace in three respects. In respect of
himself, in respect of public employments, and in respect of other men.

1. In respect of himself he lifts us up, when he admits us unto a higher
degree of favor and love with himself; which is done by manifesting unto us
the Love of Christ, and making us sensible of his life; For thereby he
strengthens us with might in the inward man, that we may have more and more
Communion with him, and he with us in Christ, till we be filled with all the
fulness of God, Ephesians. 3. 19.

2. In respect of public employments he lifts us up, when he sets our spirits
upon the things that are most excellent, to discern and to affect them; when
he gives endowments sufficient to go about them, and when he makes the
undertakings glorious to himself, and succesfull to the comfort of his Saints.

3. In respect of other men he sets us up, when he gives us a due place of
love, and esteem in the thoughts of the best of them, and makes his virtues by
us manifest in the sight of all the rest; so that they cannot but see his glory.

These favors are attainable at Gods hand, but the way to attain them is to
become lowly as in the sight of God; that is, as looking upon God and minding
our subordination unto him in all things, we should unfeinedly esteem our
selves, as of our selves, to be nothing; whether we reflect upon our state in
Grace with reference unto God, or upon our undertakings amongst men, or upon
our abilities to perform the same: For in these three things our spiritual
and natural pride does commonly break forth: and if herein we receive Grace
truly to deny our selves in Gods sight, and to be nothing in our selves; the
promise is, that we shall be lift up: here then the rule of humility is to be
observed. As concerning our state in Grace the Rule of Humility is, That none
think of himself more highly then he ought to think; but should think soberly
according as God has dealt to every one the measure of Faith. Romans 12. 3. Now
to live by Faith is, to live by the Truth of God in his Word.

Concerning our abilities in reference to our selves the Rule of Humility is,
Be not wise in your own conceits. Romans 12. 16. and again, Let no man glory in
men, 1 Cor. 3. 21. and concerning our undertakings in reference to men, the
Rule is, Mind not high things, but condescend to men of low estate. Romans 12.
16. And such as exercise themselves to walk by these Rules with reverence and
godly fear, as in the presence of God, shall in due time be exalted by him unto
the enjoyment of that glory, and virtue whereunto they are called and appointed
to come.

Who they are that should apply this cure to the spirit of Envy, And what
failing there is in the application.
This is the Cure which the Spirit of God does offer to be applied unto the
spirit of envy, that it may be cast out of our spirits by the testimony of
Jesus, nor is it possible to work for every one, to make the application of
these Remedies unto himself; yet in a more special manner the Ministers of the
Gospel should hold forth these testimonies by their own practice unto others;
and by their word of Exhortation and Instruction, chiefly when it is their Lot
(as now it is mine) to reflect upon the ways of men, wherein a competition of
greatness does appear; and for this cause I have been somewhat larger and freer,
as speaking to a matter, which is necessary to be laid to heart by all at this
time: which is most fit, to lay the ground of Peaceablenes and Moderation
amongst Christ's Disciples; and which is most suitable to my aim and design,
which is to seek out, and hold forth the Rules of Truth in Love, without
partiality toward all men. And would to God that all our debates could be
brought to disquiries of this nature, at least amongst those that are called
Ministers: For if they who are so called, and think themselves professedly
appointed, to go before others, and to lead them in the ways of Christianity;
do neither mind the offering of undeniable Rules unto all, nor set themselves
to walk in the light thereof. How can it be expected that they should be
healers, or that they whose engagements lie wholly about the affairs of the
World, should be moved either affectionately to mind, or effectually to follow
the same? We that are made remembrancers of others, should first mind our
selves of these Duties; but if in stead of reclaiming others from the passions
of flesh and blood in the World, we our selves intermeddle with Stateaffaires;
if out of the way of our calling, we make our selves in any kind competitors
with the Magistrate in his employments toward the people, and so cast our
selves upon the objects which yield temptations unto Envy and Pride, and into
the snares of outward affairs; How can we take others off from their
distempers of this nature? How can we set them right in aspirituall way? We may
find easily, as well by reason of our own frailty: as by the subtilty of Satan
our adversary, that more objects and occasions of mutual envy, are suggested
unto us within the Sphere of our own employment, then we are well able to
decline: Why then should we take up extrinsecall matters, and ferment our own
spirits with the thoughts of State-Envy, or foment the same in the
apprehensions of any one against another? Is it not our proper work to allay
and suppress all the motions of this kind, in every one? Is not this most
suitable to the employment of the Messengers of the Prince of Peace? And does
not Christ expect at our hand, that our whole work in his service should be
nothing else, but to Teach, Exhort and persuade all men, to present themselves
as a living sacrifice unto him, in following his footsteps: that is, denying
ungodlines and worldly lusts, to live soberly, righteously and godly in this
present World? And if this be all our work, how shall we answer unto him for
our inter-medling with other matters, wherein we take upon us to rule the
interests of this World; and to walk as men, in serving the passions of men
therein? But I am loath to insist any longer upon this Theme. The Lord grant
that all Christians may see the depth of Satan's wiles in this matter of Envy,
to avoid his snares; and that above all men, Ministers and Magistrates may be
faithful to Christ in their Stewardships, without desire Gal. 5. 26,
of vain glory, without provoking one another, or enviousnes against one
another.

And thus much concerning the Cure of Envy; wherein the Cure of all the other
distempers is contained, which has made me insist the more upon it; For if
this affection of our disease be fully removed, the other causes thereof will
not much trouble us; Yet it will be expedient to speak somewhat of every one
of them, at least so far as to point at the special Remedies thereof.

The Remedy of that which is amiss in State jealousies and fears.
First, a spiritual jeallousie over our selves.
As concerning State-jealousies and fears, the true discovery of their nature
does manifest the remedy of that which is amiss therein: we have seen that
some jealousies and fears are not only lawful, but expedient, and even
necessary to those that over-see the ways of others; nay, except a man be
truly jealous and fearful over his own soul, he is not faithful to it, nor to
the charge which God has given him of it: In this respect happy is the man
that fears always (says Solomon) he that hardens his heart shall fall into
mischief, Prove. 28. 14. And although it was an aggravation of Jobs misery in
one respect, Job. 3. 25.
that the thing which he had greatly feared, came upon him, and that which he
had been afraid of, came unto him; yet in another Verse. 26.
respect it was a ground of comfort unto him, that at the same time he was able
to say with a good conscience, I was not in safety, neither had I rest, neither
was I quiet; that is, I was not in security concerning mine own condition, I
did not think my self safe, but was always watchful over mine own soul, to
prevent the causes of trouble, viz. the sinful inclinations thereof; and yet
for all this, trouble is come upon me. Some jealousies and fears then are
essential to all duties of charge and trust: for without the thoughts thereof,
there can be no prudentiall foresight, nor use of watchfulness to prevent
evils. And truly the only cure of all carnal corrupt jealousies and fears
over others, is this spiritual jealousy and fear over our own souls, in
the presence of God. For as Aarons Serpent 2 Cor. 11. 28, 29.
swallowed up the Serpents of the Magicians of Egypt: so this spiritual fear
and jealousy will overcome and subdue the corrupt fears and jealousies of
this world. For when a man knows what to suspect himself of, as dangerous to
his own safety, he thereby will be taught how to prevent or rectify that
which is evil in others. The Apostle speaking of the care which did lie upon
him of all the Churches, says of himself, Who is weak and I am not weak? Who
is offended and I burn not?

Secondly, a circumspect trial of all things to put nothing to hazard.
And as in spiritual jealousies over our selves and others to prevent
offenses; so in civil government the maxim of State is true, Fiso res periit,
diffiso salva remansit, a circumspect mistrusting of all things, lest they be
liable to corruption, till by a full trial of their soundness they be
approved, and all danger prevented, is one of the main pillars of true
Statewisdome. To put nothing at an adventure which may be secured, is a
fundamental Rule of public safety: And to be more suspicious and fearful
lest our own undertakings be faulty and unsafe to the public, than other
designs hurtful or disadvantagious to us; is a maxim both of Righteousness
and prudencie in Government.

Thirdly a positive way of dealing wisely.
All true wisdom both spiritual and temporal, is positive, and it is an
argument of extreme weakness, to proceed rather upon the suppositions of
things which may be feared in the purposes of others against us, than upon
grounded resolutions of things which ought to be desired, and should be
declared in our purposes toward them. This is a positive way of acting, which
becomes Christians, viz. to overcome evil with good, both in our own
thoughts, by taking us off from needless and wrongful jealousies, and in the
intentions of others by preventing evil, and suggesting good impressions in
them concerning our selves: Nor is there any Rule of Prudencie to be compared
with this, which teaches us with well-doing to put to silence the ignorance of
foolish men.

Fourthly, A prudent carelessness of other men's thoughts of us.
There is a prudent carelessness of the thoughts of other men concerning our
selves, which frees us from a perplexed and prejudicial jealousy over them.
With me it is a very small thing (says the Apostle) that I should be judged of
you, or of man's judgment; as if he said, I will free my mind of the trouble of
thinking of that which you may judge of me to my prejudice. And this delivers
us from the seeds of perverse jealousies against others which proceed from the
distemper of pride, and excess of self-love in our selves: of which it is
truly said, That jealousy is cruel as the grave, the coals thereof are
coals of fire, which has a most vehement flame.

Fifthly, A pious and charitable prudency to rule our thoughts of other men.
For to an ambitious fearful spirit, this passion is a most vexatious plague,
which burns up all the joy and comfort which he takes in this life; and
nothing can allay the heat thereof, but a gracious resolution in well-doing to
be prudently careless of the thoughts of other men: and as this will free us
from the perplexity of jealousies within our selves; so to deliver us from the
injuriousnesse thereof against others, that by fearful and evil surmisings we
may not wrong them, a pious prudency is requisste in considering them with
charity, which will teach us to make the best of what they do, and to think of
them in doubtful matters, as we would have others in the like case to think of
us; to look upon them in matters absolutely evil, rather as misguided, and
happily corrigible, if rationally dealt withal in love, than maliciously
distempered and desperately incorrigible through the unreasonablenesse of
passion. By these maxims as our spirit will be kept from prejudice and
wrongful aims in dealing with them: so our judgment will be clear to discern
their disposition, and the way of righteousness in proceeding toward them.

Who they are that should apply this cure to the distempers a rising from
jealousies and fears. What failing is herein. How this failing is to be
remedied,
Now to put all men in mind of these Rules, that they may be rationally applied
unto the occasions of strife and debate, which are now fallen out amongst the
Professors of Christianity, to heal their breaches, and prevent the increase
of mischievous distempers; none ought to be so diligent as they whose proper
work it is to sway the affections of Christ's Disciples unto the duties of their
profession, which are the imitations of his life, to walk as he has walked in
this evil world. But here alas it my be said, Medice cura teipsum; we must
first return to these duties our selves, and learn to understand them before we
can practice them, or teach them unto others. Who are more active to quicken
and raise men's spirits to fearful apprehensions and jealousies one against
another, than even they whose main work it ought to be to quiet men's affections
one toward another about outward things with reference to God? And if the
Priest and the Prophet err in judgment, and are swallowed up with the
drunkenness of humane passions about temporal concernments, who shall be
taught knowledge? and who can be made to understand this Doctrine? Here indeed
is the rest wherewith we may cause the weary to rest, and this is the
refreshing: But who shall make men willing to hearken to it? The Lord has said
to his people of old, in a time of like distress; In returning, (viz. from
your fearful apprehensions) and rest shall ye be saved, in quietness and
confidence shall be your strength. There is nothing so unbeseeming the Spirit
of Christ, as to be disquieted with fearful apprehensions and jealousies of
men; it argues evidently a mistrusting in God, and a disowning of his
providence over us. If we believe that all the hairs of our head are numbered,
and that a Sparrow is not forgotten before Luke 12. 6, 7.
God, what should make us fearful of men? But the Apostle Peter's question is
considerable in this case, Who will harm you 1 Pet. 3. 13, 14.
(says he) if ye be followers of that which is good? that is, what cause have
you to think that any will intend evil against you, whiles you are harmless
to all, and seek that which is good? It is against reason to entertain such
thoughts: But and if ye suffer for righteousness sake, happy are ye; be ye not
afraid of their terror, neither be troubled, but sanctify the Lord in your
hearts: and if ye suffer according to his will, commit the keeping 1 Pet. 4. 19.
of your souls to him in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator: As if he had
said, But what if against all reason (which yet is not humane nor probable) you
should be requited with evil for doing good; then, if you are Christians, your
resolution ought to be, to suffer what befalls you for righteousness sake, to
count your selves happy, not to suffer fearfully, or perplexedly as men; to set
up God in your hearts, to conceive it his will and appointment it should be so
with you, to continue still in well-doing; and in so doing, to rest on his
faithfulness, and to cast the care of your souls upon him: so that to dash
the cowardly fears and jealousies which rise from the suggestions of flesh and
blood: there is nothing so suitable to a Christian, as to be armed with this
resolution, that he will be careful of nothing but to do well; and for so
doing, he will cheerfully suffer what ever may befall him. And whosoever does
not take up this resolution, as he is far from the Spirit of Christ, so he
cannot enter into his rest, which sets him above his distempers of carnal
jealousies and fears. And where this remedy cannot be applied, there this
disease is incurable; and where this disease is not cured, there it is not
possible to prevent a listening after tale-bearing and private censuring;
because the fearfulness of events, and the suspitiousnes taken up of designs
and persons, will never suffer the mind to be at rest, but by the apprehensions
of evil, listening after rumors and reports, the heart will be moved as the
trees of the wood are moved with the wind.

The remedy of Talebearing and private censuring.
By every one.
Therefore the first remedy of tale-bearing and private censuring, is, this
cure of jealousies and fears: for where the spirit is free from this
distemper, and in a serene frame within it self, following that which is good
toward all men before God, there will be no listening after evil reports, nor
entertaining of tale-bearers upon evil surmisings: and if no man will lend a
talebearer his ears, he will be soon weary of his employment.

By the Magistrate.
But the more direct cure of this disease is partly in the Magistrates, partly
in the Ministers hand: for if the Christian Magistrate would take up David's
resolution, and Psalm 101.
practice it, To know no wicked person, To cut off such as privily stander
others, To cast out of his sight, and discountenance every where such as carry
tales from one to another, and tell lies: and consequently to repress railing
accusations, scandalous pamphlets, and injurious reproaches; so that a way
might be opened, at least for a reparation of the injuries of such a nature:
with infamy to those that infer the same, (as in other Commonwealths the
custom is.) If, I say, this were done by the Magistrate, the public
inconveniencie of tale-bearing, private censurings, and of defamations, would
soon be cured. As the North Wind (says Solomon) ariveth away Prove. 25. 23
rain, so does an angry countenance a backbiting tongue. If the angry
countenance of a private man will do this to a slanderer in private, much more
will the angry countenance of a Magistrate be able to effect it when a just
reward of punishment will take hold of the transgressors.

By the Minister.
But to perfect this cure, the Ministers of the Gospel should make it a part of
their work, as well in private as public, to make all men sensible of the
sinfulnes of whispering, and backbiting and of the danger of an unruly tongue,
which sets the world on fire, and is set on fire of hell. What shall be given
unto Psalm. 120. 3. 4.
thee? or what shall be done unto thee, thou false tongue? sharp Arrows of the
mighty, with Coals of Juniper, and such as with a deceitful tongue love
devouring words: God shall likewise destroy Psalm. 52. 4. 5.
them for ever, he shall take them away, and pluck them out of their
dewlling place, and root them out of the land of the living. Says the Holy
Ghost, and if free passage of the Gospel into the souls of men is to be
regarded; there is nothing that does more directly obstruct it, and hinder men
from entertaining it; then envies and evil speakings, which are always
accompanied with malice, guile, and hypocrisy, as the Apostle does intimate, 1
Peter 2. 1. 2. nor shall we ever see Jerusalem a quiet Habitation, nor peace
upon Israel; till the disorder lines of whispering, tale-bearing, and
passionate censuring, be removed from the zeal of the Profession: if Ministers
themselves (too too many) were not guilty of this, it might hopefully be in
some Zelots; but the zeal for one, and against another party, (which has
drowned the zeal for meeknes for love, and for true unpartial Christianity,)
does licenciat the spirits of professors to do this without control, by the
example of some of their Ministers; for it is from the pride of men, that dote
about questions of their own framing, (because they mind not with true zeal,
the undoubted and known truths of the Gospel) that this heat of strife and
railing, and of passionatenes, (which is mistaken for zeal) does proceed as
the Apostle declares, 1 Timothy 6. 3. 4. 5. and truly it is hard to know, whether
Satan does more harm to the felicity of mankind, by the false accusations
which unconscionable and profane men give out against the godly in the world;
or by the private and faulty reprovings of true faults, which disorderly zealous
professors give out against them in the Church.

By all Conscionable Professors of Religion.
The Rules then to be offered to such as make Conscience of their ways, which
may prevent and cure the disorderlines of these courses are these.

First, let us watch over our spirits, that nothing be done through strife and
vain glory; but all things in humility, and without murmurings and disputings.
Phil. 2. 3. 14.

Secondly, if a man in the way of a lawful Calling must needs contend for Truth
and Righteousness, and for the Faith once given to the Saints; yet then let him
remember, that he ought to be slow to speak, and slow to wrath, because the
wrath of man Jam. 1. 19. 2.
works not the Righteousness of God; for our heat and passions, do rather
prejudice then advantage the truth in the minds of those to whom it is offered.

Thirdly, let us consider this truth, that to relate the faults and errors of
one man who is a stranger to another, under the pretense of warning him to whom
the relation is made of the danger thereof, is neither charitable nor
positively edifying, it is not charitable because the discoveries of man's
failings to strangers, can proceed from no love to those that fail, for love
covers from strangers a multitude of sins; nor can it work any love in
strangers toward them, nor is it possitively edifying to those that are made
acquainted therewith; because nothing does positively edify, but the
manifestation of Truth and Righteousness,

Fourthly and lastly, let this Rule be laid to heart, that to lay open the
faults of any, either to himself or to others; otherwise then in order to the
course which Christ has appointed to rectify the same; and with a charitable
design, to bring him that erreth from the error of his way, is altogether
unlawful, and therefore none ought to censure any man or fault; but that at the
same instant, is able and willing to show the way how to reclaim the man, and
redress the fault.

Concerning the remedy of revenge.
The first is Prayer.
Hitherto I have spoken of the distempers which are cureable in our nature by
reasonable persuasions, the distemper of revenge which we have found to be
incureable by ordinary means, must be referred unto the prayers of the Godly
to intercede for those that are in danger thereof, that their passion may not
be an incentive of the fierce wrath of God against their own souls, and over
the whole Nation; but that the remainder of wrath may be restrained from
breaking forth upon Psalm. 76. 10.
others, and by the spirit of Christ subdued within themselves:

The second is Christ's Spirit. To be held forth by the Ministers.
for nothing but the mighty spirit by which Jesus Christ did walk in our flesh,
and overcome the world, bound the strong man in our nature, and spoiled him of
his goods, can conquer this passion, and therefore none but such as are taught
of him, to deny themselves in all things, can follow his footsteps in this,
that when he was reviled, he reviled not again, when he 1 Pet. 2. 23.
suffered, he threatened not, but commits himself to him that judges
righteously; nor can any promise themselves freedom from vindicative
affections, who have not learned of him, to love their Enemies, to bless them
that curse them, to do good to Matthew 5. 44
them that hate them, and to pray for them that despitefully use them and
persecute them: this Lesson the Apostle had learned, being reviled (says he)
we bless, being persecuted we suffer it; and being defamed we entreat, 1 Cor.
4. 12. 13. It is evident then, that nothing can make a natural man effectually
to lay down the resentments of private injuries, but a real change of his nature
by the work of grace in conformity to Jesus Christ, which only can incline us
to be kind and tender hearted toward others, forgiving them what they have
done to us amiss, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven us, Ephesians. 4. 32.
So then all that can be done to cure this (as to men) incorrigible evil, is to
hold forth this frame of the spirit of Christ, and his Commandment both in our
obedience thereunto, and in our word of exhortation, to move the Conscience of
others to follow it.

The third is the apprehension of Gods vengeance.
But if those that should thus bear witness of the life of Christ, are to set
rather upon the motions of revenge themselves, and Romans 12. 19.
encourage those that are bent that way, than inclined to take them off, what
shall we say unto it? shall we not acknowledge that it will be just with God,
that he should execute his vengeance upon those, that delight in private
vengeance against others, and that take his proper work out of his hands; for
the Lord has said, vengeance is mine, and I will repay it. Behold then, all ye
that kindle a fire (of wrathful revenge) and compass your selves about with
sparks (of vindicative plots and attempts,) walk in the light of your fire,
and in the sparks that ye have kindled, (seeing by no persuasions you can be
brought herein, to deny your selves.) This shall ye have of mine hand, (says
the Lord) ye shall lie down in sorrow, Isaiah 50. 11.

Hitherto of the single Remedies. The complicated follow as proper to the work
of Magistrates and Ministers. And why.
And thus much concerning the single and distinct Remedies which every one in
private for himself is to make use of; now it remains, to speak also
something of the universal and complicated remedies, which all of us with
reference one to another, should seek to apply unto our distracted public
Condition, to heal the distempers which occasion the same, and although all
are obliged to desire and endeavor in their places the advancement hereof
toward the public; yet properly the procurement and the application thereof
does belong mainly to the Ministry, to the Magistracy in their several places,
and that with a special Reference to each other in their public
Administrations toward the Communalty.

As then the complication of our distempers, does beget an universal disease,
both in Religious and Civil Affairs: So the general Remedies which flow from
the fundamental duties of Love, of Righteousness, and of Peaceablenes, ought in
a way of concurrence to be applied, both to the Church and Commonwealth.

Now the Ministers of the Gospel are Messengers of Gods Love, and the
Governors of the State are Ministers of his Righteousness unto all men; and
both these as well in respect of their particular employments, as in respect of
the common Profession of Christianity, are called by God, both unto the
enjoyment of peace for themselves, 1 Cor. 7. 15. Colos. 3. 15. and to the
practice and procurement of it unto others, Romans 12. 18. and Matthew. 5. 9.
therefore as the love of God, (that is, our obligation to love him) is the
ground of all humane peace: So the peaceable cure of all public distempers,
and the first overtures and addresses thereunto, must needs result from the
effects and properties of love, as it is Christian, that is common to all, and
ought principally to be reached out unto all, by the peaceable hand, the
righteous carriage, and orderly behavior of those that are the Messengers of
Divine Love.

And again, as nothing is truly love which does not tend to a real good of him
who is the object thereof; or is not intended as a real good toward the
object, by him who is the Author thereof: So nothing can be counted, or will
ever be found a real good, or is intended for such unto any, which is neither
applied nor intended as from God.

And herein the Minister should be the first to apply the Remedy of love.
Now it belongs to none more to intend or apply things as from God, then to
the Ministers of his Word, whose Profession it is to be the Messengers of his
love, as being sent forth to invite all men to partake thereof: if therefore
these do any thing toward any, without a reference unto God, and without the
affections of his love, they are of all men living the most unworthy of their
employment: it is true, that all who glory in the name of Christ, to call him
Lord, are bound to walk by this same Rule of love toward every one, even as
Christ has loved us; but yet it is evident, that the Ministers appointed to
publish unto all men his name, are obliged herein to go before all others, and
to make it their special work, to teach and persuade others to follow this way,
as it becomes the Disciples of such a Master: and if any does not this
professedly, he has abandoned the main work, as well of his Christian as
Ministerial Calling; for it is clear, that the end of the whole Commandment,
both in respect of the duties of the Law, and of the Doctrine of the Gospel, is
love out of a pure heart, and of a good Conscience, and of Faith unfeigned. Romans
13. 10. and 1 Timothy 1. 5. and 1 John 3. 23. and that Ministers ought to raise
their own and other men's thoughts and spirits, in reference to the life of God
in Christ, to a comportment suitable unto this Duty and Doctrine, above earthly
interests, and worldly concernments, is a truth so evident, that no Christian
can make any doubt of it: nor also of this, that as no engagement is so near to
us as this; so none is to be preferred to it, or ought to take us off from it.

From whence this conclusion is to be inferred.

That if any Minister of the Gospel, does at any time take upon him to be a
judge of the Affairs of this world, between Man and Man, about which they are
commonly in strife, and therein does take part with the one, and opposes the
other; as an Agent of the Affairs of this world: and does not directly and
mainly, by raising their spirits above earthly passions, and by leading them to
the life of Christ, endeavor to allay their worldly affections, to compose
their differences; and to reconcile their affections one to another, in the
love of Christ: if (I say) any Minister does not set himself to work thus, when
he is obliged to meddle with carnal controversies, about the things of men; he
has clearly renounced not only the work of a true Minister of the Gospel, but
the name also of a true Christian: for there can be no earthly concernment of
such importance, or so near to a Christian, as to engage him to forge and cast
off the duties and the affections of divine love toward any, or not to
endeavor the common welfare of all without partiality, as Christ has loved
us, and endeavored our welfare: if therefore any be found, who call themselves
The snare wherein some Ministers are caught, which does hinder them from
applying the Remedy.
Ministers, and yet make themselves on all sides the chief Actors and Abettors
of State differences and controversies; by whose instigation under a pretense
of Religion, the distempers, of men are heightened, and the common welfare of
humane societies is disturbed, shall we call them herein Ministers of the
Gospel of God? shall we say, that in so doing they are guiltless before men? or
shall we not rather say, that they are quite out of their way, that they are
Ministers of the Kingdom of Satan by following their own humors, and that the
Lord by them does mingle a perverse spirit amongst the unsound professors of
Christianity. I do not think or say, that all Ministers on all sides are thus
set, or set themselves a work (for that would be a great untruth) nor do I take
upon me to judge any in particular, or to judge in general of all those that
take upon them to meddle in State Matters, that they do it against the Dictates
of their Conscience (for that would be a presumptuous and uncharitable
judgment) but this I say, and judge, that so many of the Ministry as are thus
set, and do meddle (as they suppose by an engagement of Conscience) with State
Matters, to take part with one, and oppose another party therein, and do not
study directly to take off the edge of all men's carnal animosities, by the
love of Christ, that all may be directed to build up one another, in all truth
and righteousness toward the kingdom of God. I say, so many of the Ministry
as take this course, (let it be upon what pretense soever) are in a manifest
error, and dangerous snare of Satan; from which, I shall entreat the Lord in
mercy to deliver them. And that I may not be wanting to my duty and affection
to help them out of it, (according to that rule of charity, Whosoever censures
any fault, ought to show the way how it should be redressed) I shall in the
measure which I have received hold forth, and demonstrate the course, by which,
in these our present distractions, the Ministers, who truly mind the work of
the Gospel, should walk toward all men without blame, to avoid this snare of
Satan.

And to this effect, I shall take this for granted; that the Ministerial
employment in the Gospel is nothing else but a stewardship, whereunto the
dispensation of the messages and mysteries of Gods love to mankind in and by
Christ Jesus The way to recover them out of the snare.
is committed: and that consequently all the acts of this stewardship, must at
all times answer the nature and end of this dispensation; or if any thing
answer it not, and is inconsistent with the love of (...), to be dispensed
therein; that this thing (let it be what it will, and colored with a show
never so fair) is in respect of them, unministeriall as to God, and
unwarrantable as to men. Upon which ground this does manifestly follow, that no
faithful Minister of the Gospel will dare to do or say any thing
ministerially concerning our present distractions in the State, but that which
the love of God in Christ does direct him to do, and does prompt him to say, as
a Christian, unto Christians indeed, or unto such as pretend to be the
disciples of Jesus Christ. Which can be effectually nothing else; but that
which is fit to incline through the love of God the heart of every one, to put
on toward each other the bowels of mercy, of compassion, of kindness, of
meekness, and of long suffering, that the breaches which make us unprofitable
one to another in the profession of Christianity may be healed by the unity of
the Spirit of Christ in the bond of peace. For if all our works and our
persuasions center not in Gods love, upon the hearts of those with whom we
deal, through the unfeigned profession of Christianity; it is certain that we
will venture upon them in the love of this present world for something which
does oblige us to the profession of partiality: for so far as we go out of
the one way, we step immediately into the other, therefore to keep our selves
free from the trappes wherein many are caught, by the subtle contrivances of
State Mysteries; and to help those that are recoverable, to recover themselves
out of the engagement to further breaches, and to prevent the great thoughts of
heart which our destructive divisions are like to bring forth: Let us reflect
as in the sight of God upon the Rules of our Christian duties, first in love,
and then in righteousness, and in peaceablenesse; that so many of us, as make
not the pretense of Religion and conscience, a cloak of maliciousness; but in
all things and above all, endeavor without partiality toward men, to approve
our conscience in sincerity before God; may find a directory by the spirit,
in the word of Truth, which is the testimony of Jesus, whereby to ^^^y how to
behave our selves harmlesly as the Sons of God without rebuke in the midst of
these distractions; that we may not be accessory to the perverseness and the
crookedness of the generation which does occasion, and foment the same.

The complicated causes of our public disease.
Seeing then our complicated disease does lie in the general disagreement of
men's imaginations about things past, in the unrulinesse of their actions about
things present, in the unsettlement and difference of their desires about
things to come; and in the peremptorinesse of their resolutions, taken up, upon
mutual discontents, and future hopes of changes: our way to cure these
distempers, must be also in a complicated course of using Remedies, which will
meet with the disorderlinesse of men's hearts and actions in all these
unsettlements; and because the first ingredient and basis of this whole Remedy
must needs be Divine Love (for without it the rest will be ineffectuall) and
this ought first to be exhibited in the work of the Ministry, by their
practice and persuasion, we shall take the composition of it from the Apostles
doctrine to the Hebrews, who in his 12. Chapter, having exhorted the professors
of Christianity to follow Jesus Christ, and the cloud of witnesses which are
gone before them, in hearing the Cross, and the contradiction of sinners. v.
1, 2, 3. and not to faint under the fatherly rod, and chastisements of the Lord
through afflictions; knowing that they are the effects of his care over them,
and that they will bring forth the peaceable fruits of righteousness to them
that are exercised thereby: v. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. He does infer from
thence this direction and admonition: Wherefore lift up the hands which hang
down, and the knees that are loosened, or out of joint. v. 12. And make
straight paths for your feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of the way,
but let it rather be healed. v. 13. Follow peace with all men, and holiness,
without which no man shall see the Lord. v. 14. Looking diligently, lest any
man fail of the grace of God, lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble
you, and thereby many be defiled. v. 15. Lest there be any fornicator, or
profane person, as Esau, who for one morsel of meat sold his birthright. v.
16.

The complicated Remedy thereof in the words of the holy Ghost. Which are
opened in the twofold scope thereof.
This Apostolical counsel does presuppose a people in a condition such as we
are in, under a trial of afflictions and chastisements for their sins: his
scope is twofold: first, to encourage them to make a right use of their
afflictions, in bearing them patiently, and without faint-heartednesse; for the
end for which God does send them, which is, that thereby they should be drawn
to lay aside sin, and the weight of earthly things which does beset them. v. 1.
to resist sin unto the blood striving against it. v. 4. to look upon God as
their Father in afflictions. v. 7, 8. to be in subjection to him thereby. v. 9.
and to hope to partake of his holiness, and of the peaceable fruit of
righteousness when they are exercised thereby. v. 10, 11.

His second scope is, to direct them how to free themselves from sin, that in
the performance of necessary duties, they may concur with Gods working by his
chastisements, to work out their own salvation. To which effect he lets them
see, what they ought to do, and what they ought to avoid: he exhorts them to
that which they should do, in v. 12, 13, 14. and admonishes them of that which
is to be avoided: v. 15, 16.

And applied, First in the conformity of our State to that of the Hebrews.
Now to make a distinct Application of this advice to our present condition,
let us consider two things: first, what conformity is between our state, and
that state wherein the Apostle does find them to be: secondly, how the duties
which they are enjoined to perform, that they might be delivered from the
sinfulness of their state, should be set upon by us, that we may be freed from
the same evils attending our State.

The conformity of that State, wherein they are found to to be with ours, is in
these particulars. 1. They were under the chastising and reforming hand of God,
so are we. 2. Their afflictions did occasion in their spirits a want of courage
and resolution, to undertake cheerfully the good works of the holy profession:
and in the way of their proceeding there was an unevenness, and lamenesse of
their course: out afflictions have wrought the same indispositions upon our
spirits, and upon the course of our proceedings; for in our spirits, we find
not that alacrity amongst most men, which should be, to set upon the work of a
complete Reformation, and which is necessary to carry it on as it is begun;
but the hands of many hang down, and their knees are loosned, and out of joint
through the apprehension of discouragements, and in our proceedings, we find
the course of many very uneven and lame; and of some so much perverted, that
they are even turned quite out of the way.

3. From this faintness of spirit which was upon the Hebrews in undertaking
the works of their profession, and the inequality of their ways in
prosecuting that which they did undertake, did arise strife and debate: and
with it much uncleanness and defilements of the flesh and spirit; which
naturally go along with variance. We are here in the same case, for on the one
hand our want of true zeal and forwardness in necessary duties; on the other,
the crooked and perverse courses which we have followed, have multiplied
matters of private and public quarrels amongst us: and these have been
fruitful in manifold disorders, wherein our corruptions have mightily broke
forth, and manifested the uncleanness which is in us.

4. The Hebrews by reason of their strivings, and of the defilements following
thereupon, were under a threefold danger: First, that amongst them there might
be a falling away from the grace of God: that is from the saving truth which
they had received. Secondly, that upon their defection a root of bitterness
might spring up and defile many. Thirdly, that amongst such as might be
defiled, fornicators, and profane persons (such as Esau was) might be found.
Now to us, all these dangerous evils are befallen, as the results of our
filthiness in our quarrels. For it is clearly manifest, that although the
grace of God which brings salvation has been more powerfully revealed unto
this nation, then unto any in the world, since the discovery of Popery; yet
it is as fully apparent as any thing can be, that amongst us now, there is a
more apparent defection of many from the grace which we have received, then
amongst any that have attempted a Reformation in these latter times. So the
first thing whereof they were in danger is come effectually upon us: As for the
second, would to God that there were but one root of bitterness sprung up
amongst us; but alas, there are so many, that they can hardly be named; and
they have defiled so many, that they cannot be numbered. Instead of
acknowledging God to be the only true God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent;
a root of bitterness is sprung up, whereby men do Deifie themselves: instead
of the holy Scriptures, they make their own reason or fancy a rule of truth:
and instead of Ordinances of holy worship; they rest upon the pretense of the
spirit and the private motions thereof to enjoy God. Some instead of Repentance
and Faith, and the exercise of all virtues; maintain, that the practice of all
vices is the only way to happiness: and some instead of denying themselves in
the world, and submitting to the superior powers which God has set over them
therein, maintain, that all government is to be abolished; and that the right
to possess all things does belong to none but unto themselves. And because
these defilements have spread themselves in the hearts of many, therefore the
last of the evils, whereof the Hebrews are warned, is come upon us in full
measure: for there be swarms of fornicators, of Atheists, and profane persons
like Esau, which show themselves openly amongst us and shamelesly: which sads
the hearts of all the godly.

Thus we see, that in every thing there is a doleful conformity between our
present State, and that condition whereinto the Apostle found the Hebrews
either already fallen, or like to fall, to the dishonor of God, to the
disadvantage of the Gospel, and the great prejudice of their own salvation.

Which is made worse by the evil will of complainers one of another.
I am not ignorant how much, and in what way some complain of all these evils
which now are our burden; how they cry out against the misery thereof, and
what an odium they endeavor to cast upon some by whose fault (as they
conceive) we are fallen thereinto: but they are far out of the way, who
think, that by blaming others in something, they exempt themselves from the
guilt of these sinful calamities: however suppose this could make them
guiltless: yet the complaints of such a kind are no balsome nor mollifying
ointment, to heal these putrefying sores in in any; they are rather like a
corrasive plaster to make them worse in all; for this ripping up of matters
past, to represent evils suffered on the one side, and injuries done on the
other, is the method to foment bitterness, hatred, wrath, clamor, and evil
speaking, which we are commanded at all times to put away from us; but should
then do chiefly, when we are about a way to cure distempers, and heal public
evils: for this way is so far from reclaiming any from his violent
affections, that it tends rather not only to dishearten the well affected even
in lawful proceedings, when they see evils hainously aggravated, against those
to whom they feign would do good; but it also helps to increase our divisions,
by renewing matters of disaffection which ought to be forgotten. For he that
covers a transgression seeks Love; but he that repeateth a matter
separateth very friends; says Solomon. Prove. 17. 9. If then either as
Christians we are bound to provoke one another unto love, and to good works, or
as messengers of Gods loving kindness unto mankind, we are obliged to seek the
love of all men to each other in him; it cannot be denied, but that a main part
of the Ministerial work is, to seek and maintain Christian love amongst men,
and to do this, it is evident, that a chief preparative will be, to persuade
all men, not to insist upon the repetition of former offensive matters (which
are past remedies, as being transient acts) but to cover mutually each others
transgressions, even as we would desire God to cover our sins in Jesus Christ:
And if will needs lay open Where of the Remedy is showed.
matters of grief, let it only be, either to observe them penitently, to make
confession thereof and to lament over them, till God have mercy upon us; or
prudently to use cautions for the public, to prevent the causes of future
disturbances; that none may wilfully return again to folly. All the
satisfaction which God requires of us men, for former faults, though never so
heinous, is this, that we should in after times cease to do evil and learn to
do good. And if we do Isa. 1, 16 17.
so, all our transgressions, though formerly like unto Scarlet; yet then they
shall be as snow in his account: and they shall not be mentioned unto us any
more, says the prophet Ezekiel. Chap. 18. ver. 22. This therefore ought to be
in like manner our way of love; and the healing of evils, which we should use
one toward another, should be this, not to mention former faults any more,
upon sufficient grounds of harmelessenesse in time to come: and he that will
not be heartily reconciled upon these terms with his neighbor, deserves not
to be admitted unto terms of peace with God; till he pay the utmost farthing of
the debt which he does owe him, as the parable of the Gospel does teach us,
Matt. 18. 23. till the end of the Chapter. Thus then, if upon the contemplation
of our evils, we can put on the bowels of Mercy and compassion one toward
another; and not suffer our hearts to imagine evil against our brother; by
making him wrongfully more guilty of the evils befalling to the public then
our selves, we shall be fitted to follow the direction, which in this place is
offered unto us by the Apostle, for the cure of our distempers. And that we may
do this, let us come to the consideration of the matters contained therein.

Secondly in the duties recommended to the Hebrews, and to be practiced by us.
Of which the General rule is, that we must not look backward, but forward upon
our State.
This Direction then has a Positive and a Negative part of Duty for our cure.

The Positive part does teach us to look foreward, and not backward; and first
to our own resolutions and actions within ourselves, and then to our relations
toward other men; and toward God, who is the end of the race that is set
before us.

The Negative part does also teach us, to look forward and not backward, and
first to prevent the corruption and defection from the doctrine of Truth: And
secondly, from the practice of holiness, and from the professed obedience
which is due thereunto. So that before we come to particulars, a main Rule is
to be observed, which both in the positive and negative duties of this
directorie is employed; which is, that we should not look backward but forward,
when we go about to remedy common evils in our own spirits, and toward
others: for the fountain, or rather the sink, of those corrupt humors, which
feed our distemperatures; namely, the disagreement of our imaginations one from
another, about things past, cannot otherwise be cured, but by laying the
thought thereof aside: for some look upon things, past as remembering their
enjoyments and greiving for the loss thereof; others look upon things past as
remembering their sufferings, and the injuries done to themselves, and others
therein: both these by dwelling upon these objects, heat their Imaginations
within themselves: and put their spirits in a feverish distemper of passion
and discontentednesse thereby, which cannot be removed, but by the removal of
the objects which occasion the same.

Why natural men look backward.
The first sort of these distempers is like unto that of Lots wife, whom Christ
in these latter days bids us remember. Luke 17. 32. She having lived at her
ease in Sodom, when she was to flee for her life out of it, was forbidden to
look back; lest she should grieve at the judgment of God, when she should see
all the objects of her sensual delights, burnt up thereby at once. Now because
she obeyed not the counsel of the Lord, but fixed her Imagination (as many do
now amongst us) backward, and went not forward in her heart to the place of her
rest and safety, which the Lord had appointed her, therefore he made her to be
a pillar of salt, with her body turned this way, and with her face looking that
way, neither going backward nor forward, but standing still in the mid way,
that she should remain as an example of a special punishment which is due to
those, who in their hearts control the past judgments of God, and which is
inflicted, by fixing their spirits, in that useless posture, wherein they set
themselves, by looking back upon the remembrance of their lost enjoyments. Let
us therefore beware of remembering things past in such a way, lest we be made
like to her.

The second sort of these that look backward upon their sufferings are like unto
the dogs, who when a stone is cast at them, though flung beyond them, yet they
will run back to bite at it; for these upon the consideration of things past,
though now beyond them, yet they whet their affections with malice, envy and
revenge, and their tongues with bitter words against the instruments of Gods
judgments over them. The punishment of these men is likewise as their fault
is: their spirits are fixed in the restlesnesse of their condition; for the
wicked shall have no peace, says my God, but as the troubled sea, with raging
waves, they are Isa. 57. 20, 21. Jude 13.
condemned to foam forth their own shame continually: they are bent to quarrel
with every one, who agree not with them in the apprehension of matters bypast;
and so are made firebrarnds to the spirits of unstable souls, who take not hold
of the rest which Christ has prepared for them. And this is the effect of men's
looking backward with discontent upon things that are past; whence it does
appear, that the only cure of this distemper, is to dash the remembrance of
all such things, to the end that the things present, and to come, may be laid
to heart in the way of righteousness: as for those that are truly godly, and
walk Why true Christians look always forward, and not backward. Ph. l. 3. 13,
14.
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, they are inclined of themselves to
forget the things that are behind; because their whole aim is set to press
forward toward the mark, for the price of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus: their mark is, to have communion with God in all his ways, and the
excellency of the life of Christ, and the joy which is set before them does
fill their eye, and drowns all other thoughts, so that they look at all times
but one only way, which is heavenward: not walking as men, but as citizens of
heaven, and worthy of God; they mind the fruits of the spirit in all
goodness, righteousness, and truth; they prove toward Ephesians. 5. 9, 10.
every one in all conditions what is acceptable unto the Lord. And this is that
which Ministers, who desire to be healers, and to repair these breaches, should
apply themselves to do, and put their hearers in mind of, chiefly at this time
when men are so much set upon mischief. For what profit can they bring to
themselves, to their hearers, or to the Gospel of Christ, by entertaining them
with the grievances of matters that are past and gone? there can be none other
use of this course, but to boil up their spirits into a paroxisme of unrulines,
and of discontentednesse against those that are in power, to make them
unweildie for action, in order to present and future occasions; and to give the
common Enemy his hearts desire against us: and how suitable this is unto the
way of the Gospel, of righteousness, and of peace, and to the employment of
the Messengers of Gods love; whose aim should be to become helpers of the joy
of the faithful, I shall leave unto their own conscience to judge.

And when they look backward, what they aim at in so doing.
As for mine own part, I shall never call to mind the sinful courses of either
party to reproach them therewith, or to anger any thereby; but when I shall be
obliged to reflect upon the same, I shall endeavor two things: first, to
represent the guilt under which we all lie before God, that we may for our
selves, and one for another, be humbled under his mighty hand unto repentance?
Secondly, to set the spirits that are upright in their way, a work, to attend
without partiality, through the love of God and of goodness, all the designs
of a public nature which are necessary and commendable, to heal breaches, and
to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. And because it is an
undoubted truth, that this ought to be the behavior of all those who fear God,
when he does visit a people with his judgments, as is manifest by the counsel
of Zephaniah, Chap. 2. v. 1, 2, 3. I am amazed, and much troubled at the
different behavior of some who pretend to zeal in this time of our visitation,
wondering that Satan should be able to prevail so far with them, as to take
them off from this The obstructers of this course at this time reproved.
aim, and to make them isntrumental to pull back others, and to stagger any
that is conscientious, from the prosecution of these duties. And that which I
most wonder at, is the deceitfulness of the persuasion, which is used, to
foment the division of our spirits, even in those matters, wherein we are all
equally related unto God, for our selves and the public, as in matters of
prayer, and of thanksgiving; shall the discontents about earthly concernments
reach even unto heaven? shall a duty which is not only lawful and
commendable in it self as to men, but necessary, and commanded to be observed
in such occurrences as we are fallen into, as to God, be not only neglected,
but opposed, and made a subject of contradiction; nay, and made unlawful to be
observed as by us; because of some interpretations and constructions which we
make of the actions of others to their disadvantage? Should my supposall of the
failing of another man, who yet is willing to draw nigh unto God with me, and
desirous to have my friendly concurrence and conjunction in drawing near unto
God with him, be a just ground for me, to refuse to pray for public mercies,
and to be thankful for public blessings? And what although he were as unjust
in his way, and as guilty before God, as some would make him; is it therefore
unwarrantable for me at his desire (when he is actually in power over me) to
worship God, by craving and acknowledging of seasonable favors, for my self
and others? Pharaoh was a cruel, unnatural Tyrant over the Israelites, he was
a type of a natural incorrigible man, and declared to be a reprobate, whom God
would harden to his destruction; yet at his entreaty, Moses refused not to
pray to God for temporal deliverances over him, and his people. And although
Pharaohs end in desiring Moses to pray, was known to be nothing else but
self-interest; yet this took not Moses off from doing the duty, only he had a
further end then Pharaoh in it, as sometimes also he declares unto him: which I
observe to show, that although men be never so wicked in their way, and their
ends never so carnal, in desiring our prayers for things in themselves good
and lawful, that nevertheless it is not unlawful for us, to comply with them
in such a duty. But to refuse the performance of such a duty, when the
public good, and the edification of all does require it; only to show our
opposition unto those that do desire it, because of some other things wherein
we are not satisfied with them, is to me a subject of great admiration; how it
can come into the minds of any pious, conscionable, knowing and reasonable men
for to say, that this condescension unto their desire will be taken as a
compliance with them, in that wherein we disallow of them; or will tend to
confirm them in that which we think to be unlawful in them, is a great
mistake: first in respect of the nature The Answer to their Plea for their
practice.
of the duties (which being absolutely good in their own kind, and not
indifferent, cannot be supposed to tend unto evil:) secondly, in respect of
the inference which is made upon the performance of these duties, which if it
be well looked into, will be found inconsistent with true Piety, and Showing,
First, the unreasonablenesse thereof.
void of Reason. For it is neither agreeable to godliness, nor unto reason,
that I should conclude thus; because it is possible that others may, and likely
that some will, make another construction of that which I am about to do, then
I mean they should; that therefore I should be obliged to abstain from a
lawful and commendable duty: or thus, because a thing in it self good and
laudable, may accidentally tend to confirm some man in an evil course, or in
that which we think to be unlawful in him, that therefore I should be bound
not to apply my self unto it, although I am clear, that the thing per se, and
in its own nature, has no tendency unto the production of such an effect.
Moses praying for Pharaoh and his people, was an accidental cause of his
hardening, this Moses knew would be so, yet he refused not to do the duty. I
say therefore that these inferences consist neither with the Rules of Piety,
nor of Reason; and therefore that the conclusion against the condescension
whereof we speak is a great mistake: it is true, that in things of their own
nature indifferent, which by circumstances are alterable, this consequence will
hold, that if by my compliance with any in that which is free to be done, or
left undone, I should think they would be confirmed in that which I disallow in
them, and judge unlawful for them to do; that then I am bound to abstain from
it, lest I build them up in that which is evil, and be accessorie to their
sin; but in things which in their own nature are holy, just and good, it does
not follow, that because others may misconstrue, and abuse what I do, that
therefore I ought not to do it; for else what shall become of the whole
profession of Christianity? for what is in any part of it, or what can any man
say or do in it, which another that is malicious may not misconstrue, misapply,
and abuse? this is therefore (as to my apprehension) a very unconscionable and
unreasonable pretense to cover an undutifull practice. But I have yet a further
observation upon this pretense of non concurrence in duties absolutely good and
lawful, with those that are in power, which is this; that if this practice and
pretense be looked into, and laid open in the root whence it proceeds, and in
the end whereunto it does tend, I suppose it will 2ly, the unconscionablenesse
thereof.
be found to have much of the Serpent in it, and very unsound and unsavourie to
a good conscience: for consider we whence this scruple does rise, and is taken
up; and to what the practice whereunto it leads, does tend in its own nature,
and where it ends.

First, the rise of the scruple is this; that such as refuse to pray, and give
thanks solemnly for blessings upon the Nation, at the desire of those who are
in government, do it, because they look upon matters past, as they are inclined
to consider them with discontent; and upon things present with reference
thereunto; considering the same with a sullen humor, as in the hands of those
that manage the same contrary to their sense: wherein they make themselves
absolute Judges of all the proceedings past, and present, of the power and
government which is over them; and upon this judgment of the miscarriages
which they lay unto their charge, they frame a resolution of non-complyance in
all things, though in themselves, never so good and profitable to the public:
which how far it is lawful for them in the way of Christianity to do, we are
now about to consider.

Secondly, the scruple being thus taken up, that whereunto their practice does
lead, is to uphold the breach, which they suppose is already made of the
public peace; which is very unchristian: and that wherein it does end
directly, is an opposition to the present power: so that in effect this
practice does speak thus much; that the Ministers of Christ may lead men to
maintain an opposition against those that manage public affairs in every
thing; because in one thing concerning the alteration of Government (about the
cause and way thereof) they are not agreed with them. Now if we cannot say,
that the Ministers of the Gospel are proper Judges of State Interests, nor that
their ministerial work ought to be made opposite or subordinate thereunto, to
lead Christians for or against it; then I cannot see how it can stand with a
good conscience in them, to intend such a practice: and as for Christians to
follow them in such a practice, I understand not how it can be either lawful
or commendable; except they will show, that an obligation is laid upon them by
God, as private men, to say in their hearts thus: because the proceedings of
those men that manage the public affairs of State, do cross my thoughts,
engagements, and designs concerning the outward settlement and government of
this world; therefore I ought to be cross unto them in all things whatsoever;
and to oppose them in spiritual, as well as in temporal matters: yea, and
although these matters in themselves be exceeding lawful, good, and acceptable
to God, yet in their hands I must oppose them. And although I can probably
foresee, that by this kind of opposition, I shall hazard to embroil all, and
perhaps help to bring my self, and the whole State to ruin and confusion, yet
still I must oppose them. Now what conscience can be found in such a
resolution, I shall leave to all those, not only that have the Spirit of
Christ, but that morally are rational, to judge: and yet in effect this is the
speech, and plain English of this pretended scruple and practice, so far as I
can make sense of it; wherein I shall desire that three things may be yet
further noted.

First, what the pernicious effect is, of looking back with carnal
discontentednesse upon the offenses which we suppose are given by others;
rather then of looking forward with uprightness and simplicity upon the good
which we ought to do our selves: here we may see, how far this is able to
pervert our way from the truth of Christianity, for in true Christianity we are
taught; not to be overcome with evil, but to overcome evil with good. Romans 12.
ver. 21. But such back-looking suggestions as these, lead us to the resolutions
of a quite contrary nature; which make us a verse unto that which is good, and
forwardly yielding to that which is evil: and from what spirit this does
proceed it is easy to judge.

Secondly, herein we may see, how deeply and deceitfully the corruption of
humane passions can insinuate it self under the apprehensions of Religiousnesse
into our conscience, before we we are aware thereof: which does undiscernably
fall out, when we suffer our humane affairs and considerations, to mix
themselves with spiritual concernments in our thoughts, and the latter of
these to be acted by the sense which we have of the former, whereas we ought to
have no thoughts of the former, but such as are subordinate and commensurable
unto the latter.

Thirdly, we may see also herein what the danger is of letting our spirits
loose unto strife: for if we once come to be engaged as men, with a design
rather to oppose other men's persons hatefully; then as Christians lovingly to
endeavor to rectify that which is amiss in them, and in their ways: we can
hardly ever suffer our selves to be disingaged again; because we know not where
to stop our course of opposition, in respect of new provocations daily offered
by others. Nor are we naturally inclined to get hold of the reins of our own
passions to recover our way to a peaceable disposition toward them. I remember
that I have read the Acts of one of the general Synods of the Churches of
Polenia, Synod. Cravon. Actu sexto.
wherein the spirit of opposition against the Anabaptists, and Arrians, did so
far transport those otherwise godly men; that they did make a Decree, not to
observe the custom of fitting (which undoubtedly is most agreeable to the
institution of Christ) in the Lords Supper, (notwithstanding that they
acknowledge in the same Act, that Ceremonies should be set free,) only because
those their adversaries did make use of that custom, as if the way of Christ's
Institution of that Ordinance might be laid aside, rather then that we should
seem to agree therein with Heretics. So that the hatred of these adversaries
and the desire to be found opposite unto them; did blot out of their minds, in
that matter, the love of Christ Jesus, and the righteous desire to be united
unto him in all his imitable ways. I hope that the spirits of these Brethren
are not yet so far transported, but that upon the discovery of this snare of
Satan, they will quickly recover themselves out of it: therefore to cure this
distemper and mistake of the way, in such as are not incurable, and desire not
to err obstinately; I shall entreat them, in reference to the case in hand to
ask of their own conscience these two questions.

Whether at any time, and in any case whatsoever, it be lawful for a Christian
to oppose that which is truly good in any, or to do evil that good may come
of it?

Secondly, whether Jesus Christ, who did declare in the days of his flesh,
that his Kingdom was not of this world, and the Apostle Paul who in the course
of his Ministry did profess, that he became all things unto all men in that
which was lawful. If these were now amongst us at this time, would upon matters
of earthly circumstances, and outward changes of humane concernments in
State-affaires, proceed thus in the work of their Ministry, and suffer their
consciences about the duties thereof, to be entangled into such wordly
considerations?

The Apostle says, I am made all things to all men, that I 1 Cor. 9. 22.
might by all means save some: And shall we say in our hearts the contrary
thus; I shall be made nothing to these men, that by all means I may help to
destroy them? God forbid. Such a persuasion cannot come from him who has
called us. The Apostle says again concerning his Ministry, Though we walk in
the flesh, yet we do not war after the flesh. And shall we under a pretense of
walking after the Spirit in our Ministerial employment, make the chief ground
of our proceedings therein toward the public, a State-jealousie, and
accordingly wage war in spiritual matters after the manner of men in the
flesh? Shall we that are sent to teach all men godly simplicity, meekness,
harmlesnesse, and how to deny this world and the wisdom thereof; become the
chief leaders of the men of the world to mutual provocations and irritations,
and encourage them to manage opposite interests about Statematters, with the
breach of Christian unity? Is it lawful for us to intend the displeasing of
one party to please another, rather then to intend the reconciling of them to
each other in the love of Christ? May we make the vindication of wrongs
supposed to be done by one party against another in outward matters, the proper
work of our employment? It might be tolerable in Samson (a man raised
extraordinarily to pick quarrels with the inveterate enemies of the Church of
God) being provoked by some of them with injuries to say, Now I Judge. 15. 3.
shall be more blameless than the Philistines though I do them a displeasure:
But in us to take up a resolution to displease any man, is wholly against this
Rule of Christ, Do good to them that hate you, pray for them that despitefully
use you. And the Apostles Matthew. 5. 44.
practice, We give no offense in any thing that the Ministry be not blamed, 2
Cor. 6. 3. As for Samson, he does not exempt himself from blame; all tbat he
pretends for his justification, was, that his enemies deserved more blame than
he: for he sought as an enemy, some advantage against them to quarrel; and
seeing they had done him wrong first, he was resolved neither to bear it, nor
to be behinde-hand with them in matters of displeasure. But that the ordinary
messengers of Gods love toward all men, and the Disciples of the Cross of
Christ, should upon any provocation whatsoever, be moved to take up such a
resolution, is as far below the dictates of a good conscience in following
Christ's example, as Samsons calling to be a Judge of Israel, was of a different
nature from the course wherein God has set us, which is to be dead with Christ
unto the world, to crucify the flesh with the affectios and lusts, and to give
up to him that judges righteously, the righting of all wrongs that are done
unto us. I shall conclude therefore that the bottom of the demurrer his scruple
is beaten out (as to spiritual actings in Christian duties under the present
Government) if it be found manifestly Gods will that to heal breaches of love
amongst brethren, and to prevent the increase of public calamities and
confusions in a Commonwealth, Christians ought to look forward how in their
callings they should by themselves readily perform good duties toward all;
and not to look backward to demur upon their duties, or to intend evil to any,
by reason of other men's offenses, or their own private disaffections in them.

Hitherto we have looked upon the first Rule of this Directory, showing the main
preparative duty which will fit us to seek a Remedy for public evils, and
without which it can not, (though found out) be applied thereunto to work a
cure; we have also endeavored to apply this Rule unto one of the greatest of
our present distempers: we may now come to the particulars offered in the
Apostles words; which if men, that call themselves Professors of the name of
Christ, could be persuaded in godly simplicity without respect unto by-matters,
through love to that which is good in Christianity for it self; we might hope
that the cure of our diseases would soon be accomplished by Gods assistance.

The particular Duties are considered first in their order as they are to be
used toward the Cure. Secondly, in their distinct branches, where is (...).
Loosned knees, as in a Palsy.
Let us therefore, if we are resolved to look forward, and not backward any
more, proceed toward a full cure of our evils, after this method which the
Holy Ghost has pointed out.

First, let us set upon the duties which are Positive, and then upon the
Negative; that is, let us begin our work with the performance of that which is
actually good in our own way of walking, before we reflect upon the evils which
may befall unto us from others to prevent the same. This Rule lies in order of
the things which are here prescribed; and it is very observable, in the method
of our cure; because we are naturally inclined to a contrary and preposterous
course, which makes us miscarry in most of our undertakings; for our natural
policy does lead us, rather to look upon others, then upon our selves, and to
observe rather that which is evil in them to their discredit; than that which
is good to their encouragement and credit, and to be more apprehensive of
danger from without and constrain to prevent the same; than solicitors of
safety from within, and careful to settle the same; all which is contrary to
the Rules of true wisdom and prudency, and does oblige men's thoughts to dwell
without themselves upon the objects of evils and discontentments, whereby they
are engaged into crooked courses, rather to attend the work of destruction than
of edification; but true spiritual policy does set our thoughts in another
frame, and our course in another method.

First, it sets before us the reality of that which is good and lovely, as the
end of our undertaking; then it presents unto us the effectual means of
attaining, and way of prosecuting the same.

First, by and for our selves.

Secondly, by and toward others also.

And lastly, it reflects upon the evils and impediments which may be incident
to the prosecution of the whole design, to prevent and remove the same; and
according to this method, the spirit of God has ordered the particular duties
recommended unto us in this place, for the positive duties, directing us to
intend that which in it self is good, are enjoined in the first place in v. 12.
13, 14. and afterward the negative duties, showing the evils that are to be
prevented, are recommended in the second place, in v. 15. 16. and of the good
things to be intended; that which concerns the ordering of our selves to our
own works, is put before that which concerns our relation toward others; for
that must needs be a ground unto this, and so likewise of the evils to be
prevented, that which is the most dangerous, as being a cause and ground upon
which other evils will follow, is to be prevented or remedied before tbe other
be meddled withal: namely, that which occasions our falling away from grace,
ought first to be looked into and remedied, before we take in hand to digg up
the roots of bitterness, and to repress the defilements and the profanation of
the profession.

Thus we see the way of the Cure, which Ministers should follow in their own
Calling, and which they should by Doctrine and persuasion, lead others unto,
according to their several places: these then are the particular duties which
make up the Remedy of our complicated disease; and this is the Order to be
observed in making use of the same: for in this method the Text does recommend
them to us.

The particular duty then to be intended.

First, for the ordering of our selves toward our own employments, is v. 12.
Lift up the hands which hang down, and the knees that are loosened, and for the
ordering of the works of our employment toward our own undertaking, as v. 13.
And make straight paths for your feet.

Then having rightly ordered our selves and our affairs within our own Sphere,
our next care is, to order our relations toward others; where our first duty
is to reflect upon the weakness and infirmities which are between them and us,
that they may be healed, and not made worse. And this is recommended to us in
the latter part of verse 3. Lest that which is lame be turned out of the way;
but let it rather be healed. The second duty is to reflect upon the perfections
which are to be upheld amongst us, both in reference to one another, and all of
us in reference to God. In reference to one another, we are commanded to
maintain peace: And in reference to God, we are commanded to maintain
holiness, in verse 3. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which
no man shall see the Lord. Where, before we come to the negative duties, we may
observe briefly, that the righteous ordering of our own ways, is that which
does enable us through love to heal and rectify the ways of others; and that
thereupon the endeavors to maintain peace and holiness with all men, will
prove successful, but not otherwise. For as there can be no healing of
infirmities wrought by us toward others, except our own ways being rightly
ordered, we be carried forth in love toward them; so there can be no
maintaining of peace and holiness with any, except the healing of mutual
infirmities be first lovingly and righteously intended. So that we see in what
order the complicated endeavors of Righteousness, of Love, of Peace, and of
Holiness, are to be applied, as a remedy unto public diseases and afflictions
when Gods chastisement is upon us.

When we have set the positive remedies a-work, we ought then also to be
cautious lest the effect of all our endeavors be made void by reason of
dangerous evils which may be incident to our state, if we take not heed
thereunto. The most dangerous of all evils is to fail of the grace of God,
either by falling from the Truth, or by losing the sense thereof: for if this
be lost, or that be cast off, nothing that is good can be found in us, or
remain with us. Therefore this is the first evil which is to be prevented,
which we are directed to v. 15. Looking diligently lest any man fail of the
grace of God. Then the second is a consequence of this defection, and therefore
to be looked unto in the second place, that it may be observed and prevented:
namely, the fructifying of our natural corruption within our selves, or
others; and the uncleanness which does spread it self abroad from thence;
whereof we are warned in the latter part of verse 15. Lest any root of
bitterness springing up, trouble you, and thereby many be defiled. As the
former evil separates us from the life of God, and the enjoyment of the means
of salvation: so this does bring us under the power of Satan, and the guilt of
condemnation. That does relate principally to the truth of faith; this to the
power of godliness, lest both first that, and then this, be lost amongst us:
whereupon the third evil which may in the last place follow, is also to be
prevented, which is, an open denying of the public profession of Religion,
through love to the World: of which we are taught to beware, v. 16. Lest there
be any fornicator, or profane person, as Esau, who for a morsel of meat sold
his Birthright.

Thus we have a brief, yet a very substantial and full directory, (both in
respect of matter and order) for the regulating of all Christian, but chiefly
Ministerial proceedings in the cure of these our evils. If now I should give
way to my affection, to enter upon the distinct consideration of every one of
the ingredients of this compound spiritual Antidote, to show what influence it
has to cure our distempers, and how suitable it is to our present occasions, I
might be very large, and easily engaged to show, that in the parts thereof (if
taken severally) we have as it were a dispensatory of Receipts fit for all the
Symptoms of our diseases; and that in the whole (if taken in the composition)
we have a most provident course of Physic, or medicinal method prescribed for
the regular prosecuting of the cure: but I shall contract my thoughts, and
observe only that which is mainly considerable, and may be obvious to every
ones capacity.

The duty of spiritual resolution.
First then in the duty whereby we are directed to order our selves toward the
works of our employment, which is, To lift up the hands which hang down, and
the feeble knees, I observe this, That the indisposition which most remarkably
seaseth upon all men's spirits when they are brought under the rod of
affliction, is a faint-heartednesse, which by reason of the astonishment of our
thoughts, and the dullness and flatnesse of our courage does deprive us of
resolution what to do for our selves; by which means our hands (the
instruments of action) hang down in a lazy posture; and our knees (the
supporters of the whole body for motion) are loosned, as it were out of joint,
and without strength. The hands and knees in the spiritual man, are the moving
and acting faculties of the soul, which are the imaginative apprehending
objects, and the will and affections moving thereon: these faculties hang down,
and are loosned from action, when we are out of heart with businesses, and
discouraged to undertake the works of our employment. This indisposition is
very frequent in these our times, upon all the unexpected changes and turnings
of affairs, wherein of a sudden men know not where to find themselves, as
being at a loss; and the worst is, that they who should by instructing many,
strengthen the weak hands, and Job. 4. 3, 4.
whose words should uphold him that is falling; do add unto the
discouragements by their complaints and scruples. But against this
faint-heartednesse, and the grievous thoughts which some suggest unto drooping
spirits, the Apostolical exhortation is in this place a Cordial, prescribing
unto them a draught of resolution from above, which will enable them, if they
receive it, to lift up their heads, their hands, and their knees, to the duties
of their calling, upon the consideration of the comfortable effects of their
chastisements, which is the peaceable fruit of righteonsnesse, which it will
yield unto them that are exercised thereby: Wherefore (says he) lift up your
hands, etc. and be of good cheer and resolute, because the end of your trial
is for peace and righteousness, only be not wanting to your selves, fall to
the works of your employment, and raise your affections to be active therein:
for in so doing your duty there is hope; your confidence and courage in
well-doing, is not to be cast away, because it has a great recompense of
reward, Heb. 10. 35. In the worst times of Israel, when their Leaders caused
them to err, and destroyed the way of their paths, even then the Prophet was
commanded to say unto the Righteous, that it should be well with him, because
he should eat the fruit of his doing. The worser the times are, the work of
courage in our Calling is the more commendable, and the fruit thereof the more
useful, precious and glorious. There be some that make it their work to make
the times worse then indeed they are, by prepossessing the spirits of the
multitude against the constitution of the State, and the ways of their Rulers:
These men by their suggestions, discourage the plain-hearted from the
resolutions of walking cheerfully in their ways, as bcometh Christians, and
set them out of their Sphere, upon discontent and fearfulness. Let such then,
who make themselves isntrumental to stagger the hearts, and weaken the hands
of their Brethren, by disquieting their affections upon doubtful
considerations of things which are extrinsecall to the stations of private men,
and whereof they are no competent Judges; look well to it, that the evil which
they occasion to procure unto the times, overtake them not: For in the same
place where the Prophet Isaiah in evil times is commanded to comfort the
righteous with promise, he denounces a heavy threatening to the wicked, which
is due to the practice of these men. Woe (says he) unto the wicked, it shall be
Isai. 3. 11.
ill with him; for the reward of his hands shall be given him. Such therefore as
refuse to lift up their hands without wrath and doubting to God in prayer, for
the obtaining of public mercies; or in praises for the acknowledging of
blessings received: such as by withdrawing sullenly their affections and
concurrence from lawful endeavors, discourage the hearts and hands of others
from the common duties of love and peaceablenesse, and of righteousness: and
such as thereby seek to distract and perplex the government, and obstruct the
public settlement of the Commonwealth in quietness, if they repent not, will
at last assuredly receive that reward of their hands which will be a woe unto
them, and no matter of rejoicing. This then will be our wisdom to behave our
selves in these times as it becomes Christians: I say Christians, who are not
to be shaken with the stormy changes of this world, which passes away; but
stand steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord,
forasmuch as we know that our labors of love, of peace, and of righteousness,
are not in vain 1 Cor. 15. 58.
in the Lord. We ought then to shake off the spirit of drowsiness, and like
unto Wrastlers who set themselves in a posture of striving for Masteries, to
stir up strength to raise our hands, to confirm our knees, and be in a
readiness for the actions of our employment; and all this should be intended so
much the rather because the days are evil,

The duty of ordering our conversation aright.
This resolution thus taken, will fit our mind for our undertakings; and then
the duty next to be laid to heart, will fit the works which we are to take in
hand for our places and abilities, whereof the Rule is this, That we should
make straight paths for our feet.

The feet of the soul are all the moving faculties thereof, which carry it
from one object to another, as the feet of the body carry it from one place to
another. The paths of these feet are both the objects wherewith our soul is
conversant, and the steps of our proceeding in moving about the same. The
objects are all the affairs of a Religious, Natural and Civil property,
according to the several relations in private and public wherein we are set.
The steps are the thoughts, the affections, and the outward actions by which we
are carried from one object to another. The straightness of these paths, is,
the enemies both of the way wherein we walk, and of our motion therein: the
enemies of the way is the lawfulness of the things themselves, when the objects
of our employment are none other but such as they ought to be in our proper
stations, when they are made free from crooked turnings and windings, and laid
in a direct line before us from their beginnings to their endings; and when the
rugged and unequal paths thereof are made smooth and plain, that is, the
knotty circumstances of affairs taken off by equity. The enemies of our motion
in this way, is the lawfulness of our proceeding and carriage, in following a
direct course, neither turning to the right nor left hand till our journies
end, nor moving unequally, one time too high, another time too low, as those
that halt.

And to make these paths straight, our care must be of two things; first to
reflect upon the end of our work, and then upon the means by which it is
attainable; for there be two parts of folly in our nature, which pervert all
our ways: the one is Childishnes, when we consider not to what purpose we are
busy; the other is improdence, when we consider not our work is to be carried
on. To avoid the first of these, we must not suffer the faculties of our soul
to walk at random about their objects; but should determine the purpose of
their motions by a known and undoubted Rule toward that which is manifestly
good, and to avoid the second branch of folly, we must set our faculties and
their motions a work, in an orderly way without confusion, and disproportion,
according to their places and properties in nature.

Thus then, he that will fit his work in Righteousness to his proper place and
abilities, that it may not miscarry, must forecast and consider his whole way
with every thing belonging unto it, and his own walking therein; this forecast
must contain two parts: the one positive, the other negative.

The positive forecast is that which hitherto we have mentioned concerning the
end of our undertakings, and the ordering of all the means and motions tending
thereunto, by a sure and known Rule, without which we have no light in us, and
can do nothing but play the fool in every thing.

Therefore such as walk not by a known Rule, and love not to come to the light
thereof, to approve unto all men, but chiefly to those with whom they have to
do their aims, and the means and ways of their proceeding to gain the same;
but cover their Council deep, and hide these things from those that are
concerned therein; make no strait paths for their feet, and do not the truth,
and by this they are known that their works are not done in God; whereas others
who forecast without prejudice and partiality their affairs, to proceed no
further therein, then they have a rule to warrant them, love to discover
themselves, as in the presence of God before every one.

The Negative forecast is that which does consider the impediments, incident to
the work of our employment, how they may be removed; for seeing the whole world
does lie in wickedness, and we cannot avoid meeting with the cross effects of
wickedness either in the crookednes of our own nature, or in others, we cannot
be said to have made straight paths for our feet, except some preparations be
made to remove and obviat the same.

The impediments then which should be foreseen, lie either in the objects of
our work, or in the working faculties: the objects are either things or
persons. The impediments to be foreseen in things, are the evil qualities
thereof, which by reason of the curse and bondage of corruption cleave to the
whole Creation: therefore to make our paths straight in respect of things, we
ought to discern their defects, as well as their useful properties; we ought
to presuppose and suspect more defects in them than we are able to discern,
and we ought not to venture upon their abilities further, than the ordinary
usefulnes of their natural activity, is plainly discovered unto us.

The impediments to be foreseen, in persons, (for no man can do any thing in
this world without some relation toward other men) ought to be considered as
well with reference to those who are directly or collaterally concerned in the
business we take in hand; as with reference to those who are not concerned
therein, but yet are likely to take notice thereof: as for those with whom we
have to do; our considerations should run chiefly upon the impediments which
may fall in about the circumstances of our station and relation toward them,
and about the apprehensions and thoughts which they may have of our persons and
proceedings: in all which we should reflect upon the occasion of offense, which
may be incident, either as given by us for want of circumspection, or as taken
by them, for want of sufficient information: Therefore to make our paths
straight in respect of persons, the way is to deal so in love, in simplicity,
and in warines of prudency with them, as to prevent mistakes, and not to
venture upon any enterprise toward any, before stumbling blocks be removed
toward all, according to the Apostles rule, give none offense, neither to the
Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God. 1 Cor. 10. 32.

Lastly, the impediments to be foreseen in our own working faculties, are the
sinful inclinations of our wills, the disorderliness of our understandings,
besides the darkness thereof, and the unrulines of our lusts and passions;
together, with the weakness of our best abilities, as they are in our own hand
disproportionate to every thing we apply them unto.

Therefore to make our paths straight, in respect of our own working
faculties; we ought not only, to look often conscionably upon our infirmities,
to keep a strict guard over them, and by the spirit of Prayer and Faith, to
seek help and supply of grace in time of need against them; but we should
before all our undertakings, bind over our souls to the observation of these
three Rules.

1. Never to attempt any thing without the Warrant of a clear call from God.

2. Never to set upon any work, though our call be never so clear unto it,
without a due examination and preparation of our heart about the aim which we
should have in it.

3. Although our aim be never so good and commendable, yet not to proceed any
further, than with modesty, we can measure out the undertaking as
proportionable unto our place and abilities, that we may keep within compass,
and not suffer our attempts to go beyond our line.

These are summarily the heads of matters contained in the second duty, which
being neglected, make men guilty of manifold private and public miscarriages
and offenses. And would to God the Brethren who have taught others to demurre
and make a scruple of Conscience, about concurring with the present power in
lawful things, tending to the public good; had seriously before they took that
work in hand, reflected upon these rules, to make straight paths unto their
feet thereby; for that hitherto they have not done this, there is just cause to
complain; but if they yet would begin, before it be too late, to reflect thus
upon their ways, and follow this Council; perhaps our breach might be healed:
it is evident, that we are out of the way of peace, and that we cannot come
into it again, except we apply our selves to the way of Righteousness. I
suppose it is undeniable: if we seek this way by these Rules, undoubtedly we
shall find it; the Lord grant us eyes, both to see it, and also to observe our
own strayings from it, and as we have discovered the way, so it would be no
difficult matter, (if it could edify) to set the strayings of our Brethren in
order before their eyes, and by the topies of this directory, as by a line and
plummet to show them the unevenness of their paths in this matter; but I shall
spare my self this labor, wishing rather that they may do it themselves; for
Christ does 1 Cor. 13. 6.
not rejoice in iniquity but in the truth, and my desire is, in covering their
weakness, to heal that which is lame, that it may not any more be turned out
of the way. For this is the third Apostolical Rule, by which the cures of these
and other miscarriages, in private and public, are to be endeavored. Let us
then understand the Apostles meaning in it.

The duty of healing mutual infirmities.
By lameness I understand here all manner of infirmities, which take not away
the motions of the faculties; but only make them in their proceedings
irregular; for properly to be lame, is to have a weakness in the moving
faculty, causing an unequal motion, which is unseemly and disproportionat to
other men's faculties and motions, in respect of strength and swiftnes; whence
also this inconvenience does follow the lameness of a Member, that it may soon
be turned out of the way, either by its own unequal mocions, if the way wherein
it walks be rugged and narrow: or by the uncharitableness of others, who
being stronger, may justle it out of the way, although it be neither rugged nor
narrow. Now that there are amongst us many lamenesses, and that the lame are
turned out of the way, as well by their own weak, innocent, and irregular
motions, as by the evil will of others, who justle with them, cannot be denied.
Therefore this duty of healing, and of keeping the lame in the way which is the
effect of love and righteousness, must be applied unto this symptom of our
disease. Here the work of love (as every where else) must have the first place,
and the influence which it has toward the weak, is by way of compassion,
whereof the effect is a desire and endeavor to ease them of the evil wherewith
they are afflicted: the work of Righteousness has the second place, whereof
the influence is by way of innocence, and the effect is to be no way accessory
to the Causes of begetting or continuing any lameness among us, or of
disturbing any good design by turning the lame out of the way; and thus by
this third Rule, when we have made our own work straight for our selves, our
steps toward others are to be regulated, that we may also walk straightly
therein toward all men, being useful toward them and harmless; where the
usefullnesse of our washing is to be made straight, by the Law of Love which
does cover and heal that which is amiss, and the harmlesnes thereof is to be
made straight by the Law of indemnity, that if we cannot make their condition
better, to be sure not to wrong them by making it worse.

If the Brethren, who in opposition to the present power, refuse to act with
others in good and lawful things, that which in it self is acceptable to God
and approved of men: had considered our present public state with compassion;
and had laid to heart this rule, to walk dutifully thereby as Christians ought,
they could not have engaged themselves in a course so contrary to that Charity
which calls upon conscionable men to the healing of public calamities; and to
that righteousness; which should keep Christians from turning weak consciences
out of the way. For if they whom God has set in the place of subjection
throughout this Nation, should be provoked to a wilful halting, and to go
forward (as many do) but lamely in their submission to the power that is over
them, till they turn themselves quite out of the way of all orderlinesse, by a
refractory scrupulosity, and then be justly turned out of the way of Peace and
safety: either by the total dissolution of Government, or by the breaking in
of power upon them for their unjust behavior, to whom should all such evils
be imputed? Must they not fall to the account of those that do provoke them to
the causes thereof, and have no thought of mutual compassion and tenderness
to heal one another infirmities? Must they not be laid to the charge of
those, who rather than not to oppose the powers that are over them, will
renounce the practice of the best and most solemn duties of Christianity, only
to show their disaffecrion unto them? Surely it cannot be expected, that the
obstinate opposition to all orderly courses (whereupon all common safety is
grounded) can be of long continuance without some great Judgment; nor that the
Supreme powers of any State in the world, will suffer themselves always to be
openly despised, (though they may bear it for a while) and opposed in things
undeniable, just and equitable, by those that are wholly under their power. We
may see therefore that in end this can produce nothing but the fruits of
bitterness and grief: and where no healing of grievances is at all aimed at;
but a direct turning of the lame in all things, out of the way; there all
manner of confusion, with irreconciliable war, and hatred must needs break
forth in the minds of a people.

The Duty of Peaceablenesse with all men.
Therefore to take away these evils, which unavoidably will follow the neglect
of this third Duty, the Apostle does add further two duties, which are joint
in the Cure; but in the application distinctly make up, the fourth and fifth
part of the Remedy of these public evils. The fourth Duty is, to follow Peace
with all men. And the fifth is, to follow (in like manner with all men)
Holiness without which no man shall see the Lord. Let us briefly see what
these things mean.

To follow Peace, is to mind, intend, and do all things: which may procure and
keep between our selves and others: mutual quietness from hurtful thoughts
and attempts, that the Christian good will of being helpefull to each other
against common Romans 12. 18.
miseries, may not be utterly lost and obstructed amongst us. Now this is an
endeavor which Christians are bound unalterably to maintain toward all men,
if it be possible so far as in them lies; even as Christ Jesus the Prince of
Peace did maintain it toward sinners, in the midst of their greatest
opposition Matthew. 12. 19. 20.
and contradiction against himself: For in that it is said of him, that he did
not strive, nor cry, nor caused any man to hear his voice in the streets: his
quietness is commended; and when it is said, that the bruised reed he did not
break, nor did he quench the smoking flax, his harmlesnesse is set forth; and
when it is added, that by this means, He should bring forth judgment unto
victory, and that the Gentiles should trust in his Name. His helpfulnesse unto
all mankind against their common miseries is declared, as the true end, and
proper effect of that peaceable behavior. This then is the example by which
all men, but especially the Ministers of the Gospel should walk before others
toward every one. And if the thoughts of Peace should be thus extended unto
all, and chiefly by Ministers; How will it be warrantable for any, or in any
respect for these to exclude the powers under which we are set from the same?
and that by an aim to strive against them in all things; though they be things
in themselves and for the public never so good and useful? Christianity does
set a rule to the spirits of men: Now if the frame of men's spirits be wholly
bent to strive against, and oppose some nen in particular continually; How will
they clear themselves before God; whose command is, that they should follow
Peace with all men ingenerall; and that if it be possible, and as much as in
them lies, that is, at all times, and upon occasions whenever they have to
do with them?

And because wheresoever the thoughts of Peace and good James 3. 19.
will prevail not, but envying and strife rather take place; there is always
confusion, and every evil work, which defile the hearts and hands of men
before God.

The Duty of following Holiness with all men.
Therefore unto the endeavors of Peace in respect of men, the Apostle does
add the care of Holiness in respect of God: for this Duty must be made Mark
9. 50.
the ground of that: else it will never be intended to any good purpose and
effectual. Christ says, Have Salt in your selves, and have Peace one with
another. Salt is the grace of the Spirit, resisting the corruption of the
flesh; whereby we are defiled in our selves, and pollute one another, through
the passions of our lust; But if the inherent defilements be first cleansed by
the Spirit of Holiness, then the lusts which in our members beget War with
others will certainly cease: because the Apostle says thus, We were sometimes
foolish, disobedient, living in malice, and envy, hateful and hating one
another: but after that the kindness of God appeared, he saved us by the washing
of Regeneration, and renewing of the HolyGhost. Tit. 3. 5. and elsewhere thus:
Thieves, Covetous, Revilers, Extortioners, such were some of you, but ye are
washed, but ye are sanctified by the Spirit of our God. 1 Cor. 6. 10. 12. It is
then the Spirit of sanctification which cleanses this corruption at the root;
whence it appears, that the Reason why men do not seek Peace, and follow after
it with all men, is, because they want Holiness, and seek not after it; that
is, they set not their hearts aright, to take hold of Grace, whereby they may
serve God acceptably with Heb. 2. 28.
reverence and godly fear; For if this Grace as it is offered were apprehended,
and in the holiness of the Spirit of our God his service were above all things
heartily set upon, and followed; it is evident that the spirit of strife would
be quenched, and the unrighteous motions thereof cease: because the promise is
made to such as are under grace, that sin shall not have dominion over them.
Romans 6. 14. Now those are under grace who by faith in the promise of grace walk
with God under his ordinances; over such, sin shall not have dominion; neither
continually, nor against their will; because it is said, that when we are made
free from sin (which is done, whenever we take hold of Christ by faith in his
blood) we become servants Romans 6. 22.
unto God, and have our fruit unto holiness. And wherever this fruit does
grow up effectually, there the fruit of malice and hatred will never break
forth unto wickedness. For the natural property of Holiness, as it is
originally in God, and from him derived unto us, does put an extreme distance
between the desires of Saints, and those inclinations which beget strife in
other men. For in God original Holiness is a property of his eternal being,
by which we conceive him to be most gloriously pure in himself, and exalted
above all creatures and imaginable qualities, infinitely and unconceiveably
beautiful in all perfections; so that in him, and in all his ways, there is,
has been, and shall be nothing but pure and perfect goodness for ever and
ever, without any shadow of turning: This property of the Divine Nature we are
made partaker of by Christ, for of his fullness we receive all, and grace for
grace; and in him the 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16
Father does call upon us to be holy, as he is holy. Holiness then in us is
the conformity of our spirit and state unto God in this property of his nature;
whereby we become pure and undefiled, set a part unto him from all
uncleanness; and exalted above the causes of disorder and lustfulnesse in the
creatures, that we may have communion with him: for without this conformity
unto him in his nature, there can be no fellowship between him and us; for what
communion has purity with uncleanness, or light with darkness? for which
cause also the Apostle adds this doctrinall clause to his exhortation, that
without holiness no man shall see God: both to stir us up the more to follow
after it, as that which is so absolutely necessary for our salvation; that the
want thereof does inevitably threaten a separation between God and us for ever.
And also to intimate an employed promise, that if we follow holiness with all
men, we shall be made fit to see God, as well in his works here in time toward
all men, as in himself face to face hereafter for ever.

It is evident then by this, that the following of Holiness with all men, does
make us peaceable toward all men: because it takes us off from the occasions
of carnal strife, and unites us unto God in the purity of the Divine nature:
but where the heart is not cleansed, and made above all things careful in
serving God acceptably, to walk in the sphere of a pure life, above the
defilements of creature concernments, there it cannot attain to a peaceable
disposition, neither within it self, nor toward others. And without scruple we
may conclude thus, that wheresoever men are not raised unto that universal
peaceablenesse of spirit which is here required, there they come also far short
of the duty of Holiness which is here recommended unto them. Let therefore no
men deceive themselves, and lie against the Truth: whosoever do take up a
resolution rather to strive and contest with some men about the affairs of this
world for their own sake, then to follow Peace and Holiness with all men for
Gods sake; are not in a case to see God, or to serve him acceptably in all
things, because the passion of lust for themselves, which is the cause of all
strife between them and others, is inconsistent with that reverence and fear,
which is requisite to serve him acceptably.

The Negative Duties. How to prevent failing of the grace of God, and the
springing up of the roots of bitterness.
Thus we see, what the Positive Rules whereby our disorders and distempers may
be cured are, and how they depend one upon another. Concerning the Negative
Duties which follow, I shall be very brief, for if these former be carefully
observed, there will be no difficulty in the practice of the latter, but with
ease and safety they will fall in of themselves. For he that follows
holiness with all men, must needs follow it by the Truth, which is the ground
of that performance. Now the Truth which does beget Holiness in all those that
are sanctified, is, the Grace of God which has appeared, and brings
salvation unto all men; teaching us to deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts;
and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in tgis present world: looking for
the blessed hope; and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity; and purify unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works.

The truth of this Doctrine is the Grace which brings salvation unto all men;
and this it does by teaching them the way to true holiness in and by Christ
Jesus: he then that does follow this, (namely, Holiness) with all men, must
needs look after that (namely, Truth) in every one, lest any fail of it: for if
the knowledge of this saving Truth should fail, and be cast off by any, as then
he will be taken off from the way of Holiness; so he will be set to follow the
imaginations of his own heart, which can send forth nothing but seeds of
corruption, which will beget roots of bitterness, whereby many will be
defiled. The way therefore to prevent the growing up of these roots, is to keep
the heart possessed with these principles of saving knowledge, which are the
fundamentals of all Gospel, faith, and hope for Grace: and to do this there is
none other direct means, but to hold forth the testimony of Jesus, so as to
commend the truth thereof to the conscience of all men in the sight of God,
which is done by manifesting the light of life which is in Christ with sound
speech that cannot be condemned; that he who is of the contrary party, may be
ashamed, having no evil thing to say of us, or of our testimony. Whence I
shall infer this, that the way to maintain Religion by the shaken reed of mere
humane authority, and to beat down the errors of the mind with the club-law of
corporal punishments (which some have endeavored to do) is no part of Gods
counsel: for that which has upheld, and will uphold the Truth of Religion
without, yea and against, all the might of the world, is nothing else but the
evidence, and the demonstration of the spirit and power, and that which has
beaten down, and will beat down heresies and errors, is nothing else but the
armor of Righteousness on the right hand and on the left, by which all the
imaginations of men, and strong holds of Satan in them are cast down; and every
thought is brought into captivity to the obedience of Christ. The method then
both to prevent, and to correct errors is this, that we should take care, that
the faithful word which has been taught, and as it has been taught by the
Apostles and Prophets be held fast, and held forth, that by the sound doctrine
thereof, we may be enabled both to exhort those that stand in the Truth, that
they take heed lest they fall from it; and to convince the gainsayers, whose
mouths must be stopped by religious dealing, and rational conferences with
them. If then we should apply our selves to dig up the roots of bitterness
which are sprung up amongst us, (for to prevent the rising of them is too late)
we see, that the way to be taken is this; that on the one hand Catechetecall
Truths should be fundamentally taught, and according to the form of sound words
enlarged upon, and opened: and on the other hand, orderly conferences should be
set afoot, and regulated by Authority, that vain-talkers and deceivers may not
be left without conviction: and this the Ministers of the Gospel should intend
before all others, as the proper work of their peculiar calling.

How to repress and correct profaneness.
Thus then by this way of looking out, we may both prevent, and correct, the
falling of many from the grace of God; and the growing up of the roots of
bitterness which have defiled many: but as concerning the profane, who, like
Esau in their uncleannes, are come to that height of impiety, that they
renounce openly the profession of Christianity, for a morsel of sensual
pleasure in this present world; there can be no dealing with them, as I
conceive, but two ways, if God peradventure will give some of them repentance
unto life. The one is to deal rationally, the other to deal authoritatively
with them. In dealing with them rationally, the principles of Humanity and
Morality must be brought home unto their conscience, to discover unto them,
what the indignity and vileness is of these defilements, wherein they wallow
themselves like unto beasts; what the unprofitablenesse is of all their present
enjoyments: what in that course their loss of Honor and Perfection is by man
in another course attainable: and whence all this does arise in them, to the
prejudice of their own state of true happiness, and of the society of
mankind: that so much reason and morality as may be found remaining in them,
and is not become brutish through sensuality, may be kept alive, and (if
possible) wakened unto righteousness.

In dealing with them authoritatively, notice must be taken of their open
profession of profaneness, that it may be repressed in them, and they brought
to shame for it, of their plots and practices against Christianity, by which
they endeavor to bring reproach upon the professors thereof; by making them
contemptible for the professions sake: and of their excess of riot and
sensuality, lest others be infected, and perverted by their example: for which
they ought to be made liable to some punishments; that they may stand in a we,
and fear, if not God, yet virtuous men, and the loss of their own bodily
conveniencie. Now the punishment which I conceive a Christian Magistrate should
inflict, at least upon those that are found incorrigible, is, that which
Abraham, at Sarahs request, and by Gods approbation of her Genesis 21. 9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14.
desire, did inflict upon Ismael, because he mocked Isaac: which was, that he
did cast him out of his house: and the punishment which David, as a Magistrate
in the Commonwealth of Israel, does resolve to execute against all wicked
doers, in the discharge of his duty toward God, which is, to cut off all
wicked doers from the City of the Lord: that is, at least Psalm. 101.
to banish them; or discountenance them so, that they shall not find any abode
in the Commonwealth with content.

And thus far we have followed the Apostle in the first part of this
Directorie; let us now come to the second part thereof, and take the royal
Prophet for our Director therein.

The second part of the Directorie relating to the duty of Magistrates in the
cure of our diseases.
Hitherto then we have seen, how all professors of Christianity, but chiefly
the Ministers of the Gospel, are taught what they ought to do toward the cure
of our present diseases, in their charge, by the administration and application
of Divine love unto the symptoms thereof: but now we shall also, God willing,
observe briefly, how all that have power and authority over others, but chiefly
the supreme Magistrates of Nations knowing God, are taught what they ought to
do toward a further cure of the same diseases, by the administration and
application of Divine Righteousness unto the symptoms thereof in their
peculiar places.

I conceive then, that the holy Ghost has set forth David in the 101. Psalm,
as a pattern of righteousness, to teach all Magistrates their duty, that they
may learn to write after the copy which he has set them. Let us then consider,
and contemplate in him the spirit of a true Christian Magistrate, by the
Analysis of his words, and some short observations to be made thereon.

The pattern of a true Christian Magistrate set forth in Psalm. 101. Where of
the brief Analysis is given.
The prophetical King intending to make profession of that which in the
discharge of his Magistracy he was resolved to perform; does in the 1. ver: of
the Psalm declare three things by way of Preface. 1. The matter whereof he did
purpose to speak: I will sing of mercy and judgment. 2. The Person to whom he
would address his speech: Unto thee O Lord will I sing. 3. The manner of
delivering himself: I will sing, I will sing. Where we shall observe these
four points for an introduction.

1. What the sum and substance of a Magistrates employment is, whereupon all
his thoughts should be set: that it is Mercy and Judgment. Mercy is his work
toward the godly and honest: Judgment toward the ungodly and dishonest:
toward those, Protection and favor is the work of Mercy; toward these, to
discover, and to punish them, is the work of Judgment. Whence we may further
conclude, that to leave the virtuous without encouragement and protection; or
the wicked without reproof and punishment, is not only want of judgment in a
Magistrate, but cruelty against the State over which he is set; how much more
then if he should persecute the godly, and favor the wicked?

2. That Magistrates ought to intend the performance of their duty for
conscience sake toward God, and not for any other design of their own, as
many use to do: for David here sets himself as in the presence of God, to
speak, and make profession of his duty unto him; Unto thee O Lord (says he)
will I sing. To thee, as to the great witness of the sincerity of my heart, in
this profession of my duty. And to thee, as to my Judge and Sovereign, to whom
I am accountable in all the works of my employment. For Magistrates judge not
for men, but for the Lord: and happy would they be, if they could be mindful
of this.

3. That the professions which Magistrates make of their duty, and of their
resolutions ought not to be addressed as to men; to cajole them with fair
words, and gain credit with them: but as to God, in the nature of a religious
promise, to bring an obligation voluntarily upon their own souls to perform
their duty.

4. That Magistrates should undertake the works of their calling with a great
deal of cheerfulness; and that to such as are in places of eminent trust, the
discharge of their duty should be the chief matter of their joy. For we see
here with what cheerfulness of mind David does undertake his employment; I
will sing, I will sing, says he, twice repeating the expression, once in
respect of Mercy and Judgment; another time in respect of God. For his duty
relates to both at once; materially to the one, and finally to the other. A
worldly minded man coming to preferment, does rejoice that he is exalted above
others; and has gotten power to do his own will: But a godly man does rejoice
in the assurance of Gods favor; Lift thou up the light of thy countenance
(says he) upon us: thou have put gladness in my heart, more then in the time
that their corn and their wine increased. Psalm. 4. 6. 7. And again, Thy
statutes (says he to God) are my songs in the house of my pilgrimage. Psalm.
119. 54.

And this much the Preface does teach and direct Magistrates concerning their
employment; the profession of David's resolutions follow, wherein he declares,
first, what he will endeavor to do in his place and calling: secondly, to what
effect, and end he will prosecute that endeavor. That which he will endeavor,
does concern partly himself in his own person, partly the persons of other men.

First, he resolves to order himself toward the doing of that which is good;
then toward the avoiding of that which is evil. Toward the doing of good, he
not only resolves upon the duty, but prays unto God for his presence with him
in it. The Duty resolved upon, is set forth in the thing, to be followed, in
the manner of following it, and in the means whereby it may be attained. The
thing to be followed and aimed at, is a Perfect way. The manner of following I
will behave my self wisely in a perfect way. And the means whereby this aim
may be attained, is to walk in his particular station, with a frame of heart
suitable thereunto. His particular station is his house; I will walk within my
house. And the frame of heart suitable to his aim is, with a perfect heart. A
perfect heart toward God, will bring a man and keep him in his way, which is
perfect. In the midst of this resolution, between the expression of his aim,
and of the means to attain it, a prayer is put up, for the assistance of Gods
presence with him in the undertaking. O when will thou come unto me: which does
presuppose a promise laid hold of, that God would come and be with him: and it
does express his faith, and expectation of the fulfilling of that promise. A
promise to this effect is given to all believers, in Isa. 64. 5. Thou meetest
him that rejoices, and works righteousness. But more expressly David might
look upon the promise made to Joshua, and in his name to all faithful
Magistrates, where God says: As I was with Moses so I will be with thee; I
will not fail thee, nor forsake thee: only be thou strong, that thou may
observe to do according to all the Law, etc. This Commandment he resolves to
do, by walking in that perfect way with a perfect heart; and therefore he
expects the fulfilling of the promise made to the performance, and accordingly
prays for the same. Thus then he sets himself, not in his own strength, but
under the conduct of God, for the doing of that which is good: as for the
avoiding of that which is evil, he takes up a twofold resolution: first, to
free himself from evil objects and ends, I will set no wicked thing before
mine eyes: (the original is, no word of Belial: now Belial signifies one that
is, without yoke and disorderly; So that his meaning is more properly, I will
not intend to be without yoke or to do any thing out of order.) Secondly, to
free himself from the means and instruments subservient thereunto; which are
all the works of men turning away from the will of God. I hate the work of them
that turn aside, it shall not cleave to me.

These are his resolutions concerning himself, the things which he resolves
concerning others, are partly against those that are vicious, partly for those
that are virtuous:

Against those that are vicious, his resolutions seem to run in two Channels;
the one under a more private, the other under a more public relation; and in
each respect his resolutions against them have three parts or degrees. The
first tends to a separation from his acquaintance and familiarity; the second
to a banishment: and the third to an opposition and destructione of them.

In the Channel of private relations, he resolves thus against the vicious,

First, to separate two sorts of vicious men from his acquaintance and
familiarity, the first are those of a froward and perverse heart; that is, men
whose intentions and designs are perverted from the right way. A froward heart
shall depart from me. The second are those who are willing, and ready to act
evil, and put wicked designs in execution; I will not know a wicked person.
In the Original it is properly, a person doing evil.

Then to banish and cut off from all private society, him that is a backbiter
of his neighbor; who so privily slandereth his neighbor him will I cut off.

And thirdly, to oppose and put down as unsufferable the proud and ambirious,
him that has a high look and a proud heart, will not I suffer.

Having thus determined how to behave himself against those that are vicious in
respect of private relations; he resolves under the same relations for those
that are virtuous, that he will seek them out, to bring them near unto
himself, that they may abide with him. Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful in
the Land, that they may dwell with me.

The Channel of private relations being thus resolved upon, he comes to resolve
upon public relations also. Where first, he reflects upon the virtuous, and
determines to employ them, in public services; He that walks in an upright
way, he shall serve me. And then setting himself against the vicious in
reference to public affairs, he has another threefold gradation of distance
in dealing with them.

First, To separate all deceivers from amongst his domesticke He that works
deceit shall not dwell within my house.

Secondly, To banish all liars from his sight and presence: He that tells
lies shall not tarry in my sight.

Thirdly, To oppose and destroy diligently all the ungodly I will early destroy
all the wicked of the Land.

Hitherto we have seen what David would endeavor, as a Magistrate in his
place: the end and effect for which he would intend all this, is to do service
unto the people of God, that I may cut of all wicked doers from the City of the
Lord.

And brief observations raised thereupon showing, The Supreme end of a
Magistrate, Which to attain they must order themselves to their work. By
settling their relation toward God in their places, And how that is to be done.
Now, to gather briefly a Directory from hence for a Christian Magistrate in
his Charge; besides that which the Preface of the Psalm has already
suggested, and we have taken notice of; we may observe from the whole of this
Profession, and from the particulars of David's resolution, and their orderly
coherence, these maxims of true Government.

First, From the whole I gather this, That Christian Magistrates knowing
themselves to be Gods Vicegerents on earth, ought to do all for the
maintaining of his interests amongst men, and the fulfilling of his ends
toward them: and nothing for any other end or interest.

For we see here, that as David does set himself in subordination unto God, by
thinking upon his Charge, with dependence upon him, and making his application
with cheerfulness therein unto him: so the end of all his endeavors is, to
procure the Peace and safety of the City of the Lord, which is his Church, that
wicked doers may be separated from it.

Secondly, From the particulars and their coherence, I gather these Conclusions.

1. That Magistrates should wisely order themselves before they think of
ordering other men: they must first look to themselves, and then to others.

For we see here, that David makes this the first part of his care; and what
the Apostle says of the fitness of an Elder to Rule in the Church, must be
said of a Magistrate to Rule in the Commonwealth: If a man (says he) know not
how to rule his own house, how shall he take care of the Church of God? So we 1 Timothy 2. 4.
may say, if a man has no care, and zeal to order his own way aright; how
shall he take care, and be zealous to order the ways of other men to a public
good.

2. That all men but chiefly Magistrates, in looking to themselves, should
settle before all other things clearly, the Relation which is between God and
themselves in their places.

For we see that David makes this the groundwork of all his other Resolutions
and Professions: and the Reason of it is clear, not only because Magistrates,
who represent God on earth, can have no assurance of success, or ability to
stand in their places, further than their relation unto God is clear and
entire; but in general there is a curse denounced against all men, Whose heart
departs from the Lord, they shall be like the heath in the desert, and not
see when good comes. Jer. 17. 5. 6. If a Subject on earth take upon him to
Govern his fellow Subjects, without a Commission from his Sovereign, he is an
usurper: so is every Magistrate before God, though his right be good as to men;
yet his spirit is an Usurper of his place, if by settling his relation toward
God, in his place; he receive not his Commission from him.

3. That no Magistrate can have any settlement of his relation toward God, or
pretend to any Commission from God in his place: except his spirit be ordered
toward him in these three things.

First, Except he know the way of Perfection, wherein God does appoint him to
walk. For this is the chief point of his Commission, or rather the whole
substance thereof.

Secondly, Except he intend, and resolve to follow that way, behaving himself
therein wisely and considerately, to fit all occasions thereunto; and with a
sincere and upright heart, to approve himself to God therein; For if he does
not this, he has not accepted of his Commission (although he may know fully
the contents thereof) and consequently has no right to his place.

Thirdly, Except he desire and affectionatly wait for Gods presence, and
assistance with him in the executiou of his charge, to be able to do all things
in his name; for if he does not this, he does renounce his dependence upon his
Sovereign, and against the tenor of his Commission, he takes upon him to
execute his power in his own name, which makes him ipso facto, to forfeit all
his right to his place.

These maxims are clearly to be inferred from the matter and order of the
parts of David's resolution, in ver. 2. and being manifest Truths in themselves,
I shall not insist to prove them, but proceed to other observations.

How he may be sure of Gods presence with himself in his place.
4. That no Magistrate can hope for Gods presence with him, or success in his
public place: who does not walk in his house privately so with his familiars,
as to keep his heart perfect toward God. Fot if his heart be most upright
toward God in secret, it will never be entire in public concernments; and if
his life and personal carriage at home be not exemplary, it will never be just
and without offense abroad. This maxim also does clearly follow upon the
latter part of David's resolution. ver. 2.

By taking care as well of preventing evil, as of doing good.
5. That the care which Magistrates should take for themselves, ought not to be
only for good purposes and resolutions which should be prosecuted: but it must
also be extended unto the apprehension, and prevention of evils which are
incident unto the stations of men in public places, that they may be prudently
avoided.

This maxim as it is clearly in it self a true Rule of Prudencie: so it is
evidently, to be inferred from the matter of David's resolution in ver. 3.
compared with that which went before in ver. 2.

6. That Magistrates looking to the evils incident to the stations of men in
public places, to prevent the same should reflect upon the two fountains
thereof; Namely, their own irregular designs from within, and the works of
men that turn aside cleaving to them without. For as these are the two evils
which David resolves to free himself from ver. 3. so they are dangers more
eminently incident to Magistrates than to other men.

First in their own stations.
First, Magistrates are more liable to be tempted to disorderly courses (the
text calls this to set matters of Belial before their eyes) than other men:
because of their places; wherein as they are free from the yoke of fear which
others must apprehend, who are accountable to their Superiors of their ways:
so by reason of the power which they have over others, they are more
susceptible of pride, of self-conceitednesse, of being flattered into
licentious resolutions of freedom; and to resentments of injuries, and so to be
transported to designs which are not orderly, but against or above the Laws
which others are subject unto.

Secondly, Magistrates are more liable to be accessory to the guilt of other
men's sins, than men of private places: for evil and dissolute men, who study
nothing but voluptuousness, make it their whole work to creep into favor about
them, and subtle men, who study nothing but profit and greatness, oft-times to
the prejudice of the meaner sort, by oppressive ways, insinuate themselves
also about them, if they then authorize and countenance these in their
designs, either openly by commands, or subtily by wincking at them, and giving
them a shelter; the guilt of all such men's wickedness does cleave unto them.
For not only these whose life it is wholly to depend upon those that are in
power; but also all other men that are under their charge, bring guilt upon
them, and make them accessory to sin, except they repress and reprove the
evil which they find in them, nnd show their hatred against all those that
turn aside from the direct way of godliness and honesty, of justice and
sobriety.

Then also in the persons of others.
7. That Magistrates walk not in a perfect way in respect of their places,
although they free both themselves and their attendants from evil; except they
also take notice of others that are without, to oppose the vicious, and advance
the virtuous both in private and public occasions.

This axiom is evident from the whole matter of David's profession, especially
from ver. 4. till the end: and the reason of it will appear if the nature and
motion of a perfect way, be compared with the nature and motion of a
Magistrates place; for the place of a Magistrate is wholly relative and toward
others; except therefore his way be perfect against evil, and for good in
teference to others, it does not answer his place: and except it be so as well
in private as in public, it is not perfect: for although a good man may be an
ill Magistrate for want of Ruling parts; yet no man that is ill can be a good
Magistate, though his parts be never so eminent. Because an evil man, as he
makes no conscience of sin in private, so he will never be zealous for virtue,
nor against vice in public: All that he will do, will be only for himself, to
save his own credit, that he may not be cried out against; For if his heart be
evil. he has no love to Judgment and Mercy, as they are works good to all,
as they are acceptable to God who has commanded them, and as they are proper
to his place of Rule; but only as they make a show before men, and serve to
keep up his reputation amongst them.

By cutting off the incorrigible,
8. That by opposing vice in others privately and publicly, Magistrates do not
enough to remove the wicked from places of Trust, and to show their dislike of
men; except also they use means to cut them off from the society over which
they are set, and especially if they be found incorrigible.

This is plainly David's resolution, in his perfect way of walking, as appears
by ver. 5. 7. and 8.

Especially of four sorts
9. That Magistrates walking in their places in a perfect way, should take
notice as well of those that plot perverse designs, as of those that put them
in execution; but amongst all these the slanderer, the proud, the deceiver and
the liar, are especially to be hunted out of all places of trust, and cast out
of the Commonwealth; for these four may be compared to the wheels of Satan's
Chariot, on which he rides through the societies of mankind, to disturb the
Peace and Happiness, by the corruption of our nature, which Magistrates are
appointed to curb and resist. This is that which David resolves upon in ver. 4.
5. and 7. and by experience we find that without the discovery and removal of
these four sorts of wicked men, there can be no Peace and quietness in
human Societies.

By seeking out, and calling the virtuous to places of employment,
10. That the way of a Magistrate is not perfect although he thus oppose vice,
except he also seek out those that are virtuous; and make use of them for
private and public occasions of employment.

This is manifestly David's resolution in ver. 6. and the perfect way of
Magistracy can no more subsist without the use of good instruments, than
consist with the employment of evil ones: as therefore the removing of the one
is necessary, so is the finding out and calling of the other: nor can there be
a greater cause of corruption in Civil Government, than the want of care to
find out and employ virtuous men therein.

11. That no man ought to be entrusted with any access, or privacy about the
Magistrate, but he that is faithful in the Land; and no man employed by him in
any service, but he that is upright in his way.

And how that should be done. These are the two Characters of persons, whom
David resolves to seek out and call to himself, ver. 6. and till Magistrates
make it a chief maxim of State to follow his example herein, it will never go
well with them in their Government. It is not he who commends himself, and that
is offered by the solicitation of friends unto a place; but he whom God
commends by his abilities, and such Characters as these who is fit to be
employed it were greatly to be wished; if it could also be hoped, that these
who have the disposal of places, would make it an unalterable maxim of State,
to reject all suitors for places, and to admit of none but whom they themselves
should choose, and call upon the discovery of their abilities, and of these
Characters found in them: Namely, that they are faithful in the Land, and
perfect in their way. He is faithful in the Land, who is true to the public
good thereof; who has not sought his own private advantage, before the
interest of the Commonwealth: such a one may be trusted with a public place,
that he will not abuse it for his own ends; and he is perfect in his way, whose
course of life is sincere and conscionable; and who is careful to maintain his
integrity without offense toward all. If none but such were sought out for
public places, the affairs of States and Commonwealths, would indeed be
successful; but as long, as the maxims and interests of factions and parties
(which all along destroy humane societies) are followed, and private aims bear
rule over the spirits of those that rule in a State; these characters of men
fit for places will never be regarded, nor the course to choose and call
thereunto taken up by any.

12. That the aim of a godly and wise Magistrate is, not to serve himself in
his place but others: nor his ultimate end, to serve others so much in their
temporal conveniences, as to protect the City of God, and free it from the
disturbance of Gods service and all causes of trouble.

And why he ought mainly to intend this.
This is professedly David's end in ver. 8. and if we first look upon a
Magistrate as Gods substitute and Deputy; and then if we grant that no Deputy
can be counted faithful to him that has deputed him, except he mainly intend
that which his Superior does aim at: then this cannot be denied, that the
Magistrates ultimate end, must needs be the safety and prosperity of the City
of the Lord; for God having created all for his own glory, has given the world
unto Christ; and Christ having Redeemed all for the glory of his Father, has
given all to his Church, where God does dwell with men. So that for the
Churches sake which is the City of God, all Government is maintained and
appointed by God in the world; If then a Magistrate does not design his pains
to protect this City, and make it free from the molestation of wicked doers, he
does not fulfill the mind of God in his place; and is so far from behaving
himself wisely in a perfect way, that he falls short of the main end of his
employment, and will be circumvented by the folly of his own deceitfulness;
for God will certainly overturne, be-foole and disappoint all the contrivances
of men, though never so crafty and powerful, which are not answerable unto
this great end of setting up his Son: and he will turn out of their places
all Magistrates and Governors of the Nations, which Rule the World only for
themselves, or for temporal advantages, rather than for the convenience and
protection of his City: if we believe that Christ has a rod of Iron in his
hand; and that he is now dashing all the Nations in pieces, and turning the
Rulers thereof out of their way, who have not kissed and served him with fear;
we ought to be so wise as to consider that at last no interest but that of
Christianity will hold out.

What the cause is of the present troubles and changes of government in the
world, and among our selves.
Let Magistrates then, if they desire to stand, learn to understand this
interest, what it is: for nothing will preserve them from danger but the
maintaining of it; because nothing can direct them in a way pleasing to God,
and permanently good, but what is answerable to these Rules, and leads to this
end. And who is so blind as not to see, that the not observing of these Rules
by those that were in places of government over us, and the missing of this
end, has brought all these changes and alterations upon them and us? And
therefore it is a certain and easy prognostication to say; That if those who
now govern us, take not up these Rules and Maxims of State to govern justly
themselves under God, and us thereby; but think to do all their will by
standing upon their sword, they will assuredly find themselves deceived. It is
clear enough that the misgovernment of those who are conquered, did overthrow
them, and not the wise conduct and might of those that have conquered them. If
therefore our present Emperour-Power govern not themselves in their places any
other way than their predecessors have done; their own want of rule in the
profession of Christianity, will condemn them, and the fruits of their own
doings will execute the sentence of destruction and conquer them, although from
without no enemy should appear to invade them. That which the Psalmist has
said, is verified in our sight before all the world, That Promotion comes
neither Psalm. 75, 6, 7.
from the East nor from the West, nor from the Desert, either South or North,
but God is the Judge, he puts down one, and sets up another. If promotion
could have been upheld to those that were in place, by helps from any parts
round about us; they could not have been put out of place; for all possible
endeavors from all parts were used to keep them in: but it is manifestly Gods
hand that has put down some amongst us, and set up others. And why has he put
down some? He has done it as a Judge; their ways were ripe for judgment: and
he would continue them in their places no longer. They sought themselves more
than mercy and judgment therein. And why has he set up others? He has done
this also as a Judge: that the course of mercy and judgment may be still
maintained in the earth; that those who are entrusted with his power to rule
others, should walk with him in a perfect way, and destroy all evil doers from
the City of the LORD: Which if they do, they shall be established; but if
they do it not, they shall be put down and judged, as others were before them.

That the present Rulers are Conquerours. And how conscionable men ought to
behave themselves toward them. Notwithstanding the doubtfulnesse of their
title and claim of right to their places.
Now to bring this matter yet nearer home, to the purpose in hand; I suppose
that none is able to deny this, That God has given to those that are now over
us in places of Rule, a conquest of all that have hitherto opposed them in
their designs; and to call them conquerours of the State that lately was, as I
conceive it no injury to themselves, nor reproach to the conquered, nor
disparagement to us that are under the power of their conquest (seeing it is
manifestly Gods will it should be so, and who can reverse it?) so I hope that
God who has set them up, will incline their hearts to set themselves as his
instruments in their places to be conquered by the perfect way of his Rule;
that therein by the law of Love, they may conquer all such as fear his
judgments, and hate not thereby to be reformed. And as it is my duty to wish
and desire this for them (seeing they are now under God over me:) so I am bound
to pray unto him that it may be so with them, through his grace toward them:
And if I am bound thus to pray for them, I am also obliged to do what I can to
procure it unto them. For I take this to be a clear Rule in Christianity,
Whatsoever I ought to pray for, I ought also to procure and labor for by all
the means I can in the way of my calling. Now some of the means by which I
can in the way of my calling help to procure the grace I pray for unto them,
are these:

1. That I should make my paths straight toward them, giving them no cause of
offense in any thing, lest my Ministry in the Gospel be blamed.

2. That I should apply my self in love toward them, to heal what I find
amiss; and not set my self to turn the lame out of the way, and make any thing
worse.

3. That I should follow peace and holiness with them, and consequently not
set my self to strive obstinatly against them; far less to oppose them even
in things that are just before God and Man, and necessary to preserve common
safety and quietness.

4. That I should look carefully to them, to be able when God does give me
opportunity, to instruct, exhort and warn them, lest any fail of the grace of
God, and walk not worthy of the vocation wherewith they are called: For by
these means God peradventure may make me a good instrument, and a vessel of
honor in his own hand toward them, if I be purged from the earthly distempers
of humane passions. And what although I should see no great appearance of being
received by them, in that which I offer and mean well, according to the Gospel?
What although I should perceive no redress of any thing, but rather an
increase of public troubles and grievances? What although all hopes of peace
and settlement should more and more fly from us? should I therefore leave off
to do my duty? shall I cease to pray for those that are over me? shall I not
endeavor that they may know Gods will in their places, and receive grace to do
it? shall I be weary of well doing toward all? I hope none will advise this. I
therefore shall not need to scruple a compliance and concurrence with any, in
things just and lawful in themselves. For let the Title of those that stand
now with power in the places of Rule, be what it will, whether it be called a
conquest of the former state yea or no? and whether as Conquerours they may
justly claim all the rights which the State could pretend unto yea or no? Or
whether it be a vindication of the inherent power and liberty in the body of a
Nation from the hands of those that had enslaved it yea or no? Or whether it be
the necessity of a natural defense of the Rights and Privileges of the
people, against those that by power seek still to invade the same yea or no? Or
whether it be (as some term it) an irregular usurpation and abuse of power and
trust in those that are servants to make themselves masters yea or no? or what
Title soever else may be given to their ruling state and power; it makes no
matter to me in respect of Christianity, and those forenamed duties; because
in Christianity those are duties which I must intend without respect of
persons, at all times, and toward all men (except I can truly judge that they
have sinned the sin unto death, which I hope none will judge of these) for
suppose as to men, that their standing had no place, and should be thought not
only in respect of the National, but even of natural laws, altogether
unjust: yet if I must look upon them as they are by Gods permission and
direction set up; and from him; if I find them, as over me, in places of
Government; so such in whose hand he has put the full administration of his
power over the whole Nation, I must conclude that by virtue of his command, I
am bound to pray for them, that they may have grace to manage their Power and
Talents rightly, according to his will, and for the good of the Nation, and for
the City of God therein: for whose sake also I ought to assist them with my
best abilities received for public service, to enable them so to do. Upon
this account therefore I wish from my heart, that every one of them may be in
their lives and charges as perfect and upright in the way of God, as David was,
and as zealous to advance all good, and destroy all wicked doers from the City
of the Lord, as he professes himself to be. What ever the title and claim to
right may be in others, who stand as competitors with, or against those that
are in possession, I take not upon me to determine either way: no man has made
me a judge or a divider of rights between the great ones of the world; my way
in the Gospel is to prejudge none in that which God has given them, but to
serve all through love in that which is good: As for that right which God does
give to power ( For the most high of all rules in the Kingdom of Dan. 4. 17.
men, and gives it to whomsoever he will, and sets up over it the basest of
men) I shall leave it to his own effectual determination, by the setting up of
one and putting down of another: for the actual possession of Gods place over
men, by the administration of his supreme power, in the hand of one, and out of
the hand of another, is that by which I must take notice of his determination
of the matter. As for my self, my whole work is to judge of mine own ways how
to keep them pure and without offense toward all, how to hold forth the word
of life, and thereby to stir up every one to follow the example of Christ
Jesus, by walking in love as he has loved us, and in holiness as he is holy,
and how to follow peace, and reconcile differences which are destructive to
Church and State, in a Gospell-way, chiefly when God does open a door of
utterance unto me; and this is all that I am to meddle withal in my place and
calling; and as I hope without humane respects and worldly ends, never to be
wanting to this; so beyond this line, nor consideration, no man nor thing, God
willing, shall ever draw me. It is a small matter to me, what any may think or
say of my present meddling in this business and this way, yet I shall never
refuse to give a true reason to any that shall discreetly seek it, of my
proceedings; but to answer the partial cavils and interpretations which
passionatly selfe-willed and conceited men shall intend to put upon my actions,
I shall always think it below my care and Calling, and regard it no more than
the noise of a Dogs barking.

A brief Digression. Concerning a correspondency between Magistrates and
Ministers.
And these expressions I have here inserted, concerning my self by way of
digression, not only to show the true grounds by which I am led, thus to judge
and act within my Sphere; but also to obviat something in the minds of some
men, which is obstructive to the entertaining of these impartial suggestions in
Gospel-simplicitie; as at this time offered without any further design (for
cursed be he that does the work of the Lord deceitfully) and finally to make it
apparent, that I am neither ignorant nor imprudently careless, nor afraid of
The intent of the digression
the thoughts of men concerning my self; nor unaware of the imaginations which
some will entertain concerning that which I have said already, and that which
now I am entering upon to say, which shall refer to a mutual correspondencie,
which ought to be between the Ministers of the Gospel, and the Rulers of this,
and of every Christian State. For seeing the last Aphorism which I have drawn
from David's Directory, concerning the aim of a wise and godly Magigistrate,
does lead me as it were by the hand, unto this matter, whereof the
consideration is as necessary for our safety, as any thing hitherto spoken of;
I should be very much grieved that my Brethren of the Ministry, by a mistake
of duty, and preposterousnesse of zeal against those that are over them with
power in the State, should necessitate them through their unruly and implacable
misbehaviours, to take up designs for their own and the public safety,
wherein neither we, nor they themselves will have any cause of rejoicing: or
that they should divert them from the intentions whereunto hopefully they may
be fully carried, as being inclined thereunto by their own principles. For I
know no probable reason to think, that they should not be willing to perform
the perfect duty of a Christian Magistrate, and follow David's example therein,
when they are fully convicted, that their ultimate end must not be so much to
serve themselves and others in temporal matters, as to protect the City of GOD
from all anoyances of the wicked of this world: for that is David's meaning when
he says in the conclusion of this Psalm, that He will early destroy all the
wicked of the Land, that he may cut off all wicked doers from the City of the
LORD. Where it evidenty does appear, that the last effect of his endeavors in
his Magistracy, was to procure the well being of the Church of GOD, by the
ways of power and authority, which God has put into his hand. And if so, then
these Corollaries will follow as I conceive, concerning the power and duty of
the Magistrate.

The grounds upon which it is hoped.
1. That to the Magistrate a coercive power of all wickedness does belong both
in Church and Commonwealth.

2. That no persons may pretend any exemption from being under his power and
jurisdiction in outward visible matters belonging to their places.

3. That he is bound by his place to protect those whom he judges true and
faithful servants to God, in all the duties of his service.

4. That he ought to take notice of the carriage of all Ministers in their
places, how they behave themselves therein without blame, and oversee all the
affairs which are agitated amongst them in all their public Assemblies.

5. That as the City of GOD without his protection cannot be in safety; so
without his concurrence the public Reformation thereof cannot be accomplished.

6. That it does no way belong unto any who by Gods appointment are under his
inspection, protection, and jurisdiction, and ought to act with his
concurrence. to take upon them to act any thing in a public way, or of public
concernment, whereof to him they intend not to be accountable.

The necessity of it.
These Corollaries as they follow clearly to my understanding upon the last
words and matter of the Text; so I am persuaded they will meet with no
objection or contradiction which to a rational man may not easily be answered.
Therefore taking them as Truths to be granted, I shall endeavor to build
thereupon that which I think may, and hope will, and judge should, work a
Christian correspondendency between the present ruling Powers and the Ministry
of these Churches: for seeing it is evident that the Ministry and Magistracy
are the Pillars of humane Societies. and that a House cannot stand when the
pillars which support it stand not firm together, or by their standing weaken
one another. Therefore we must needs conclude, that if there be no amiable
correspondency sought, but a manifest division maintained between these two,
that our public diseases will become absolutely incurable; and that this
symptom thereof will be fatal to this State.

For except a Cure can be found unto this breach, how can there be any true
healing of other breaches, or prevention of future Calamities hoped for? will
not from hence inevitably follow a perpetual increase of animosities and
offenses on all sides, and from thence an endless sequel of judgments? and
will not God destroy all those that are accessory to the Causes of such evils,
except they prevent him by repentance? therefore to complete the application of
the forenamed Remedies, which we have found to be specifical to our Diseases;
nothing can be thought upon more useful nor so necessary, than to work out and
procure this correspondency; for as without the Concurrence of these two hands,
there can be no settlement or advancement of any public undertakings: So with
their joint strength and cooperation in this way of God, we may confidently
hope that the works of our Reformation may be speedy, safe, full, and permanent.

Let me therefore as one touched with the sense of this necessary Duty,
discharge my Conscience in the presence of God.

Three points to be spoken to about it.
I shall not stretch my self beyond my line, either in respect of superior
Powers, or of my Brethren in the Ministry; but with all tenderness,
faithfulness, and humility of spirit, I shall apply my self unto them both,
jointly, and as briefly as may be, in so weighty matters, and for a close to
this discourse, I shall represent unto the one, and the other indifferently
three things.

1. What the conscionable inducements are which should equally move both
Magistrates and Ministers unto a friendly correspondency in the discharge of
their public Duties.

2. What the means and ways are by which this correspondency both may and
ought to be entertained.

3. How the obstacles which stand in the way thereof, should be removed.

Of the first. Concerning the Motives obliging Magistrates and Ministers to
correspond in their charges.
If Conscience should be reflected upon, and consulted withal, in respect of
the inducements which should equally move Christian Magistrates and godly
Ministers to correspond together in the discharge of their public duties,
three things will be found considerable to them both. 1. Their joint relation
unto God, who has put them both in their public places as his servants. 2.
The great interest of Christianity, which he has mainly recommended unto them
both. 3. The immediate ends of their mutual correspondency which are these
two; the purifying of the City of God from all wickedness: and the
strengthening of each others hands in going about that work: both which things
they are equally obliged in the presence of God to intend. If therefore any
weak voice could reach unto them both at once, I would with due respect say
thus; if either of you do mind the great Lord and Master under whom you stand,
as Moses and Aaron did; if to him you judge your selves to be fellow servants,
equally accountable as well of your mutual willingness to concur in his
service, as of any other duty; if you think the profession of Christianity a
business worth the owning, and a work incumbent to your charges, that you
should uphold and advance it as well jointly, as severally: if the well being
of the City of God, and of the Commonwealth of Israel, be at all a design to
be thought upon by you; and if you can rationally conceive, that your amiable
concurrence will be highly helpful toward these undertakings; and that the
want thereof will be as great an obstruction as any that can befall thereunto;
then I must entreat you that are upright in heart, and that understand what
such engagements mean, that upon the consideration thereof, you would show your
selves conscionably loving, and inclinable to a correspondencie: but if you
will not lay this duty to heart, nor make use of the interest which ye have in
each other for the service of the Lord: My soul shall weep in Ier. 13. 17
secret places for your pride; and mine eye shall weep sore, and run down with
tears, because the Lords flock is carried away captive, by reason of your
undutifulnesse. If these things are not at all understood to be obligatorie; or
being understood, are not thought upon; or being thought upon (at least now in
this extremity, and thus represented) are not at all effectual to make any
impression toward your duty, how can you persuade your hearts before God, or
think that your Conscience has any soundness? I do not hereby make my self a
Judge of any man's Conscience; every man shall stand and fall to his own Master:
but if this which I bear witness unto is a truth, then I must discharge mine
own conscience in the presence of God, and give warning unto those whom it may
concern of the danger of this neglect of duty, to exhort every one to look to
his own conscience, lest it be found asleep under the guilt of this
unsociablenesse, which being manifestly broke forth amongst us, the guilt
thereof must needs rest somewhere. Wherefore also it follows, that every one
is bound to look to himself, lest sin be found lying, and resting at his door.
For when Christ told his disciples that one of them should betray him, they all
fell to a scrutiny of themselves, and enquired of him also; Is it I Master, is
it I? Let us do the like in this case; for it is evident, that if this neglect
of duty does continue long, some of us will therein betray the public
profession of the Gospel, and with it the safety of the State into the hands
of our adversaries: and this scrutiny should be the more earnestly heeded,
especially by those that are in public places; because the means and ways to
beget a good correspondency, and to make it effectual toward the healing of
our breaches are not very difficult, but may without trouble be set afoot
speedily: as now I shall show, if there be no unwillingnesse to entertain the
same.

Of the second. Concerning the Means and ways of setting a correspondency
afoot between Magistrates and Ministers.
To beget then a correspondencie which will be no less sufficient to do our
work of Reformation, then necessary to preserve us from ruin, I conceive
three things must be thought upon. 1. First, by what means a good understanding
may henceforth be begotten between Magistrates and Ministers in order to common
desires. 2. By what means a concurrence may be framed in all present
undertakings toward public aims. 3. And by what means the execution of that
which shall be undertaken may become effectdall: for except these three things
be found, and agreed upon between the godly parties at a distance, I can see no
possibility of this performance of their duty. For if there be no good
intelligence, nor right understanding between them in reference to common
desires, how can there be any confidence either in the communication of
counsels, or in the undertaking of endeavors? And if no confidence be found
between those that should act together in these things, how shall their
concurrence be wrought? or being brought about, continue, and become
successful? But if the Ministry and the Magistracy, as the two hands by
which God does lead the inward and outward man, unto eternal and temporal
felicity, be brought by his grace and Spirit, to understand one another
desires and designs aright, they will be glad to join, and readily concur to
heal all breaches to rectify their own mutual mistakes, and to prevent the
further increase of public distempers in others: nor will they lead any more
the streams of peoples affections, as hitherto has been done, either into
opposite, or into different channels; which is altogether inconsistent with the
good of the Commonwealth, and destructive to their mutual satisfaction in
each other.

These mediums then toward the procurement of a correspondencie are evidently
necessary, but how they may be had, seems a difficulty; and truly as things
now stand, I cannot say that the procurement thereof is no difficulty at all:
but this I may confidently say, that if Christianity be respected amongst us,
or Moral and Prudentiall honesty, more then worldly aims and policies, there
will be no great difficulty in the business: yet in this deliberation I shall
not presume to prescribe my sense unto any; but shall humbly offer unto the
consideration of all, that which I conceive most agreeable, both unto reason,
and to the simplicity of the Gospel of Christ.

1. By begetting a good understanding between them, in order to common desires.
Concerning the means therefore to beget a good understanding henceforth between
Ministers and Magistrates in order to common desires, let us search into the
properties thereof to see what they are, and how they may be found out. What
then are, or ought to be the common desires and designs of Christian
Magistrates and Gospel Ministers? are they not the thoughts of procuring
toward the Church and State, the best things which belong to their charges?
and wherein all other things are comprehended, and without which none other
enjoyments will be profitable or lasting? I suppose none will doubt of this.
But then what are these things which are thus qualified? certainly they must be
things undisputably good, of themselves desirable, fully known to all in
Christianity, absolutely necessary to be attained, indifferently useful to
the good of all; and which being obtained none other profitable things will be
wanting to the society of mankind: and of this kind two things there are (as
I conceive) which comprehend the rest, viz: Godliness and Honesty, whereunto
is subservient Conscionablenesse and Rationality. The way then to beget a What
these common desires should be.
good understanding in order to common desires between Magistrates and
Ministers, whose proper work it is to procure the welfare of the societies
wherein they are jointly placed, can be none other but this; that they should
both set before their eyes the advancement of these things toward their
people, and endeavor to strengthen each other in the furtherance thereof, to
the end that toward them all safety, peace and plenty may be settled thereby,
and therewith: for without the grounds of Piety and conscionable dealing in
things pertaining to God, and of honesty and rational dealing in things
pertaining to men, it is not possible that the blessings of constant safety,
peace, and plenty can be procured unto any Nation of the world: because no
true virtues, either of religiousnesse, or of humane industry, (without which
no public happiness can befall to any Nation) can be cultivated, and
propagated amongst men, except the principles of godliness and honesty, of
conscionablenesse and rationalitie be maintained, and advanced toward them.
Except therefore Magistrates and Ministers professedly join in these designs,
and intend to raise all other their wishes and desires upon these grounds, it
is in vain for them either severally or jointly to frame resolutions, and take
pains to fulfill the same: their labor shall be for the wind, and none of
their purposes shall be established. The way then to beget a true and good
intelligence between these instruments of the public welfare (which are the
two hands of God, to reach forth all the means of true happiness (whereof
these are the chief) unto mankind) can be none other but some mutual
assurance of their true desires, to set forward this, which is the only common
and real good of all Commonwealths: therefore if I may, upon this
demonstration, of that which is to be counted good in the common aim of
Magistrates and Ministers, offer, without seeming to presume, some advice unto
the present Rulers of this State, I would entreat them chiefly now, in laying
the foundations of our settlement, to make these things their main and real
designs toward this Nation; and that they should manifest the realitie of
their intentions herein, by sow way which may not only be suitable to their
places of Authority, but which may give unto all men a rational And how a good
intelligence may be wrought henceforth in the procurement thereof.
assurance that the designs are truly meant, and likely to be accomplished: to
this effect then I conceive, that this might be done without difficulty, and
very profitably, viz: that the Counsel of State, in the name of the
Parliament, should (as it becomes the Authors of Public concernments, and
those that preside in matters of Order and Justice) by some Act of State lead
others to be conversant with themselves about these thoughts; inviting all that
have abilities, but especially the Ministry of the Nation to entertain
impartial counsels concerning these objects, and to communicate the same
severally, or jointly, as they should think most expedient to some men, who
should be appointed to receive all advises in that kind; to be made use of so
far, as publicly they should be found practicable; and that the counsels which
should be suggested by such an invitation might all be directed to one mark,
and not wander at random from the true design which is to be prosecuted; I
would have some Questions proposed, concerning Religiousnesse and Rationalitie,
Godliness and Honesty, Conscionablenesse and Industry (all which are
Homogeneall matters) which should oblige those that give their advices, to
limit and determine their thoughts within the bounds thereof: and I would have
them engaged to bring the matters which they should advise about the tenor of
the Questions, into some Aphorisms, which should be set in order, under
certain heads readily to be found. Concerning Religiousnesse, Piety, and
Conscionablenesse (for these are inseparable) I would have their advises
determined to the resolutions of three Questions, which are these.

1. How the Knowledge, Practice, and Power of Godliness may be most
effectually advanced throughout this Nation, either by the impartial
settlement and regulating, of Catecheticall Exercises, of Prophetical
Conferences, and of a Preaching Ministry; or by other means which may tend to
the same effect?

2. What the scandals and disorders are, which may fundamentally destroy this
design, and how they should be prevented.

3. How without prejudice to good order on the one hand, and to true Christian
liberty on the other, the causes of present breaches and offenses may be
remedied; especially, between those that acknowledge each other to stand fast
in the doctrine which is fundamental.

Concerning Rationality, Honesty, Moral Industry (which things go hand in hand)
I would have not only Ministers, but the wisest Schoolmasters, and other men
of parts, and experience to be invited, to give in their advices, to this
Question.

How throughout the Nation, the Schools of Learning, and the education of youth
therein, may be rectified, and reduced to a more compendious, profitable, and
uniform way of teaching tongues, Moral virtues, Industry, and Sciences then
now it is?

If these Questions were, upon the grounds of common advice, rationally and
fully resolved, (as I suppose they may be) and some men of choice parts, of
free and public spirits, deputed to gather the substance of all those
counsels, into one orderly sum, so far as they shall be found agreeing
together, and inoffensively practicable; this would not only hold forth the
true sense, and unanimous desires of all the godly wise of all parties in the
Nation, to give them content therein, so far as possibly may be; but a ground
would be laid for their union, and better understanding of each other: and a
great deal of good confidence would be begotten in the minds of all ingenuous
men of all parties, toward the upright meanings of the Government which is
over them. The rational frame, and righteous constitution of a well-ordered
Commonwealth should be so settled, that all men that are true to it, should be
admitted, in a regular way, to interest themselves into the counseis of the
Government thereof, about the ways of common safety, peace and Plenty; nor
ought the Governors to take upon them, (except in cases of necessity and
imminent danger,) to rule as Monarchs, and determine any matters by mere
Authority, and the dictates of their own will: But the more they can engage
others to be of their counsel, and endeavor to give conscionable and
rational satisfaction to the desires of every one; the more successful their
settlement will be, chiefly if these grounds be followed, and if they make
their Authority to be (not that, which proud and foolish men, by a Principle of
Tyrannical greatness pretend it is; viz: a prerogative to law, to appear and
to command over others, either at will without law; or by their own sense of
the law, without being obliged to hear others; but) that which it ought to be,
amongst rational men, viz: a prerogative to go before others in minding common
concernments to lead them rationally and conscionably to see their own good
therein: and a right to make things public, and oblige every one to take
notice thereof. For Authoritas, ab Authore derivatur. Nam qui Actares primi,
Auctiresque rerum sunt in humana societate publicarum and publicandarum, ij
sunt cum Authoritue. Therefore as it is the ordinary Policy of sole-rulers, to
be like unto Tiberius close and secret, that no man should dive into their
counsels; so I think it would be the best Policy of Common Wealths to lay all
counsels (upon such Principles as these are) open to all, and to suffer no man
to be ignorant or in doubt thereof. This only will be their strength and this
will be their glory: And thus much concerning the way how in reference to
future designs, a good intelligence may be wrought between those that are in
public places in the Church and State: Now follows to be considered, how in
all present undertakings of a public nature, a friendly concurrence may be
framed between them; or at least a distracting dissonancie, such as is now
apparent amongst us may not be continued; but lovingly composed, and hereafter
prevented.

2 By concurring in present undertakings by way of mutual counsel. Concerning
this I cannot be so free as in the foregoing deliberation for fear of giving
offense; yet briefly, I shall offer something I hope without any just cause of
exception; because in other reformed Churches and Common wealths it is
healthfully practiced, as a means of good correspondency and concurrence,
between Magistrates and Ministers in public concernments: and that is amongst
other things this,

1. that in all provincial assemblies concerning Church affairs, a certain
time should be determined for their meetings toward the redress of
sc(...)ndals, and advancing the means of spiritual edification within
themselves, and that the determination and denomination of this time should
stand at the arbitrament and ratification of the supreme authority, upon the
desire of the Ministry.

2. That in all such meetings the supreme Authority should depute some body to
be in their name present at them; to give countenance and authority to their
proceedings; to assist the Ministry in outward matters with counsel and
advice; or also in other things as may be requisite and desired, (though in
particular matters it will not at all be expedient, that the State Deputy
should either debate or vote) to take notice of all things that come before
them; and of their orderly and decent carriage about the same, to see that they
meddle not with Sat matters, or designs of another kind, then such as tend
to the Spiritual edification of souls, and finally to make report to those by
whom he is deputed; of every thing relating to the public constitution of
their affairs; or which otherwise are observable for the welfare of the Church
and State. Thus the Magistrate may concur with the Ministry in their present
undertakings; the Ministers may concur also reciprocally with the Magistrate
in his present undertakings, if they be called by him thereunto: and as the
Magistrate in his concurrence about Church affairs does go no further then the
Sphere of his calling does permit, so the Ministers being desired by him to
give assistance in State businesses, should not exceed the proper sphere of
their employment; therefore if a doubtful case of conscience should fall in
about State deliberations; I conceive, that (as elsewhere the custom is, so
here, the matter may be proposed unto some of them, without acquainting them
with all the particulars of State concernments relating thereunto: but only
with that which is doubtful as to conscience in respect of Gods will,
concealing the rest as Lawyers use to do when they propose matters under the
names of Titius and Caius.

And thus far in point of counsel, the concurrence may go on both sides,
about present undertakings: the Minister helping the Magistrate in that which
is spiritual with advice; and the Magistrate helping the Minister in that
which is outward and matter of order, both with countenance and advice.

By concurring in present undertakings to give strength unto the execution
thereof. As for the point of execution in things on either side undertaken, the
last part of their correspondency is to give strength thereunto, by their joint
concurrence; and the means to do this, can be none other but that which in all
humane affairs is the true cause of strength and sucessefulnesse; which is
nothing else but the righteous ordering of all proceedings toward their
proportionate ends, when each agent shall stand in his own place where God has
set him; and do the work which is proper to his own calling, wherein he may
expect that God will bless him. My meaning is, that the spiritual and
temporal administrations, the one relating to the inward, the other to the
outward man, should not be confounded and jumbled together, without any
distinction of their bounds; and made to run out of their own channels into
each others: because if this fall out, both will lose their efficacy toward
their objects, in the application of public remedies to the spirits of men.
For if the Magistrate should take upon him the work of where, 1 Of irregular
undertakings and concurrences.
the Ministry whereunto God has not appointed him, he cannot hope for a
blessing from him, because he is out of his calling: nor will the spirits of
men to whom he offers himself as a Minister, receive him as such, but will be
prejudiced and confounded in their relation toward him. The Ordinances of the
Ministry and Magistracy are understood by all knowing men to be distinct in
Gods hand, and that each ought to be respected by it self, and in its own way
used: now if he who is set up to be the president and protector of all public
order, should confound them, and become the author of disorder, in his main
business, he weakens his own reputation, and makes his works void, for the
minds of men who respect the Ministry by it self for their spiritual works
sake. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 13. and the Magistracy by it self for their temporal works
sake: Romans 13. 3, 4, 5. will be obstructed to every thing which he does in that
kind, because to them he acts neither as a Magistrate, nor as a Minister, and
so does make himself useless. Nor will Ministers in such a case being
concerned in their places be idle; nor will it be possible to take off the
affections of men from looking toward them, whether they be superstitiously or
judiciously affected with the Ordinance, where of necessity they will be
distracted; when in the same work they see Ministers act one way, and
Magistrates another: which disagreement in their proceedings, must needs make
all their undertakings ineffectuall.

In like manner if the Minister should take upon him the work of the
Magistrate, whereunto God has not appointed him, he cannot expect Gods
presence with him in it; because he is out of the place where God has set him,
and out of the employment whereunto the promise is made, Behold I am with you
always till the end of the world. Matthew. 28. 19, 20. Nor is it fit that the
Magistrate should suffer another to usurp his place, nor ought a Minister of
Christ to be busy in other men's matters: nor is it just that he should fish in
other men's waters, with their angling rod and baits without their leave: nor
can the people, to whom a Minister, does in this way apply himself, receive him
in the simplicity of the Gospel as a servant of Christ, seeing he does not
apply himself unto them by the Spirit of Christ, and in things belonging to his
kingdom; but as a man, and in the affairs of this world, wherein they are not
subordinate unto him, but unto the higher powers, which as to them in this
respect are made void and useless. Whence it will unavoidably follow, that
about the performance of their duties, and the observance of their relations,
their spirits will be distracted, this way and that way; when both Magistrates
and Ministers act each others parts, and offer themselves with different or
contrary influences toward them about the same matters. The strength therefore
of the execution of all public businesses, is that which Solomon does intimate
by the two 1 King. 7. 21,
Pillars which he named Jachin and Boaz, and set up in the porch of the Temple.
The name Jacbin signifies, he shall Of the Rule of Regular undertakings and
concurrene^^.
establish: Boaz signifies, in it is strength. Solomon's meaning by these
names, and by the setting of these pillars at the first entry of his building
was, to teach this Doctrine: That none of our works have any strength otherwise
then as God will order and establish them; nor further then they are
conformable unto his ordering and establishment. If therefore both Magistrates
and Ministers in the prosecution and execution of all public designs, do not
walk in their spheres according to his establishment of the same; nothing will
prosper, and be successful in their hands, because their strength will be
gone from them. Samsons strength did lie in his hair, not because long hair
has any natural property to make a man strong; but because God appointed
Nazareths to wear long hair; and when Samson was conform to his ordinance, he
was with him, as his strength: so will he be to every one whom he has
established in his place, if he be conform to his establishment. Let us then
suppose, that there should be such a conjunction of endeavors settled between
Magistrates and Ministers, that they should agree to do all things by a mutual
intermixture of administrations, jumbling all their works together, as here it
was formerly in part, by the constitution of Bishops under the King, yet I say,
that this would not bring any successefulnesse to the execution of their
designs; because the point of strength does not flow from the bare conjunction
of their endeavors, or concurrence of their wills quecunque modo: but from their
orderly conjunction thereof, in their proper places, according to Gods
appointment, for the performance of such works as he has entrusted each of
them withal in their several stewardships: it must not then be a political
concurrence, as that of the King and Bishops was, for self-interests, and
private ends of men: but it must be a conscionable concurrence for the doing of
Gods will, and for the prosperity of the Commonwealth of Isreal, and of
interest of Christianity: for hereunto the promise is made of being
successful. To conclude, then this matter of joint strength in reference to
the execution of undertakings, we must say, that to make their actings
powerful, they should work together hand in hand; yet so, as that each should
do his proper work, and in his own way; and not his neighbors work, or in his
neighbors way.

These things being so laid, and the Rule of concurrence, in the point of
execution, being thus understood; I hope it will be no cause of offense unto
any, if I should desire, that henceforth one thing might be more me(...)urely
considered then hitherto it seems to have been; which is, whether it be not
every way more expedient for the welfare of the State, and more suitable to this
Gospel Rule of concurrence between Magistrates and Ministers, that Ministers
should not 3. Of the publication of the Acts of State by Ministers a
disquisition, how (...) that is (...) the State.
be obliged to publish the Acts of State in their Pulpits, then that they
should be obliged so to do? The reasons which move me to make this doubt, and
for which I would have the matter laid to heart, by those to whom the Ruling
power over us is committed, are briefly these. If the end for which Ministers
are made use of in this matter, be only to have the Act of State notified to
the people at a solemn meeing, I conceive this end may be gained as well if
not better, by obliging any subordinate officer who can read distinctly, to do
it in the Magistrates name, (as else viz: Helvetia.
where the custom is) at the same time of public meeting; either before the
Minister goes into the Pulpit, or aftes he is come out of it: for it is more
proper, that the Magistrate should make one of his own Officers of State, an
Herald of his Acts and Ordinances toward his Subjects, then that this should
be imposed upon him, whom Christ has called, and set apart to be the Herald of
his kingdom only, and not to meddle with Matters of State, especially then,
when he is about the proper work of his service. The mixture of Temporal and
Spiritual concernments is not answerable to the Rule of the Ministerial
Calling; and if the opportunity of the place, and time of public meeting be
mainly considered, I say, that all public places, and solemn meetings are
more immediately, and directly subordinate unto, and dependent upon, the
Magistrates appointment, then the Ministers; and therefore may be made use of
by him, for his own occasions, as he shall think fit; without seeking leave of
the Minister: nay, it is clear, that the Minister has no right to the place,
or the publicknesse of the meeting, without the Magistrates leave; and
therefore has no such property in his Pulpit, or holiness annexed to it, that
none but himself may use it; or nothing else but what he will allow, may be
declared in it.

But if the end of obliging the Ministers to this publication of State Acts, be
not so much the bare publication thereof to the people in the Magistrates name
(which certainly is more proper for his own Officer to do) but a design either
to engage the Minister to recommend the business it self, which he is required
to publish; or to discover his want of affection toward it, that upon that
score he may be dealt withal: then under favor I think that this design both
ways is extremely irregular, and consequently prejudicial to the welfare of
the State. For so many inconveniences arise both ways, unto the quiet,
safety, and settlement of the Government in righteousness, and to the respect
due to the Magistrate by their Subjects, and to the Gospel-work of the
Ministry, that they scarce can all be reckoned up. For first, in respect of
the design of engaging the Minister to recommend to the people the acts of
State; I conceive it, under favor, to be very inconsistent with the Prudency
of a State so to do: for although, for the time, the particular business may
be advanced, and the Minister may seem well affected to the Magistrate, and so
make his acts considerable toward the people: yet by this way of proceeding
there is more lost in the main Authority of the Magistrate, and in the right
way of settling it to the advantage of Government, twenty times; then is gained
by the affecting of any particular business: for let the business be what it
will, the publication and recommendation of it, is but a transient action in
the Minister, and if the matter of the Act of State like him well; perhaps he
may do it heartily; if not, perhaps coldly: but the impression which that
action naturally begets, and leaves in the mind both of the people, and of
worldly minded Ministers is not transient; but permanent to the great
disadvantage and diminution of the Magistrates just Authority and due respect:
for this his publication of the Magistrates Acts with a recommendation thereof,
signifies to the people, that without the Ministers approbation and allowance
of his proceedings, they are not valid, and consequently that the Ministry is
to be looked upon as the last judge of their Magistraticall determinations; and
that obedience is not to be yielded, so much, because it is his Act of State,
as because the Minister has recommendit to them: And thus the Minister comes
between them and home, in the subjects thoughts; and that upon no irrational
grounds: for if the Magistrate himself trusts not his own Authority, and right
to command what is just, but must borrow the help of the Ministry toward the
carrying on of State businesses: then it follows rationally, that in State
matters Ministers must be considered as well as Magistrates, and in somewhat
more then they; seeing the effectual accomplishment of businesses is referred
unto them by the Magistrate himself: and without them the people are brought
into a custom not to receive it. And I verily believe, that this ratiocination
upon this preposterous employment of Ministers, does not only work that
impression upon the people, whereby the Ruling Power is degraded from what it
should be in their esteem; but even Ministers themselves (whose minds are not
toward their own work in simplioitie, and without worldly wisdom) are raised
to interest themselves in the management of State designs; and to make
themselves considerable, and in a manner collateral, either for the business,
as Assistants; or against the same, as controulers: for by what rule and right
they are employed, or called to be assistants in a work, by the same, if they
like it not, they may become controulers thereof. And if they may not publicly
toward the people, be controulers of the Magistrates State proceedings in what
they like not; I see no reason why they should be obliged to become his
heralds, and adjutators, in what they like. They are supposed to be free
Agents; and if the Magistrate in his place, and against the nature of it makes
himself so inconsiderable, as to appear unable to do his business without
them, he makes himself in the thoughts both of the people, and of the Ministers
themselves (who aspire unto the world) dependant upon them in his
administrations; and so gives them occasion to presume above the measure of the
Rule which Christ has set for their employment.

By this irregular and preposterous improvement of the Ministerial interest in
the affections of the ignorant multitude for wordly ends; Antichrist did of old
get his foot into the stirrup of worldly power, and made the Kings and
Emperors of the earth hold it for him till he got on horseback; and ever since
he has kept the saddle, and rid the beasts, at his pleasure, till of late by
the light of the Gospel, some that were his beasts, are become men; and have
cast him out of their saddle to the ground under their feet: and it is hoped
that God will open the eyes of all to do the like, till his usurped greatness
vanish out of the world.

And this much in brief, of the inconveniences following naturally upon the
recommendation of State matters to the people in the pulpit, when Ministers are
affectionate and hearty thereunto: but if they be disaffected and not hearty to
this business; either because they refuse to give in all things due respect
unto the Power which requires it of them: or because they have some other
scruple in the business, perhaps in respect of the matter to be published
which they understand not to be just and right, and cannot allow; and
consequently cannot publish, perhaps (although the matter may be without
exception, yet) in respect of the end and design wherefore it is to be
published, which they may suspect, and will contribute nothing unto: and
perhaps (although there be nothing of all this, yet) in respect of their own
relation toward such an employment, and the consequences which it may seem to
bring upon the Ministry of the Gospel, which their conscience cannot stand
under: whether their scruple does arise from any, or from all of these
considerations; so many, and so great inconvencies may beshewed, from thence to
redound to the quiet of the State, and to the repute of the superior powers in
the hearts of their subjects; that if it were needful (as it is not) to
enlarge my self upon this subject, and go to the particulars comprehended under
these heads, a competent treatise might by it self, be written thereof, to show
the disadvantages of this practice to the well being of a Common wealth:
whereas on the other side, by the pressing of that practice toward the
disaffected thereunto, nothing is to be found of advantage (if yet that be at
all any advantage) but this; that some kind of discovery is made upon some
men, of an appearance of disaffectednesse in them toward the ways of the
State: which kind of discovery the true prudencie of sober States men, will
teach them rather to prevent and conceal; then to lay open before the world.
(for what advantage is it to me, to let all my adversaries know, who they are
that disaffect my ways? is not this a manifest advantage to them, and
disadvantage to my affairs and repute?) And then also the rule of Christian
wisdom and generosity, leads the disciples of Christ, to overcome and conquer
by well doing the secret disaffectednesse of men's spirits against us, rather
then to hunt after a discovery thereof: or to pursue them with ill will for
it; when it is found out: it was the last plot, and highest attempt of
Episcopal persecution, which immediately went before their overthrow, to dive
into the disaffectednesse of Godly Ministers against their ways, by putting
them upon the reading of the book of sports on the Lords day in obedience to
the King: but by that discovery God did take them in their own snare, and
discovering to all men their shameful nakedness, he did thereby cast both
them and the Authority of the late thing upon which they so much stood in that
matter, out of the rational esteem not only of Godly but even of Morally
honest men: therefore I would not wish any godly Statesmen to imitate this
kind of Policy, or think to gain any thing by it; seeing it is so contrary
both to the rule of Christianity, and to sound reason in State affairs. And
besides all this, as in it self it is a point of the highest Tyrannical
oppression and cruelty, to intend a persecution against men's persons; who are
otherwise inoffensive in all their curriages, because their secret affections
are not such toward us, as we would have them; or because they cannot submit
their judgments and spirits to every thing which we would have set up over
them: Nor did in effect Nebuchadnezzar any thing else when he set up his Image
to be worshipped, but this; which in a lesser degree is aimed at by those who
will mainly press this practice by setting up lesser State images to be
respected: namely he sought this very thing, to know what all men's secret
affections were to his ways, that whosoever should be found so stout, as not
to submit his spirit in a slavish manner to worship his will; should be put to
death, though in all other things he should be faultlesse. As therefore (I say)
this in it self is the highest point of Tyranny; so in these times it may
prove a most deceitful policy, and hurtful to this State to be practiced;
because it is not always a true mark of a Minister that is disaffected, either
to the State or the government thereof, to be unwilling to meddle with Acts of
State in his pulpit; for I can by an infallible testimony affirm the contrary
in some whom I know: who being as well affected to the State as any can be, yet
will be most averse from this task: and that out of scrupulositie of
conscience, raised upon these and such like considerations of the inexpediencie
of the thing, toward the good of the State and government it self, toward the
Gospel, and toward the Ministerial function therein.

Now if a Minister should only upon such grounds as these refuse to be engaged
in that practice, would it be either just in nature, or conscionable toward
God, or profitable to the government, that a Magistrate should discountenance,
punish or discarde one of his best subjects from his most useful employment
for such a cause? I suppose no rational man will think so. Therefore I shall
conclude, that it would be every way more expedient, for the good both of
Church and State, that this custom were altered then continued: Yet I do not at
all dissuade the Magistrates publishing of his Acts in the Church, and at
Church Assemblies, but I would not have it an engagement laid upon Ministers to
do it, lest it be done by his own officers. And thus I have done with the means
and ways of setting a foot, and entertaining a correspondency between
Magistrate and Ministers: now remains the last point of this matter, which is
concerning the obstructions of this friendship, and how they may be removed.

Of the third. Concerning the difficulty of meddling with the matter of
obstructions.
In all this discourse, if any man shall look upon me, as having any other
design then what I profess to have, (before him who knows all secrets) which
is to seek without all partiality the ways of Truth and Peace; I am sure he
will not rightly understand neither me, nor the things which now I shall offer.
But seeing the faithfulness of my conscience to the aim which I prosecute;
does bear me up in a resolution to proceed without all fear, therefore I shall
use that freedom, whereby I hope it will sufficiently appear, that I have
renounced the hidden things of dishonesty; and that without all craft and
deceitfulness, I handle these matters in the light, and although I see my self
engaged at this time in a thicket of thornie difficulties, and that briers of
the sharpest nature do beset, and wholly cover this subject which I must take
in hand, yet I have hope in God, that I shall be enabled to find a passage
through them without stop; and to handle and remove them so, that I shall
neither prickle my self nor others therewith; that is, I shall neither offer
nor receive any occasion of grievance thereby: because I shall study by a
rule, and not by any interest, and with the spirit of meekness, and not
presumptuously; to heal, and not to heighten, or exasperate the causes of our
public grievances, so far as the Lord shall give me address unto the spirits
of men that are rational and ingenuous: Let me then not be understood to act
for either party, or to tax any thing in the one or other partially; but I
shall speak the truth in love to both, that in the sense of our sinful
miseries, the deep obstructions of this necessary correspondency, which I
plead for; with the causes whence they proceed, and the remedies thereof, may
be represented to the consciences of those, who therein are no less them my
self concerned, as in the presence of the Lord.

What the obstructions are in general. The obstruction then of this amiable
correspondency, is at present nothing else, but the distance of affections,
which is sprung up between some of the Ministry; and the rulers that have the
power of this State in their hands, the aversion which has begotten this
distance seems to be greater on the one side, then on the other; as by the
forbearance which has been used by the one in cases of provocation, and by
some fair offers, toward the giving of satisfaction unto the other party,
(which finds it self now most agrieved) does appear: but yet no full
satisfaction has been received; nor any way taken hitherto to give the same
effectually, so far as I have been able to observe transactions, something of
ignorance: something of evil surmisings, something of Passion; something of
just exception against failings: something of self-will, and some thing of
neglect and disrespect toward each other through prejudice; is to be
acknowledged on both sides, as things still lying in the high way, and stopping
the inclinations and attempts of their endeavoring a mutual satisfaction. And
if the acknowledgement of this, were but heartily, (though in general terms
only, upon the score of humane frailty) taken up by both sides, but chiefly
by that side which does think it self most injured, and therefore seems more
stiff to keep up the distance; there might happily (as I may charitably
conjecture) be some real hopes of a reconcilement conceived: upon the grounds
of the amendment of somethings which are amiss, mainly offensive; and without
the removal of which, the piecing of this breach will be as to men rationally
impossible.

What the more special and chief causes thereof are. The immediate causes
therefore of this obstruction, which keeps off the one side (whom of all men it
does least become to be irreconcilable) from a willingness to be reconciled:
are (as I suppose) the continuance of some stumbling blocks, which lie in their
way; over which, they think it not lawful for them to step, to shake hands
with those that have laid them, till they be removed. And the main causes of
stoppage, which keep off the other side, from coming nearer, or condescending
to the chief desires of the former party; are partly the boisterousnesse of
their provoking carriages, and the destructivenesse of their desires and
principles to the safety and constitution of the present State; which are
things no ways to be condescended unto, by those that are in the possession
and trust of power. On the one side, the supposed new frame and face of the
public profession of Religion, with the consequences thereof, apprehended to
be set up by the Ruling Power, and upheld to the destruction of the present
Ministry; is the main obstacle of their willingness, to yield to a
concurrence in public designs, lest they should seem to approve thereof: and
on the other side, the supposed old frame and face of the public government of
the State, with the consequences thereof, apprehended to be intended, and to be
sought after by the Ministry, to the destruction of the present Magistracy,
is the main obstacle of their willingness to condescend unto the others
desires, lest they should yield to the means of their own overthrow. Upon these
surmisings and jealousies on both sides, opposite designs have been raised,
and steps have been laid in each others ways; to the hindrance of all
friendly proceedings, and correspondencie in every thing whatsoever, tending to
the public welfare, and to common safety. It is fallen out through the
unsearchable and just judgment of God over us, and over those that have
managed our affairs, that these blocks are fallen mutually in their ways: so
that they could not be prevented, nor avoided; but each of the parties
different in counsel, have fallen thereupon, and thereby upon each other, to
the breach of friendship between them hitherto; and to the apparent threatening
of their mutual destruction, the danger whereof is not as yet removed; but
that now they should be still continued, and kept a foot by either side, is the
hight of our present distress, and the sinfulness of our calamity. It is
fatally unavoidable to men, to be of different judgments in the management of
affairs, and to act thereupon by different designs, is a necessary
consequence thereunto: but that they should set themselves destructively to
oppose one another; is no necessary consequence of different ways, but only
an effect of the sinfulnes That the chief guilt of the evil thereof will lie
upon those that are not inclinable to the ways of reconciliation.
of our spirit of envy: for when we cannot endure others, to be like and equal
to our selves, in the prosecution of their own conveniences, and to enjoy all
the freedom which we desire for our selves; then we become naturally their
opposites, and cast stumbling blocks in their way; but if when God in his
righteousness does overtake us, and causes us to fall by our own contrivances;
so that the evil intended against others, becomes the portion of our own
inheritance, by the evil success of our affairs; so that we cannot but see
his hand lifted up against the way wherein we have set our selves If (I say)
when God does thus deal with us, we then still continue rather to be
obstructive unto others, then edifying unto all in our designs; it is to be
feared, that the stubbornness of our envious disposition, will make our case
remediles. For if we turn not unto the Lord, to make straight paths unto our
feet, in his presence, and to take reciprocally the stumbling blocks which
proceed from each other out of one another way, it will be just with him to be
avenged upon us both: as being therein manifestly the enemies of Christ, and of
his kingdom, which now he is to set up more evidently in the world then
heretofore. If therefore obstructions of Christian friendship, through
prejudices and humane frailties, are formerly fallen in amongst us, and we see
they can tend to nothing but to ruin, we ought not to be so unconscionably
mad, as to foment them any longer: the time past may suffice us, to have been
at a distance in profitable undertakings, and strangers to one another
counsels for the Gospel; and it is more then enough, that envious surmises, and
evil speakings, with cross designements have been entertained; let us
henceforth purify our hearts, and our hands from the guilt thereof, that we
may have a joint entrance, and become helpful through love to one another
furtherance, in the kingdom that is prepared for us; for we may confidently
expect the enjoyment thereof, if we be delivered from the clogs of these
obstructions. Wheresoever therefore any invincible stumbling blocks are still
continued, and whosoever is the cause of the continuance thereof henceforth,
there, and upon that side the guilt of the obstruction of Christian love and
correspondencie, toward the building up of Christ's kingdom will rest: and
wheresoever that guilt is found at his appearing, woe be unto that party,
whatsoever it has been, or now is. And if both sides at once, as in the heat
of their opposition they have laid heretofore, should still continue (which
God forbid) to lay such stumbling blocks in each others way, as neither side
can overcome, the guilt will be found a like in both. For although it may fall
out, that the things differently opposed and offensive, by each to other, are
not equal in weight, and a like of importance in themselves; yet as to the
intentions of those that are at variance in point of obstruction, the guilt may
be found equal; what the different weight is, of the opposite offensive
matters, tending to the obstructing of the kingdom of Christ amongst us (for
that is the standard by which God does weigh all things) I shall not take upon
me to judge or determine, (the day which comes will make that manifest) nor is
it needful for any man, either of this or that side, so to do for a
reconcilement of these differences; if on either side a Christian healing be
truly desired. But if on any side no such healing be desired, nor sought
after, nor can be admitted; then justly all the guilt will rest there alone,
what ever the others fault may be, great or small: for in Christianity he is to
be counted guiltless (what ever otherwise his fault is) who sincerely is
willing, and seeks to make a reparation, in the presence of Christ, to him whom
he has grieved: and consequently sin will be found lying at his door, who
does not at all mind either to give or receive such a reparation as is possible
and expedient to be given and received.

The Remedidie of the Breach how it should be brought on.
If then both parties could be brought unto this frame of spirit, that they
should be moved to declare solemnly to each other, their willingness both to
give satisfactory, and receive equitable reparation, for wrongs done and
suffered reciprocally, and that in time to come they should not only have a
care to be harmless; but would study to be helpful to each other, in all
things which may be, the public and common good of all. By this means a
sufficient ground could be laid (as I conceive) to proceed toward the removal
of the obstructions which stand in the way of a Christian correspondencie
between both parties in their several charges: and without some expression of
a mutual willingness in this kind, to live as it becomes the Disciples of
Christ without biting and devouring one another henceforth, I see no
possibility of any further healing: but that which the Apostle has warned all
Christians of will certainly befall unto our present Magistracy and Ministry;
They will be consumed one of another. Gal. 5. 15.


Now because all men are not of the same temper, and in all parties of men,
there are always some more moderately disposed then others, nor can it be
expected that the fiercer spirits on either side, should be inclinable to make
the overture of such a resolution, either to their own party, or to their
adversaries: therefore those of each party, who have not overheated
themselves by the resentments of partiality, so, as to forget all their
interest in our common safety, should be sought, and stirred up, to become
leaders of the rest in this work; and upon the ground of this duty, that all
are equally bound to help toward the removing of stumbling blocks out of each
others way; they should be made Mediators to procure from all of their own
party such a Declaration, whereby an engagement may be brought upon them, to
make them willing to listen after some amiable treaty, wherein both sides may
for conscience sake, in the fear of God intend to receive and give mutual
satisfaction, so far as may be, for things past; and to prevent the desperate
effects and mischievous consequences of a perpetual increase of disatisfaction
in time to come. This should be the maine design of the Treaty; which none
but an enemy unto all goodness can disrelish: and none can intend to obstruct
or divert, but such as seek equally to have both parties destroyed by their own
divisions. For as to preserve us from inevitable ruin, nothing is now
necessary but our union in Christianity; so to work our certain destruction,
nothing, as to men, has a possibility to do it, but the continuance of our
unchristian divisions. Therefore I shall confidently hope, that if by the means
of this kind of Mediation; some Regular and Prudently limited treaty with
moderately free and peaceable conferences might be set a foot, to the end that
between the godly on both sides, some better intelligence may be begotten
toward common Christian designs; that between the Rational, the discreet and
the ingenuous of both sides, some hurtful mistakes and prejudices may be
rectified: and that between the fiercest and most injuriously passionate on
both sides; some allaying of their heats may be wrought, and hateful
offensivenesses made to cease. I say, if a Treaty and conferences to this
effect might be obtained; I am confident, that notwithstanding all these black
clouds which hang over us, and the darkness of confusion which does beset us,
that the Sun of Righteousness would speedily break forth, and gloriously shine
upon us, with healing in his wings.

And how it may be perfected.
Therefore the means and ways to draw on this Treaty, and to order the
conferences which therein may be effectual to these ends; will be in all
probability, that which under God may settle us in a good correspondency
together: and that I may not be misunderstood in this motion, I conceive it not
fit, that the Treaty and the conferences should be between the Magistrate
himself and the Ministry: but that it should be between Ministers of the one
and the other side, to whom grave and judicious Commonwealths men of both
parties might be joined: not so much to debate, as to deliberate, and consult
of the manner and way of removing obstructions, by the mutual satisfaction of
doubts and equitable desires, of the one and the other side: to the end that
henceforward a concurrence in necessary and pious endeavors may be settled
amongst those that are truly Godly and faithful in the Land.

And if it could be hoped, or probably known that this motion would be
generally entertained; and a real inclination found on the one as well as on
the other side, to meet together and speak one with another about matters of
agreement in a Rational and Christian way, it would be no difficult thing to
propose upon liking a particular way and platform of proceeding, both for the
Treaty and for the Conference; to show how they might be ordered without
partiality, so as to reach without doubt to the ends for which they should be
set a foot: but till this can be hoped for, or known; it will be in vain to
make any such offer, especially in a public way: perhaps privately it will not
be useless to show more fully these particulars. 1. For what Reasons both
sides should intend a Treaty and Conference one with another. 2. For what
ends, and to what purposes the Treaty and Conference should be set afoot. 3.
What the way and means should be to make them effectual to their ends. Here
again may be showed. 1. How the preparatives thereof should be made. 2. How the
proceedings therein should be ordered; both in the Treaty and in the
Conference.

In the Treaty is to be thought upon. 1. Who should be the treaters. 2. By
whom chosen and appointed. 3. What their authority should be. 4. How it should
be limited by those that appoint them. 5. And what the Method of proceeding
should be in the meetings of each party amongst themselves apart; when they
consult with those whom they shall appoint to treat publicly in their name.

In the Conferences is to be thought upon. 1. Who should be appointed to confer
in the name of others. 2. How the conferences should be managed; whether by
extemporary discourses, or by putting things to paper; or both ways in certain
cases. 3. How the things whereof conferences are to be had, should be
determined; what should be exhibited in writing; what left unto extemporary
discourses at the meetings of both parties. 4. And whether each party should
not exhibit unto the other in writing, what ever they amongst themselves fully
agree in; that the other party may take it along with them to consider of it,
and to reply thereupon, to show how far they consent thereunto. 5. And to
prevent mistakes, whether the papers mutually exhibited to be considered,
should not be read; and in cases of ambiguities in words explained and opened;
and of doubts in the matters cleared, by the proposal of Questions and
Answers; which Scribes appointed on both sides should take notes of. 6. Whether
any particular Treaters in cases of doubts proposed should be entrusted to
speak the sense of all ex tempore: and if not, how the matter should be
ordered, that all those whose sense is not declared, may be heard, and taken
notice of without confusion. I say concerning these, and such like matters
tending to prepare the way toward an agreement, perhaps it would not be amiss
to have a preliminary Tract, which might be put into the hands of the Mediators
of both sides, that they might possess those with whom they shall deal on each
side, with the platform of the whole design; lest any should think themselves
overreached, and brought into a snare; lest jealousies and sinister
impressions, of men that are prepossessed with fears of loosing their just
freedoms, make the design without effect. And lest any should be backward in
so necessary a duty for want of insight into that, which ought to be
fore-known, and predetermined, that the means may be found answerable to the
end, which shall be pretended, and intended.

Thus you see, Honored Sir, how since the beginning of May, though diversely
interrupted, yet one thing drawing on another, I have ingulft my self into this
Discourse, to satisfy first your desires; and then mine own affections toward
the ways of Peace and Unity. All that I shall desire of your self, and of all
those to whose hands it may come, is, that they would recommend the design, or
rather this motion of a Treaty (for as yet it cannot be called a design, till
parties consent unto it) to Gods blessing in their best thoughts; and to the
serious consideration of their best, and most ingenuously pious, and rationally
moderate friends, of both sides; that if it be Gods will, the thing may be
relished, and with some concurrence of hearty affections, and countenance of
those that are in public places it may be advanced, to the glory of God, and
the comfort of his distracted servants and people in this State, whereof in his
presence we are bound to seek the welfare. Whereunto I know no way more ready
at this time then this, which both to the one and the other side, I shall be
ready at all times to attest; and with all faithfulness endeavor to approve
my self, especially in such occasions, both theirs, and

your Most affectionate and humble servant in Christ, John Dury.

The Analyticall Table. SHOWING The heads of Matters with their Coherence.
THe occasion of the Discourse. page 12 The scope of the Discourse. p. 3 The
subject matter and parts thereof; which are four. 1. The first concerning the
Rules by which Debates among Christians, may be rightly ordered. p. 4
Preparatively before they enter upon Debates: where The things to be observed
as preparative are four. The choice of the Subject. p. 5 The end for which a
Debate is to be undertaken. p. 6 The stating of the Question. p. 7, 8 The
handling of the point in doubt, or question stated. p. 9
The causes why those things are to be observed in The benefit and effect of
the use thereof. p. 10, 11 The inconveniencie of the neglect thereof. p. 12

Decisively after they are entered upon Debates. Where you have the Arguments to
be used, and the way to use them, in making a disquirie of the matter, which
are taken, From holy Scripture. p. 13, 14 From right Reason. p. 15 From the
words of Men. p. 16 From humane actions. p. 17

2. Secondly concerning the persons who entangle the work of our Reformation
with irregular Debates. Who they are. p. 18, 19 What their way of controverting
is. p. 20, 21, 22 What the evil effects thereof are, and what hopes there is
of a remedy thereunto. p. 23
3. Thirdly, concerning the Question, whether Ministers should meddle with
State matters, yea or no: where the way how to determine this Question
according to the former Rules is showed. From p. 24. till 40. Where the office
of Magistrates and Ministers is opened at large as distinct and concurrent.
etc. 4. Fourthly, concerning the use to be made of these matters toward the
Reformation of our present distempers and disorders, where The whole substance
of the Discourse is summarily applied to such as pretend to debate matters
learnedly. p. 40, 41, 42, 43, 44 The latter part is more distinctly applied to
Magistrates and to Ministers, to let them see their Duty. In the General
Proposals. p. 45, 46 In the particular deductions of Their proper works
Jointly. p. 47, 48 Severally. Concerning The Magistrates work by himself. p.
49, 50 The Magistrates way in going about his work. p. 51 The Ministers work by
himself, and his way of going about it. p. 52 The difference of the Magistrates
and Ministers administrations. p. 53 The limits of their intermedling with each
others affairs. p. 54, 55 The discovery of their perverse administrations by a
certain Rule. p. 55, 56, 57, 58
The fundamental Rules of their duties in their works as they are Christians.
Where, The Rules and Duties are explained. viz: What the Rule and Duty of love
is. p. 49, 60 What the Rule and Duty of righteousness is. p. 61, 62 What the
Rule and Duty of Peaceablenes is. p. 62, 63 What is proper to a Christian in
these Duties more then to other men. p. 64 How inseparable they are from
Christianity, and necessary to leading men. p. 65, 66
The Practice thereof to cure our present diseases is explained. Where you have
The state of our distemper, and what will make us miserable or happy therein.
p. 67, 68, 69 The Causes which beget the miseries. See let: A. The Remedies
which will make us happy. See let: B. A. The Causes of public miseries are
mainly four. 1. The spirit of envy. Whereof The nature. p. 70, 71, 72 The
object. In general among all parties. p. 73 In particular among our selves. p.
74, 75
The effects. p. 76 The end, wherefore these things are mentioned. p. 77

2. State jealousies and fears. p. 77. Where you have What they are, and how
far lawful. p. 78 Wherein they are unlawful. p. 79 What their effects are
among subjects in general, and our selves in particular. p. 80, 81
3. Tale-bearing, and private censuring. Where you have The effects, and end
thereof. p. 82, 83 Their prevalency amongst us. p. 84
4. Revenge What sort of passion it is. p. 84 How incorrigible. p. 85
B. The Remedies of our distempers and diseases are twofold. The first are
single Remedies to each Cause of the disease by it self. Where you have The
Remedy of the spirit of envy, given by the Apostle Saint James, and by whom it
should be applied, from p. 89. till 102 The remedy of State jealousies and
fears, from p. 89. till 106 The Remedy of tale-bearing, and private censuring,
from p. 106. till 109. The Remedy of Revenge. p. 109, 110
The second are complicated Remedies for the complicated distempers and
disorders. Where you have The Ministers obligation to apply this Remedy, with
the snare wherein some of them are taken, and the way to reocver them out of
it. p. 111, 112, 113, 114 The Cure prescribed by the Apostle to the Hebrews,
and fitted to our present case; with the explication and application thereof at
large: from p. 115. till 149. Where you have The state wherein the Hebrews
were, and we are compared. p. 116, 117, 118, 119 C. The remedy of that state
recommended in several Duties, inferred upon the Apostles Doctrine. Whereof C.
The first is in general, not to look backward upon discontentments, but
forward upon dutiful performances: where the ground of the Demurrers scruple
is Answered. From p. 120. till 130 The second is in particular. To observe the
Apostles orderly proceeding in the Cure. p. 130. till 134 To follow the duties
therein prescribed: which are Affirmative duties, namely, Spiritual
resolution. p. 135, 136 The ordering of our conversation. p. 137. to 140 The
healing of mutual infirmities. p. 141, 142 The study of Peace with all men. p.
143 The study of Holiness with all men. p. 144, 145

Negative Duties, namely, How to prevent the failing of the grace of God, and
the springing up of the roots of bitterness. p. 147, 148 How to repress
profaneness. p. 148, 149

C. The Magistrates obligation to apply the Remedy to our complicated disease,
which is taken from the express form: and the pattern of the Magistrates Duty
set forth by David, in his Psalm 101. whereof you have The brief Analysis. p.
150, 151, 152, 153 Brief Observations raised thereupon. From p. 154 till 160
Where you have amongst other things, The causes of present troubles, and
changes of Government in the world. p. 161 How conscionable men should behave
themselves toward our Governors in these changes. p. 162. till 166

The correspondency between Magistrates and Ministers to perfect this
complicated Cure; where you have The grounds upon which it is to be hoped. p.
166, 167 The necessity of it, and the Motives inducing thereto. p. 168. 169,
170 The means to procure it. p. 171. Which are To beget a good intelligence
between them in reference to common desires. p. 172, 173, 174, 175 To concur in
present undertakings. By way of counsel. p. 176. and of execution. p. 177 By
avoiding irregular, and observing the rule of Regular undertakings. p. 178,
179. Where is showed The inconveniencie of Ministers publishing Acts of State
in the Pulpit. p. 180. till 185

The obstacles what they are, and how they may be removed by a friendly
Treaty. From p. 186. till the end.











The grosser Errata.
Page 3. line 30. for forth, read worth. p. 19. l. 14. for division, r.
decision. p. 21. l. 23. for entreat, r. intimate. p. 36. l. 7. for deface, r.
diffuse. p. 38. l. 4. for brain, r. bran. ib. l. 9. and 10. for do his, r. do
in his. p. 54. l. 35. and 36. r. nor is it any. p. 60. l. 20. r. nothing in it
self. p. 64. l. 28. r. as a spiritual. p. 69. l. 25. r. nor is there. p. 81.
l. 34. r. in the way of. p. 101. l. 1. after to work, add, this cure by any
other way but by the use of these remedies: and although it is necessary. p.
112. l. 27. r. forgo. p. 130. l. 2. after matters, add to do. p. 133. l. 3. r.
ver. 13. p. 137. l. 21. and 22. and 29. for enemies, r. evennesse. p. 138. l.
3. r. how our work. p. 141. l. 5. for Christ, r. charity. ibid. l. 25. for
innocent, r. inconstant. p. 142. l. 5. r. walking. p. 15. 6. l. 20. for most,
r. not. p. 161. l. 23. for emperor. r. superior. p. 156. l. 12. for place, r.
plea. p. 169. l. 15. for any, r. my. p. 159. l. 22. for law, r. stand. p. 178.
l. 12. for his, r. this.

FINIS.

