ANIMADVERSIONS Written by the Right Reverend Father in God JOHN, Lord Bishop
of SARISBURY, upon a Treatise entitled Gods love to Mankind.

Alma Matter

HINC LVCEM ET POCVLA SACRA printer's device of Roger Daniel

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by Roger Daniel Printer to the University. 1641.

I Have perused these Animadversions upon a Treatise entitled Gods love to
Mankind, and now acknowledge them thus corrected for mine own.

JO. SARUM.

Addenda and Emendanda.
Page 13. line 6. add, It is truly said by Abulensis. 107.21. after Being
add, As for death, it is a privation of bodily life and bodily pain, but it is
no absolute privation of the being either of body or soul. 129. title, read
men's sins. 149. 20. they would never. 169. 3. as an. 185. 15. three
Indignities. 202. 3. put-in (H). 218. 4. add, We in this place think it rather
respects all mankind, unto whom God offers life upon the condition of
believing. 224. title, The Sublapsarian doctrine. 246. 30. add, Pelagians
only excepted. 255. 28. for eligendos read fideles. 263. 28. put-out must.
303. 16. was therein.

In the margin.

Page 86. for Comment. read, Sent. super. 97. for aetern. read, occulta. 157.
8. put O. 161. 15. P. 240. 3. A. 305. 16. M. 355. 28. Vide Calvin. in Hoseam,
c. 14. v. 1. page 340. lin. 1. K. 379. for Doct. read, Decl. 416. ^3. C. 433.
30. L. 462. 5. C.

ANIMADVERSIONS upon a Treatise lately published and entitled,
Gods love to Mankind, Manifested by disproving his Absolute decree for their
Damnation.

Hos. 13.9. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self: but in me is thy help.
Wisd. 1.12, 13. Seek not death in the error of your life; and pull not upon
your selves destruction with the works of your hands.

For God made not death: neither has he pleasure in the destruction of the
living.

Concerning the Title of this book.
THe general love of God toward mankind is so clearly testified in holy
Scripture, and so demonstrated by the manifold effects of Gods goodness and
mercy extended to every particular man in this world, that to doubt thereof
were infidelity, and to deny it, plain blasphemy: yet for all this, if any
shall go about to magnify the common love of God extended promiscuously to all
men, that thereby he obscureth the special love and mercy of God prepared from
all eternity and bestowed in due time upon elect men, this may lead the
ignorant and unlearned into a dangerous error: And therefore obliquely to
oppose the eternal, free and absolute decree of Predestination or Election
under color of disapproving an absolute decree for any man's Damnation,
befitteth not any Divine who acknowledges the truth of that doctrine which the
Scriptures have delivered, St Augustine cleared, and the Church of England
established in the xviith Article. But if the Author of this treatise had no
other aim, then the overthrowing of such an eternal decree of Predestination
and Preterition as is fondly supposed will save men whether they repent or not
repent, believe or not believe, persevere or not persevere; and such an
absolute decree of Reprobation as will damn men though they should repent and
believe, or will hinder any man from repenting and believing, or will cause and
work any man's impenitency or infidelity; we both wish, and shall endeavor
together with him to root such erroneous fancies out of all Christian minds.

The place cited out of Hosea, with many others which might be alleged, will
easily prove that Man is the author of his own sin and the procurer of his
own damnation, and God only the Judge and punisher: But withal they prove as
clearly that Man is not the procurer of his own Predestination, nor the
deserver of his own Salvation by his foreseen faith and perseverance: but God
is he who according to his absolute and infallible purpose gives in time that
grace unto his elect which before all time he decreed should be an effectual
means to bring them unto glory.

To the Reader.
THe Author of this Treatise was persuaded to pen the reasons of his opinion
against absolute Reprobation, that he might satisfy a worthy friend of his,
who required it. What satisfaction that learned gentleman, his friend, has
received by these reasons, I know not: but sure I am, they have given good
content to some others, who have read them, and do still desire a copy of them
for their further use. To ease whose pains in transscribing this treatise, it
does now appear in this form. If any of contrary opinion shall undertake to
answer or refute it, I wish he would set down his opinion and reasons with that
perspicuitie and modesty that our Author has set down his. Such a course of
disputing will gain more credit to himself and his cause, then voluminous
vagaries about impertinent things. If any shall use railing speeches, or
unnecessary diversions from the cause, I shall ever interpret that to be a
strong sign of a weak cause; or at least I shall think it to be an argument of
an obstinate mind, who neither knows how to yield to the truth nor to defend
his error. I hope the Reader who loves his own salvation will be a more
indifferent judge in a question which concerns him so nearly. And so I leave
him to Gods blessing.

An answer to the Preface, with some propositions concerning the true nature of
Predestination or Election.
THe Title of the Book justly rejects an absolute Decree for the damnation of
any particular person: for such a decree was never enacted in Gods eternal
counsel, nor ever published in his revealed word. But for absolute Reprobation,
if by this word be understood only that Preterition, Non-election, or negative
decree of Predestination, which is contradictorily opposed to the decree of
Election, the one is as absolute as the other, and neither depends upon the
foreseen difference of men's actions, but upon the absolute will of God. For if
God from eternity absolutely elected some unto the infallible atteinment of
Grace and Glory, we cannot but grant that those who are not comprised within
this absolute decree are as absolutely passed by as the other are chosen. The
decree of Damnation therefore must not be confounded with the decree of
negative Predestination, which (according to the phrase of the School rather
then of the Scripture) is usually termed Reprobation. By which term of
Reprobation some understand only the denial of Election or Predestination.
And because the negation is to be measured by the affirmation, unless we be
agreed what is meant when we say, Peter was predestined before the
foundations of the world were laid, we can never rightly judge what is meant
when on the contrary we avouch, Judas was reprobated before the foundations of
the world were laid. Some others under the name of Reprobation involve not
only the negative decree of preparing such effectual grace as would bring men
most certainly unto glory, but an affirmative decree also for the punishing of
men eternally in hellfire.

So far forth as this Author seems to oppose the absolute decree of
Predestination, and the absolute decree of negative Reprobation or
Non-election, reducing them to the contrary foreseen conditions of good or bad
acts in men, he crosses the received Doctrine of the Church of England. But if
he intend only to prove, that the adjudication of men unto eternal life or
eternal death, and the temporal introduction of men into the kingdom of
heaven, or casting of men into the torments of hell, are always accompanied
with the Divine prescience or intuition of contrary acts or qualities in those
which are to be saved or condemned; we hold it and acknowledge it a most
certain truth. Yet we must here add, that Predestination and Preterition are
eternal acts immanent in God the Creator, whereas Salvation and Damnation are
temporal effects terminated unto the creature: and therefore the latter may be
suspended upon many conditions, though the former be in God never so absolute.

The Treatise ensuing would have had much more perspicuitie, if the Author had
briefly and plainly set down what he understands by this word Predestination
or Election, and whether he conceive it to be an absolute or a conditional
Decree. If conditional; he should have showed us with whom God conditioned,
upon what terms, and where the conditions stand upon record. If he grant
absolute Predestination, his plea for conditionate Preterition will be to
little purpose with those who understand that the absolute Election of such a
certain number does in eodem signo rationis as absolutely imply a certain
number of men not elected.

The wisdom of our Church of England in the xviith Article lays down the
doctrine of Predestination, and does not so much as in one word meddle with the
point of Reprobation; leaving men to conceive that the one is the bare negation
or denial of that special favor and benefit which is freely intended and
mercifully bestowed in the other. Would to God the children of this Church had
imitated the wisdom of their Mother, and had not taken a quite contrary
course, balking the doctrine of Predestination, and breaking-in abruptly upon
the doctrine of Reprobation.

I know not whether I should think him more defective, who in disputing about
Reprobation runs out into impertinent vagaries, or him that undertaketh the
handling of this question without premising and opening the true nature of
Predestination.

And no man need fear but (with all that are judicious, religious, and loving
their own salvation) that manner of handling this controversy will be best
accepted, which so reduces man's Sin and Damnation to himself, as withal it
forgets not to reduce his Justification, Sanctification, Glorification not
to any foreseen goodness springing out of man's free will, but to the free
mercy of God, according to his eternal purpose effectually working in men
those gifts and acts of grace which are the means to bring them unto glory.

Having thus briefly spoken of the Title and Preface, I will lay down such
fundamental doctrines concerning Predestination or Election as I conceive are
grounded upon the xviith Article, and have always been taken for the common
received doctrine of our Church; the contradictory by our Universities and
reverend Bishops (when they were broched) having been always held and censured
for erroneous. This done, I will go along with the Treatise it self, not
intending to defend the particular opinions of any foreign or homebred Divines,
exorbitant from the doctrine of our own Church, but only to defend our
well-settled doctrine against all opposers of what names or sects soever.

Propositions concerning the nature of Predestination, and wherein it properly
consists, with certain Corollaries apperteining thereunto.


For proof of this proposition these places of Scripture might serve; Romans
8.29, 30. Ephesians. 1.4, 5, etc. Luke 12.32. Matthew. 24.24.

The definitions of Predestination prove the same. As that of St Augustine, De
Bono Perseverantiae, c. 14. of the Schoolmen; Praeparatio gratiae in praesenti
and gloriae in futuro. Amongst the rest, of Aquinas; p. 1. q. 23. art. 2.
Praedestinatio est ratio ordinis aliquorum in salutem aeternam in mente Divina
exsistens. of the Jesuit Vasquez; Praedestinatio est propositum aeternum Dei
quo gratiam alicui praeparat in vitam aeternam. And lastly Arminius himself
gives us this description; Disp. publ. These. 15.
Praedestinatio est decretum beneplaciti Dei in Christo, quo apud se ab aeterno
statuit, fideles quos fide donare decrevit vita aeterna donare. In all these
descriptions, Predestination contains an eternal, absolute, infallible
decree, as well for the giving of grace effectual unto certain persons here,
as the bringing of the same persons unto glory hereafter. Arminius perceiving
this, in his private disputations These. 40.
wipeth out those words, quos fide donare decrevit, which he had used in his
public.

Predestination being an immanent and

A prime and eternal cause cannot depend upon the self-same temporal effects
which are thereby caused. If therefore Predestination be the prime and eternal
cause from whence Peter's faith, repentance and perseverance were derived, his
foreseen faith, repentance and perseverance cannot in any good sense be
imagined antecedent causes, merits, conditions or motives unto the Divine
Predestination.

The Jesuit Vasquez, In 1. disp. 89.
though he found Predestination unto glory upon foreseen merits, yet in this he
is sounder then the Arminians, in that he makes the differencing of the
Predestinate from the Reprobated to begin before all absolute prevision of
their free will consenting the one way or the other. And our learned Bishop of
Norwich Dr Overall explaining the xviith Article has these words, Nostra
Ecclesia conjungit particulare decretum absolutum, non ex praescientia humanae
fidei aut voluntatis dependens, sed ex proposito Divinae voluntatis and gratiae
de his quos Deus elegit in Christo liberandis, cum generali and conditionata
voluntate, seu generali promissione, etc. Where he evidently acknowledges an
eternal, secret, absolute Decree, predestinating particular persons unto
eternal life without all dependency upon their foreseen faith or perseverance;
though therewithal he conjoyn an open, revealed and Evangelicall Decree of
bringing men into the possession of eternal life by the way and upon the
condition of their faith, repentance and perseverance.



If Predestination be conceived as antecedent to the fall, then it takes all
men in statu innocentis, and so alike. If it be considered in statu lapso, then
it also finds all the sons of Adam alike miserable and damnable.

They who will have God in his Divine in statu integro, nor in statu lapso, but
in statu reparato, and tantum non glorificato. 2. Again, this is not to bring
Faith, Holiness, Perseverance, out of the gracious benefit of Election, but to
bring Election out of the foreseen acts of Believing, Obeying, Persevering,
quite contrary to the doctrine of our Church and of the truth. 3. Last of all,
if we admit this opinion of conditionate Predestination, following upon the
eternal foresight of men's final obedience and perseverance, we must of
necessity grant that the grace or benefit of Predestination affords no man
any help at all in the way unto eternal salvation or glorification: which no
Christian ear can patiently hear. For how can that be the cause leading
infallibly in the way unto eternal life, which comes not so much as into
consideration until a man have run out his race in faith and godliness, and
be arrived at heaven-gates? Such a falsely-named Predestination might more
truly and properly have been called a Postdestination. But call it how they
please, it enacteth only per modum legis, That men thus living and dying shall
be received into the kingdom of heaven: but it does not per modum decreti
operantis infallibly work those graces and gracious actions whereby men are
brought unto heaven.



That the grace prepared in Predestination is an infallible cause producing
faith and perseverance in all the elect, appears from the nature and essence
of Predestination: which being a special part of the Divine providence, is
distinguished from that more general providence, by appointing and applying
such means as never fail to produce the end whereunto they are fitted.

So that St Augustine fears not to infer, That if the grace prepared for
the elect in their Predestination should not work the intended end, which is
their glorification; aut vinceretur aut falleretur Deus, God himself must
either be overcome or deceived. Yet he withal defends, That this effectual
grace has no violent coactive operation upon the will, but causes it to work
by its own freedom. Abul. in 3. Reg. cap. 12.
Stat libertas arbitrii cum Divina motione voluntatem nostram ad id quod vult
applicante. And St Augustine to the same purpose, Deus omnipotentissima
facilitate convertit, ac volentes ex nolentibus facit. In which few words he
conjoyneth the invincible operation of the grace of God with the free operation
of man's will. Nay the grace flowing from the decree of Predestination is so
far from putting a necessitation upon the will, as that it is the very cause
which freeth the will from the slavery of sin, and makes it freely to move
and work in all good acts. It gives the will and the deed; and therefore it
implies a contradiction to say, it makes a man do any good by way of
necessitation. Bern. De lib. arbitr.
Vbi consensus, ibi voluntas: ubi voluntas, ibi libertas. Whenas therefore God
had eternally predestined Peter to believe in Christ, to repent, to
persevere, he did by special grace move him and work him to the most free and
willing performance of all these things; according to that of St Augustine, Cum
Deus vult fieri quod non nisi volentibus hominibus oportet fieri, inclinat
eorum corda ut hoc velint. They who refuse to acknowledge this power of Gods
will over man's will, do not perceive how they stumble at the first article of
the Apostles creed.

Faust. Rheg.
If the Divine Predestination be absolute, nemo vigilet, nemo jejunet, nemo
libidini contradicat, etc. And again; If Predestination be absolute, ad vitam
rectam non suo ductu, sed violento tantum Dei imperio homines pertrahuntur. In
a word; If absolute Predestination unto grace and glory be granted, intra
gratiae vocabulum absconditur fatale venenum. These with many other inferences
of the same stamp Faustus and others of the Semipelagian sect would needs
thrust upon the doctrine of Predestination: and as for themselves, they boldly
maintained these propositions, as it were in defiance of Gods absolute and free
Election; Prosp. Epist. ad. Aug.
Hoc propositum vocationis Dei, quo eligendorum and rejiciendorum dicitur facta
discretio secundum quod placuit Creatori, lapsis curam resurgendi adimit,
sanctis occasionem affert, etc. Prior est hominis obedientia quam Dei gratia.
Initium salutis ex eo est qui salvatur, non ex Deo qui salvat. And Faustus
Rhegiensis has the like or worse: Salus hominis non in praedestinatione
Factoris, sed in operatione famulantis collocata est. Non est specialis circa
credentes Dei munificentia. Praedestinatio ad justitiam pertinet. Nisi
praescientia exploraverit, praedestinatio nihil decernit. Justitia
periclitabitur si sine merito indignus eligitur.

Unto all these and the like inferences and opinions we briefly answer three
things. First, That Predestination is absolute, not because it intends the
bringing of any man unto eternal life without performing the conditions which
God requires in the Gospel, as Repenting, Believing, Persevering, and the
like; but because God in his most gracious decree of Election does as
absolutely and certainly ordain men unto saving grace as unto everlasting
glory. Secondly, That in the Divine Predestination there is always included a
prescience of the faith and perseverance of all such as are elected: yet so,
that this prescience is not the antecedent motive unto their Election; but this
foreseen faith and perseverance is a consequent fruit or effect of the Divine
Election. Lastly, That there is a decree conditional established by God
concerning man's salvation, namely, That if any man repent, believe and
persevere, he shall most certainly be saved. But we say it is an abuse of the
Word, to call this the decree of Gods Election or Predestination. For the truth
of this decree may stand good and firm though no man living should believe or
attein unto eternal life. But the Divine Predestination or Election is such a
decree as infallibly in some men produces faith, and brings unto eternal
life a certain number of persons known only unto God himself.

To shut up this Corollary; We do not only avouch the doctrine of S. Augustine
concerning absolute Predestination to be true, allowed by our Church, and
easily cleared from all those absurd consequences which the Adversaries would
fain fasten upon it; but we further avouch, That the new-devised platform of
Predestination grounded by Arminius upon foreseen faith and perseverance, is
false, vain, and disagreeing from the notion of Predestination rooted in the
hearts of all catholic and orthodox Christians. For his Predestination is
settled upon these four pillars.

1. The first is, an absolute decree of giving Christ for a Mediator and
Redeemer unto mankind considered as fallen, in the state of sin.

2. Another absolute decree, To receive into favor all such as shall repent
and believe, and to save them persevering unto the end; as also, To leave the
impenitent and unfaithful under Gods wrath, and to condemn them as men out of
Christ.

3. A third decree, Effectually to afford and administer unto all men
sufficient and necessary means of breeding faith and repentance.

4. The fourth and last, a decree, To save or condemn certain singular
persons, grounded upon the Divine foresight who will repent, believe and
persevere, and who will not.

To this platform in general we say, That the marshalling of the eternal
immanent acts of the Divine understanding or will into First, Second, Third,
Fourth, is a weak imagination of man's brain, and so uncertain that amongst
twenty who give us such delineations of Gods eternal decrees, you shall not
find two who agree between themselves in numbering them and ordering them; but
where one makes four, another makes five, six, or seven, etc. and that which
one man sets in the first place, another sets in the last: and in brief,
every man orders them secundum suum modum imaginandi. To build therefore any
doctrines of faith upon the Prioritie or Posterioritie of such decrees, is to
build castles in the air. For as Hilarious speaks, De Trin. lib. 12.
Omnia penes Deum aequabili aeternitatis infinitate consistunt.

Now to come more particularly to Arminius his decrees. Whereas the true decree
of Election or Predestination is an Operative Practical decree, preparing from
all eternity and in time certainly causing grace and glory in singular
persons elected; Arminius has given us Enunciative Doctrinall decrees
concerning the general causes and means of salvation, apperteining
promiscuously unto all men, whether elected or not elected, conjoined with an
act of Divine prescience, which causes not Peter's Faith, Repentance,
Perseverance, Salvation, but rather Peter's Faith, Repentance and Perseverance
cause or draw after them his Predestination. So that in the whole series of
Arminius his Predestination there is not one decree to be found which causes
infallibly in any singular man Justification, Sanctification or Glorification.

1. His first decree is very defective, because it gives us a predestined
Mediator and Redeemer in separato signo rationis from the persons
predestined infallibly to participate the benefit of this Mediator and
Redeemer, which is reconciliation and effectual grace in this world, and
eternal glory hereafter. For as it were an absurd imagination to conceive that
God first decreed to make Adams head, and then by another decree to make him
members subordinate to his head; so is it, to frame a particular decree for the
Predestination of Christ, and then to devise another for the Predestination of
his subordinate members.

2. His second decree is a decree revealed about the manner how many in time
must be brought unto heaven, and not the secret decree wherein God from all
eternity predestined those whom he pleased unto the infallible obteining of
the kingdom of heaven: so that this eternal decree, Quicunque crediderit and
perseveraverit salvus erit, might stand true though no man in the world should
either believe or be saved. But the decree of Election or Predestination does
imply, per modum causae infallibiliter operantis, the faith, perseverance and
salvation of a number of singular persons known unto God, and cannot be
verified otherwise.

3. His third decree has the same fault: For God may (in his sense)
sufficiently and effectually administer the means of grace and salvation unto
millions of men who notwithstanding will never attein salvation. But that
administration of grace which flows from the decree of Predestination never
failed to bring those particular persons unto whom it is mercifully vouchsafed,
unto the state of glorification. These decrees hitherto concern Cain as well as
Abel, and Judas as well as Peter; and therefore as yet we see in them no decree
of Election.

4. His last decree is it wherein only the Divine Predestination is formally
and essentially placed by Arminius: and yet this has as little in it of real
Predestination or Election as the former. For, First it is a decree for the
temporal and actual introduction of certain singular persons into the
kingdom of glory; whereas Predestination is a decree fore-appointing and
preparing that effectual grace whereby those persons were infallibly brought
unto glory. Secondly, this decree is founded upon the prescience of man's right
use of Gods grace: But the decree of Predestination causes the right use of
grace. Aquin. Qu. De Praedestin.
Hoc ipsum velle accipere gratiam est ex praedestinatione Divina.

This discourse concerning Predestination is necessary for the true
understanding of Reprobation: And it is probable that those who err in the one
are not free from error in the other.

Gods Love to Mankind.
SIR,
I Have sent you here the reasons which have moved me (A) to change my opinion
in some controversies of late debated betvveen the Remonstrants and their
Opposites.

I do the rather (B) present them unto you,

1. That I may show the due respect which I bear your Worship with my
forwardness to answer your desires, as I can with regard to conscience.

2. That you may see that I dissent not without cause, but have reason on my
side.

3. That if I can be convinced that my grounds are vveak and insufficient, I
may think better of the opinion which I have forsaken then I can for the
present.

In the delivery of my motives I will proceed in this order: 1. I will state
the opinion which I dislike. 2. I will lay down my reasons against it.

Touching the first your Worship knovveth these two things very well: 1. That
(C) the main (...) and question in these controversies, and that on which the
rest do hang, is, What the decrees of God are touching the everlasting
condition of men, and how they are ordered. 2. That the men who have disputed
these things, may be reduced to two sorts and sides.


The first side (D) affirms, That there is an Absolute and Peremptory decree
proceeding from the alone pleasure of God, without any consideration of men's
final impenitency and unbelief: by which God casts men off from grace and
glory, and shuts up the far greater part (even of those that are called by
the preaching of the Gospel to repentance and salvation) under invincible and
unavoydable sin and damnation.

The other side disavovving any such decree, say, That Gods decree of casting
men off for ever, is grounded upon the foresight of their continuance in sin
and unbelief, both avoydable by grace, and consequently inferring no man's
damnation necessarily.

The first side is divided: For

1. Some (E) of them present man to God in the decree of Reprobation, looked on
out of or above the Fall; and say, That God of his mere pleasure antecedent to
all sin in the creature, original or actual, did decree to glorify his
Sovereignty and Justice in the eternal rejection and damnation of the greatest
part of mankind, as the end; and in their unavoydable sin and impenitency, as
the means. And this way go Calvine, Beza, Zanchius, Piscator, Gomarus, and
some of our own countrymen.

2. The rest (F) of that side thinking to avoid the great inconveniences to
which that Supralapsarian way lies open, fall down a little lovver, and
present man to God in his decree of Reprobation, lying in the Fall and under
the guilt of original sin, saying, That God looking upon miserable mankind
lying in Adams sin, did decree the greatest number of men (even those whom he
calls to repentance and salvation by the preaching of the Gospel) to
hell torments for ever and without all remedy, for the declaration of his
severe Justice. This way went the Synod.

The difference (G) betvveen them is not much, and even in their own account
too small a discord to cause a breach. Notvvithstanding this petty difference
therefore, they agree well enough together, as we may see in the
Hague-Conference and Synod.

In the Conference at Hague the Contra-remonstrants have these words; Col.
Hag. Brand. page 37. Quoad sententiarum diversitatem in hoc argumento, quod Deus
respexit hominem in hoc decreto nondum creatum, vel creatum and lapsum; quia
hoc ad fundamentum hujus doctrin^e non pertinet, libenter alii alios aequitate
Christiana toleramus.
As touching the diversity of opinions in this argument, viz. That God looked
at man in this decree, not yet created, or created and fallen; because this
belongs not to the foundation of this doctrine, we do in Christian equity
bear with one another.

After this in the Synod at Dort they permitted Gomarus to set down his
judgment in the upper way. And the Delegates of South-Holland were very
indifferent which way they took: For these are their words, Act. Syn. part.
3. page 48. An Deus in eligendo consideraverit homines ut lapsos, an etiam ut
nondum lapsos, existimant non esse necessarium ut desiniatur, modo statuatur
Deum in eligendo considerasse homines in pari statu.
Whether God in choosing considered men as fallen, or else as not fallen, they
(the Delegates of South-Holland) think it is not necessary to be determined, so
it be held, that God in choosing considered men in a like estate. Antidot.
Remonstr. page 32.
Maccovius (H) also Professor of Divinity at Franeker, a violent and stiff
mainteiner of the most unsavory speeches which have been uttered in this
Controversy, and one that undertook in the very Synod to make good against
Lubbert his fellovv-Professour, That God did Velle peccata, ordinare homines ad
peccatum qua peccatum, and neutiquam velle ut omnes homines salventur, etc*
will sins, ordain men to sin, and would not at all that all men be saved;
and besides this, openly and peremptorily affirmed, That except these things
were held and maintained by them, they could not possibly keep their own
ground, but must come over to the Remonstrants: this man was not only not
censured, but publicly declared in the Synod to be pure and orthodox, and
dismissed only with this kind and friendly admonition, That he should
hereafter take heed of such words as might give offense to tender ears, and
could not well down with those who are yet incapable of such mysteries.

By these instances it appears that they of the first side can easily bear
one with another in this difference. And (to say the truth) there is no reason
why they should quarrel about circumstances, seeing they agree in the
substance. For they both (I) contend,

1. That the moving-cause of Reprobation is the alone will of God, and not the
sin of man, original or actual.

2. That the final impenitency and damnation of Reprobates are necessary and
unavoydable by Gods absolute decree.

These two things are the maxima gravamina, principal grievances, that the
other side stick at. So that these two paths meet at last in the same way.

Both these opinions of the first side I dislike.

My reasons why, are of two sorts; 1. Such as first made me to question their
truth. 2. Such as convince me of their untruth.


Answer.
THe Remonstrants in this controversy opinion, therefore is not to be blamed,
unless where from one extremity you have run into the other.



main (...) is not, What are the Decrees of God only concerning the final
conditions of men; but, What are the Decrees of God concerning the different
preparation of grace, whereby some are guided infallibly unto salvation, others
are permitted through their own corruption or voluntary transgression to fall
into damnation. As for the ordering of such eternal Decrees by first, second,
third, fourth instantia rationis (as they term them) it is a School-devise
unknown to the Ancients, and never attempted by any with good success.

absolute decree by force whereof Persons not elected are cast off from grace:
for the non-elect Angels and many millions of men not predestined have had a
great measure of grace bestowed upon them. Reprobation is not a denial of
sufficient grace, but a denial of such special grace as God knows would
infallibly bring them to glory.

Neither does the decree of Preterition shut up any man under a necessity of
sinning and being damned; but it permits men voluntarily and freely to run
into damnable sins, and through their voluntary impenitency to incur
eternal damnation. Prosp. ad Obj. Vinc. Resp. 10.
Non cursus ruentium, nec malignitatem iniquorum, neque cupiditates peccantium
praedestinatio Dei aut excitavit, aut suasit, aut impulit, etc. Resp. 15.
Nemini Deus correctionis adimit viam, nec quenquam boni possibilitate
despoliat.

And last of all, absolute Predestination, and absolute Reprobation or
Non-election, do not exclude or deny the eternal intuition of Faith and
Perseverance in the Elect, nor the eternal consideration of Infidelity and
Impenitency in the Non-elect; but they deny such a consideration of good or bad
acts foreseen in men as causes or precedeth the different decrees of God in
electing some men mercifully unto salvation, and leaving others through their
own default to plunge themselves into eternal damnation.

If by casting off men for ever you mean the eternal exclusion of the damned
from the blessed presence of God, and their eternal tormenting in hell, no
side will deny but this is grounded upon the foresight of their final
continuance in sin: yet so, that as the final continuance of Peter in faith
was not a cause, condition or motive foreseen, and so determining the Divine
will to elect him; but the Divine Election was the cause which afterward
produced in him that foreseen faith. So the foreseen final continuance of
Judas in sin and infidelity was not it which determined the Divine will to
passe-by him in his decree of electing singular persons unto the infallible
atteinment of eternal life; but being thus passed-by, God foreseeth that
through the voluntary obstinacy of his own will (not by any necessitating
violence of Gods decree) he will live and die in sin and impenitency, and for
his voluntary sin and impenitency deserve and undergo eternal torments.

Lib. 1. did. 41. Lib. 3. did. 19.
Scotus with the whole army of Scotists, the greater number of late
School-Divines, are of this opinion: And Suarez by name; whose words are these,
In 3. disp. 5. p. 103.
Probabiliorem existimo communem sententiam Theologorum asserentium electionem
hominum praedestinatorum antecessisse permissionem originalis peccati.

As for Calvine, he never troubled himself with these imaginary Priorities and
Posteriorities in the eternal immanent operations of God: but all that he
aimed at was to prove, That the fall foreseen could not be cause or motive unto
God of some men's Election and others Reprobation. As for the intuition or
Divine consideration of all mankind in statu lapso, Calvine in plain terms
avoucheth it; De aeterna Dei Praedest.
Postquam Paulus, Deum ex perdita massa eligere and reprobare quos illi visum
est, docuit, quare and quomodo id fiat adeo non expedit, ut potius expavescens,
etc.

And this Presupposition of sin considered in persons, whether elected or not
elected, whether to be saved or to be damned, is most convenient for helping
our understanding in this deep mystery. But if any shall thereby conceive that
the eternal Volitions or Intuitions of God have any real posterioritie or
prioritie in the Divine will and understanding, he deceives himself, and
troubles others with vain jangling. Ruiz. De volunt. p. 250.
Vtilitas distinguendi haec instantia rationis, non est, ut ille modus
intelligendi retineatur, sed ut viam aperiat veritati, quae aperta relinquatur.

God did eternally decree to glorify himself in the salvation of some and
damnation of others; which the event does plainly demonstrate: But for those in
whose salvation he decreed to glorify his Mercy, he works in them the means
of their salvation, faith, repentance, perseverance in faith and godliness, by
an influx of grace into their souls, by a powerful yet not violent, by a most
sweet and yet most infallible guidance of their wills; in and over which God
has a more predominant power then themselves. As for those in whose damnation
God glorifieth his Sovereigntie and Justice, he does it not by an influx of
malice into their souls, nor by unavoydable wresting of their wills unto any
particular sin; but leaves all sinful defective actions to their own
sinful defective wills, which wanting the special grace and effectual
guidance proceeding from Divine Predestination, never fail to run themselves
willingly and wittingly upon their own damnation. The means whereby men are
brought unto salvation, are real effects of the Divine Election wrought by
Gods Spirit; as the light and heat of the air is by the sun: But the means
whereby men are carried to their damnation, grow from themselves; as coldness
and darkness of the air is from it self.

As for those whom you term Sublapsarians, you should have taken notice, that
in this number you must put all who embrace S. Augustines doctrine, and who
have subscribed to the XVII Article of our Church. Now these do as well oppose
themselves against the conditionate Election and Preterition, built upon the
foresight of men's good or bad acts, lately brought in by Arminius, as unto the
extreme harsh opinions of Piscator, Gomarus, or whomsoever. So that by joining
your self with the Remonstrants, you have as clearly forsaken the doctrine of
the Church of England, as of Beza, Zanchius, or Piscator.

The description of their opinion whom Sublapsarians, will not agree unto all
who reject the conditionate Predestination and Reprobation of the Remonstrants.
For many with S. Augustine and our Church, condemn this as erroneous who
notwithstanding make no absolute decree adjudging men to hell torments with an
excluding of all preconsideration of sin: But they grant an absolute decree of
not effectually freeing many men from their estate of Sin, and an absolute
decree of permitting many men to want the joys of Heaven, and an absolute
decree of punishing such men's foreseen sins voluntarily committed and
voluntarily continued by eternal torments in Hell.

Those who are passed-by in the eternal decree of God are not by any force of
the decree left without the benefit which the Scriptures promise upon condition
of repentance, no more then those whom God has eternally elected are by virtue
of that decree freed from the punishment which supposing their impenitency must
light upon them. Notwithstanding the absolute eternal decrees of Election and
Reprobation, the revealed Evangelicall decrees stand in their full force. If
Cain repent and live well, he shall be pardoned and saved: If Peter repent not,
and persevere in his sin, he shall be damned. And yet farther (not to
determine whether sufficient grace be offered to every particular person in the
world or no) we may resolutely determine, that the distinct absolute decree of
Electing some infallibly unto perseverance in grace and atteinment of glory,
and of Passing-by and rejecting others, is no good argument to prove that
therefore the non-elected are left without all remedy or sufficient means of
salvation. Adam was not predestined to stand in the state of his innocence,
yet he was not thereby excluded or bereft of sufficient means of standing. From
the decree of Preterition or Reprobation, it well follows, Judas is
reprobated; Therefore he will not use the remedies or means which God offers
for his salvation. But it is not good consequence to say, Therefore God has
not given him sufficient remedies or means to escape damnation, were not his
own wicked will the only hindrance.

man to set down plainly his own opinion. And since the Divine understanding
does not consider or behold this after that, but all together in one instant of
eternity, there is no cause why men should stiffly contend about these
Priorities and Posteriorities, which are humane imaginations, or intellectus
nostri fictiones, as some truly term them.

Maccovius was upon a by-occasion

Unto the objection of ordaining men unto sin, his answer was, That God did not
ordain any man unto sin efficiendo, but permittendo.

For his denying of a will in God for the saving of all men, he understood it
of the absolute effectual operative will, not of the conditional and
approbative will of God.

They both confess, that the Divine understanding moving causes whereupon God
distinguished men into Elect and Non-elect, was the foreseen faith of some, and
the foreseen infidelity and impenitency of others. The state of men under
sin was common to all: the mercy of God in effectually freeing from sin was
due to none.

MY reasons of the first sort do indifferently respect and make against both,
and I will set them down against both together. My second sort of reasons I
will divide, delivering some of them against the upper and more rigid way,
others against the lower and more moderate way.

I begin with those reasons which first moved me to question the truth of
absolute Reprobation, as it is taught both ways. They are these four which
follow.

1. Reason NOVELTY
1 The Novelty (A) of this opinion. Absolute and inevitable Reprobation has
little or no footing in Antiquity. The upper way was never taught or approved
by any of the Fathers (even the stoutest defenders of Grace against the
Pelagians) for the space of six hundred (I may say eight hundred) years after
Christ: nor the lower way till the time of S. Augustine, which was about four
hundred years after Christ. They did generally agree upon the contrary
conclusion, and taught men in their times, That it was possible (B) for them to
be saved which in the event were not saved, and to have repented, which
repented not; and, That there was no decree of God which did lay a necessity of
perishing upon any son of Adam. This that I say Mr Calvine himself does
freely acknowledge, speaking of Election and Reprobation according (C) to Gods
foreknowledge; Calv. Inst. lib. 3. c. 22. Sect. 1. Neque haec vulgo recepta
opinio solius vulgi est: habuit enim seculis omnibus magnos autores.
This commonly received opinion, says he, (of a conditional respective
decree) is not the opinion only of the common people, but has had great
authors in all ages. Reverend Beza likewise speaking of the same opinion, has
these words to the same purpose; Beza, in cap. 11. ad Romans v. 35. In quem
errorem sane turpissimum Origenes veteres plerosque tum Graecos tum Latinos
adegit.
Into which surely most foul error Origin has driven many of the Ancients
both Greek and Latin. To the same effect also Prosper, S. Augustines follower,
has a remarkable speech: Prosper, in Epist. ad Aug. prope finem. Pene omnium
parem inveniri and unam sententiam, qua propositum and praedestinationem Dei
secundum praescientiam receperunt: ut ob hoc Deus alios vasa contumeliae, alios
honoris vasa fecerit, quia finem uniuscujusque praeviderit, and sub ipso
gratiae adjutorio in qua futurus esset voluntate and action praescierit.
Almost all the Ancients, says he, did grant with one consent, that God
decreed men's ends according to his foresight of their actions, and not
otherwise. To these speeches let me add that of Remigius Archbishop of Lions,
who to Rabanus Archbishop of Mentz, objecting that S Augustine wrote a book
called Hypognosticon against Pelagius and Caelestius, wherein he denied that
Reprobates were properly Ush. hist. Got. page 107
praedestinati ad interitum, predestinate to destruction, answers, That S.
Augustine said not so: but some other man (as it is supposed) to purge the
Church of that calumny which some ill-affected ones did cast upon it, namely,
That it taught that God by his Predestination did impose upon men a necessity
of perishing, did withdraw the word PREDESTINATION from the point of
Reprobates, and gave it only to the Elect; and so gave great occasion of
further error and mistake. In this speech of his is clearly implied, that it
was (D) the constant doctrine of the Church then, that Reprobates lie under no
necessitating decree of perdition.

The truth of this charge may further appear by a few particular instances.
Minutius Felix brings in the Pagans objecting to the Christians, That they
held the events of all things to be inevitable, and did feign and frame to
themselves an unjust God, who did punish in men their unavoidable destinies,
not their ill choises. This is the objection; Min. Felix, page 23. Quicquid
agimus, ut alii fato, ita vos Deo addicitis: iniquum igitur Deum singitis, qui
sort in hominibus puniat, non voluntatem.
Whatsoever we do, as others to Fate, so ye ascribe to God: ye make therefore
to your selves an unjust God, who punishes in men their lot, not their will.
To this he answers, Idem, page 116. Illud farum est, quod de unoquoque Deus
fatus est.
Christians hold no other Fates then Gods decrees; Ibid. Qui cum universam
praescit materiam, pro meritis and qualitatibus singulorum etiam sata
determinat, and ita in nobis non genitura plectitur, sed ingenii natura punitur.
who foreknowing all men and their actions, did accordingly determine their
retributions.

S. Hierome an eager opposer of the Pelagians, in many places of his writings
says the same thing; Hieron. ad Galat. c. 1. v. 15. Ex praescientia Dei
evenit, ut quem justum futurum scit, prius diligat quam oriatur ex utero; and
quem peccatorem, oderit antequam peccet.
From the foreknowledge of God it comes to pass, that who he knows will be
righteous, him he loves before he comes out of the womb; and who he knows
will be a sinner, him he hates before he sins. In another place he speaks
to the same purpose, Ad c. 1. Malac. Dilectio and odium Dei vel ex praescientia
nascitur futurorum, vel ex operibus; alioquin novimus quod omnia Deus diligat,
nec quicquam eorum oderit quae creavit.
The love and hatred of God arises either from the foresight of future things,
or from the works; otherwise we know that God loves all things, nor does he
hate any thing that he has made. And in his book against Pelagius he says,
Lib. 3. contra Pelag.
Eligit Deus quem bonum cernit, God chooses whom he sees to be good.

The sum of all which speeches is but this, That (E) there is no decree of
damning or saving men, but what is built upon Gods Foreknowledge of the evil
and good actions of men. Fulgentius is plain for that too: Fulgent. lib. 1. ad
Monimum; Quos praescivit Deus hanc vitam in peccato terminaturos,
praedestinavit supplicio interminabili puniendos
Those whom God foresaw would die in sin, he decreed should live in endless
punishment. I may take-in S. Augustine and Prosper also, who are judged to be
the Patrones of the Absolute decree, as it is set down the Sublapsarian way:
Even they do many times let fall such speeches as cannot fairly be reconciled
with absolute Reprobation. I will only cite Prosper: (for S. Augustine
speaks in him.) He discoursing of some that fall away a sanctitate ad
immunditiem, from holiness to uncleanness, says, Prosp. ad Object. 3. Gall.
Non ex eo necessitatem pereundi habuerunt quia praedestinati non sunt; sed ideo
praedestinati non sunt, quia tales futuri ex voluntaria praevaricatione
praesciti sunt.
They that fall away from holiness to uncleanness, lie not under a necessity
of perishing because they were not predestinate; but therefore they were not
predestinate, because they were foreknown to be such by voluntary
prevarication. Not long after speaking of the same men he says, Prosp. Resp.
ad Object. 7. Quia illos ru^turos propria voluntate praescivit, ob hoc a filiis
perditionis nulla praedestinatione discrevit.
Because God foresaw they would perish by their own free will, therefore he did
not by any predestination sever them from the children of perdition. And again
in his answer to the xiith Objection he has these words, Ibid. Resp. ad
Object. 12. Vires obedientiae non ideo cuiquam subtraxit quia eum no^
praedestinavit; sed quia recessurum ab ipsa obedientia esse praevidit, ideo eum
non praedestinavit.
God has not withdrawn from any man ability to yield obedience because he has
not predestined him; but because he foresaw he would fall from obedience,
therefore he has not predestined him.

I will shut up the instances of that age with the judgment of the Council at
Arles against the Pelagians in the year CDXC, or thereabout. This Council
subscribed to the letter which was written by Faustus against Lucidus the
Predestinarian, and made the Anathemaes (F) and curses which therein he
denounces against him and such like, to be their own: Some of which were
these; Anathema illi qui dixerit illum qui periit non accepisse ut salvus esse
possit.
Cursed be the man that shall say that the man that perishes might not have
been saved* and again, Anathema illi qui dixerit quod vas contumeliae non
possit assurgere ut sit vas in honorem.
Cursed be the man that shall say that a vessel of dishonor may not rise to be
a vessel of honor.

A testimony or two* I will borrow likewise from some persons of note, and
those S. Augustines followers too, who lived about four hundred years after
S. Augustines time. Remigius the great patron of Gottschalk the zealous
preacher and publisher of Absolute reprobation in those times, in his answer to
that epistle which we suppose to be the Epistle of Rabanus, to Rabanus saying
That God did Bishop Usher, hist. Gottsc. p. 53, and 54. Sanabiles facere
nationes orbis terrarum.
make the nations of the world healthful, and that he does velle omnes homines
salvos fieri, will that all men be saved; he gives such an answer as cannot
stand with Absolute reprobation: Ex hoc omnino verum est, quia nemini Deus
imponit necessitatem pereundi, sicut nemini imponit necessitatem male agendi.
This, says he, is very true, because God lays on no man a necessity of
perishing, as he has laid on none a necessity of sinning. And a little after
he is plainer: Quos verissime praescivit impios and iniquos futuros, and in sua
impietate and iniquitate permansuros, justis and rectissimis de causis
decrevit, statuit and ^ praedestinavit perituros: sicut ipse ait, Qui
peccaverit mihi, ipsum delebo de libro meo.
Those whom God did foreknow would live and die in their wickedness, for
reasons most just he decreed should perish: as himself says, Him which sins
against me, even him will I blot out of my book.

In the Valentine Synod assembled in favor of Gottschalk we may find these
words, Can. 2. Nec ipsos malos ideo perire, quia boni esse non potuerunt, sed
quia boni esse noluerunt, suoque vitio in massa damnationis vel merito
originali vel etiam actuali permanserunt.
Therefore do the wicked perish, not because they could not, but because they
would not be good, and by their own fault original or actual also, remained
in the mass of perdition. And in the end of their third Canon they denounce
Anathema to those that hold that men are so predestined unto evil as that
they cannot be otherwise: Can. 3. Verum aliquos ad malum praedestinatos esse
Divina potestate, ut aliud esse non possint, non solum non credimus, sed etiam
si sunt qui tantum malum credere velint, cum omni detestatione, sicut
Arausicana Synodus, illis Anathema dicimus.
That any should be (says the Council) predestined to evil by the power of
God, so as he cannot be otherwise, we do not only not believe, but also if
there be any that will believe so great an evil, with all detestation we
denounce them accursed, as the Arausicane Council also did. By these
testimonies (which are but a few of many) it appears that absolute and
inevitable Reprobation found but cold enterteinment from Antiquity.

Which considering, I began to call it into question. For albeit I make not the
decisions and determinations of the Fathers or Councels the rules of my faith,
because they are but men, and therefore subject to error; yet I honor their
gray hairs, and their grave assemblies, and do vehemently mistrust those
doctrines which they never taught or approved, but misliked and condemned.

Answer.
ABsolute negative Reprobation is no novell in potestate praedestinatorum and
reprobatorum, is novell and false.

The Ancients before S. Augustine granted a Prescience in God of all the future
good and bad acts of men: but their good acts they derived from Predestination;
their bad, from their own Free Will, and not from the Reprobation. And as for
the sentence of Damnation, it lays hold upon them, non qua non-electi, sed
qua impii. In all this Augustine differs not from those Fathers that went
before him.

Possible and Impossible being taken in diverse senses afford the Remonstrants
many advantages amongst the ignorant, in their disputes against absolute
Election and Reprobation. It is therefore to be observed, that in Scriptures,
Fathers, Schoolmen, and all manner of Authors, and in the common use of all
languages, many acts or events wherein no necessity or inforcement is laid
upon men's wills, are notwithstanding said impossible to be otherwise then they
are. But for the eternal Divine decrees of Predestination and Reprobation, to
say that they are or ever were in potestate praedestinatorum aut reprobatorum,
is contrary to the very essence and formalitie of Decrees. Those things wherein
men may agere or non agere, are said to be in their own power: But
Predestination and Reprobation are immanent acts of the Divine will and
understanding, and therefore it is impossible that they should be either way in
potestate voluntatis humanae. August. De Spir. and lit. c. 31.
Hoc quisque in sua potestate habere dicitur, quod si vult facit, si non vult
non facit.

Now for the acts of believing, repenting, and atteining unto salvation, we say
not that these are simply impossible, or that the decree of God leaves a
necessity of perishing upon the non-elect. Perditio tua ex te, is as true in
their Doctrine which maintein Absolute and oppose Conditional Predestination
and Reprobation, as in the Decree of the Remonstrants.

The Remonstrants grant an eternal Prescience of many men's infidelity and
impenitencie, and thereupon an eternal immutable decree of their damnation:
and yet they hold (and that truly) that thereby no necessity of infidelity or
impenitencie, no impossibility of believing or repenting is laid upon men.
They must give us leave to say the same of Predestination, until they can
demonstrate how this does more infringe the liberty of man's will then the
other. If we respect that necessity which is called Necessitas
Infallibilitatis, Anselmus makes it alike in both: De Concord. c. 2.
Necesse est fieri quae praesciuntur and quae praedestinantur. If we call that
an impossible act or event which cannot stand in sensu composito when the
contrary is presupposed, the Divine prescience makes believing, repenting and
being saved as impossible unto Cain, Judas, or any person reprobated upon
prescience, as when they are reprobated upon Gods mere will. But the truth is,
neither the one nor the other can stand cum eventu contrario; and yet both the
one and the other do stand cum possibilitate ad eventum contrarium.

Conditional decrees of Salvation and Damnation have been published in the
Gospel, and are acknowledged by all Divines: but conditional Decrees of
eternal Predestination and Preterition are not found in Scripture, nor allowed
of by the Church of England. Every man knows where to find these conditional
decrees, If any man believe and repent, he shall be saved; If any man continue
in infidelity and impenitencie, he shall be damned: But it will be hard for
any Remonstrant to show these other, If any man believe, he shall be
predestined; If he believe not, he shall not be predestined. Faith is a
temporal effect produced in those which were elected from eternity, not a
foreseen condition drawing after it Gods eternal Election. And infidelity and
final impenitencie are faults voluntarily proceeding out of the wicked hearts
of men eternally reprobated, not preceding the eternal act of Reprobation but
the temporal act of their judicial Condemnation. As for the Fathers which
grounded Predestination upon Prescience, they understood Vide Aug. De bono
persever. c. 18.
a practical Divine prescience, not a bare speculative.

No Divine that acknowledges the Omniscience In 2. ad These. cap. 2.
Reprobi suo delicto morti devoti sunt; non pereunt nisi qui digni sunt. and
Zanchius, De Natura Dei, l. 5. p. 712.
Peccatum non est causa rejectionis, sed est causa damnationis.

For the phrase, Praedestinati ad interitum; it is manifest that Augustine and
his followers applied it unto all such as were not praedestinati ad gloriam:
though the word Electi was never used by them in that sense Vide Aug. tract.
48. in Joan. and De Civit. l. 15. c. 1. and Enchir. c. 100. and in Psalm. 13.
.

That which Augustine denied was a Predestination of reprobates unto sin: But
as for their Predestination unto the just punishment of their sins, namely
death and destruction, Augustine, Prosper Vide Prosp. ad Cap. Gall resp. 19.
and ad Object. Vincent. resp. 10, 11.
, Fulgentius Vide Fulgent. ad Mon l 1. c. 7. 14 and 18.
were never afraid to acknowledge it.

As for Hincmarus his fancy, that the book called Hypognosticon or
Hypomnesticon, was written by S. Augustine himself, and that in the sixth book
thereof he retracted what before he delivered concerning praedestinati ad
interitum, is false and frivolous, and sufficiently confuted by Remigius. Yet
we willingly grant, that in the most strict and proper sense the word
Predestination does only respect the good supernatural qualities and acts
which God works in men elected, and the supernatural blessed end whereunto
he brings them by the foresaid means. And the reason hereof is, because
Aquin. 1. q. 23. art. 1.
Destination is the direction of a thing unto such a scope as by its own
strength and nature it could never move unto. Thus the arrow is destinated unto
the mark, whereunto of it self it could never move. Now men are too ready to
move in the way of wickedness, and to carry themselves unto destruction: and
therefore as God cannot predestinate men unto sin, so he does not properly
predestinate them unto their damnation (for then he should be a working cause
thereof) but he preordinateth their just damnation as a recompense of their
sin and rebellion Vide Fulgent. ad Monim. l. 1. c. 17 Bed. l. 1. qu. art. 13.
. So that if by Predestinating ad interitum we understand the causing and
effectual working of any man's destruction, God cannot be said praedestinare ad
interitum: But if we only understand the preordaining of those to damnation
whom God foresaw deserving and working the same, we neither think nor speak
otherwise then the orthodox Fathers did.

It is still the constant Doctrine of those necessitating decree of doing well
and being saved, nor persons not-elected under a necessitating decree of doing
ill and being damned. The eternal decrees of Gods will take not away the
liberty of man's will; and therefore the Pagan objections were Paganish.

The eternal decree of saving or damning men is conjoined with an eternal
foresight of the obedience of men saved, and disobedience of men to be damned;
but with this difference: The foreseen good actions of the elect were neither
antecedent conditions moving God to elect them, nor meritorious causes of their
salvation: but the foreseen final estate of the wicked in their sins, was the
intuition of a most just and meritorious cause of their damnation. As for
Election and Preterition, all men being represented unto God electing as in the
common mass of sin and misery, there can be found no opposite qualities or
actions in men whereupon to ground the opposite decrees of Gods eternal
Election and Reprobation. And therefore we think that saying of Calvine
warrantable, Instit. l. 3. c. 22.
Deus in negotio praedestinationis non egreditur extra seipsum. To which we
add another of the same Author; Ibid. c. 23.. 3.
Si judicio mortis obnoxii sunt omnes naturali condition quos Dominus ad
mortem praedestinat, si ex corrupta massa desumti sunt omnes, non mirum si
damnationi subjaceant.

There needed no such pains in heaping up Fathers for proof of this conclusion,
That there is no decree of damning men otherwise then upon the guilt, and for
the misdeserts of their sins. Not only Fulgentius, Augustine, Prosper, but
Calvine, Beza, and others whom you make Supralapsarians, have constantly
defended this true doctrine. Calvine; Deaeter. Praed. p. 709.
Quisque sibi propria incredulitate est damnationis author. Beza; Annot. in 9.
ad Romans ver. 15.
Inepte faciunt, qui Reprobationis decretum cum Damnatione confundunt: cum
hujus causa manifesta sit, nempe peccatum; illius vero, sola Dei voluntas.
Zanchius; Lib. 5. De attrib. qu. 3. page 506.
Certum est, Deum, sicut propter peccata impios punit, sic etiam decrevisse
illos propter haec peccata punire.

This Author is doubly mistaken: First, in statu massae corruptae, but as they
are caused by that grace which was eternally prepared for them in their
Predestination, and actually bestowed upon them in their effectual Vocation,
Justification, Sanctification. This conditional Predestination upon foresight
of men's goodness or holiness, was the error which Augustine ascribes to the
Pelagians: Aug. De Praedest. Sanct. l. 1. c. 18.
Praesciebat ergo, ait Pelagianus, qui futuri essent sancti per liberae
voluntatis arbitrium, and ideo eos ante mundi constitutionem in ipsa sua
praescientia, qua tales futuros esse praescivit, elegit. But what says S.
Augustine to this point? Ibid.
Non quia futuri eramus sancti, sed ut essemus, nos elegit. Ideo quippe tales
eramus futuri, quia elegit ipse praedestinans ut tales per gratiam essemus.

Secondly, he is mistaken, in thinking those speeches of the Fathers cannot
fairly stand with absolute Non-election, Preterition or negative Reprobation,
which import a decree of positive or punitive Reprobation, that is, of
damnation, no otherwise grounded then upon preconsideration of sin. For
though God out of the corrupted mass of mankind electeth some men unto the
means and end of salvation, merely of his own gracious good pleasure in Christ,
yet he enacteth no decree of damning men for his pleasure, but for their own
sin and misdeserts. And as for negatio praedestinationis; it is not a working
cause of any man's sin or damnation, though it contein a decree of not working
their deliverie, of not working their effectual salvation. But far be it
from God that it should import a decree necessitating their perdition and
eternal destruction. As men not comprised within the decree of Predestination
commit sin willingly and greedily, so they run on to their own destruction
voluntarily, and not carried by any necessitating force flowing out of the
decree of Reprobation.

Whereas Augustine or Prosper Ad Ca^. Gall. resp. 3.
seem to fetch the cause negatae praedestinationis or negativae reprobationis
(as some call it) from the foreseen disobedience of men, their purpose is to
show, That the final continuance of any man in the state of sin, and his
final falling into the state of damnation is not caused by the negative act of
Predestination: and further, That where men are foreseen of God as ending their
lives in sin, there is a sufficient reason to infer, Ideo non fuerunt ex
praedestinatis, or, Ideo Deus eos non praedestinavit. But that this foresight
of their personal sins was the cause of the Divine decree of their
Non-election whereby they stand distinguished from the elect, was no part of
the Fathers meaning. So that the eternal prevision of some men's perseverance
in faith and godliness, and of other men's perseverance in infidelity and
ungodliness, was not the ground, cause or reason of the opposite decrees of
Election and Preterition; but a proof that there are such distinct or different
decrees concerning men.

Last of all, this foresight of God concerning men left to the deficiency of
their own wicked wills, and through infidelity and impiety procuring their own
destruction, is not alleged as a cause why this man rather then another was
not predestined, but as a certain note and an infallible consequent of men
not predestined; causa probationis, non rei ipsius.

Those curses may be most just, granting peremtorium decretum puniendi, never
proceeds ex solo Dei beneplacito: though we hold therewithal, that negative
Reprobation, which is absolutum decretum non praedestinandi, depends only
upon Gods free pleasure. For it is no error to say, that non-election or
negative Reprobation may stand together with a possibility of avoiding sin
and damnation. The non-elect angels had this possibility; all mankind generally
in Adam had this possibility: and yet every singular person was not
predestined. And if God were so pleased to give as sufficient grace to every
particular man in the world as he gave to Adam in his creation, yet the
opposite decrees of Election and Preterition or negative Reprobation may stand
firm and good. The reason is evident: Because Predestination is not a bare
ordination of men unto eternal life by sufficient means, which make the event
only possible; but a merciful providence in ordering such means for the elect
as make the event infallible and infrustrable. On the other side, Preterition
or negative Reprobation is not a decree necessarily excluding persons not-elect
from all possible means of salvation; but a decree permitting such out of the
freedom of their own wills to neglect and abuse such means of their salvation:
which abuse foreseen of God, is unto him a just cause of their damnation.

As for vessels of Honor and Dishonor; we grant, that not only men may but
do continually from vessels of Dishonor rise to be vessels of Honor. For when
any man whatsoever, who has lived in infidelity and uncleanness of life,
believes, repents, and leads a holy life, then a vessel of Dishonor
becomes a vessel of Honor. But if by vessels of Honor you understand the
Elect, and by vessels of Dishonor the Non-elect; and conceive such a change,
that men not-elected may by acts of their own make themselves elected; this is
a fancy contrary to truth, and rejected of all orthodox and judicious Divines:
who consent, Nec praedestinationem esse in potestate praedestinati sed
praedestinantis, nec reprobationem in potestate reprobati sed reprobantis. For
we understand the Divine Reprobation, where there is not a Predestination unto
effectual and infallible means of eternal life. Now who can say, that it is
in the power of man's will either to procure or hinder such a decree?

All the testimonies of the ancient Fathers here cited, do not prove the
eternal decrees of Election and Non-election to be conditional, or to depend
upon the contrary foreseen actions of men's will; But they prove two other
things, which we willingly grant: 1. That these decrees necessitate no man's
will unto good actions, much less unto wicked. 2. That wicked men are not
therefore damned because they were not predestined, but because they lived
and died obstinate in sin.

As for the possibility which men non-elected have, either to believe or to
eschew this or that sin, and so to escape condemnation. The Fathers, when
they consider that the wills of men not-elected do commit all their evil acts
freely, usually say, that they had a power to have done the contrary: But when
they consider the infallible certainty of their impiety and infidelity, then
many times they pronounce it a thing impossible that they should unfeignedly
repent, perseverantly believe, and finally attein salvation: Of which manner of
phrase of speech we have frequent examples in Scripture, Fathers, Schoolmen,
and all kind of Authors.

He that embraces the opinion of the orthodox Fathers, cannot hold
Predestination to be grounded upon the prevision of perseverant faith, since
they confess Perseverance to be an effect of Election; nor the decree of
negative Reprobation to be grounded upon foresight of infidelity, since
Infidelity is a consequent thereof.

Treatise.
2. Reason UNVVILlingnesse to be tried.
II. Its Unvvillingnesse to abide the trial. I find that the authors and
abettours of it have been very backwards to bring it to the standart; not only
when they have been called upon by their adversaries to have it weighed, but
also when they have been entreated thereto by their chief Magistrates, who
might have compelled them: A shrevvd argument (me thinks) that it is too light.

In the disputation at Mompelgart, Anno 1586. held between Beza and Jacobus
Andreae, with some seconds on both sides, Beza and his company having disputed
with the Lutheranes about the Person of Christ and the Lords Supper, when
they came to this point, did decline the sifting of it, and gave this reason
among others, That it could not then be publicly disputed of Beza in Coll.
Mompelg. p. 373. Sine grayi eorum offendiculo qui tanti mysterii capaces non
sunt.
without the great scandal and hurt of the ignorant, and unacquainted with
these high mysteries. Brand. Coll. Hag. page 57.
The Contra-remonstrants also in their Conference with the opposite parties at
the Hague, in the year 1611, could not be drawn to dispute with them about
this point, but delivered a petition to the States of Holland and
West-Friezland that they might not be urged to it, resolving rather to break
off the conference then to meddle with it. In the Synod likewise at Dort, in
the years 1618 and 1619, the Remonstrants were warned by the President of
the Synod Acta Syn. part. 1. page 133. Ut de Electione potius quam de odiosa
Reprobationis materia agerent.
That they should rather dispute of the point of Election then the odious point
of Reprobation.

Can this Doctrine be a truth, and yet blush at the light, which makes all
things manifest? especially considering these things: 1. That Reprobation is a
principal head of Divinity, by the well or ill stating and ordering of which
the glory of God and the good of Religion is much promoted or hindered. 2. That
there is such a necessary connection betvveen the points of Election and
Reprobation (both being parts of Predestination) that the one cannot well be
handled without the other. 3. That the Doctrine of Reprobation was the chief
cause of all the uprores in the Church at that time. 4. That it was accused
with open mouth and challenged of falsehood, and therefore bound in justice to
purge it self of the crimination. 5. That the Remonstrants did not at that time
desire that it should be talked of among the common people, who might have
stumbled at it, but disputed of among the judicious and learned, who (as the
threshing oxen which were to beat the corn out of the husk) are to bolt out
those truths which are couched a^^ hidden in the letter of the Scriptures.

That the Doctrine which is loath to abide the trial even of learned men,
carries with it a shrevvd suspicion of falsehood, the heathen Orator shall
witness for me: who to Epicurus, saying that he would not publish his
opinion to the simple people, who might happily take offense at it, answers
thus; Cicero, de fin. bon. and mal. l. 2. page 115. Aut tu eadem ista dic in
judicio; ant si coronam times, dic in senatu, Nunquam facies. Cur nisi quod
turpis est oration?
Declare thine opinion in the place of judgment; or if thou art afraid of the
assembly there, declare it in the Senate House, among those grave and judicious
persons. Thou will never do it: and why, but because it is a foul and dishonest
opinion?

This striving to lie close is (peradventure) no infallible argument of a bad
cause, yet it is a very probable one. For true religion (as Vives says) is not
a thing guild^d over, but gold it self: The more that is scraped and
discovered, the brighter and goodlier it is; and so is the truth. Vives, De
ver. fidei, l. 1. p. 16. Puriorem ac nitidiorem illam reddit belium, quam pa^
adversus gentes.
Disputations illustrate and set forth true opinions more then silence can. Let
us not fear therefore (says he) lest our Faith when it is laid open, appear
filthy to the eyes of the beholders. Metuant hoc aliae religiones falsae and
umbratiles
Let false and superficial religions, in which there is no soundness, be
afraid of this. The Jew is loath to reason with the Christian touching his
Law, and the Turk is forbidden to dispute of his Alcoran, because their
Religions are brittle, like gl^sse broken with the least touch: But the
Christian, Vives, l. 4. page 429. Qui veritate sua sidit, nihil reformidat
examen ingenii, imo advocat and quantum potest exacuit.
who is confident of the goodness of his Faith, fears no examination, but
rather as much as may be, soliciteth and provokes his adversary to the combat.
Truth, whether it be in men or doctrines, is best when it is uncovered: it
coveteth no corners, though Error do; but it is vvilling to abide the trial.
Psalm. 139.23, 24.
Search me, O Lord, and know my heart; try me, and know my thoughts, and see if
there be any way of wickedness in me, says the Prophet David, knovving his
heart to be without guile. And our Savior tells us, John 3.20, 21.
That every one that does evil, hates the light, and comes not to it, lest
his deeds should be reproved: but he that does truth, comes to the light,
that his deeds might be made manifest that they are wrought in God. As St Paul
says of an heretic, Tit. 3.11.
He is (...), self-condemned; so we may say of heresy and untruth, It
condemns it self, and by nothing more then by refusing the touchstone. He is
to be thought an empty scholar, who is loath to be apposed; and his gold to be
light and counterfeit, who will not have it touched and weighed; and those
opinions to be but errors, which would so willingly walk in a mist and
dvvell in silence, when it concerns the peace of the Church so much to have
them examined.

Answer.
IF Unwillingness to abide the trial be an argument of a bad cause, never men
showed themselves more unwilling to abide the trial of their doctrine in this
controversy of Predestination and Reprobation then the Remonstrants. At the
Synod of Dort, it being ordered by all the power Civil and Ecclesiastical
which was in the Commonwealth or Church, that the Remonstrants cited should
lay down their opinion concerning Predestination and Reprobation, together with
their reasons, and so expect the answer of the Synod; they first, contrary to
all reason and to the duty which they ought to their chief magistrates, would
begin at the point of Reprobation, or do nothing at all. And as if this had not
sufficiently expressed their perverseness, they refused to set down their own
tenants, and to confirm them; and would needs make themselves opponents, and
put the Synod to answer such objections or cavills as for the most part were
scraped together out of the writings of men either dead long since, or not
there to answer for themselves: with whom the Synod had no reason then to
meddle.

It was intended and yielded unto them, that the point of Reprobation should
also be treated upon in due place and time. That which was denied them, was
their preposterous demand of setting Reprobation before Election; whereas
Reprobation, being the negative act of Election, cannot be well stated, ordered
or understood, if men will needs begin at the wrong end.

It is true that the doctrine of Reprobation was the chief cause of uprores on
the Remonstrant party: But the doctrine of Conditional Predestination, whereby
they endeavored to set the rotten Dagon of man's Free Will before and above the
Ark of Gods special predestinating Grace, was it which chiefly offended both
the orthodox ministers and people in the Belgic Churches. And if any were ever
bound in justice and duty to purge themselves from crimination, it lay then
upon the Remonstrants, who were cited unto the Synod by public Authority, so
to do; and not upon the Synod, to submit themselves unto the wilfulness of
those who appeared there as delinquents. If here in our Church of England the
Non-conformitants summoned to lay down their own opinions concerning their
Presbyteriall Parity together with their proofs and arguments, should refuse to
do it, and stiffly stand upon it that they will first oppose the Episcopal
authority, which has given all the offense, and hear what the Bishops can say
for themselves, it would be deemed an insolent part, and not so long tolerated
as it was by the Synod of Dort. And yet this was just the case and behavior of
the Remonstrants: which this Author does not only endeavor to justify, but
to cast an aspersion upon the Synod for not obeying those who in such a case
owed obedience unto them.

And yet that it may further appear how fearful the Remonstrants were of
clearly and plainly opening their own tenants at that time; When by reason of
their obstinacy the Synod was resolved to dismiss them, and yet desired
withal to know their doctrine concerning the controversed articles, it was
asked of them severally, whether they now acknowledged for their doctrine that
which formerly they had set down in Collatione Hagiensi, and since published in
print unto the world; not one of the fourteen could be drawn to say in plain
and express terms, that he either held that doctrine for true, or that he held
it not. If Unwillingnesse therefore to come to open trial be a sign of false
doctrine, you had small reason to become a Remonstrant.

The question was not, Whether the controversy of Reprobation were to be
treated upon or no, but, Whether the Remonstrants were to prescribe the Synod
their order and proceeding, or the Synod them. And then the Remonstrants
devised another shift to put off the declaring and opening their own doctrine;
and that was, That unless they might be promised beforehand a liberty Act.
Syn. Dordrecht. Sess. 42.
eo modo causam suam proponendi, explicandi and defendendi, prout ipsi
necessarium judicarent, they refused any farther to proceed in laying down
their opinions. If the Synod had been so foolish as to make the Remonstrants
the moderatours, in all likelihood they had sat there till this day, perchance
to their lives end, and yet never have brought one controversy to an end.

If this Author had been truly informed how the Remonstrants carried
themselves in suppressing their own opinions, and only aiming at the
exagitating of other men's, he would have forborne his excursion into this common
place. But it should seem he was more willing to believe what he desired should
be true, then to enquire what indeed was true.

If Striving to lie close be a probable argument of a bad cause, those who are
afraid to deal with the more lightsome part of this controversy, which
concerns Election and Predestination, and thrust themselves, without
borrowing any light from this, into the other (which taken by it self is much
more dark and obscure,) are the men who strive to wrap themselves and others in
an obscure and dark cloud. Our Church of England was more willing and desirous
to set down expressly the doctrine of absolute Predestination, I mean of
Predestination causing faith and perseverance, then it was of absolute negative
Reprobation, I mean of such Reprobation as implies in God a will of permitting
some men's final impiety and impenitencie, and of justly ordaining them unto
punishment for the same: And yet the latter does plainly follow upon the truth
of the former. It was wisdom, and not Jewish or Turkish fear, which made our
Church so clear in the Article for absolute Predestination, and yet so reserved
in the other; easily perceiving that Predestination of some men cannot be
affirmed, but Non-predestination or Preterition or negative Reprobation (call
it as you please) of some others must needs therewith be understood.

Though Truth be best uncovered, yet all truths are not of the same nature, nor
alike profitable to be debated upon: Yet for the truth of absolute Reprobation,
so far forth as it is connexed and conjoined with absolute Predestination;
when the main intent of the Remonstrants is by opposing of the former to
overthrow the latter, it imports those who have subscribed to the xviith
Article not to suffer it to be obliquely undermined.

Treatise.
3. Reason INFAMY.
III. The (A) Infamy of it. It is an opinion (especially as it is defended the
upper way) odious to the Papists, opening their foul mouths against our Church
and Religion; abhorred (maintained either way) by all the Lutheranes, who for
this very Tenet call us damned Calvinists, think us unworthy to be above
ground, and in their vvritings protest that they will rather unite themselves
to the Papists then to us: And it is also distasteful to all the Greek
Churches, which are very many. Molin in his Anatomy, speaking of the
Supralapsarian Doctrine, says, Molin. Anat. Arm. c. 12. de Praedest.
If it should be so that God has reprobated men without the consideration of
sin, or has ordained them to sin, yet it is the part of a wise man to
conceal these things, or not to know them, rather then to utter them; Quia
enunciata injiciunt scrupulos, and ansam praebent adversariis infamandi veram
religionem. Sir Edwine Sandys, page 172.
Because when they are taught and defended they fill men's heads with scruples,
and give occasion to the adversaries of defaming the true religion. The same
may as truly be said of the Sublapsarian way: For (as I have said) they are in
substance all one. And Sr. Edwine Sandys is of the same mind too: For in his
most excellent Book called A Survey of the state of religion in the Western
parts of the world, speaking of the deadly division betvveen the Lutheranes and
Calvinists in Germany, he has these words, That though the Palsgrave and
Landtgrave have with great judgment and wisdom, to asslake those flames,
imposed silence in that part to the Ministers of their party, hoping the
charity and discretion of the other party would have done the like; yet it
falls out otherwise: For both the Lutherane preachers rail as bitterly
against them in their pulpits as ever, and their Princes and people have them
in as great detestation, not forbearing to profess openly, that they will
return to the Papacy rather then ever admit that Sacramentary and (B)
Predestinary pestilence. For these two points are the ground of the quarrel,
and the latter more scandalous at this day then the former. And in the same
book, page 194. and 198. speaking of men whom he commends for singular
learning and piety (whose judgment he so sets down as that he declares it
to be his own) he says, that they think it were no blemish for the (C)
Reformed Doctors to revise their doctrines, and to rebate the rigor of
certain speculative opinions (for so he is pleased to call them) especially
touching the eternal decrees of God: wherein some of their chief authors have
run into such an extreme to all Romish doctrine, as to have exceedingly
scandalized all other Churches withal, yea and many of their own to rest very
ill satisfied.

At the closing up of the Conference at Mompelgart, Coll. Momp. p. 566, 567.
Osiand. Hist. Eccles. p. 1040. Cent. 16.
when Frederick Earl of Wortenberg exhorted his Divines to acknovvledge Beza
and his company for brethren, and to declare it by giving them their hand, they
utterly refused, saying they would pray to God to open their eyes, and would
do them any office of humanity and charity, but they would not give them the
right hand of brotherhood, because they were proved to be guilty errorum
teterrimorum, of most pestilent errors, among which this they reckoned for one.

Hemingius left his own side, and joined with us in the point of the
Sacrament: but he would come no nearer, mainteining alvvayes a distance in
this.

And as for the Grecians, we learn also by Sir Edwine Sandys his Relation, Page
237.
that they do mightily dissent from that doctrine touching the eternal
counsels of God which Calvine (as some conceive) first (D) fully revealed or
rather introduced into the Christian world, and since some of his friends and
followers have seconded, as thinking it very injurious to the goodness of God,
and directly and immediately opposite to his very nature. In regard of which
one of their Bishops has written a book against it, which has been sent to
Geneva, and there received.

It is a morsel which the greatest part of Christian Churches cannot
swallovv: and therefore (I think) it should not very easily without suspicion
down with us.

And to say one thing more; Besides this infamy of it among Christians, it is
very probable, that among the too many scandals given to the Jews by
Christians, among whom they dwell, this doctrine is not one of the least rubs
in the way of their conversion. Page 223, 224.
For they think it a (E) bad opinion (says the same judicious and learned
Gentleman) which some of great name have seemed to hold, That God in his
everlasting and absolute pleasure should affect the extreme misery of any of
his creatures for the showing of his justice and severity in tormenting them,
or that the calamity, castingaway and damnation of some should absolutely and
necessarily redound more to his glory then the felicity of them all;
considering that his nature is mere goodness and happiness, and has no
affinity with rigor or misery. This is my third reason.

Answer.
infamy upon the opinion of the Supralapsarians; if that which he calls the
Supralapsarians upper way be only that way which conceives the decrees of
Predestination and Preterition in order of prioritie antecedent to the
Permission of sin, and therefore much more to the Prevision, it is so far
from being odious to the Romanists as that it is an opinion commonly received
amongst them, as before has been showed. But if he bring this under the name
of the Supralapsarian Doctrine, That any men are ordained unto damnation
without all consideration of sin, this is a calumny of their Adversaries,
not an infamy sticking to the opinion it self. And indeed it is impossible,
that God, who by his infinite knowledge sees not one thing after another as
we, but all things together by one infinite and eternal act, should
predestinate or reprobate without prevision or consideration of sin. That
only which is maintained by the judicious in the upper way, is this, That
original sin though eternally foreseen by God, yet neither was nor could be
the cause why Peter was predestined, and Judas not; seeing it was foreseen in
both alike, and made them both ex aequo reprobabiles: Which shows that it was
Gods free pleasure to make a difference by Election and Not-election, where
there was no foreseen difference in regard of original corruption.

So likewise for actual sins, as Infidelity, Impenitencie, and the like,
and for all good acts, as Repenting, Believing, Persevering; no man can truly
say, that God electeth some men and passeth-by others without the eternal
cognition or consideration of these future actions. This were either to make
God ignorant, or discursive, considering first one thing, then another, as we
our selves do.

But the consideration of good or bad actions which is denied in the point of
Election and Non-election, is such a consideration as procures and draws
after it the distinct opposite decrees of Election or negative Reprobation.

As for the introduction of some men into the kingdom of heaven, and the
abjection of others into the torments of hell; it is willingly granted, that
the holy and good acts of the one are foreappointed and foreseen as the way and
means whereby God will bring them thither; and the voluntary wicked actions of
the other, as the means whereby, and the misdeserts for which they are brought
into hell, and there justly tormented.

As for the Lutheranes, that bring-in a conditionate Predestination; No man can
look into Luthers works, but must needs see they have forsaken their own
Master: and therefore they are less to be regarded when they rail upon the
Calvinists.

For the Greek Churches; If they tread in the steps of the learned and ancient
Greek Fathers, they may found Predestination upon Prescience, but not upon the
Pelagian or Arminian Prescience, which they make merely intuitive, and caused
by the object foreseen; but by a Prescience practical or factive of that good
which it foreseeth in the Elected, and permissive of those voluntary evil
actions which are foreseen in the Non-elected, and also preparative of their
just punishment.

The Sublapsarian way of considering this high mystery of Predestination and
negative Reprobation, is the way which the Church of England takes, as the
more easy for our understanding. And it so walks in this way, that it makes
Predestination an absolute decree of giving grace and glory unto the
predestinate, and not a conditionate decree foreseeing their gracious actions,
and thereupon predestinating them: And by this it silently teaches us what to
think of negative Reprobation, which cannot be severed from Election.

If you embrace the late Lutheranes opinion, and bring within the compass of
Predestinary pestilence the doctrine of Predestination which they disallow, you
manifestly brand the Church of England with this note of infamy, and might as
well charge us with the Sacramentary pestilence for denying their feigned
Consubstantiation and Orall manducation of the flesh of Christ, as with the
Predestinary pestilence for denying their Conditional Predestination upon
foresight of men's belief in Christ. The Lutheranes make Predestination or
Election nothing else but a revealed decree of bestowing eternal life upon
those which shall perseverantly believe in Christ; and consequently they make
Reprobation nothing else but the revealed will of God to condemn all those who
shall continue in their infidelity and obstinacy. Our Church acknowledges the
truth of such decrees; but it places not Election or Reprobation in such
general conditionate decrees. The decree of Election or Predestination is by
us conceived Vide Penott. page 398.
an act of Gods absolute will by effectual grace mercifully ordaining certain
persons unto the infallible atteinment of glory. In this decree, Faith,
Perseverance, and all saving graces are not in order of nature the foreseen
conditions but the afterseen effects of Predestination.

So likewise our Church conceives Reprobation to be Vide Penott. page 393.
negativus actus praedestinationis, a free act of the Divine will denying the
special benefit or favor of Predestination (which is the preparation of
grace, infallibly bringing men unto glory) to some certain persons. As for
positive Reprobation (which is eternal damnation) this our Church foundeth
upon the guilt and demerit of man's sin. We say therefore with a learned
writer of the Romish Church (to whom you think this opinion to be so odious)
Ruiz. De Praedost. and Repr. disp. 2.. 2. page 19.
Omnibus hominibus consideratis sub esse possibili prius ratione quam
praedestinarentur aut reprobarentur, nulla fuit ratio discriminis quae potuerit
Divinam voluntatem inclinare ut praedestinationem Judae negaret potius quam
Paulo. And again, Ibid. page 22.
Nulla scientia visionis ultimo formaliterque constituit reprobationem, sed
potius totam reprobationem supponit ex part objecti. So that all they, whether
Lutheranes or Remonstrants, who make Predestination nothing but the will of God
to save believers, and Reprobation or Preterition nothing else but the will of
God to damn unbelievers, retein for fashions sake the old words, but obtrude a
new notion of those words upon the Christian Church.

In vain therefore it is to dispute with those about Election and Preterition
who reject all the definitions or descriptions given by ancient Divines, and
bring new ones of their own coining.

If in explicating the decree of Predestination Ita fugias ne praeter casam.

That which exasperateth the Lutheranes against Calvines doctrine, was their
own collection, That it made God the author of sin, and a damner of men to
hell torments only for his mere pleasure, which opinions are justly to be
detested: But Calvine both by his own writings, and by diverse learned writers
Vide Crakanthorp. Defense Angl. c. 35. and Bishop of Ely his Defense of the
orthodox faith, p. 228.
of our Church has been sufficiently cleared from these false and malicious
calumniations.

Jacobus Andreae is no competent judge over Beza his antagonist: and if he
were, yet we deny, that the rejecting of conditionate Predestination is to be
reckoned amongst his errors.

Vide Carthusianum, in 1. Sent. disp. 41. p. 549. and Valentianum, tom. 1 disp.
1. qu. 23. De reprob. punct. 3. ubi agnoscit multos scholasticos idem sentire
cum Calvino. V^de Suarez. Opusc. l. 2. page 174, etc. Ex nostris, Paul. Fer.
Schol. orth. c. 28. and Fr. White, Defense of the Orthodox way, p. 231.
the fancy of conditional Predestination and Reprobation is commonly
rejected. Any man who understands that God out of his own free will and
special mercy has elected some unto the infallible means and blessed end of
eternal life, may as easily conceive that out of his own free will he has
denied the said special mercy unto some others, and so permitted them to fail
in the atteinment of eternal life: For if that Penott. p. 393.
be true (which all orthodox Divines are agreed upon) that both the material
and formal number of men elected, or (as other term it) the numerus numerans
and numerus numeratus, is eternally designed according to Gods own good
pleasure, it must needs be acknowledged, that in eodem signo rationis there is
a number also of men not elected, who are left out in this gracious
designation. Suarez gives a satisfactory reason why there can be no cruelty
or injustice in this negative Reprobation, Opusc. l. 2. page 175.
Quia haec non-electio non est poena, sed est solum quaedam negatio gratuiti
beneficii quod Deus ut supremus Dominus negare potest.

This may well be esteemed a bad opinion: non-praedestinatio, non-electio, or
negativa reprobatio imports no such thing; as is evident in angelis
non-electis.

It is one thing to affect the extreme misery of his Creature for the end of
showing his justice in tormenting it; another, for God to Pen. page 398.
suffer some of his Creatures through their own default to fall into extreme
misery, to resolve not to free them, and to decree their just punishment. And
if any one will go about to bind God to prepare effectual grace for all men we
answer, It is lawful for God to do as he lists with his own. And it is
usual with God to dispense as well supernatural as natural benefits according
to his own absolute will and free pleasure. If God should necessitate any man's
final impenitency, that so he might afterward cast him into hell, this were
to affect his misery: but the sin and obstinacy in sin of all the damned,
was their own and voluntary, not of Gods causing, much less necessitating.

God is not to learn of us what makes most for his own glory. He could have
upheld the Angels which made a voluntary apostasy from him; he could have
upheld our first Parents; he could by his special and effectual grace have
brought every particular man in the world unto salvation: and all this he could
undoubtedly have done without prejudice to the Creatures freewill: But since we
know and see he has done otherwise, we must confess that this order of Divine
Providence, whereby he has decreed to guide and bring some infallibly unto
eternal happiness, and whereby he has decreed to permit some infallibly to
fall into eternal misery, does make most for his glory.

Treatise.
4. Reason AFFINITY to Fate
IV. The fourth, its Affinity with the old exploded errors of the Stoics and
Manichees.

The opinion (A) of the Stoics was, That all actions and events were
unavoydable, determined either by the revolutions of the heavens, and the
qualities of such stars as reigned at men's births, or by the concatenation of
natural things and the disposition of the first matter, all things being so
put together from eternity that one thing must needs follovv another as it
does; and the prima materia being so disposed, that things cannot successively
come to pass otherwise then they do, but must of necessity be as they are,
even invito Deo, though God would have some things to be otherwise then they
are.

The Manichees held, That all men's actions, good or evil, were determined too;
good actions by a good God, who was the author of all good things that were
created, and of all good actions that came to pass in the world; evil actions
by an evil God, who was the primum principium mali, the prime author of all
evil things or actions that were extant in the world.

The mainteiners of the absolute decree do say one of these two things,
either, That all actions, natural and moral, good and evil, and all events
likewise, are absolutely necessary; so the Supralapsarians: or, That all men's
ends (at least) are unalterable and indeterminable by the power of their
wills; so the Sublapsarians: And this is upon the matter all one with the
former. For first, (B) in vain is our freedom in the actions and means, if the
end at which they drive be pitched and determined; since all actions are for
the ends sake, that it might be obtained by them, which without them could
not. And secondly, the determination of the end does necessarily involve the
means that precede that end; as if a man be fore-determined to damnation, he
must unavoydably sin, else he could not be damned.

Now in these three opinions we may note two things.

1. The Substance and formalitie of them, which is an unavoidablenesse of men's
actions and ends whatsoever they be. In this all of them agree, all holding
that in all things, at least in all men's ends, undeclinable Fates and
insuperable Necessity do domineere. And therefore (C) Melanchthon does not
stick sundry times in his Common places to call this Absolute decree fatum
Stoicum and tabulas Parcarum, Stoicall fate and the Destinies tables. He also
charge the Church of Geneva (the great Patron of it) with a labor to
bring-in the Stoics error, as we may see in a certain Epistle of Melanchthons
to Peucer, where he has these words; Melanch. in Epist. ad Peucer. Scribit ad
me Laelius, de Stoico fato usque adeo litem Genevae moveri, ut quidam in
carcerem conjectus si^ propterea quod a Zenone differret. O misera temporal
Doctrina salutis peregrinis quibusdam dubitationibus obscuratur.
Lelius writes unto me, that in Geneva there is such strife about the Stoics
Fate, that one was cast into prison because he dissented from Zeno. O miserable
times! etc. And by the testimony of Beza too, who speaking of Melanchthon
says; Beza in vita Calvini; Philippus de his rebus ita scribere coeperat, ut
Genevenses quasi Stoicum fatum invehentes notare quibusdam videatur.
Philip has so written of these things, as if he meant to tax the
Geneva-Divines for bringers-in of Destiny.

2. We may note the Circumstance or the grounds of their opinions. The Stoics
(D) derive this necessity from the stars or the first matter; the Manichees
from two prima principia, aeterna and coaeterna, first principles of all things
eternal and coeternall; these last, from the peremptory decree of almighty
God. So that they differ in their grounds indeed: but in this difference the
Stoics and the Manichees in some respects have the better. For it is better to
derive this necessity of evil actions and unhappy events from an evil God or
the course of nature, then from the decree of that God who is infinitely good.
The substance of their opinions is all one: the ground wherein they differ is
but accidental to the error.

Which being so, for this very reason alone may this doctrine of Absolute
Reprobation be suspected: because those dreams of the Stoics were exploded by
the best Philosophers of all sorts; and this of the Manichees was generally
cryed-down by the Fathers, not only as foolish, but impious and unworthy of
enterteinment in a Christian heart or christian Commonwealth, not so much for
any thing circumstantiall in it, as for the substance of the error, because it
made all things and events to be necessary, and so plucked up the roots of
virtue, planted vice, and left no place for just rewards or punishments.

These are my reasons of the first sort.

Answer.
opinion of the Stoics. For though they held a necessary concatenation of
causes overruling all external events, yet they were of a near kind to the
Pelagians, and thought man's will such an absolute Commandresse, that for his
goodness, virtues and happiness a man need be beholding only to himself.
Vide August. de Civ. lib. 5. cap. 10. and Plat. 10. de Republ. page 617. and
Senec. Epist. 31.41.93. The Remonstrants in a manner acknowledge this mistake,
Exam. Censurae, page 79. The mainteiners of the Absolute decree hold that
nothing is acted in this world good or bad, without an eternal determination
or decree of Gods will for the being of such a particular act: But they detest
the Manichees; and make this difference betwixt good actions and bad, That good
and holy actions have God not only a determining cause for their event, but an
effectual working cause in their production; bad actions have God the
determining cause of their event, but the permissive cause only of their
malice Vide Fr. White, Desense, p. 224, etc.
.

The mainteiners of the Absolute decree, whether Supralapsarians or
Sublapsarians, hold no more necessitation to lie upon men's actions, ends, or
upon any events depending upon man's free will, then the mainteiners of the
Conditional decree of Election and negative Reprobation. Both hold the
actions, events and ends of all things whether predestined or foreseen to
imply Vide Aquin. contra Gent. 1.67.
necessitatem infallibilitatis aut consequentis: Neither hold that they imply
necessitatem coactionis aut consequentiae. For example; To reason thus, God
has eternally foreseen Judas his impenitencie, and thereupon decreed him unto
eternal damnation; therefore Judas shall infallibly and unalterably continue
impenitent, and at length be damned, is a true inference, But this, God has
eternally foreseen Judas, etc. therefore Judas shall by coaction or compulsion
of his will be made unalterably impenitent, and so be damned, is a false
conclusion. In like manner to reason thus, God in his absolute decree of
Reprobation or Non-election has determined not to give Judas the special
grace of repentance and perseverance, not to bestow upon him the benefit of
eternal life; therefore Judas infallibly and unalterably will continue
impenitent, obstinate, and will draw upon himself eternal death and damnation,
is a good inference: But this, God in his absolute decree, etc. therefore Judas
is compelled to be impenitent and obstinate and finally damned, is not only a
weak and false but a wicked inference. For as the infallible prevision of God
sees from all eternity the actions of men and their ends, and yet this makes
not the modus agendi to be necessary or compulsory, but makes the agent most
free, as if he had never foreseen it: so the absolute decree of God to work
repentance, faith and perseverance in Peter, and so to bring him infallibly to
eternal life, makes not the actions of believing, repenting, persevering
necessary or compulsory, but makes the agent most free in performing these
actions; because it gives him that Spirit of which the Apostle says, Vbi
Spiritus, ibi libertas. And for the contrary absolute decree of Not-giving
faith, final perseverance and eternal life unto the Non-elect, it denies
them that grace which would effectually and infallibly make them produce good
actions; but it depriveth them not of their own natural freedom and liberty,
neither does it compel or constrain or necessitate them unto their bad
actions. Aquin. Quaest. de vol. Dei, art. 5.
Divina voluntas non imponit necessitatem rebus volitis, quia ex voluntate ejus
sequitur aliquid eo modo quo voluntas disponit, non eo modo quo voluntas habet
esse. And, Ibid.
Divina voluntas in contingentibus non tollit potentiam ad oppositum
voluntatis, sed actum. S. Augustine shows us the reason of this: De Civit.
7.30.
Deus ita ordinat omnia, ut ipsa proprios motus exercere sinat. From hence it
appears how weak their judgment is who think Gods absolute decrees must
needs absolutely destroy the freedom of men's wills; or, that where God is
absolutely determined to permit any men to fail in the atteining of the blessed
end of eternal life, there he must needs be the author of the sins whereby
they incur eternal death.

In good actions the freedom of men vain, though the end be determined;
because God has together with the end determined that by their free actions
they shall attein unto it. In bad and wicked actions of the reprobate their
freedom of will is not vain; because thereby their consciences are convicted
of their guiltiness and misdeserts, and Gods justice is cleared in their
damnation. Neither is there any indeclinable or insuperable necessity
domineering over free will, more then in the opinion of the Remonstrants.

Melanchthon took offense at the manner of delivering the doctrine of
Predestination and Reprobation which some insisted upon, but for the substance
of doctrine he acknowledges his agreement with Calvine. That men must come to
knowledge of their Election from their faith and holy life, was Melanchthons
opinion: but, That their foreseen faith and holiness was the cause or
condition or motive upon which God founded his decree of Election, was far
from his mind Vide Melanch. Enarr. in epist. ad Rem. p. 23, 24. and Calvin.
Epist. p. 384.
.

Stoics, it was before showed that they were the Patrones of free will, and of
virtue and happiness growing out of man's free will, as it is to be seen in
Tullie's Stoicall Paradoxes.

For the Manichees, who derived evil from an evil God; they were in a foul
error: But those who derive the evil actions of men from their own free will
as the proper efficient cause, and the exsisting or coming of such actions in
eventum a decreto Dei permittente and ordinante, are in no error at all See
Defense of the way, p. 228, 229.
. But if any shall go about to set man's will at liberty, and to tie up short
the decreeing and determining will of God, as if this had not the determining
stroke amongst all possible evil actions or events, which shall infallibly be,
and which shall infallibly not be, he may avoid the suspicion of Stoicisme or
Manicheisme, but he will hardly avoid the suspicion of Atheism. For the
greater number of men's actions being wicked and evil, if these come into act
without Gods determinate counsel and decree, humane affairs are more overruled
by man's will then by Gods.

The Stoics maintained free will and free power in man to make himself
virtuous and happy: From whence those Axioms of theirs, Cic. Parad. 2, and 5.
Seipsa contentam esse virtutem ad beat vivendum; (...), and the like: And
that of Seneca, Epist. 31. and 41.
Beatae vitae causa and firmamentum est sibi fidere. Turpe est Deos fatigare:
Quid votis opus est? fac te felicem. Epist. 77.
Bonam mentem stultum est optare, cum possis a te impetrare. Ratio recta and
consummata felicitatem hominis implevit. Whether the substance of these
opinions belong to the Remonstrants or to their opposites, let any man judge.

As for the Manichees, concerning a good God and an evil God, no man more cried
it down then S. Augustine, no man more strongly confuted it; and yet the
Remonstrants cannot deny but he held absolute Predestination and absolute
negative Reprobation, and always opposed that Election and Non-election which
the Semipelagians fetched from foreseen merits and demerits, or (as the
Remonstrants change the words but not the substance of the opinion) from the
foreseen good and evil actions of men. As therefore we grant it a foolish and
impious opinion, to father evil actions and unhappie events upon an evil God;
so we avouch it a more foolish and impious opinion, to hold that absolute
Predestination and Reprobation do either necessitate the wills of the elect
unto their good actions, or the wills of the non-elect unto their wicked
actions. Aquinas gives this reason of both; In disp. de Proph. art. 1.
Quia omnis effectus in necessitate and contingentia sequitur causam proximam
and non primam.

Treatise.
THe reasons that have convinced me of the untruth of absolute Reprobation now
follovv. And first of those that fight against the upper way.

They are drawn ab incommodo, from the great evils and inconveniences which
issue from it naturally: Which may be referred to two main heads: 1. The
Dishonor of God; 2. The Overthrow of religion and government.

1. Inconvenience.
It dishonors God: For it charge him deeply with two things no ways
agreeable to his nature: 1. Men's eternal Torments in hell; 2. Their Sins on
earth.

I. FIRST, it charge him with men's eternal Torments in hell, and makes him
(A) to be the Prime, Principal and Invincible cause of the damnation of
millions of miserable souls: the Prime cause; because it reports him to have
appointed them to destruction of his own voluntary disposition, antecedent to
all deserts in them: and (B) the Principal and Invincible cause; because it
makes the damnation of Reprobates to be necessary and unavoydable through Gods
absolute and uncontrollable decree, and so necessary that they can no more
escape it then poor Astyanax could avoid the breaking of his neck when the
Grecians tumbled him down from the tovver of Troy. Now this is a heavy
charge, contrary to Scripture, Gods Nature, and sound Reason.

1. To Scripture: Which (C) makes man the principal, nay the only cause (in
opposition to God) of his own ruin. Thy destruction is of thy self, O Israel:
but in me is thy help, Hos. 13.9. As I live, says the Lord, I will not the
death of the wicked, etc. Turn ye, turn ye: why will ye die? Ezekiel. 33.11. He
does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men, Lam. 3.33. To
which speeches for likeness sake I will join one of Prospers; Resp. ad 12.
Object. Vincent. Praedestinatio Dei multis est causa standi, nemini est causa
labendi.
Gods Predestination is to many the cause of standing, to none of falling.

2. It is (D) contrary to Gods nature: Exodus 34.6.
Who sets forth himself to be a God merciful, gracious, long-suffering,
abundant in goodness, etc. and he is acknowledged to be so by King David;
Psalm. 86.5.
Thou Lord art good and merciful, and of great kindness to all them that call
upon thee, and by the Prophets Joel, Jonah, and Micah: Joel 2.13.
He is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, says
Joel. I know, says Jonah 4.2.
Jonah, that thou art a gracious God and merciful, slow to anger, and of great
kindness. and, Micah 7.18.
Who, says Micah, is a God like unto thee, that takes away iniquity? etc. He
reteineth not his wrath for ever, because mercy pleases him.

3. It is contrary also to (E) sound Reason: Which cannot but argue such a
decree of extreme cruelty, and consequently remove it from the Father of
mercies. We cannot in reason think that any man in the world can so far put
off humanity and nature, as to resolve with himself to marry and beget
children, that after they are born and had lived a while with him, he may hang
them up by the tongues, tear their flesh with scourges, pull it from their
bones with burning pincers, or put them to any cruel tortures, that by thus
torturing them he may show what his authority and power is over them. Much
less can we believe without great violence to reason, that the God of mercy
can so far forget himself, as out of his absolute pleasure to ordain such
infinite multitudes of his children made after his own image to everlasting
fire, and (F) create them one after another, that after the end of a short life
here, he might torment then without end hereafter, to show his power and
sovereignti^ over them. If to destroy the righteous with the wicked temporally,
be such a piece of injustice, that Abraham removes it from God with an ABSIT,
Genesis 18.25.
Will thou destroy the righteous with the wicked? That be far from thee, O
Lord. Shall not the judge of all the world do right? how deeply (may we think)
would that good man have detested on^ single thought, that God resolves upon
the destruction o^ many innocent souls eternally in hellfire?



(G) with these properties i^ God, to appoint men to hell of his mere will and
pleasure, n^ fault at all of theirs preexisting in his eternal mind.

1. It is not compatible with Justice: Which is a constan^ will of rendering
to every one his proper due, and that is vengeance to whom vengeance
belongs, namely to the obstinate and impenitent. August. lib. 3. cont.
Julian. c. 11. page 164. Bonus est Deus, justus est Deus: potest aliquem sine
bonis meeritis liberare, quia bonus est; non potest quenquam sine malis meritis
damnare, quia justus est.
God is good (says S. Augustine) and God is just: he may without any deserts
free men from punishment, because he is good; but he cannot without evi^
deservings condemn any man, because he is just. In another place also he says,
Aug. epist. 106. ad Bonifac. Quenquam vero immeritum and nulli obnoxium peccato
si Deus damnare creditur, alienus ab iniquitate non creditur.
If God be believed to damn any man that by sin deserves it not, he is not
believed to be free from injustice.

2. Nor is it compatible with Goodness: Which is an inclination in God of
communicating that good which is in himself to his creatures, as far as he
can without vvronging his Justice: And therefore if God be (as the Scripture
reports him) good to all, it cannot be that he should of himself without any
motive in the reasonable creature provide for it from everlasting the greatest
of all miseries, and that before he thought of making it or bestovving any good
at all upon it.

It is further objected, Perk. De Praed. page 25.
(H) That we do and may slaughter our beasts for our daily use without any
cruelty or injustice; and therefore God may as well, nay much more, appoint as
many of us as he pleases to the torments of hell for his glory, and yet be
just and good notvvithstanding: for there is a greater disproportion betvveen
God and us then betvveen us and beasts.

For answer to this we are first to premise thus much,

This being premised, I answer further, That this comparison holds not: For
there is little proportion between the Objects compared, and less between the
Acts.

1. There is but small proportion between the objects, Beasts and Men,
creatures of a different nature and made for a different end. Beasts are void
of reason and liberty in their actions, creatures whose beings vanish with
their breath, made only for the use and service of men upon earth: But Men are
reasonable and understanding creatures, able through the Creatours bounty to
discern betvveen good and evil, and according to their first principles to
choose the good and forsake the evil: they are the very image of Gods purity
and eternity, and were made for the service of God alone upon earth, and his
blessed and everlasting society in heaven. So that albeit there be a very great
distance between God and Man, yet nothing so great as betvveen God and Beasts.
It follovveth not therefore, that if God may appoint beasts to be killed of his
own free pleasure for man's use, he may with like equity and reason appoint men
of his own will to destruction for his own use. We read that God required
of his people many thousand beasts for sacrifices, but not one man: the
firstborn of other creatures he challenged for burnt-offerings (except they
were unclean beasts) but the firstborn of men were to be redeemed: Which
shows that he put a vvide difference betvveen the blood of men and beasts.
Besides, in the ninth of Genesis he gives men power to kill and feed upon all
living creatures, but he straightly forbids them to shed man's blood, and
gives this reason of the prohibition, Man is the image of God. So that we may
well conclude that there is but small proportion betvveen the objects
compared, Men and Beasts, in respect of this act of killing or slaughtering.

2. There is far less or rather no proportion at all betvveen the acts
compared, Killing and eternal Tormenting. A man may kill, but he cannot
without barbarous injustice and cruelty torment his beast, and prolong the life
of it that he may daily vex and torture it, to show what power and
sovereignty he has over it: Vid. Molinaei Enodat. quaest. graviss. p. 125.
So I doubt not (though there be some that will not grant it, but charge the
Arminians with contumely against God for affirming it) I doubt not (I say) but
(I) God may kill a man of his own free pleasure, yea and resolve him into
nothing, without any cruelty or injustice; because in so doing he does but take
away what he had given him: but he cannot without both these antecedently
decree to keep him alive for ever in hell, that he may there torment him
without end, to show his sovereigntie. For this is to inflict an infinite
evil upon a guiltless creature, to whom he had given but a finite good. And
so is the comparison most unequal too in the acts compared; and therefore
proves just nothing.

D. Twisse his Vindic. great. l. 2. part. 1. dig. 1. page 17. edit. 2.
But it is replied by some (who will rather speak unreasonably and against
common sense then lay down the conclusions which they have undertaken to
maintein) That (K) it is better and more eligible to be tortured in hell then
to want or lose a being: for he that wants a being, enjoys no good; but
he that is tormented in hell, has a being, and by consequence something that
is good. If therefore God may take away a man's being that is innocent, and turn
him into nothing for his pleasure, much more may he torment him in hell.

I. To the first part of this Reply, namely, That it is more

First, the [L] speech of our Savior concerning Judas; Matthew. 26.24
Woe be to that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed: it had been good for
that man if he had never been born. Two things especially are set forth in
these words of our Savior: 1. The misery of Judas the betrayer of his Lord;
Woe be to, etc. 2. The greatness of his misery, It had been good, etc. It [M]
is as much as if our Lord had said, Judas the Traitor shall be damned: and
therefore so woeful will his condition be, that it had been good and happy for
him if he had never received a being: good in earnest, as Interpreters do
generally expound it; not in the opinion and esteem of weak-minded and
faint-hearted men only, as some few understand it. For First, let it be
granted that the Scripture speaks of things sometimes according to men's
opinions; yet without reason to fasten such an exposition upon any Scripture,
is to do as Dunses do in the Schools, who being not able to answer a place in
Aristotle vvherevvith they are charged, shift it off and say, Loquitur eu
aliorum sententia, He speaks according to the opinion of others. Secondly,
This Scripture [N] cannot in reason be thus expounded, 1. Because it is an
argument and ground by which Christ declares the truth or greatness of the
misery of Judas, Woe to the man, etc. And why woe? Because it had been good,
etc. But it were no argument to show his woeful estate by, to say that it had
been good for him that he had never been born in the opinion of men who
mistake the case, but not in truth. 2. Because this exposition would teach and
[O] encourage men to be Atheists and Epicures. In the second of Wisdom we
read, how voluptuous men do stir up one another to enjoy the good things
that are present, to fill themselves with wine and ointments, to leave some
tokens of their jollitie in every place, and to practice all manner of
wickedness: and what is their motive? A false persvvasion that their souls
should the with their bodies, and that they should have no being after death.
If this conceit could flesh them thus in their impious and voluptuous courses,
how freely and eagerly (may we think) would they pursue their carnal and
sinful delights, if they could be but once persuaded, that after all their
pleasures they shall be in a better case then if they had no being?

Secondly, I oppose common consent. Where shall we pick out a man but will
say (P) (if he speak from his heart) that he were better to vanish into a
thousand nothings then to be cast into hell? What is the reason why men are so
afraid of hell when they are touched to the quick with the conscience of
their ungodly lives and the expectation of eternal vengeance, that with Job
they curse their birthday, and vvish an hundred times over that they had never
been, or might cease to be, that so they might not come into the place of
torments; but because they judge a being there to be incomparably worse then
no being any-where? And why are men who are sensible of hellfire, so
strongly curbed and held-in by the fear of feeling it, even from darling and
beloved sins, but because they apprehend it to be the most terrible of all
terribles? Fear of being annihilated can never do that which the fear of hell
does.

The third thing which I oppose is common sense: which judges (Q) pains when
they are extreme to be worse then death. Hence it is that Job being tormented
in his body by the devil, cursed his birthday, magnified the condition of the
dead, and wished himself in the grave, plainly preferring the loss of his
being before that miserable being which he then had. And hence it is that men
even of stoutest and hardest spirits (as we see by daily experience) would (if
they might enjoy their opinion) choose rather to have no bodies at all, then
bodies tormented with the stone, or gout, or any other sharp and sensible
disease. It is a known saying grounded on this judgment of sense, Praestat
semel quam semper mori, Better it is to die once then to be alvvayes dying.
This the Tyrant Tiberius knevv very well: and therefore he would not suffer
those toward whom he purposed to exercise his cruelty to be put to a speedy
death, but to lingering torments as Suetonius reports of him in that chapter
where he reckons up his barbarous and cruel practices. Sueton. vit. Tib.
cap. 61. Mori volentibus vis adhibita vivendi.
Those (says he) who through the extremity of their torments would have died,
he used means to keep alive. Nam mortem adeo leve supplicium putabat, For he
accounted death so light a punishment, that when he heard that one Carnulius,
a man appointed to torments, had prevented him, he cried out, Carnulius me
evasit, Carnulius has escaped my hands. To a prisoner entreating him to put
him quickly to death, he gave this answer, Nondum tecum redii in gratiam, I am
not yet friends with thee; accounting it great kindness to put him quickly to
death whom he might have tortured. Many (K) that were called into question,
did partly vvound themselves in their own houses, ad vexationem ignominiamque
vitandam, to prevent that pain and ignominy which they knevv they should
endure; and partly poisoned themselves in the midst of the court as they were
going to their arraignment for the same cause. Seneca speaking of one Mecaenas,
who was so afraid of being dead that he said he would not refuse weakness,
deformity, nec acutam crucem, no nor the sh^rpest crucifying, Seneca Epist. l.
17. Epist. 101. Dummodo inter haec mala spiritus prorogetur.
so that he might live still in the midst of these extremities, he calls his
desire turpissimum votum, a base and most ignoble and unnatural vvish, and
censureth him for a most effeminate and contemptible man; Quia distulit id quod
est in malis optimum, supplicii finem.
because in all his evils he was afraid of that which was the end of all evils,
the privation of his being. And certainly we must needs conceive and censure
them to be stocks and stones rather then flesh and blood, who can so put off
all feeling and sense, as to think a tormented being in hell to be a lighter
and lesser evil then no being at all.

II. To the reason on which the Reply is grounded, which Melius est esse quam
non esse, It is better to be then to have no being, I answer that it is a
sophisme or fallacy a non distributo ad distributum. To be in it self is better
then Not to be: but it is not universally true in all particulars. Again, it is
true in some cases, and ex hypothesi, si caetera sint paria, if there be any
equality in the adjuncts. It is so far from being simply true, that our
Savior limiteth it, and puts a case wherein it is not true, but the
contrary to it is true; and that is the case of Judas, of which we have said
somevvhat before: It had been good, etc. Which words S. Hierome expounding,
says, Hieron. comment. in Matt c. 26. v. 24. Simpliciter dictum est, Melius
est non subsistere quam male subsistere.
It is simply and plainly averred by our Savior that it is better to have no
being then an ill being. This was the judgment too of Job, chap, 3. v. 11,
12, 13. Why dyed I not, says he, in the birth? why did the knees prevent me?
and why did I suck the breasts? For now should I have lain still and been
quiet: I should have slept then and been at rest. In which words he plainly
implies, that he thought it far better to have had no birth and bring then
such a painful and miserable being. This was also the opinion of Solomon,
Eccles 4.1, 2, 3. So I returned, says he, and considered all the oppressions
that are done under the sun; and behold the tears of such as were oppressed,
and they had no comforter, etc. Wherefore I praised the dead which are already
dead, more then the living which are yet alive: yea better is he then both they
which has not yet been, who has not seen the evil work that is done under the
sun. The words do clearly show (S) that Solomon did think it better to be
dead, and to be deprived of being, or to have alvvayes vvanted a being, then to
be oppressed by the mighty, and to be without comforters; that is, then to
have a miserable and a mournful being.

Sr. Francis Bacons Colors of good and evil, the last Color.
To this assenteth Sr Francis Bacon in his Colors of goo^ and evil: Where
against this mathematical position (as h^ calls it) That there is no
proportion between Something and Nothing, and that therefore the (T) degree of
privation seems greater then the degree of diminution; he excepeth, That it
is false in sundry cases, and among the rest i^ this, namely, when the degree
of diminution is more sensitive then the degree of privation. In this case a
total privation is much better then a diminution. Hence these usual^ forms of
speech, Better (V) eye out then always ache; Make or mar, etc. Some evils and
pains (perhaps) either for their lightness, because they may be well endured,
or for their shortness, because they are quickly over, are less the^
resolution into nothing; and a man had better for a vvhil^ endure them then
lose his being to be rid of them, because his being may afford him presently or
afterward such and so many desirable good things as will more then recompense
his pains: But when his pains are so many and violent that they leave him no
other good then a poor being, or so pinch him that he cannot enjoy or joy in
the goods the remain, it were a thousand times better for him to have no
being. And such are the pains of hell: which for their greatness are
infinite, producing many miserable weepings and vvaylings and gnashings of
teeth, all symptoms of intolerable griefs; and for their length, eternal: The
wor^ never dies, the fire is never quenched: but the breath of the Lord, as a
river of brimstone, does kindle it for ever. And therefore it is incomparably
better to cease to be, then to live in those torments, which cannot be
equalled by any good which a being can make us capable of; much less by that
poor little entitative good, which is all the good the damned do enjoy in hell.

This (X) sophistical evasion therefore and all others of the like sort
notwithstanding, I doubt not but I may safely say, that the unavoidable
damnation of so many millions cannot be absolutely and antecedently intended by
God without the greatest injustice and cruelty, which may in no wise be
imputed to God. Plut. De sup^rst. prope finem. ^
Plutarch speaking of the Pagans, who to pacify the anger of their Gods did
sacrifice to them men and women, says, It had been much better with Diagoras
and his fellows to deny the being of a God, then confessing a God to think he
delights in the blood of men. How much rather may we say, It were better to
be an Atheist and deny God, then to believe or report him to be a (Y) devourer
of the souls of men. The like argument is pressed by Eusebius against those
cruel and merciless Gods of the Pagans; Eusebius. de praeparat. lib. 4. cap. 16.
page 161. Edit Graecol. Enimvero, si boni vestigium in iis ullum esset, quamo
brem bonorum appellationem jure sortirentur, eos utique cum natura sua benignos
ac salutis omnium cupidos, tum vero amantes justitiae, hominumque studiosos ac
defensores esse oporteret, etc.
Doubtless, says he, if there were any footstep or spark of goodness in
them, for which they might deserve to be called good, they would be disposed to
do good, and desirous to save all men, they would love justice, and take a care
of men. And being such, how could they delight in their slaughter? etc. Yea, he
concludes that they were ibid. c. 15. page 153. Non bonos sed malos fuisse
daemones, vel hac ipsa ratione confici existimo: Quicquid bonum est, prodesse
solet; nocere vero contrarium.
Devils or evil spirits, and not Gods or good spirits; Because if they were
good, they would do good; whereas those which are evil use to do hurt. I will
therefore shut up my first reason with the speech of Prosper; Prosp. ad Object.
Vincent. resp. 3. Omnium quidem hominum Deus creator est: sed nemo ab eo ideo
creatus est ut periret; quia alia est causa nascendi, alia pereundi.
God is the Creator indeed of all men, but yet of no man for this end, that he
might be damned: The reason why we are created is one; and why we are damned,
another.

An Answer to the first Inconvenience inferred upon the decree of absolute
Predestination and Reprobation.
ABsolute Reprobation is (in the true the eternal decree or act of Gods will
Not to confer upon some men his effectual grace, Not to guide some men
infallibly unto glory, but To permit them through their own voluntary default
to live in sin, and To determine their eternal torments in regard of their
sins. All this put together does not make God the Prime, Principal and
Invincible cause, nay, it does not make him any cause at all, in working the
damnation of any one soul, no not of the soul of Judas himself. Not the Prime
cause: For by negative Reprobation no man is adjudged unto hell torments,
otherwise then for his own foregoing sins As for the imaginary antecedencie
of one act of the Divine volition or intuition unto another, because it is
imaginary, and no such real priority or posterioritie of eternal acts to be
found in God, there is no building of firm conclusions upon such a tottering
foundation. And yet for further illustration of this point we add, That as
when a sovereigne King considering two of his subjects inwrapped in the guilt
of rebellion, determines in his mind that the one shall be freed the other
hanged, it is not his determination, but the others rebellion, which is the
prime and true cause of his hanging; though the Princes absolute will be the
prime cause why he was not freed as well as the other: so God considering all
mankind inwrapped in the guilt of Adams rebellion, absolutely determines to
free some both from their sin and punishment, and as absolutely determines
not to free some others; and yet their own sin and not Gods will was the
prime cause of their being tormented, though Gods was the prime cause
distinguishing and determining who should be delivered and who should be
condemned.

Whereas it is further objected, That absolute principal and invincible cause
of many men's damnation, in that it makes it necessary and unavoidable; all
this proceeds from an erroneous and false imagination, That Gods absolute
will of not producing such a good act or event is an invincible cause of
producing the contrary evil act or event: Whereas this negative will of God is
no cause at all of man's sin or misery, but his own positive will is the cause
both of his wickedness and of his wretchedness. He is the true and principal
cause of any effect or event, who imployeth his faculties and endeavors to
bring it into being; not he who only resolves not to hinder such evil
effects, though he foresee they will come into being if he prevent them not.
For first, this decree of negative Reprobation tumbleth no man down necessarily
into the pit of destruction: Prosp. ad Cap. Gall. comment. 14.
Non^^praedestinatus perit infidelitate voluntaria non coacta. Secondly, though
this decree contein a denial of that grace which effectually freeth men from
sin and so consequently from destruction, yet it contains nothing which
causes effectually their impenitencie, their infidelity and their
destruction. Ad object. Vinc. resp. 15.
Non est consequens, sicut putant qui talia objiciunt, ut Deus, quibus
poenitentiam non dederit, resipiscentiam abstulerit; and quos non levaverit,
alliserit; cum aliud sit insontem in crimen egisse, quod alienum est a Deo;
aliud, criminoso veniam non dedisse, quod de peccatoris est merito. Lastly, he
is said to be invincibly drawn into sin and plunged into perdition, who
fights against sin with all his strength, and striveth to avoid damnation,
and yet by the overmastering power of another is thrust into the one and hurled
unto the other. The consciences of the most wicked men in the world can tell
them, that there is no such forcing power in Non-election or Reprobation. The
non-elect angels (which are now devils in hell) cannot upon their Non-election
charge God, that either their transgression or damnation was invincibly forced
upon them, they endeavoring to escape it.

Scriptures make man the only cause of his own ruin: But the Scriptures teach
not, That God by his absolute will of preserving some from ruin, and
permitting others to runne-on unto their own ruin, is the invincible cause of
any man's ruin. God has given some creatures sufficient means to preserve
themselves from ruin, whom notwithstanding by the decree of Reprobation he
permits to procure and work their own ruin.

It is contrary to Gods nature causelessely De Great. Christ. 1.12.
Haec gratia praedestinatos and secundum propositum vocatos ad glorificationem
perducit. And for the denial of this special grace, which we term Negative
Reprobation, Prosper confesses, That it is not the foresight of any iniquity
in men which causes this denial: De vocat. l. 1. c. 17.
Nulla sunt tam detestanda facinora quae possint gratiae arcere donum. And yet
more expressly, Ibid. c. 15.
Liberatur pars hominum, part percunte: Et si hoc voluntatum meritis
voluerimus adscribere, ut malos neglexisse gratia, bonos elegisse videatur,
resistet nobis, etc. Ibid.
Latet discretionis istius ratio, sed non latet ipsa discretio. Non
intelligimus judicantem, sed videmus operantem: Quid calumniamur justitiae
occultae, qui gratias debemus misericordiae manifestae? etc.

sound but blind reason, which forbids God to elect and passe-by according
to the good pleasure of his own will, and binds him to proceed according to
his eternal foresight of the good or bad actions of man's will. As for those
tragical exaggerations of Resolving to create that he might torment, etc. they
are all beside the purpose, and must not drive us to deny that Apostolical
decision, Miseretur cujus vult; and quem vult indurat. And when they can show
us that Faith, Perseverance, or any quality or act of saving grace, was
foreseen in Peter and Paul, and thereupon their following Election grounded, we
will grant that antecedent infidelity in Cain and Judas was the cause of their
negative Reprobation as well as of their positive or punitive.

creating of any persons to the end or intent that they might be eternally
tormented, we deny that the opposite decrees of absolute Election and
Preterition, whether considered in angels or men, imply any such thing. It is
true, that the Elect are severally created to the end and intent that they may
be glorified together with their Head Christ Jesus: But for the Non-elect, we
cannot truly say that they are created to the end that they may be tormented
with the devil and his angels. For we may then say, God makes such a thing for
such an end, when he gives the thing a nature and qualities fitted to such an
end. Now no man is created by God with a nature and qualities fitting him to
damnation. Nay, take every man as he is created by God, and he is a capable and
fitted subject for salvation: But, when he was at his best, so fitted, that he
might run himself into the pit of perdition. But neither in the state of his
Innocence nor in the state of the fall and his corruption does he receive any
thing from God which is a proper and fit means to bring him to his damnation:
And therefore damnation is not the end of any man's creation.

We say with Prosper, Resp. ad Cap. Gall. resp. 13.
Vniversos homines non ignoramus a Deo sigillatim creari; and de hac
universitate alios damnandos cum diabolo, alios regnaturos esse cum Christo.
Quod ergo etiam hi creantur qui aeternae vitae participes non erunt, nulla est
culpa Creatoris; qui naturae author est, non vitii quod natura contraxit. And
again, Ad object. Vinc. resp. 3.
Omnium quidem hominum Deus creator est: sed nemo ab eo ideo creatus est ut
periret; quia alia est causa nascendi, and alia est pereundi. Vt enim nascantur
homines, conditoris est beneficium; ut autem pereant, praevaricatoris est
meritum.

God created some Angels not-predestinate unto eternal life whom he foresaw
would run themselves upon the rock of eternal death; concerning whom he
decreed absolutely to permit their apostasy, and to damn them for their
apostasy: and yet no man that understands what he says, will say that God
created them to the end he might torment them. There is the same reason of
Non-election or Non-predestination of men; and it is as much against sound
reason to say, that their Non-election infers, that God created them to the
end he might damn and torment them.

The root from whence this gross mistake springs is this, That some falsely
conceive, that God in the decree of Reprobation or Non-election does by as
effectual means intend to bring men to their damnation as in the decree of
Election he intends to bring others to salvation. But the thing is far
otherwise: salvation is a benefit undue to any man: therefore God may
absolutely intend the bestowing of it upon any man, and the withholding it from
any man: But damning or torturing of men in hell is a punishment; and therefore
the inflicting thereof cannot be intended but with relation to a fault. Again,
the means whereby men are brought to salvation, are bona and dona gratuita; and
therefore they must be derived unto us by an influence and effectual operation
of God: But the means whereby men are carried unto damnation, are mala
spiritualia and voluntaria, they are their own defective, and depraved actions;
and therefore they are not means whereby God directs them unto their
damnation (who cannot be the author of any sinful act or defect) but they are
the misdeserts which God permits them to fall into, and in the due
punishment whereof he intends to exercise his justice. No cruelty therefore
in the decree of Non-election or negative Reprobation.

God never resolved upon the eternal destruction of an innocent soul: But God
resolved to permit some of those Angels and men whom he created innocent and
righteous, to do that which procured their own destruction; and he resolved to
preserve some others from procuring their own destruction, and infallibly to
bring them to the state of glorification. And unto these different decrees we
give the different names of Election, Preterition or negative Reprobation.

To Elect or Not-elect is an act of Gods Sovereigne power and absolute
liberty; but To crown or damn is an act of Judiciary power, and proceeds
according to the tenor of the revealed Gospel. The one he does, not taking
men's different actions for the ground thereof: the other he does according to
men's different actions.

Goodness of God is as it were a firm^tie upon him, to do no man injustice:
but it tieth him not in beneficiis gratuitis, to do all the good unto every
singular man which he could do without any violating of his Justice. He that
shall avouch, that God could not have elected Cain or Judas unto glory, by
preparing for them effectual grace, without wronging of his Justice, makes
Election and Non-election to be necessary and not free acts in God. For the
perfection of the Divine nature is such, as necessarily excludes a clashing of
any of his Attributes one against the other. And therefore if God should have
wronged his Justice if he had not predestined Peter, his Predestination was
not an act of mercy but of necessary justice: And if God could not have
predestined Judas without plain wronging of his Justice, then the Preterition
or Reprobation of Judas was not an act proceeding from that liberty which God
uses in the eternal preparation and temporal donation of his supernatural
benefits, but from such a necessary determination of the Divine will as could
not do otherwise. I am sure this is new Divinity; and I think it is untrue.
The general goodness of God unto all is sufficiently shown by doing good unto
all, and by wronging none: but it binds him not either to do or to intend the
same measure of mercy unto all. He may therefore without any prejudice to his
Goodness, in special mercy prepare for some from everlasting, and in time
bestow upon them, that grace which he knows will and intends should
infallibly bring them unto glory: This we call his decree of their Election. He
may also without any prejudice to his Goodness or Justice, out of the liberty
of his own will absolutely resolve not to prepare nor bestow upon some men that
grace which he knows would bring them unto glory; and may further justly
decree to permit such to fall into those sins which he knows will deserve
and for which he decrees to inflict upon them eternal torments: And this we
call Non-election or negative Reprobation.

As for that wild fancy of providing for any men their eternal misery, and
that from everlasting, and before he thought of making them, or bestowing any
good upon them, we hold absolute Election and Reprobation, and yet utterly
disclaim it. First, because it lies not upon God to provide means for men's
damnation, these springing from their own free and defective will. If he by the
effectual grace prepared in Predestination do not furnish them with the
infallible means of salvation, they will voluntarily and infallibly furnish
themselves with the means of their damnation, as the example both of angels and
men non-elected does clearly prove. Secondly, that conceit of Before and Behind
in the everlasting decrees or cogitations of God has no solid or real truth
in it. The immanent acts of Gods will and understanding are not one before and
another after, as ours are which proceed upon discourse; though in things
willed and seen there is Before and After, First, Second, Third, according to
the nature of dependence. Last of all, no instant can be assigned in eternity,
when God thought of providing misery for his creature, excluding the cogitation
of bestowing any good upon it.

Slaughtering beasts without injustice, we grant it is of no force to prove
that God may appoint many to be tormented in hell without all respect unto
sin: because the Slaughtering or Saving of beasts alive is no act of justice
or injustice; but the Crowning of men in the kingdom of glory is an act of
remunerative justice, and the Tormenting in hell an act of vindicative justice:
and therefore both the one and the other are exercised according to that rule
of remuneration and vindication whereunto God has tied himself in his word.
But to decree the infallible bringing of some angels and some men unto eternal
glory, and to decree the infallible permission of others to fall into the
desert of damnation, and thereupon to fore-appoint their eternal punishment in
hell, is consonant to the justice of God, and to the doctrine of Predestination
and Reprobation, as it is delivered in the Scriptures, explained by S.
Augustine and other orthodox Fathers and Writers of late time, and allowed by
our Church.

If any man think that Non-election or negative Reprobation implies, that some
men were made to be tormented in hell for Gods absolute pleasure, and not for
their own sin, he is in a foul error. God made all things for himself and
for the illustrating of his glory. And he eternally saw that he could
illustrate his glory in most excellent manner, by making all men capable of
salvation, and yet by permitting some men to incur damnation. This he
eternally and absolutely decreed to do, by preparing special grace for some;
and bestowing it upon them in due time he infallibly works their salvation:
and these only in Scripture are termed men predestined or elected. And on
the contrary, by not preparing and not bestowing effectual or special grace
upon others, they do wilfully and willingly work their own damnation and
destruction: And these we call not-elected, not-predestinated, or (in the most
harsh term) reprobated.

This doctrine takes away all boasting in themselves from those which are
saved; because it was Gods special grace mercifully and eternally prepared for
them, and not their special goodness eternally foreseen, which caused their
salvation. It takes away also all pretense of murmuring against God, or
traducing him as unjust and cruel. For no man is to be condemned upon this
evidence, Because he was a man not-elected; Because he was a man unto whom
special grace in the riches and height of Gods mercy was not afforded; but,
Because he is convicted to have been sinful and wicked, and out of his own
free will partly to have resisted and repelled the good motions of the Spirit
of grace which were vouchsafed him, and partly to have abused those initiall
gifts of supernatural grace which God had actually conferred upon him.

And as for Calvine, who both whilst he lived and since his death has been
slandered to have been a defender of this position, Deus maximam mundi partem
nudo puroque voluntatis suae arbitrio creavit ad perditionem, hear what he
says for himself, Vide Calv De aetern. Dei prove. page 735.
Etsi quid toti humano generi futurum esset Deus ab initio decrevit, haec tamen
loquendi ratio nusquam apud me occurret, FINEM CREATIONIS ESSE AETERNUM
INTERITUM. And in the same treatise he grants, that both angels and men were
destinated to destruction page 737.
futurae defectionis respectu. If therefore any writers amongst the Protestants
have made the Creation of the Non-elect a means by God himself subordinated
unto their damnation, and the Damnation of such an end desired and aimed at by
God, and consequently the means of men's damnation (namely sinful Corruption
and voluntary Rebellion) procured or wrought by God as the author thereof;
they deserve rather to be branded then patronized by any judicious Divine. Yet
it becomes orthodox Divines to be careful as well in mainteining the free and
special mercy of God in giving faith, repentance and perseverance to the
Elect, as in mainteining the justice of God in the punishment and damnation of
the Non-elect. The defenders of conditionate Predestination may suppose they
clear themselves well in the latter; but we are sure they stick in the
Semipelagian briers as concerning the former. For if God upon the foresight of
men's faith and perseverance be induced to predestinate them, Gods
Predestination is no cause at all of faith or perseverance or any saving grace,
this prevision not causing things, but supposing them as already produced by
other causes.

annihilate a sinner, nor torment a righteous man in hell, only to show his
sovereignty. Not that he wants power or strength to do either the one or the
other, but because his constant and immutable will has decreed that sinners
shall be tormented and not annihilated, and that righteous men shall be crowned
not tormented. It is therefore utterly denied, that the absolute decree of
electing some and not-electing othersome contains in it an antecedent decree
to inflict an infinite evil upon any guiltless creature.

or men, always to carry a just respect unto their future corruption and
rebellion. Calvine (howsoever ranked by this Author) was plainly of this
judgment: his words will show it; De aetern. provid. page 710.
Cum de praedestinatione sermo habetur, inde exordiendum esse constanter semper
docui, atque hodie doceo, jure in morte relinqui omnes reprobos, qui in ADAMO
mortui sunt ac damnati; jure perire, qui natura sunt irae filii: ita nemini
causam esse cur de nimio Dei rigore queratur, quando reatum in se omnes
inclusum gestant. And lest that old cavil should be revived, That God
appointed the reprobate unto their damnation before he considered them as lying
dead in sin and corruption, Calvine does in this also clear himself, and
subscribeth to the opinion of S. Augustine; Ibid. page 704.
Augustinum ridet [Pighius] ejusque similes, hoc est, pios omnes, qui Deum
imaginantur, postquam universalem generis humani ruinam in persona Adae
praesciverat, alios ad vitam alios ad interitum destinasse. We leave therefore
those to wrangle amongst themselves, who think that God may without crossing
his declared will, for his mere pleasure either annihilate an innocent man or
torment him in hell. I persuade my self that neither the one nor the other can
stand well with the goodness of God, as in the word it is made known unto men.

For the question it self, Which is better for any man, Annihilation or
Torment, it carries a double improprietie of speech: first, in that it
supposes some kind of eligible goodness in things which rightly considered
have none at all. For neither to be annihilated nor tormented have any
goodness at all in them for him who is supposed to choose the one before the
other. Again, non entis nulla affectio: and therefore annihilation cannot be
said to be good or bad, better or worse for any man; since all these terms
require a subject or person in whom they must be verified, which by
annihilation is become nothing.

our Saviors speech; It is according to the vulgar manner, who, when they see
a man extremely mischievous or miserable, use to say, It had been happy for
such a man if he had never been born. And in the opinion of some good writers
both ancient and modern, the words of our Savior give no just occasion to
raise a curious controversy concerning the Goodness or Betternesse of
Annihilation and eternal Damnation. Bar. tom. 4. lib. 2. c. 11. p. 45.
Euthymius and Hieronymus interpret the words, IF HE HAD NEVER BEEN BORN, If he
had perished in his mothers womb. And Cajetane, Bonum erat Judae si natus non
fuisset, quia mortuus in utero incurrisset solum poenam damni, etc. These words
in this sense concern not absolute Annihilation, but Abortion, much like those
of Job, chap. 3. v. 11, 12, 13, 14. The question here then is not, Which of the
twain is better or greater good; but, Which is the lesser of the two evils. And
yet in this sense it is improper to say annihilation is the lesser evil,
because it leaves no subject wherein good or evil can be received. To be
nothing is not more desirable then To be in hell: Both of them are extremely
hateful, and have in them nullam rationem bonitatis aut appetibilitatis.

It is as much as if Christ had said, When O that I had never received a being!
If such a wish could take place, no degree of goodness or happiness could
thereby accrue unto the person, because the person thereby is made nothing.

This Scripture will import thus much, ablatio mali has rationem boni, the
condition which removes the greater evil is to the intellective appetite more
welcome or desirable. Now the greatest evils imaginable, are, To be stained
with sin eternally, To be eternally subject to the wrath of God for sin,
and, To be eternally tormented for the same. A tormented soul therefore cannot
upon a deliberate election desire to have never been, which it apprehends as
merely impossible; but it may in a passionate wish prefer the condition of
not being before the condition of such a woeful being. And the reason hereof
is, because man's understanding does not only conceive ens and bonum naturae,
but ens and bonum rationis. And thus though Not-being or Annihilation after
being received, contein in them no positive or natural goodness for which
they can be desirable, yet they may be represented to the understanding as
negations or ablations of the greatest evil, and so per accidens they may be
wished rather then lying under those eternal evils before mentioned. But if in
cogitation we separate the infinite evil of Sin and of the Divine Hatred, and
should leave a man under never so great torments, Annihilation were in right
reason to be conceived a greater evil then those torments: neither ought a man
to desire the loss of his being (in which many benefits both corporal and
spiritual are involved) to escape the sense of pain by not being, which is a
total deprivation of all Gods benefits, and an abolition of the person who
desires it Vide Ruiz. De volunt. Dei, disp. 34.. 3, n. 16 p. 620.
.

Atheists and Epicures, who believe no such thing as the Immortality of the
soul, or enduring eternal punishments after death, will scoff and laugh at the
question it self, and will be neither encouraged nor discouraged which way
soever it be decided. Yet it is discretion in Divines so to temper their
disputations that they give no occasion unto any of sleighting or extenuating
the infinite misery of hell torments, which no understanding of man conceives
unto their full height.

Those who defend the state of man in Hell Torments to have more good in it,
then the estate of Not-being or Annihilation, ground themselves upon this main
reason, That Ens and Bonum convertuntur, and whosoever reteineth a being is not
only capable of good, but is actually endowed with some good; whereas that
which is resolved into nothing, is neither endowed with any good, nor capable
of the least good. And it is indeed abusiva comparatio to say, that Judas never
created, or after his creation annihilated, is in a better case then Judas
eternally tormented; because Judas never created, or Judas annihilated, cannot
be compared with Judas exsisting, either in happiness or unhappiness. The
former Judas is only a feigned imagination in the brain, and has no realitie
answering the name of the person: the latter Judas is a real subsistent person
capable of real happiness or misery. Non sunt comparabiles res quae non sunt
ejusdem generis. Omne comparabile est univocum. Judas being is a true man, but
Judas annihilated whom they put in the other scale of comparison, is neither
man nor creature, but a mere nothing clothed with an empty name.





Had God yielded unto Jobs passionate wish, the comparison would not have stood
betwixt his Being and Not-being, but betwixt his Being miserably vexed in one
state and his Being acquit from those vexations in another.

Though the Being of any thing is a kind of goodness, and the foundation or
receptacle of all other good, yet take Being praescindendo ab omni super addita
bonitate, and burdened with all sorts of evil, and then there is in it no
motive unto appetibility for a reasonable creature. This is clear in those
external things which we possess and use. If a man's horse have the mere
goodness of Being left him, and be troubled with manifold incurable diseases
and perpetual lamenesse, the owner rather desires his not-being then his
so-being. It is clear also in a man's bodily members; for no man is so in love
with the bare Being of a leg or an arm, but if it want the goodness of
strength and motion, and be affected with the evils of rottenness and extreme
anguish, he would rather choose to lose the Being of those members, then to hold
them under condition of a perpetual and so ill affected Being. And to come to
the soul it self, the mere Being thereof in rerum natura, utterly and eternally
separated from the natural and supernatural Wel-being thereof, and burdened
with the evils of sinful pollution, of the Divine detestation, and of the
hellish vexations, is not nor cannot be presented unto the understanding and
will of a damned man as an object lovely or desirable. It is likely enough
therefore, that all the damned are weary of their Being, and wish rather their
Not-being: yet even to them in their woeful estate, Not-being is not per se and
properly the object of their desire, but only per accide^s, in as much as the
removal of evils has rationem boni; and this they conceive will be effected
in their annihilation. And the very ablation of evils is not properly and
primarily desirable for it self, but it is desired out of a love to those
opposite good things whereof those evils have deprived a man: As he that
desires to be freed from sickness, is properly in love with the Being of
health, improperly with the Not-being of sickness: for that which has no
being cannot have a good being; and that which has no kind of good being
considerable in it, has no power to draw the will to affect it. It is not
therefore simply Not-being which any damned and tortured man prefers and
electeth before Being, but it is Not-being in pain and torments which he
prefers before Being in pain and torments. This is it which Saint Augustine
intended in saying, De lib. arbitr. 3.6.
Si quis dixerit, Non esse quam miserum me esse mallem, respondebo, Mentiris.

It is better and more eligible to be in torture or pain for a little time then
for a long time: But Not-being in it self is neither bonum nor melius, nor
eligibile nor eligibilius.

Men who kill themselves, do it out of an lighter and lesser evil, since
Nothing is neither lighter nor heavier, neither good nor bad.

If this be a good collection, it had been

The sense of the degree of diminution, and total deprivation, makes an
impatient man rather wish the latter then the former: but notwithstanding in
judgment of right reason the total deprivation may be the greater evil.

That which is made better then formerly it was, must be bettered by adding
some perfection thereunto which formerly it wanted, or by taking some
imperfection from it, wherewith formerly it was encumbered; and in both changes
the subject must remain: Now Annihilation or Not-being brings no perfection
to any man nor takes any imperfection from him, but it takes him quite away
from being the subject either of good or evil: and therefore it cannot give a
true denomination of being better or worse.

As for the rule, Melius est esse quam non esse; it is most certainly and
universally true. For otherwise God would never from Non-esse or out of nothing
have produced all things which are into that Being or esse which they have
neither would he preserve the esse of men damned. Yet we confess withal, that
this or that particular person may be through his own default under so many
evils contrary to his Well-being, that he may fancy a Not-being more eligible
for him then that lamentable and woeful Being wherein he subsisteth. I call
this a fantastical rather then a real and true election: For if such a man
should be asked, What is it which you have preferred in your choice? he must
answer, Nothing. Aug. De lib. arb. l. 3. c. 8.
Nam qui eligit non esse, profecto se nihil eligere, etiamsi hoc nolit
respondere, convincitur. Not-being therefore is but out of a mere deceived
fancy of the man in torment conceived to be it which he prefers before
Being: whereas in deed and truth it is (as Augustine speaks) Ibid.
natural desiderium quietis, which is the desirable object the will of a
damned man longs for, and not the state omnimodae defectionis, or
annihilationis. Now he that desires his ease or quiet, does not aim at a
Not-being, but at a Not-being-tormented. Ibid.
Nam quod quietum est, non est nihil; imo magis est quam id quod inquietum est.

Though we hold it an abusive comparison to say, Judas is better when he has
no being, then when he has an ill being; yet because evils are measured by the
degrees of the opposite good things whereof they deprive men, and supernatural
good things, such as are the fruition of God and heavenly joys, are infinitely
better then the fruition of natural Being; we must needs judge the privation
of supernatural well-being, which consists in being eternally banished from
the beatificall presence of God, and eternally tortured in hell, to be a
greater evil then the loss of our natural Being. If therefore God should put
it to the choice of Judas, or any damned man, and say, Choose whether thou will
have me abolish thee into nothing, or continue thy being as it is, in the state
of sin, and thy person as it is, in the state of enmity with me, and thy
body and soul in the state of endless torments; I think he would and should
rather choose abolishment, annihilation or Not-being, then continuance of being
so hateful a person unto God, and so sinful and woeful a person in himself.
And this is it, and all which may be inferred from the words of S. Hierome, or
of our Savior.



If the comparison of better and worse be put to the disordered judgment and
will of the damned person, who looks only at himself, no doubt but he will
judge that best which makes most for his own ease: But if better and worse be
considered with respect of the true judgment of God, Judas his being tormented
is better then Judas his Not-being. And if Judas himself in his choice of Being
or Not-being had a well-ordered will, his Being (though in torment) would seem
better, wherein he serves to illustrate the glory of Gods power, truth and
justice, then his Not-being, wherein he can be useful or serviceable to no
good end. Not-being cannot be the scope of regulated election: for Aug. De lib.
arbitr. l. 3. c. 8.
quod quisque recte eliget appetendum, cum ad id pervenerit, necesse est melior
fiat: melior autem esse non poterit, qui non erit. Nemo igitur recte potest
eligere ut non sit. It is therefore only amor inordinatus proprii boni, which
makes a damned person prefer Not-being before being in pains and eternal
torments.

Whatsoever be determined concerning absolute antecedent intent of damning
millions of innocent men as this author charge the Supralapsarians withal.
And I further add, That those who imagine the decrees of Predestination and
Reprobation to be secundum nostrum modum intelligendi before the decree of
permitting, and consequently before the absolute prevision of man's sin, do
easily clear themselves from this accusation, as has been already shown.
Paulus Ferius has these words tending to this purpose, Schol. orth. cap. 28.
p. 48.
Voluit quidem Deus non beatificare Judam, sine ullo respectu peccati; tamen
non habuit voluntatem infligendi poenam, nisi propter peccata, quae in eo
praevidit. And he shows there, that many Schoolmen have embraced this
opinion.

He who in regard of Gods eternal and a devourer of those souls whom he
permits to fall into eternal misery through their own default, neither
speaks nor thinks so reverently of God as he should. God delights not in
the slaughter of any man; but God wills the just punishment of many men. God
is willing to save all men, if they repent and believe. And God has an
absolute will of working repentance and faith in some men, and so of working
their salvation. Were God thus desirous to save all men, he were not absolutely
happy, for he wants part of his happiness that wants his desires.

Too much pains has been taken to prove a conclusion, which those who hold
absolute Predestination and negative Reprobation may as safely grant as those
who hold conditional upon the foreseen good and bad acts of men; which Prosper
himself opposed as a Semipelagian error, and our Church has always rejected.

Treatise.
SECONDLY, this opinion (A) charge God with men's Sins on earth; and makes
him the Author, not of the first sin only that entered by Adam into the
world, but of all other sins that have been, are or shall be committed to the
worlds end: No murders, robberies, rapes, adulteries, insurrections, treasons,
blasphemies, heresies, persecutions, or any other abominations whatsoever, fall
out at any time or in any place, but they are the necessary productions of Gods
almighty decree. The Scriptures, I am sure, teach us another lesson. Thou art
not a God (says David) that has pleasure in wickedness. Psalm. 5.4.
And the Prophet Esaias tells the people that when they did evil in the sight
of the Lord, Esaias 66.4.
they did choose the things which he would not. Jam. 1.13, 14.
Let no man say when be is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God cannot be
tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man: But every man is tempted when
he is drawn away with his own concupiscence. And S. John having referred all
the sins of the world to three heads, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
^yes, and the pride of life, tells us that they are not of the Father, but of
the world. To which speeches let me add the speech of Siracides, though not of
the same authority; Say not thou, It is through the Lord that I fell away: for
thou ought not to do the things that he hates. Say not thou, He has caused
me to err: Ecclus 15.12.
for he has no need of the sinful man.

Pious Antiquity has constantly said the same, and pressed it with sundry
reasons: Some of which are these that follow. If God be the author of sin,
then

1 He (B) is worse then the devil, because the devil does only tempt and
persuade to sin, and his action may be resisted: but God (by this opinion)
does will and procure it by a powerful and effectual decree, which cannot be
r^sisted. This is Prospers argument; Prosper resp. ad obj. 11. Vincent.
Who to some objecting that by S. Augustines doctrine, when Fathers defile
their own daughters, and mothers their own sonn^s, servants murder their
masters, and m^n commit any horrible villainies, it comes to pass, because God
has so decreed; answers, that if this were laid to the devils charge, he
might in some sort clear himself of the imputation; Quia etsi delectatus est
furore peccantium, probaret tamen se non intulisse vim criminum.
because though he be delighted with men's sins, yet he does not, he cannot
compel them to sin: Qua ergo insipientia, quave dementia definitur, ad Dei
reserendum esse consilium, quod nec diabolo in totum asscribi potest, qui in
peccantium flagitiis ille cebrarum adjutor, non voluntatum credendus est esse
generator?
What a madness therefore is it to impute that to God which cannot justly be
fathered upon the devil?

2 He cannot be a punisher of sin: For none (C) can justly punish those
offenses of which they are the authors. This is Prospers argument too; Prosp.
resp ad object. 4. Vincent. Insanum omnino and contra rationem est, dicere,
damnatorem diaboli and ejus famulorum velle ut diabolo serviatur.
It is against reason to say, that he which is the damner of the devil, would
have any man to be the devils servant. This reason Fulgentius uses likewise;
Fulgent. lib. 1. ad Monim. c. 19.
Illius rei Deus ultor est, cujus author non est, God is the avenger of that of
which he is not the author. Tertullian also before them has said, Tert. l. 2.
cont. M^rcion. c. 9. Nec idem habendus est delicti author, qui invenitur
interdictor and condemnator.
He is not to be accounted the author of sin, who is the forbidder, yea and
the condemner of it.

3 He cannot be God; because he should not be just, nor holy, nor the Judge of
the world, all properties essential to God. And this is S. Basils reason, who
has written a whole Homily against this wicked assertion: Basil. homil. quod
Deus non est, etc. Tan^undem est Deum asserere esse autorem peccati, and negare
esse Deum.
It is all one, says he, to say that God is the author of sin, and to say
he is not God.

Upon these and the like considerations I may well conclude, That the opinion
which charge the holy God with the sins of men, is neither good nor true.
But this opinion does so. For albeit the writers that have defended it
(Piscator and a few more of the blunter sort excepted) have never said directly
and in terminis, That God is the cause of sin; yet have they delivered those
things from which it must needs follow by necessary consequence, that he is so.
For they (D) say,

1 That as the decree of Reprobation is absolute, so it is inevitable: Those
poor souls which lie under it, must of necessity be damned. Marlor. Comm. in
Joh. 15. v. 2. Stat igitur firma sententia, Que^cunque Deus ante conditum orbem
elegerit, eum non posse perire; quem vero rejecerit, eum non posse salvari,
etsi omnia sanctorum opera fecerit: usque adeo i^retractabilis est sententia.
It is (says Marlorate) a firm and stable truth, That the man whom God in his
eternal counsel has rejected, though he do all the good works of the Saints,
cannot possibly be saved.

2 That without (F) sin this decree of Reprobation cannot be justly executed.
Piscat. l. cont. Schafm. page 29. these. 27. Deus hoc consilio condidit homines,
ut re ipsa laberentur: quippe cum nisi hac ratione pervenire non potuerit ad
fines illos suos principales.
God (says Piscator) did create men for this very purpose, that they might
indeed fall: for otherwise he could not have atteined those his principal
ends. He means the manifestation of his justice in the damnation of
Reprobates, and of his mercy in the salvation of the Elect. Maccovius also
says the same: Macc. disp. 17. p. 11. Locus misericordiae and justitiae
manifestandae nullus fuisset futurus, si peccatum non exstitisset.
If sin had not been, the manifestation of justice and mercy (which is as
much to say, as the damnation of Reprobates) had never been.

3 That therefore God decreed that Reprobates should unavoidably (F) sin, and
sin unto death, that his eternal ordinance might be executed and they
damned: Zanch. lib. 5. De not. Dei, c. 2. De praedest. part. 4. Resp. ad postr.
arg. prope finem. Damus reprobos necessitate peccandi, eoque and pereundi, ex
hac Dei ordinatione constringi, atque ita constringi ut nequeant non peccare
atque perire.
We grant (says Zanchius) that reprobates are held so fast under Gods almighty
decree, that they cannot but sin and perish. A little after he says, Non
dubitamus itaque confiteri, ex immutabili reprobatione necessitatem peccandi,
and quidem sine resipiscentia ad mortem usque peccandi, eoque and poenas
aeternas dandi, reprobis incumbere.
We doubt not therefore to confess, that there lies upon Reprobates, by the
power of their unchangeable reprobation, a necessity of sinning, yea of
sinning unto death without repentance, and consequently of perishing
everlastingly. Calvine also says that Reprobates obey not the word of God,
partly through the wickedness of their own hearts, and partly because Calv. l.
3. Instit. cap. 24. Sect. 14. Inscrutabili Dei judicio suscitati sunt ad
gloriam ejus sua damnatione illustrandam.
they are raised up by the unsearchable judgment of God to illustrate his
glory by their damnation. I will end this with that speech of Piscator; Pisc.
Resp. ad Dupl. Vorst. part. 1. page 220. Reprobi ad utrumque hoc malum a Deo
praecise destinati sunt, ut in aeternum puniantur, and necessario peccent, and
quidem ideo peccent quo just puniri possint.
Reprobates are precisely appointed to this double evil, to be punished ever
lastingly, and to sin, and therefore to sin that they might be justly
punished.

4 That as he has immutably (G) decreed that Reprobates shall live and die in
sin, so he procures their sins in due time by his Almighty hand, partly by
withdrawing from them grace necessary for the avoiding of sin, and partly by
moving and enclining them by his irresistible and secret workings on their
hearts to sinful actions. Calv. Instit. l. 1. c. 17. Sect. 11.
Calvine says, that devils and reprobate men are not only held fast in Gods
fetters, so as they cannot do what they would, but are also urged and forced by
Gods bridle ad obsequia praestanda, to do as he would have them. And in the
next chapter these are his words, Ibid. cap. 18. Sect. 1. Quod nihil efficiant
homines nisi arcano Dei nutu, nec quicquam deliberando agitent nisi quod ipse
jam apud se decreverit, and arcana sua directione constituat, innumeris and
claris testimoniis probatur.
That men have nothing in agitation, that they bring nothing into action, but
what God by his secret direction has ordered, is apparent by many and clear
testimonies. In the Section following he says, Ib. Sect. 2. Et certe nisi
intus operaretur in mentibus hominum, non recte dictum esset, auferre labium a
veracibus, and a senibus prudentiam, etc.
And surely unless God did work inwardly in the minds of men, it would not be
rightly said, that he takes away wisdom from the wise, etc. In those two
chapters that which he mainly drives at, is to show, that God does not only
behave himself privatively in procuring the sins of men, but does also put
forth powerful and positive acts in the bringing of them to pass. And in his
second Book and fourth chapter after he had said, that God may be said to
harden men by forsaking them, he puts in another way by which God hardens
men, and that (he says) comes a great deal nearer to the propriety of the
Scripture-phrases, namely, by stirring up their wills: Instit. l. 2. c. 4.
sect. 3. Ad exsequenda sua judicia per ministrum itae suae Satanam, and
consilia eorum destinat quo visum est, and voluntates excitat, and conatus
firmat.
God does not only harden men by leaving them to themselves, but by appointing
their counsels, ordering their deliberations, stirring up their wills,
confirming their purposes and endeavors by the minister of his anger, Satan.
And this he proves by the work of God on Sihon king of the Amorites, Deuteronomy.
2.30. and then insinuates the end too why God thus hardens men in their
wicked courses, which is, That he might destroy them; Quia perditum Deus
volebat, obstinatio cordis Divina fuit ad ruinam praeparatio.
Because God intended his ruin, he prepared him for it by his ^nduration.

The sum of all these propositions is this; God who from all eternity
appointed many miserable men to endless and unavoidable torments, decreed for
the bringing-about of their intended ruin, that they should without remedy
live and die in a state of sin: and what he thus decreed from everlasting, he
does most powerfully effect in time, so governing, overruling, and working
upon the wills of those reprobates, that they have no liberty or ability at
all in the issue of avoiding their sins, but must of necessity commit them.
Thus they teach: And therefore by just consequence they make God the author of
sin; as it will plainly appear by these following considerations.

I. It is ordinary to impute sin to those who have not so great a hand (H) in
the production of it as has the Almighty by the grounds of this opinion. For,

1. The devil is called a father of lies, John 8.44. and by the like reason, of
all other sins; and therefore he that commits sin, is said to be of the
devil, and to be a child of the devil, 1. John 3.8, 10. and sin is called a
work of the devil, which the son of God appears to loose verse. 8. And why
is the devil so called, but because he does egg and allure men by inward
suggestions and outward temptations to fall into sin? This is all he does or
can do. But God does much more, if he necessitate and by his decree first, and
next by his powerful and secret working in the souls of men, determine their
wills irresistibly to sin. For to determine, is infinitely more then barely
to persuade; for as much as sin must needs follow the determination, but not
the persuasion of the will. God is therefore a truer cause of sin (by this
doctrine) then the devil.

2. Wicked men are esteemed authors of their own offenses, because they plot,
purpose, choose and commit them, and are immediate agents in the acting of
them. But God (by this opinion) does more: For he (I) over-ruleth the projects
and purposes of wicked men, and by an uncontrollable motion proceeding from an
immutable decree, carries all their deliberations, resolutions, choises and
actions precisely that very way; so as they cannot choose but do as they do,
whatsoever they may think to the contrary. They have indeed potentiam in se
liberam, a power in it self free, to choose what they refuse, or to refuse
what they choose, to determine themselves this way or that way as likes them
best: but they have not liberum usum, a free use of this their power. God does
determine their will before it has determined it self; and makes them do
those only actions which his omnipotent will has determined, and not which
their wills out of any absolute dominion over their own actions have
prescribed. More rightly therefore may God be called the author of all those
offenses: for Opera magis pertinent ad imperantem quam ad exsequ^ntem.
deeds whether good or bad, are owned more truly by him that over-ruleth them,
then by the servile instruments that only execute and do them.

3. Wicked counselors (K) and they who allure and advise men to sin, are
accounted by God and men to be the causes of those sins to which they are the
persvvaders, and have been punished for those misdeeds which others through
their instigations have committed. J^z^bel Ahabs wife was reputed and punished
as the murderer of Naboth, because she counseled and contrived the doing of
it, as we may see 1. Kings 21.23, 25. But vvh^t is Counselling to Enforcing?
Evil counsels may be refused; but an Almighty power cannot be resisted. God
therefore that uses this (according to their doctrine) in the production of
sins, is much more an author of them then he that only uses the other.

II. If we could find out a King (L) that should so carry himself in procuring
the ruin and the offenses of any subject as (by this opinion) God does in the
effecting of the damnation and transgressions of reprobates, we would all
charge him with the ruin and sins of those his subjects. Molin. Anat. c.
12. De praedest. p. 73. Quis non regem abominetur sic loquentem.
Who would not abhor (says Moulin) a King speaking thus, Ego hunc hominem
addico suspendio; sed ut just suspendatur, volo patret homicidium vel
peculatum.
I will have this man hanged; and that I may hang him justly, I will have him
murder or steal? This King (says he) should not only make an innocent man
miserable, sed and sceleratum, but wicked too; and should punish him for that
offense, cujus ipse causa est, of which himself is the cause. It is a clear
case. Sueton. vit. Tib. cap. 61.
Tiberius (as Suetonius reports) having a purpose to put certain virgins to
death, because it was not lawful among the Romans to strangle virgins,
caused them all to be defloured by the hangman, that so they might be
strangled. Who will not say that Tiberius was the principal author of the
deflouring of those maids? In like manner (say the Supralapsarians) God has a
purpose of putting great store of men to the second death; but because it is
not lavvfull for him by reason of his justice to put to death men innocent and
without blame, he has decreed that the devil shall deflour them, that
afterward he may damn them. It follovveth therefore, that God is the main
cause of those their sins.

III. That God (M) is the Author of men's salvation and conversion, all sides
grant: and yet he does no more in the procuring of them, then these men report
him to do in the Reprobates impenitency and damnation. The salvation and
conversion of the Elect (say they) he has absolutely and antecedently,
without the foresight of any deservings of theirs, resolved upon, and by
irresistible means in their several generations draws them to believe,
repent and endure to the end, that so they might be saved, and his absolute
decree accomplished. On the other side, the damnation, the sins and the
final impenitency of Reprobates, he has of his alone will and pleasure
peremptorily decreed; that his decree he executes in time, dravving them on by
his unconquerable power and providence from sin to sin, till they have
made up the measure, and in the end have inflicted on them that eternal
vengeance which he had provided for them. What difference is here in the
course which God takes for the conversion and salvation of the Elect, and the
obduration and damnation of Reprobates? And therefore what hinders but that
God (by their grounds) may as truly be styled the prime cause and author of
the sins of the one as of the conversion of the other?

The Fathers (N) thought it a plain case: and therefore they did generally make
sin an object of prescience, not Predestination, and bent the most of those
arguments by which they refuted this soul assertion, against an absolute,
irresistible and necessitating decree, as I could easily show, but that I fear
to be overlong. Only I will cite some fevv of those authors words, whom
the learned and reverend Bishop has alleged in favor and for the defense of
the Predestinarians and the mainteiners of Gotteschalks opinion.

The Church of Lions in their answer to the positions of Johannes Scotus
which he framed against Gotteschalk, has these words, Bishop Usher his hist.
of Gottesc. page 138. Qui vim and necessitatem peccandi Deum intulisse homini
vel infer dicit, manifest and horribiliter in Deum blasphemat, quem ad
peccata compellendo utiqu^ autorem peccati esse confirmat.
Whosoever says, that God has laid a constraint or a necessity of sinning
upon any man, he does manifestly and fearfully blaspheme God, in as much as he
makes him by affirming that of him, to be the very author of sin. Remigius
Archbishop of that Church, explaining his Churches opinion in the point of
Prescience and Predestination in seven several rules; in the fifth of those
rules he has these words to the same purpose. God (says he) by his
Prescience and Predestination has laid a necessity of being wicked upon no
man, Id. ib. p. 173 Hoc enim si fecisset, ipse utique esset author malorum, etc.
For if he had done this, he should have been the author of sins.

And thus (in my judgment) does it plainly appear that by absolute
Reprobation, as it is taught the upper way, God is made to be the true cause
of men's sins.

Many distinctions are brought to free the (O) Supralapsarian way from this
crimination: all which (me think) are no better then mere delusions of the
simple and inconsiderate, and give no true satisfaction to the understanding.

I. There is (say they) a tvvofold decree: 1. an Operative, Permissive, by
which he decrees only to let it come to pass. If God should work sin by
an operative decree, then he should be the author of sin; but not if he
decree by a permissive decree to let it come to pass. And this only they say
they maintein.

1. It is true that God has decreed to suffer sin: leaving him in the hand
of his own counsel, Ecclus 15.13. He suffered the nations in times past to walk
in their own ways, Acts 14.16. And daily does he suffer both good and bad to
fall into many sins. And this he does, not because he stands in need of
sin for the setting forth of his glory; for he has no need of the sinful
man, Ecclus 15. but partly, because he is summus provisor, supreme moderatour
of the world, and knovveth how to use that well which is ill done, and to
bring good out of evil; and especially for that reason which Tertullian
presses, namely, Tertull. l. 1. contr. Marcion.
Because man is made by Gods own gracious constitution a free creature,
undetermined in his actions till he determine himself, and therefore may not be
hindered from sinning by omnipotency, because God uses not to repeal his own
ordinances.

2. It is true also, that a permissive decree is no cause ^f sin, because it
is merely extrinsecall to the sinner, and has no influence at all upon the
sin: it is an antecedent only, and such a one too, as being put, sin
follovveth not of necessity. And therefore it is fitly (P) contradistinguished
to an operative decree. And if that side would in good earnest impute no more
in sinful events to the Divine power then the word Permission imports,
their main conclusion would fall, and the controversy between us end. But,

1. Many of them reject this distinction utterly, and will have God to decree
sin efficaciter, with an energeticall and vvorking will. Colloq. Mompel. 2.
per page 177.
Witness that discourse of Beza, wherein he averreth and labors to prove,
that God does not only permit sin, but will it also: And witness Calvine
too, who has a whole Section against it, calling it a carnal distinction,
invented by the flesh, and effugium, a mere evasion to shift off this seeming
absurdity, Calv. Instit. l. 4. c. 18. Sect. 1, and 2.
That that man is made blind volente and jubente Deo, by Gods will and
commandment, who must shortly after be punished for his blindness. He calls
it also sigmentum, a fiction, and says they do ineptire, play the fools, that
use it. By many reasons also does he endeavor to lay open the weakness of
it, taxing those who understand such Scriptures as speak of Gods smiting men
with a spirit of slumber and giddiness, of blinding their minds, infatuating
and hardening their hearts, etc. of a permission and suffering of men to be
blinded and hardened. Idem, ibid. l. 2. c. 4. Sect. 3.
Nimis frivola est ista solutio, says he, This is too frivolous a gloss. In
another place he blames those that refer sin to Gods prescience only,
calling their speeches argutiae, tricks and quirks which Scripture will not
bear; and those likewise that ascribe it to Gods permission: and says,
Similiter quod de permissione afferunt, dilutius est quam ut subsistat.
What they bring touching the Divine permission in this business, will not
hold water.

2. They (Q) that admit the word Permissive do willingly mistake it, and
while (to keep off this blovv) they use the word, they corrupt the meaning.
For 1. Permission is an act of Gods consequent and judiciary will, by which he
punishes men for abusing their freedom, and committing such sins day by day
as they might have avoided, and to which he proceeds lento gradu, slowly and
unvvillingly, as we may see Psalm. 81.11, 12. Israel would none of me: so I
gave them up, etc. Ezekiel. 18.39. Go and serve every one his idol, seeing ye
will not obey me, etc. Romans 1.21, 24. Because when they knew God, they
glorified him not as God: therefore God gave them up to their hearts lust, to
vile affections, and to a reprobate mind. Revel. 22.11. He which is unjust, let
him be unjust still. In these places and many more we may see, that persons
left to themselves are sinners only; and not all sinners, but the obstinate
and wilful, which will by no means be reclaimed. But the permission which they
mean, is an act of Gods antecedent will, exercised about innocent men, lying
under no guilt at all in Gods eternal consideration. 2. Permission, (R) about
whomsoever it is exercised, obstinate sinners or men considered without sin,
is no more then a not-hindring of them from falling that are able to stand, and
supposes a possibility of sinning or not-sinning in the parties permitted: But
with them it is a withdrawing or withholding of grace needful for the avoiding
of sin, and so includes an absolute necessity of sinning: for from the
withdrawing of such grace sin must needs follow, as the fall of Dagons house
followed Samsons plucking away the pillars that were necessary for the
upholding of it. Maccovius in two disputations, Maccov. Coll. Theol. disp. 9.
page 10.
expounding this word Permission, circumscribeth it within two acts: the first
of which, is a subtraction of Divine assistance necessary to the preventing of
sin. And having proved it by two arguments, that none may think he is alone
in this, he says, that he is compassed about with a cloud of witnesses, and
produces two: The first of them is our ^everend and (S) learned Whitaker, some
of whose words alleged by him are these, Page 15. Permissio peccati est
privatio auxilii Divini, quo posito peccatum impediretur.
Permission of sin, is a privation of that aid, which being present, sin
would have been hindered. The second is Pareus; for saying that Subtracto
auxilio Dei homo [Adamus] istis facultatibus ad standum been uti non potuit.
that help which God withdrew from Adam, being withdrawn, Adam could not so use
his endowments as to persevere. And this doctrine (says he) is defended by our
men, as it appears out of Pareus, lib. De gratia primi hominis, cap. 4. page
46.

Their permission therefore of sin being a subtraction of necessary grace, is
equivalent to an actual effectual procu^ing and working of it; (For causa
deficiens in necessariis ^st efficiens, a deficient cause in things necessary
is truly effici^nt.) and so is but a mere fig-leaf to cover the foulness of
their opinion.

II. There are (T) two things (they say) in every material part, which is the
substance of the ^ction; 2. The formal part, which is the evil or obliquity of
it. God is the author of the action it self, but not of the obliquitie and
evil that cleaves to it: as he that causes ^ lame horse to go, is the cause
of his going, but not of his lam^ going. And therefore it follows not from
their opinion That God is the author of sin.



2. It is (V) not true, that they make the decree of Go^ only of actions and
not of their aberrations: for they mak^ it to be the cause of all those means
that lead to damnation and therefore of sinful actions as sinful, and not as
bare act^ons. For actions deserve damnation not as actions, but ^
transgressions of Gods law.

3. To the Simile I say, That the rider or master that she resolve first to
flay his horse or knock him on the head, a^ then to make him lame that for his
halting he may kill hi^ is undoubtedly the cause of his halting: and so if God
det^^mine to cast men into hell, and then to bring them into a st^^ of sin,
that for their sins he may bring them to ruin, (...) cannot conceive him to
be less then the author as w^ of their sins as of those actions to which
they do insep^rably adhere, and that out of Gods intention to destr^^^ them.

(X) is determined to an object two way^ 1. By compulsion, against the bent and
inclination of it; 2. ^ necessity, according to the natural desire and liking
of ^ Gods Predestination (say they) determines the will to sin^ this last way,
but not the first. It forces no man to do the which he would not, but carries
him toward that which ^ would: When men sin, it is true they cannot choose;
and is as true they will not choose. It follows not therefore from the
grounds of their doctrine, That Gods decree is the ca^ of men's sins, but
their own wicked wills.

necessity and compulsion, but used them in this argume^^ promiscuously; and
did deny that God did necessitate men ^ sin, lest they should grant him
hereby to be the author o^ sin, as I have touched before, and shall intimate
again a^terward. Nor did the Schoolmen put any difference between them, Calv.
Instit. l. 2. c. 1. sect. 5.
as may appear by the testimony of Mr Calvine who speaking of the
School-distinction of the Wills threefol^ liberty, from Necessity, from Sin,
from Misery, says, This ^istinction I could willingly receive, but that it
confounds Ne^essity with Coaction.

2. That which necessitateth the will to sin, is as truly the ^ause of sin
as that which forces it; because it makes the ^inne to be inevitably
committed, which otherwise might be ^voided: And therefore if the Divine decree
necessitate man's will to sin, it is as truly the cause of the sin as if it
did ^nforce it.

3. That which necessitateth the will to sin, is more truly ^he cause of the
sin then the will is; because it overruleth ^he will, and bears all the
stroke, takes from it its true ^iberty, by which it should be lord of it self
and disposer of ^ts own acts, and in respect of which it has been usually
^alled by Philosophers and Fathers too, (...), a power which is (Y) under the
insuperable ^heck and control of no lord but it self. It overruleth (I ^ay)
and makes it become but a servile instrument, irresisti^ly subject to
superior command and determination: and therefore is a truer cause of all such
acts and sins as proceed from the will so determined, then the will is. For
when ^wo causes concur to the producing of an effect, the one a principal
overruling cause, the other but isntrumental and wholly at the devotion of the
principal; then is the effect in all reason to be imputed to the principal,
which by the force of its influx and impression produces it, rather then to
the subordinate and isntrumental, which is but a mere servant in the
production of it. We shall find it ordinary in Scripture, to ascribe the effect
to the principal agent: It is not ye that speak, says Christ, but the Spirit
of my Father that speaks in you, Matthew. 10.20. I labored more abundantly
then they all: yet not I, but the grace of God which was in me, 1. Cor. 15.10.
And, I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, says S. Paul, Gal. 2.20. In
these and many other places, the effect or work spoken of is taken from the
instrument, and given to the principal agent. Which being so, though man's will
work with Gods decree in the commission of sin, and wills the sin which
it does; yet seeing what the will does, it does by the commanding power of
Gods almighty decree, and so it does that otherwise it cannot do; the sin
committed cannot so rightly be ascribed to man's will the inferior as to Gods
necessitating decree the superior cause.

4. That which makes a man sin by way of necessity only, that is, with and
not against his will, is the cause of his sin in a worse manner then that
which constrains him to sin against his will: As he which by powerful
persuasions draws a man to stab or hang or poison himself, is in a grosser
manner the cause of that evil and unnatural action then he that by force
compels him; because he makes him to consent to his own death. And so if
Gods decree do not only make men sin, but sin willingly too, not only
cause that they shall male agere, do evil, but male velle, will evil, it has
the deeper hand in the sin.

(Z) may be considered as Sin, or as a Means of declaring Gods justice in
men's punishments; God does not predestinate men to sin as it is Sin, but as
a Means of their punishment. He is not therefore (say they) the author of
sin.

Bonum oritu^ ex integris: End, manner, yea and matter too must be good, or
else the action is naught. He that shall steal, that he may give an alms; or
commit adultery, that he may beget children for the Church; or oppress the
poor, to teach them patience; or kill a wicked man, that he may do no more
hurt with his example; or do any forbidden thing; though his end be never so
good, he sins notwithstanding: And the reason is, because the evil of sin
is greater then any good that can come by sin; for as much as it is laesio
Divinae majestatis, a wronging of Gods majesty, and so Divino bono opposita,
directly prejudicial to the good of almighty God, as much as any thing can be.
This S. Paul knew very well: and therefore he tells us plainly, that we must
not do evil that good may come of it, Romans 3.8. Whosoever therefore wills a
sin, though for never so good an end, he wills that which is truly and
formally a Sin: And consequently God* though he will sin for ends never so
good, yet willing it with such a powerful and effectual will as gives a
necessary being to it, he becomes author of that which is formally sin.

2. The members of this distinction are not opposite: For sin (D) as Sin,
and in no other consideration, is a means of punishment. If God therefore
wills it as a Means of punishment, he wills it as a Sin: his decree is
terminated at the very formality of it.

3. This distinction fasteneth upon God a further aspersion, and loadeth him
with three special indignities more. 1. Want (TH) of Wisdom and Providence.
His counsels must needs be weak, if he can find out no means to glorify his
justice, but by the bringing-in of sin, which his soul hates, into the
world, and appointing men to commit it, that so he may manifest justice in the
punishment of it. 2. Want (L) of Sincerity and plain dealing with men. Tiberius
(as Suetonius reports) having a purpose to put the two sons of Germanicus,
Drusus and Nero, to death, Sueton. in vit. Tiber. c. 54. Varia fraud induxit
ut concitarentur ad convitia, and concitati perderentur.
used sundry cunning contrivances to draw them to revile him, that reviling him
they might be put to death; and herein is justly censured for great hypocrisy.
And so if God having appointed men by his absolute will to inevitable
perdition, do decree that they shall sin, that so they may be damned for
those sins which he decrees and draws them into; he dissembleth, because
he slaughtereth them under a pretext of justice, for sin, but yet for such
sins only as he has by his eternal counsel appointed as the means of their
ruin. 3. Want (X) of Mercy in a high degree; as if he did so delight in blood,
that rather then he will not destroy men's souls, he will have them live and die
in sin, that he may destroy them: Like to those Pagan Princes, of whom
Justine Martyr Apolog. 2. two or three leaves from the beginning, says,
Videmini vereri ne omnes colant justitiam, atque ita desint in quos
animadvertatis. Verum haec cura fuit magis carnificum quam bonorum principum.
They were afraid that all should be just, lest they should have none to
punish. But this is the disposition of hangmen, rather then of good Princes.
And therefore far be these foul enormities, and in particular this latter,
from the God of truth and Father of mercies.

And thus notwithstanding these distinctions, it is (in my conceit) most
evident, That the rigid and upper way makes God the author of men's sins as
well as punishments. And so much for the first general Inconvenience which
arises from this opinion, namely the Dishonor of God.

Observations premised for the more clear understanding and answering this
Authors Objections.
THe opinion here aimed at is the doctrine of absolute Reprobation, concerning
which all disputes are frivolous, if it be not first agreed upon what is
understood by these two words, absolute Reprobation.

Predestination. If a decree of God first beholding and foreseeing certain
particular persons as believing and constantly persevering unto the end in
faith and godliness, and thereupon electing them unto eternal happiness,
then we will grant that the Remonstrants (whom this Author follows) embrace
the doctrine of the Church of England. But if in our XVIIth Article, God in his
eternal Predestination beholds all men as lying in massa corrupta, and
decrees out of this generality of mankind, being all in a like damnable
condition, to elect some by his secret counsel, to deliver them from the curse
and damnation by a special calling according to his eternal purpose,, and by
working in them faith and perseverance; then it is plain that the Remonstrants
and this Author have left the doctrine of the Church of England in the point
of Predestination, and therefore may well be suspected also in the point of
Reprobation, which must have its true measure taken from that other.

Secondly, take notice, what the word Absolute imports, when it is applied
unto the eternal and immanent acts or decrees of the Divine Predestination.
Not (as the Remonstrants continually mistake it) a peremptory decree of saving
persons elected whether they believe or not believe, nor yet a decree of
forcing or necessitating predestinate persons unto the acts of believing,
repenting, persevering, or walking in the way which leads unto everlasting
life; but a gracious and absolute decree of bestowing as well Faith, Repentance
and Perseverance, as eternal life, upon all those to whom in his everlasting
purpose he vouchsafed the special benefit of Predestination. And that God can
and does according to his eternal purpose infallibly work faith and
perseverance in the elect without any coaction or necessitation of man's will,
is agreed upon by all Catholic Divines, and was never opposed but by Pelagius.
And this absolute intending of eternal life to persons elected, and absolute
intending of giving unto such the special grace of a perseverant Faith, is
that Absolute Predestination which our Mother the Church has commended unto
us, and which we must defend against the error of the Semipelagians and
Remonstrants, who strive to bring-in a Predestination or Election wherein God
sees faith and perseverance in certain men going before Predestination, and
does not prepare it for them in eternity by his special act of
Predestination, nor bestow it upon them in due time, as a consequent effect of
his eternal Predestination.



But further from hence we may well collect, That our Church, which by
Predestination understands a special Benefit out of Gods mercy and absolute
freedom absolutely prepared from all eternity, and in time bestowed
infallibly upon the Elect, would have us conceive no further of the silenced
decree of Reprobation, then the Not-preparing of such effectual grace, the
Not-decreeing of such persons unto the infallible atteinment of Glory, the
decreeing to permit them through their own default deservedly and infallibly to
procure their own misery. All this is no more then God himself has avouched
of himself, Exodus 33.19.
miserebor cui voluero, and clemens ero in quem mihi placuerit. And that which
the Apostle attributes unto God Romans 9.15, 16, 17, 18.

Fourthly, this non-praedestinatio, non-electio, praeteritio or negativa
reprobatio (for by all these names Divines speak of it) does as absolutely
leave some out of the number of the predestinate, as Predestination does
include others within the same number. And the number of both formally and
materially is so certain, that the diminution or augmentation of either is by
the general consent of orthodox Divines condemned for an erroneous opinion:
though the Semipelagians spurned against this truth. If under the name of
absolute Predestination any conceive a violent decree of God thrusting men into
an estate of grace and glory, and under the name of absolute Reprobation, a
violent decree of God thrusting men into sin and misery, let who will
confute them: for their opinion is erroneous concerning the one, and
blasphemous concerning the other. But under color of opposing such imaginary
decrees, to bring-in a conditionate Predestination, to exclude this negative
Reprobation, to settle them both upon prevision of humane acts, is opposite to
the doctrine of S. Augustine approved anciently by the catholic Church, and
till this newfangled age generally and commonly allowed and embraced both by
the Romanists and by the Protestants. Penottus, who would fain deny negative
Reprobation, yet is driven to confess, Lib. 7. cap. 17.
Doctores communiter admittunt reprobationem negativam, doc entque communiter
obdurationem, seu permissionem manendi in peccato usque ad mortem, effectum
esse hujus reprobationis. If the common opinion of Divines be, That permission
of final continuance under the guilt of sin follows after the decree of
this negative Reprobation, then this Author together with the Remonstrants,
who acknowledge no decree of Reprobation but that which follows upon
prevision of men's final continuance in sin, are wandered into a singular
opinion of their own.

These things premised concerning the absolute Predestination and Reprobation
which our English Divines maintein, and the conditionate Predestination and
Reprobation which some of ours have lately received out of Dutchland, all
objections so far as they concern us are easily answered.

An Answer to the Objection, That this opinion charge God with men's sins.
holiness and happiness, of all saving grace wherewith he is endued here, and
of that eternal glory which he obteineth hereafter. And for this cause
especially we deny the Arminian Predestination built upon foreseen acts of
man's free will, because it does not fully and truly acknowledge the special
mercy of God either in the election or salvation of the predestinate. But for
the doctrine of absolute negative Reprobation, we utterly deny, that it
charge God with or makes him the author of any sin. It makes God the
determiner, not to prevent any men's sins; which easily he could do, if he
were resolved to show them special mercy: but it makes not God the author
or necessary producer of any man's sins; which is a thing as unpossible, as
for the sun to be the author or producer of darkness. And therefore we
willingly subscribe unto all which the scripture or pious Antiquity have said
against this error.

otherwise decree the production of good actions, and the permission of bad
actions to be produced by defective agents. Of the former he is a powerful and
effectual worker: Of the latter he is only a voluntary sufferer, and a
powerful and irresistible orderer or disposer. Thus God powerfully wrought
Faith, Repentance, Perseverance in the will of Peter, according to his decree
of absolute Predestination: and according to his decree of negative
Reprobation, he suffered Judas to split himself voluntarily upon the rocks of
Covetousness, Treachery, Infidelity, Impenitencie, and he turned those very
sins to his own greater glory. Predestination is a cause effectual in the
producing of all salutiferous actions; but Reprobation is no effectual cause
in the producing of any wicked actions: and neither the one nor the other
implies compulsion, coaction or necessitation to actions whether good or evil.
And this was the effect of the answer which Prosper made to the Semipelagians,
when they objected against Augustines doctrine of absolute Predestination, as
the Remonstrants do now against ours. I wonder therefore that this Author
could not see, that Prosper, whom he alleges, holds this objection for a
mere calumniation.

God punishes not those actions whereof he is the author or effectual
working cause: for such actions are always holy and rewardable, not malicious
and punishable: But God, who according to the doctrine of Augustine, Prosper,
Fulgentius, and all other orthodox Divines of that age, absolutely out of his
own free mercy predestined some unto grace and glory, and as absolutely out
of his own free will passed-by others, not-electing or predestinating them to
saving grace and glory, is notwithstanding denied to be the cause of any man's
sin. Therefore in their judgment absolute Predestination and Reprobation
makes not God the cause of sin.

Answers to the Arguments endeavoring to prove that the defenders of absolute
Predestination and Reprobation make God the author of sin.
TO the first in general we answer, Maccovius, or any other private Doctor
holding absolute Predestination and Reprobation has uttered. We leave them as
well as we do the Remonstrants, where they leave the old way, and stray into
crooked bypath.

More particularly; We grant the decree of negative Reprobation to be absolute:
But we deny that thereupon it will follow, that the damnation of singular
persons not-elected, or in this sense reprobated, is by way of necessity and
by virtue and efficacy of this decree imposed upon any. A great part of the
Angels were under this decree of Non-election or negative Reprobation, and yet
not one of them by virtue of this decree was necessitated unto damnation, but
by an act of voluntary rebellion fell thereinto.

And if by Necessity this Author means nothing but that which the Schoolmen
term necessitatem immutabilitatis, Vid. Coll. Hag. Berti^, page 111.
then he must know, that the Election and Reprobation of singular persons such
as it is acknowledged by the Remonstrants, is as certain from all eternity, as
immutable, and in this sense as necessary as that which we defend.

Last of all, To inquire whether the decree of Reprobation be evitable or
inevitable by men, is a strange Quaere; since evitabilitie or inevitabilitie is
a thing which may be well questioned in our own temporal acts, but in the
eternal immanent operations or decrees of God, which were established before
the foundations of the world were laid, it is improper to say they were
inevitable by us, and false to say they were evitable. Take the judgment of a
learned Jesuit (no favourer of the opinions of Calvine, Beza, or any
Protestant Divines) concerning the immutabilitie of the Divine volitions or
decrees: Ruiz. De volunt. disp. 16.. 2, 3.
Imperfectio foret, si Deus in futurum tempus reservaret decretum liberum. And
again; Turpe Deo esset non statuere ab aeterno quicquid facturus esset vel non
facturus in tempore.

And for the immutabilitie of all such eternal decrees; Si Dei volitio libera
mutaretur, sequeretur per mediatam illationem mutatio Divinae substantiae. And
finally, he sets down this general conclusion; Ibid.. 7.
In quolibet instanti temporis tam est simpliciter necessaria quaelibet volitio
Dei, etiamsi respiciat creaturas in tempore futuro producendas. The
Remonstrants therefore must either deny that the decrees of electing Peter and
Not-electing or Reprobating Judas are to be accounted eternal volitions of
God, or confess that their debating of the Mutabilitie or Vitabilitie of all
such decrees, proceeds from ignorance of the very nature of that about which
they contend.

justly executed without man's sin, because God established from all eternity
no decree of damning any man but for sin. As for the decree of Non-election,
it had the same absolute dependence upon Gods free pleasure which the opposite
decree of Election had.

decree we now speak of. The eternal decree of Judas his damnation, or of the
very devils, was never in voluntate Divina without the prevision of their
sins, nor determined to be executed otherwise then for and upon their own
misdeserts. But the Non-election or negative Reprobation of Judas and of the
apostaticall angels, or (in plainer terms) the Not-preordaining them to the
infallible atteining of eternal happiness, and the decree of permitting them
finally to lose eternal happiness by their own deficient, voluntary, final
wicked actions, is such an eternal absolute decree of the Divine will, as
depends not upon any foreseen acts of man's will, though it exclude not the
eternal prevision of all future acts of men whatsoever. We grant not
therefore, that by this absolute Reprobation, God decrees that men
not-predestinate should unavoidably sin, that so they may justly and
certainly be damned: but we grant that together with this absolute
Non-election, God foreknoweth that persons not-elected will voluntarily commit
those sins for which he intends to condemn them, and to glorify himself in
the manifestation of his justice upon them, and the more clear manifestation of
his mercy toward the elect.

For harsh or false propositions of particular authors who dispute about
Predestination and Reprobation, I will not justify them. Only I would have
this Author consider, whether their errors were a sufficient cause to make
him run into the contrary erroneous doctrine of the Remonstrants; who to
avoid the absolute decree of Election and Non-election or Preterition thrust
upon the world a decree founded upon the prevision of men's distinct acts, good
or bad, thereupon making God distinguish them into Elect and Non-elect, or
Predestined and Not-predestinated. A mere Semipelagian doctrine, grounding
Election and Reprobation upon the merits or demerits of men; as both the
orthodox Fathers and Semipelagians used the words Mereri or Meritum, when the
one contended that Predestination and negative Reprobation were mere acts of
free Mercy and absolute Liberty, preparing for some denying to other the
infallible means of beatitude; and the other would make them acts of the Divine
Justice, passing differently upon both according to the foreseen difference of
their future actions, good or bad: which the Ancients without scruple termed
merita and demerita.

Immutabilitie of Gods eternal decrees whereby Reprobates are necessitated or
caused either to live or die in sin, is utterly false. Negative Reprobation
implies no such causalitie. And as for the decree of damnation (which some
call Positive Reprobation) it procures no man's sins, though it import a
necessity of undergoing just punishment for sin.

The peremptory decree of excluding men out of heaven and tormenting them in
hell, is one thing; and the absolute decree of Permitting men by their own
defective free will to fail in the atteinment of heaven, and to fall into the
torments of hell, is another. Penott. lib. 7. cap. 13.. 4.
The former is a judicial act or decree, and respects men as Gods eternal
knowledge finds them in egressu ex hac vita. The latter is an act of Gods
absolute and sovereigne dominion, freely disposing of the preparation and
donation or of the withholding and denying of that which he owes unto no man,
according to the liberty of his own will. Penott. lib. 7.3.. 10.
Quis tam imprudens qui dicat voluntatem excludendi efficaciter aliquem a fine,
and voluntatem permittendi illum pro sua liberate deficere a fine, non esse
voluntates distinctas.

What is alleged out of Calvine to prove that God, to effect his decree of
absolute Reprobation, procures or works in reprobates their sinful
actions, proves no such matter. Calvine says that the devils, totamque
improborum cohortem, non compedibus tantum teneri ligatos, sed etiam ad
obsequia praestanda fraeno cogi. What could be spoke in this point more truly
and judiciously? Is to hold them so fettered that they cannot move a finger
without Gods permission, all one with procuring and by an irresistible power
working in them their malicious actions? or rather a restraining and limiting
of their wickedness? Is fraeno cogere ad obsequia sibi praestanda, all one
with compelling them to wicked actions? or rather, by the admirable act of
Divine providence, making their disobedience to Gods revealed will serve to the
fulfilling of his concealed will? Read the whole Section, and you shall see
the point admirably well expressed by learned Calvine, and quite mistaken or
miserably wrested by this Author.

For the other places cited out of Calvines works, they import thus much; That
wicked men cannot bring to effect any wicked action according to their own
will, unless God has foredecreed that such an act, for some good which he
means to draw out of it, should be acted here in this world. And furthermore,
they import, That God does not only behave himself privatively in sinful
acts and events, but that he therein exercises positive and powerful acts.
The very decree of permitting that sin to be committed which lies in Gods
will to hinder, is a positive act of the Divine will, which is positively
conversant about all the sins of men, though not working them as effects, yet
working upon them as material objects, and using them to such purposes as make
best and most for his glory. This is not a mere privative demeanor. And last
of all, in the stirring up of their wills, even unto those actions which are
malicious in the doers, there may be and often is a positive act of God, and
yet most pure and free from infusing the least drop of malice into the wills of
such wicked agents. It is a positive act of God, to stir up a particular
cogitation in the mind of a wicked man, which otherwise would never have come
into his mind: It is a positive act of God, to order and dispose the
concurrence of all circumstances according to his own good pleasure. When God
certainly foreseeing that such a cogitation good in it self, or such
circumstances in themselves not bad, will infallibly through the ^bred malice
of wicked men stir them up to wicked actions; God procuring such ^houghts to
arise in bad minds, and order^ng the concurrence of such harmless
cir^umstances to be presented unto bad men, is thereby even in the phrase of
holy Scripture said to stir them up to those actions.

I want paper-room here to explain a point of so deep consideration. I will
only say this on the behalf of Calvine, that he attributes unto God no other
positive act in the sins of men then the Scripture does, and in no other
meaning then it does. And it were no hard matter to show, that S. Augustine,
the ancient Schoolmen, yea, the very Papists and Jesuits themselves, when they
have railed against Calvine for making God the author of sin, are at length
forced by evidence of Scripture to grant as many positive acts of God
conversant about the sins of men, and if not in the same words, yet in words
equipollent and as express as ever Calvine used. It is therefore a weak
inference and a false collection which this Author makes from Calvines
forenamed propositions. For God, who (according to Calvines doctrine) appointed
no man to torments but only in respect of his misdeeds, did not tie himself to
bring about any man's ruin; neither did he thereby debar himself from
furnishing any wicked man with sufficient means and remedies; neither does he
so overruled by any decree of his the wills of wicked and reprobate men, that
their liberty is extinguished, or a necessity of committing this or that
particular sin imposed upon them. These are dreams and fancies which by the
occasion of the doctrine of absolute Predestination and Reprobation have risen
out of the addle heads of the Remonstrants: they are no necessary consequents
arising from the doctrine it self: And therefore by no just consequent can it
be proved or concluded, that absolute Predestination and absolute Preterition
or negative Reprobation make God the author of sin.

An Answer to the Considerations page 116, etc.
GOd has no hand at all in the production actions as they have formalem or
mali moralis, which consists in the deficiency or obliquitie of the will
opposite to the straight rule of Gods law. Of this defect or malicious
crookedness God neither is nor possibly can be a Physical or Moral causer.
But all sinful and defective actions have a substratum peccati; which is a
natural action of the mind, or of the body, or both. This natural action
whereunto the formal reason of sin cleaves, has a positive and real
being: and therefore it must be reduced unto God, as Augustine has truly
concluded against the Manichees; to whom he gives this admonition, De duab.
anim. cont. Manich. c. 6. in fine.
Vt eos sequi mallent qui omne quicquid esset, quoniam esset, in quantumque
esset, ex uno Deo esse praedicarent.

If any, disputing for absolute Predestination and Reprobation, make God the
cause of that which gives unto the free actions of men the formal reason of
their sin, let him be anathematized: But if they make God the cause of that
inward or outward natural action wherein this malicious defect of man's will is
found, they hold nothing but what their very Adversaries are forced to grant.
Vide Penot. lib. 8. cap. 11.. 9. p. 477. and Ruiz. De volunt. disp. 27.. 3.
number. 17. Vbi tres modos agnoscit quibus actionem peccati ess^ a Deo tradunt
scholastici. And Suarez says, Omnes convenient proprio and reali influxi
concurrere Deum ad hos actus liberi arbitri^ ut reales actus sunt, etiamsi
pessimi and intrinsece mali sunt: And yet Opusc. l. 2. c. 1. p. 126.
Omnes etiam convenient, Deum absolute, and simpliciter non ess^ causam
peccati. So Valentianus; In 1. Aquin. q. 19. page 436.
Entitatem pravae actionis omnes fatemur cadere in voluntatem Divinam cum fit,
and esse a Deo tanquam a causa universali concurrente cum voluntal^ humana.

I wonder how that should be blasphemy when it comes from Calvine or Beza
which is found divinity when it comes from their adversaries. As for that
which is added, concerning Gods necessitating by his decree, and the
determining of men's wills to sin, and that irresistibly; they are chimericall
fancies. For the absolute decrees of God determining amongst possible actions
and events, which shall be and which shall not be, alter not the natural
operation of the agents. God absolutely decreed to give Peter faith,
repentance, perseverance: and because these are good supernatural acts, God
was the true effectual working cause of them all; yet not by way of
necessitation, but by giving Peter that spirit which made him most freely
perform them all. For wicked actions, which according to Gods eternal
determinate decree come into act at the time appointed, as the betraying of
Christ by Judas, the murdering of him by the Jews, in these and such like the
Divine decree moves no man, much less irresistibly determines him unto those
wicked actions: The devil and his own free will are the only moving and
determining causes: But the Divine decree, which for the good of mankind and
Gods glory fore-appointed the death of Christ, and willingly permitted these
Agents to effect their malicious actions, powerfully so ordered all
circumstances as God foresaw and foreknew would infallibly by the free and
wicked actions of men effect the just and holy purpose of God. Where then is
the irresistible necessitation of man's will, which this Author always
presumes (and never goes about to prove) must needs follow upon Gods absolute
decrees of infallibly working good actions in the elect, and absolutely
permitting and powerfully disposing of all the future bad actions which devils
or men shall commit to the end of the world?

overruled the supernatural good actions of the elect, as they cannot choose
but do as they do, or the bad and wicked actions of the Non-elect. Absolute
Predestination does by the virtue of effectual grace so rule and affect the
free will of the predestinate, that it causes them freely to do as they do.
And absolute Non-election or Reprobation does so permit the reprobate to the
guidance of their own defective will, that freely and upon a deliberate choice
they do as they do. Neither do they only think or dream they have such a
freedom, but their own experience and conscience assures them that they have
it. And therefore Ruiz De scient. Dei, disp. 2.. 1, and 3.
has not unfitly described the Divine permission, which is made an effect of
negative Reprobation, to be decretum manens in Deo quo decernit non impedire
peccatum, and decernit aliqua bona facere, licet sciat illorum occasion
committendum esse peccatum. And he further grants that Ibid.
all the sins of men in time to be committed, might be and de facto were
foreseen by God, in decreto hoc praedefiniente permissionem illorum. And last
of all he adds, Dei voluntate, consilio, decreto, definitione fieri
peccatorum actiones, significat scriptura. To which purpose he bringeth-in the
very self-same places of Scripture which Calvine and our Protestant Divines
usually allege. By all which it appears how weakly and falsely, upon the
infallibility of future actions decreed by God quoad ipsum eventum, the
necessitation of man's free will to the forenamed actions is collected.

Augustine, who was a stiff mainteiner of the absolute decree of Predestination
and Preterition, and a stiff opposer of the Semipelagian Election and
Non-election founded upon good or bad actions of men eternally foreseen by God,
does everywhere shake-off this Pelagian objection, That by such decrees man's
free will is necessitated, and all freedom extinguished.

He has not only potentiam in se liberam, but liberum usum potentiae, who
commits his wicked actions with deliberation and election, and can upon
other deliberation resolve to do otherwise, or to suspend such wicked actions,
and cease from them for a time. Which freedom is evident in adulterers,
thieves, and all manner of sinners, who being resolved to commit this or that
sin, when they perceive some great danger, presently choose to abstein from
it till they have sitter opportunity to commit it.

As for the predetermination of men's wills, which this Author harpeth upon, it
is a controversy between the Dominicanes and Jesuits: With whose
Metaphysicall speculations our Protestant Divines love not to torture their
brains. In brief we acknowledge no such predetermination flowing from Gods
absolute decree, as either in good or bad actions takes away the natural
dominion which free agents have over their own actions. And yet if this
dominion be conceived so absolute as that it excludes the dominion of God over
man's will, we hold it an erroneous fancy.

Counselor either by his word

Yea, but he inforceth wicked men, and by an almighty power which cannot be
resisted causes the production of all their sins.

If the absolute decree of electing some and not-electing others make God
enforce the non-elected or reprobated unto any wickedness, we grant that it
makes God the Author of sin. But this is Petitio principii, a miserable
begging of that which will never be granted, and which this Author perpetually
presumes to be a plain consequent of absolute negative Reprobation, but never
dares attempt the proving of it.

His error springs from ignorance of the different means and manner of the
Divine operation in persons mercifully ordained unto eternal felicity, and
persons not comprised in this merciful decree of Predestination, but passed-by
and left by their own defective and wicked actions to plunge themselves into
endless misery. Persons ordained unto eternal felicity stand in need of the
infallible direction and effectual operation of the Almighty: Otherwise their
own will is such a broken bow, as that by it they never attein the scope
whereunto God has preordained them. God therefore takes upon himself to be a
powerful worker and author of all those supernatural acts whereby they tend
unto the kingdom of Glory. But the case is quite otherwise with men
not-elected. Defective actions cannot proceed from the operation of an almighty
and holy God: they are the productions which defective causes of themselves
freely bring forth, where they are not guided and acted by that special grace
which guides and acts all Gods elect.

And notwithstanding, though God cannot be an Author or a producer, much less
an Inforcer, in regard of any sinful action, yet God may be a Decreer, a
Determiner, in permitting persons not-elected to fall voluntarily into sins,
to continue voluntarily in them unto their lives end, and for them to undergo
endless misery in another life. And this is all which can truly be inferred
upon the decree of absolute Election and Non-election. Bonaventure in effect
says the same; Lib. 1. did. 46. quaest. 5.
Malum non subest potentiae Divinae producenti, subest tamen potentiae
providenti.

King procuring the ruin of his subjects, or of Tiberius causing virgins to be
deflowred, that so they might be strangled, with God absolutely electing some
both to the end and to the effectual and infallible means of salvation, and
absolutely not-electing others, but decreeing to permit them by their own
default to fail in atteining salvation, is as frivolous as odious. For Gods
absolute decree of Non-election does neither make men miserable nor wicked, but
only (for ends best known to himself) absolutely wills the permitting of
such men to be the causes both of their own sins and miseries. Neither had
God ever an absolute purpose to put any innocent man to death, or to damn any
sinner, but upon the respect unto his foregoing sins.

All sides grant that God is the Author of But the Arminian

The Remonstrants may justly be taxed with that error which this Author
goeth-about to fasten upon their adversaries. For in their opinion God does no
more in procuring the conversion of the elect then he does in procuring the
conversion of the reprobates, who notwithstanding remain unconverted. For
procuring the conversion, faith, perseverance of Judas, God took order that
sufficient means should be ministered unto him, God gave him a power to elicite
the act of his conversion and those other supernatural acts required unto
salvation, though God never absolutely decreed the conversion of Judas, or the
making him a faithful and perseverant Christian. Thus say the Remonstrants. In
like manner (say they) God administered sufficient means of grace unto Peter,
God gave him a power to c^nvert, to believe, to persevere, but God never
absolutely decreed the converting of Peter (or any man else) or the saving of
Peter; but he left Peter's conversion depending upon the contingent act of his
own free will; and upon the foresight of this contingent act God predestinateth
Peter unto salvation. Just so he left the conversion of Judas, and upon the
self-same terms he had decreed the salvation and the predestination of Judas.
But to urge this no further: God does much more in procuring the salvation of
Peter then he did for procuring the salvation of Judas. And as for the
procuring and working the impenitency or infidelity of reprobates, God does not
at all work any vicious dispositions or defective and sinful actions in such
men. Wicked habits or dispositions are diseases bred within men's own souls, not
infused into them by the Physician of our souls: Wicked and sinful actions are
the productions of their own corrupted free will, and not produced by any
Divine operation working in them: for it is only in good and holy actions that
God gives us both the will and the deed. Yea but (say they) as God has
absolutely and antecedently without the foresight of any deservings resolved
by irresistible means to cause the elect to believe, repent and persevere, that
so his decree of their salvation may be accomplished; even so, in the doctrine
of those that teach absolute negative Reprobation, God has of his alone will
and pleasure peremptorily decreed the damnation and the final impenitencie of
reprobates, and by unconquerable power, etc. In both this Author is utterly
mistaken. For the Elect; God has absolutely and antecedently without any
prevision of their merits, graciously elected and ordained them unto eternal
life: And this has ever been maintained by Catholic Divines against Pelagians
and Semipelagians, and is at this day the common doctrine both of the
Protestant and Roman Church; though by some few it be gainsaid in both.

But for those words, without the foresight of their deservings, if by the name
of deservings this Author understands repentance, faith, persevering, and
such supernatural acts required to salvation; we grant it is not only untrue
but unpossible that God should decree the salvation of any man without the
foresight of those acts; because in Predestination the effectual and
infallible producing of all those acts is resolved upon, Vide Mald. Antis. page
9, 10. etc.
and God cannot but from all eternity foresee what himself has from all
eternity decreed to work. We deny not foresight of faith and perseverance in
the Catholic sense, that is, as of effects and consequents of the Divine
Predestination or Election; but in the Arminian sense, Vide page 13, 14.
that is, as of antecedent motives, reasons, causes or conditions foreseen in
men, and drawing after them the decree of Predestination.

As for those terms by irresistible means, they are merely captious. It is
sufficient to establish absolute Predestination, that such means are prepared
for the predestinate cui nullum durum cor resistet: whether there be a
metaphysicall possibility of resistance left in them or no, let those dispute
who love endless wranglings.

Vide Mald. Antis. page 13.
Now to come to the Non-elect: In their Preterition or negative Reprobation
there is no decree involved of damning any man upon Gods alone will and
pleasure, but only upon the guilt and misdesert of the persons, whom the
decree of negative Reprobation permits (and that with infallibility of the
event) to procure their own condign punishment. Neither does God draw any man
on unto sin by an unconquerable power; but he permits some men by the
devil and their own lusts to be drawn from sin to sin, till at last they
perish in their sins; of whom Perditio tua ex te notwithstanding is most
truly verified. The difference therefore which God in the course of his
providence takes with the Elect and with the Non-elect is as different as
possibly can be imagined. The conversion, perseverance and salvation of the
Elect, he works by such a special grace, as in his infinite wisdom he
knows will, and out of his infinite goodness and mercy he decrees shall
work in them all those blessed and saving effects.

As for the final sins and damnation of the Reprobate, the providence of God
permits them both, whereas he could (as he does in his Elect) hinder the
one, and prevent the other. But as God works not their sins (being effects
of a finite deficient and not of an infinite efficient cause) so he did never
upon mere will and pleasure decree their damnation, as he did the salvation of
his Elect. And therefore he cannot be called the author of any man's sin or
damnation, though he may truly be styled the author of all good graces and
actions, as also of salvation unto all the Predestinate.

For the Fathers; It is most true that they Predestination to be such a decree
as prepares from eternity and in time infallibly and most effectually works
all those graces and gracious acts whereby men are brought to eternal life. So
that Predestination implies an effectual production or operation of those
good things which are intended unto the predestinate. Now because the evil of
sin cannot fall under the Divine causalitie or operation, the Fathers granted
a prescience in God of all men's sins, but truly denied a Predestination of
any man's sins, and as truly a necessitation or necessitating decree forcing any
man unto sin. But what of all this? If there be no decree of Predestination
forcing men unto sin, is there therefore no decree of negative Reprobation or
Non-election, resolving to permit some finally to sin and eternally to
perish? Is there no decree of absolute Predestination, not permitting others
out of their own defective will finally to continue in sin and perish, and
absolutely resolving to draw them out of the state of sin, and advance them
to the state of glory?

I conclude, that unless this Author under the name of absolute Reprobation
mean the absolute judiciary decree of Damnation, and an absolute decree of
necessitating men unto the deserts of their damnation, he has said nothing at
all to evince that absolute Reprobation makes God the Author of sin. If he
mean such a decree when he fights against absolute Reprobation, he fights
with his own shadow, and opposes that which no judicious Divine will endeavor
to uphold.

Of the Supralapsarians Distinctions.
THis term of Supralapsarians, which is truly fastened upon some Protestant
Divines, but falsely upon Calvine, if it design all those who place the
decrees of Election and Reprobation before the Prevision or decree of
permitting original sin, it taketh-in Scotus and all his followers, it
taketh-in a great number of the Romanists, for (if Suarez say true) it is the
more common opinion amongst them. This I note to show the private spleen which
our Remonstrants carry against some Protestant writers of good desert in Gods
Church, whom they foully handle for the self-same opinion which they wink at in
the Romanists. But to come to their Distinctions.

The first Distinction of the Supralapsarians Operative or Permissive. This
decree of Reprobation is not a decree to work any man's sinful actions whereby
he incurreth damnation, but to let them come to pass by the free operation of
his own will. This Distinction of Gods decrees is not denied; but it is
objected by this Author, That God stands in no need of man's sin for
setting forth of his glory; as if the doctrine of the Supralapsarians
concerning absolute Election and absolute Non-election or Reprobation made
sin so absolutely needful that Gods glory must suffer an eclipse if sins
be not committed by his own procuring and working. But absolute Reprobation
implies only, that God knew he could turn the sins of men and angels (yea
and their damnation) unto his own glory; and that he decreed so to do in some,
not out of any necessity of setting forth his glory by permitting or
punishing their sins, but out of his Free Will determining so to manifest his
glory. The glory which eternally and essentially belongs unto God, needs
not the creature it self, much less then the sin of the creature. Gods
glory had been the same that it is if man had never been made; and so
consequently if he had never sinned, if he had never been condemned unto Hell
for sin. Nay further, if no man had ever been elected, sanctified, or saved,
Gods glory is a thing which could not possibly have been lessened or any way
blemished. The outward and temporal manifestation of Gods glory being in it
self a thing of no necessity in regard of God, it is fond to imagine that God
stands in need of any such means for setting-forth of his glory, seeing the
very temporal setting-forth of his glory is a thing no way needful unto him.
We agree therefore, that God stands in no need of sin either for his glory as
it is considered in it self, or as it is to be manifested unto the creature:
For God in his infinite wisdom could (without the permission of sin) have
found means enough for sufficient illustration of his own glory.

Two other reasons are assigned by this Author of the permission of sin: The
one is, the great good which the most wise God foreseeth he can, and the most
gracious God determines that he will bring out of the evil actions of men. The
other is, because man is by God made a free Creature, undetermined in his
actions till he determine himself, and therefore may not be hindered from
sinning by omnipotency. The former reason we gainsay not: The latter is
neither fitly nor truly set down. The full reason is, Because God who gave man
a Free and yet a defective will, has thought it fit that this will should
produ^^ her own acts per modum liberi agentis, and yet so that the
defectivenesse as well as the freedom should be manifested. Now had not God
established any such permissive decree, the frailty and deficiencie of the
Creatures free will could not have been discovered either in men or angels. Now
it is false (which is supposed and here implied) that Gods determination of
man's will unto every particular action is a necessary hindering of the liberty
of the will unto all actions so predetermined. The Jesuits themselves, who
oppose the Dominicanes in their Physical Determination or Predefinition of
man's will unto all acts of what kind soever, do notwithstanding grant a
Predefinition or Predetermination unto good supernatural acts, and that
without all impeachment to the liberty of man's will. To think therefore that
God should repent his own ordinance concerning man's liberty unless he leave
all his actions unto himself undetermined, and that Gods permissive decree is
founded upon this reason, is a flat mistake.

And here I must add unto what has been said, That the Divine permission
which adhereth unto the decree of Reprobation may be understood two ways. It
may be taken either for that immanent and eternal decree quo decernit Deus non
impedire peccatum, Ruiz. de scient. Dei, disp. 26. 1
and decerni^ ^^^iqua bona facere, licet sciat illorum occasion committendum
esse peccatum; and this is called increata permissio: or for the temporal
accomplishment of this decree, in producing those occasions and circumstances,
good in themselves, which God foreknew would be abused unto sinful actions,
and permits so to be; and this is called creata permissio. Absolute Election
and Reprobation cannot be defended without this absolute permissive decree: But
this absolute permissive decree may and is easily and perspicuously defended by
Divines both of our Church and the Roman from making God the cause or Author
of any man's sin.

This is so clear that it is here confessed, that such a Permissive decree is
truly and fitly contradistinguished to an Operative decree. But it is objected,
that the Defenders of the absolute decree in sinful events ascribe more to the
operative power of God then this permission imports. How is this proved?

I. Because many who defend absolute Predestination and negative Reprobation do
utterly reject this former distinction of a Permissive and Operative decree. I
dare boldly say not many, and I think not one man will be found who dares
utterly reject this distinction. And if some should, does it therefore follow
that the Doctrine it self of absolute Election and absolute Non-election makes
God the operative cause of sin, because some mainteining this Doctrine do
ignorantly and falsely maintein together with it an erroneous opinion? As for
Beza and Calvine, whom this Author challenges to make God to decree sin
with an energeticall and working will, and not only with a permissive, and
therefore to make God the cause of sin, he should first have considered that
the permissive decree concerning sinful actions implies an infallibility of
the events so permitted. Ruiz. Descient. disp. 69.. 10.
Posita permissione certissima est futuritio peccati quod permittitur, and
omnium circumstantiarum quae permittuntur in illo. Secondly it should have been
considered, that there can be no infallible knowledge of such permitted events
unless an Energeticall and Operative will be conjoined with the Permissive
will. But how far forth is this energeticall will or decree conversant about
sinful actions whose event is decreed by a permissive will or decree?

First, It eternally decrees and accordingly at the very time when sinful
actions are committed it gives the sinner the power and use of understanding
and Free Will, without which he could not sin.

Secondly, God thereby eternally decreed to concur, and accordingly at the
instant does concur, ad materialem actionem peccati, which otherwise could
not come into act or being.

Thirdly God also decreed to make a collection and concurrence of those
circumstances and occasions (good always as they come from God) whereupon God
foresaw that the sinner would infallibly fall into sin.

Fourthly, God decreed to deny all such means as in his infinite wisdom he
knew would have prevented such sins, and to afford them only such means as
he certainly knows they will voluntarily abuse unto the committing of sin.

Fifthly, God limiteth and orders their sins, that they shall break forth in
no other measure, at no other time, upon no other persons, then himself has
fore-appointed.

And lastly, God orders all the permitted sins of the reprobate to his own
glory and the good of his elect.

All these may in a good sense be called operative decrees or volitions of God,
and not barely permissive: In all these which are conversant about the sins
of men, there is a positive will of God which does not only permit men to work
their sinful actions, but above and in those sinful actions has his own good
and holy work. And this is that Energeticall will which Calvine and Beza
attribute unto God in men's sinful actions; which their very adversaries are
forced to acknowledge. As for any energeticall will which should so have a
working in sinful actions as that it should be the cause quod talis actio sit
cum tali defectu, or (in plainer terms) that should work the contrariety or
repugnancy of the sinners will unto the law of God, this Calvine and Beza
utterly disclaim. And as for the very terms which they use in referring sinful
actions unto the will of God, the very same in substance are used by all other
Divines, though some in words are more strict then others. I now quote that of
Ruiz, De scientia Dei, p. 219.
Dei voluntate, consilio, decreto, definitione fieri peccatorum actiones
significat Scriptura. And that of Penottus, Lib. 8. c. 22. 2.
Hoc solum fit in mundo, and eo modo, and ad eum finem, Quod, and Quemodo, and
ad Quem finem Deus vult illud fieri. And, Lib. 5. c. 9. p. 255.
Ipsa Divina causalitas aliquo modo extenditur ad ipsa mala, non sicut ad
effectum constitutum in esse per ipsam Divinam causalitatem, sed sicut ad
objectum circa quod versatur Divina causalitas, vel illud impediendo ne fiat,
vel illud permittendo fieri, etc. So that the question is not, Whether God have
only a permissive decree about sinful actions; for most grant he has also an
operative decree but all the difficulty is, In what manner and measure and by
what means this decree has his work upon the will.

Calvine and Beza then might well tax all who grant only a permissive decree
concerning the events of sin, and deny an operative, and truly avouch that
many places in Scripture cannot be understood of a bare permission, but of
necessity they import some kind of effectual operation.

II. It is further objected, That the mainteiners admit the name of a
permissive decree, yet they corrupt the meaning: For whereas Permission is an
act of Gods consequent or judiciary will, they make it an act of Gods
antecedent will exercised about those who as yet lie under no guilt of sin.

It is true that there is such a permission as this Author speaks of, which
is judiciary, and lays hold only upon those who have long abused the mercies
of God: but he is deceived in thinking that no decree of Divine permission can
be antecedent unto the guilt of sin. The Non-elect angels were permitted to
commit their first sin; which could not possibly be a judiciary permission in
punishment of any former sin. Adam and Eve were permitted to fall into their
first transgression; which permission cannot without evident absurdity be
deduced from any foregoing or foreseen sin of theirs. And to speak generally
of all persons not-elected, the permissive decree of their final perseverance
in sin must in reason be antecedent to the absolute prevision of their
impenitency. And though God may justly decree to punish the abusers of their
free will by letting them fall from one sin to another, yet there can be no
one sin insisted upon in which the permissive decree of God is not antecedent
to the prevision of the same sin.

But let us hear what Calvines adversaries themselves say concerning this point
of Permission. Molina, Quaest. 23. page 398, 399.
Voluntas permittendi peccata, permissioque ipsa, esse potest non propter
culpam aliquam quasi in poenam, sed ex sola libera voluntate Dei. Prius est
Deum denegatione (specialium) auxiliorum permittere peccatum quam peccatorem in
illud incidere. And this is properly that permissive decree or that Permission
which we understand when we dispute about Non-election or negative Reprobation.
Of this Suarez speaks in this manner; Opusc page 178.
Hinc intelligitur, voluntatem illam permittendi peccata reprobi, si ad totum
ejus lapsum comparetur, non habere causam ex part illius. And Vasquez; In Im.
qu. 23. Disp. 9.. 4.
Sicut primae vocationis nulla datur causa, ita neque permissionis in eo qui
permittitur, post quam ab originali justificatus est. Nullum peccatum est quod
non praecedat aliqua permissio, hoc est, Negatio vocationis congruae qua novit
Deus peccatum impediendum si concederetur. I could bring many more speaking to
this purpose: but the mistake of this Author is so evident in making the
permissive decree which cohereth unto Non-election or negative Reprobation to
be a judiciary decree, that it needs no further confutation.

He further tells us, That Permission is But those who defend absolute
Reprobation make it a withholding of grace needful for the avoiding of sin,
and so including a necessity of sinning.

In this dispute about absolute Predestination and Reprobation or Non-election,
we are not to regard what every particular Doctor says or writes, but what
is in deed and truth a consequent of the doctrine it self. And first we answer,
That the permissive decree upon which Reprobation depends contains in it
somewhat more then a bare not-hindering of men to fall into sin, though it be
no real positive efficient or working cause of their sin. For whereas God
has infinite ways whereby he could prevent the sins of any Reprobate
person, and that without forcing their free will, it contains a positive and
peremptory resolution of denying them all such grace as he knows would prove
effectual to their salvation were it afforded them. And which is more, it
contains a positive decree of putting them into such circumstances,
conditions or occasions as God knows will infallibly induce them to sin.
This is not done by a bare permission, but by some kind of operation. And this
is out of all question amongst judicious Divines whether Protestants or
Papists. And yet withal they maintein, that men thus reprobated, and thus
permitted to fall into final impenitency, thus placed by Divine providence in
circumstances and conditions which he knows will by them infallibly be abused
unto sin and obstinacy in sin, were not thereby spoiled of their
possibility of standing, or of their possibility of not committing this or that
sin permitted. The Reprobation therefore which is maintained by orthodox
Divines, and the Permission thereunto annexed, imports not a withholding of
grace absolutely necessary for the avoiding of sins so permitted, much less
a necessitating of sinners unto their several sins, but a withholding of all
grace which would be de facto effectual unto the avoidance of sin, and such
an ordering of circumstances and occasions as God certainly knows will make
them freely run into their sins and obstinately continue in them.

Now whereas it is further objected, that from the withdrawing of such grace
sin must needs follow; we answer, That sin does infallibly follow upon this
Reprobation, permission, and withholding of effectual grace; yet not an as
effect flows from the proper and true cause, but as a Consequent is deducted
out of an Antecedent, by a true form of reasoning. As for example, if we reason
thus, God absolutely decreed to withhold from the non-elect angels all such
effectual grace as he knew would have upheld them, and without which he knew
infallibly that they would fall away; and he further decreed to permit them to
fall away: Therefore God by these his decrees necessarily caused their sin,
it is a false collection or inference. But thus to argue, God absolutely
decreed, etc. therefore their sin and voluntary apostasy certainly followed
necessitate infallibilitatis, this is a true inference.

That which occasioned the Remonstrants error in this point, is an
equivocation in the word Cause or Causing. For one may be said to be the cause
of such an evil action or event, really, truly, and properly, when he does
directly work the production of that evil; or abusively, improperly, and
falsely, when he does not work as he could to the preventing and hindering of
such an event. Thus ignorant men may suppose that when the sun withholdeth
his beams, it really and truly works or causes that darkness, coldness,
fogginesse, wherewith the air is presently possessed: but in truth there is no
such matter.

2. And further we say, That this Reprobation or Permission whereof we speak in
this controversy concerning absolute or conditionate Election and
Non-election, implies not a Subtraction of any graces or helps obtained, much
less of any absolutely necessary to the preventing of sin; but a
Non-preparation, a Non-donation of such graces and helps without which God
foresaw and foreknew that the Reprobates out of their own free and perverse
will would infallibly delight and perish in their sins. The Subtraction of
some measure of grace already given, and permission of a man to fall into more
sins, in punishment of a former sin voluntarily committed, is not always a
sign of Reprobation, nor of the permissive decree thereunto appendent. For
many of the elect have thus been permitted to fall from one sin into another,
as David was from adultery unto murder; and yet at length all turned to his
greater good. But when we speak of a permission inseparably and properly
belonging to the Non-elect, it is not a Subduction of needful grace in poenam
peccati, much less a working of any malicious quality in them whereby they
are necessitated to sin, but a Not-preparation or Non-donation of such grace
without which God knows most infallibly that they will live and die in their
sins. And this is it which S. Augustine intended when he said, Deo reprobante
non irrogatur aliquid quo homo fit deterior, sed tantum non erogatur quo fiat
melior.

For the saying of learned Whitaker, it is quibus positis peccatum impediretur:
which must be understood of final sin, if it be applied unto the permission
which is only proper to the Non-elect: For the Elect oftentimes are denied
such helps, which if they had been afforded, this or that particular sin had
certainly been prevented; and the Non-elect may have such help of grace
afforded them, whereby they do actually avoid this or that sin, unto the
committing whereof they were before strongly inclined.

As for the phrase used by Pareus, That Adam could not use his endowments to
persevere; This non posse is in Scriptures, Fathers, Schoolmen and all manner
of Authors usually applied unto such actions wherein the Agents had a free
power not to have done what they did. It is therefore a weak inference, to
gather from the bare words Necesse, Impossible, Non posse, Non possibile, or
the like, a necessitation of man's will unto such acts, or an absolute impotency
unto the opposite acts, as this Author and the Remonstrants ordinarily do.
Jerem. 13.23. The Jews are said to be under the same impossibility of doing
good which the Black-moor is of making his skin white: yet no necessitation of
doing evil actions is thereby employed. Joan. 12.39. Propterea non poterant
credere, etc. and yet according to Prospers determination, Ad Cap. Gall. sent.
super 14.
Non-praedestinatus perit infidelitate voluntaria, non coacta. Matthew. 18.7.
Necesse est ut veniant scandala: and yet the giving of scandals is not enforced
upon any man's will. Nemo potest corrigere quem Deus despexerit: and yet the
Reprobates continue incorrected in their sins through their own voluntary
obstinacy. Romans 2.5. Thou after thine hardness and heart that cannot repent:
and yet this CANNOT does not free the wicked from voluntary impenitency. 2.
Pet. 2.14. Having eyes full of adultery and that cannot cease from sin: and
yet nothing hereby is employed or intended which takes away the freedom of
man's will in committing sin. The Fathers use the same words, and yet never
intending thereby the destruction of free will, or the necessitation unto any
sinful act. Augustine speaking of a wicked man says, Vide Ruiz Descient.
disp. 66.. 1. page 634, etc.
Cogenti cupiditati bona voluntate resistere non potest: yet he never imagined
a necessitation or coaction unto any particular sinful act, De perfect. Just.
Resp. 5. Speaking of Pharaoh, he says he was so hardened, ut obtemperare Deo
non potuerit, Propos. 62. in Epist. ad Romans And he uses the same phrase
concerning the Jews, Tract. 54. in Joan. and yet non posse in neither place
imports a coaction or necessitation of the will unto any sinful act. Not to
heap up any more allegations, it may be generally observed, That wheresoever
there is an infallible Divine prescience of any future act or event, there it
is not unusual to affirm that act to be necessary, and the opposite event to
be impossible. And Ruiz gives a reason of this manner of speech, De scientia
Dei, disp 80.. 6.
Quia infallibilitas actus est aliqua impotentia omittendi, and infallibilitas
omittendi est aliqua impotentia operandi talem actum.

I have insisted the longer upon this because it is presumed always a good
inference against Calvine, Beza, or any of our Protestant Divines, They say
such an action or event is necessary, such an one is impossible; therefore they
overthrow free will, and put a necessitation unto sin upon men not-elected.
Whereas when Scriptures, Fathers, Schoolmen, and modern Papists use the same
terms, our Remonstrants can give them a right interpretation.

To conclude; Albeit the Permissive decree do infer an infallibility of
final infidelity and impenitency in persons not-elected; and albeit in this
regard their not-believing and not-repenting be sometimes termed necessary, and
their believing and repenting unpossible; yet it ought not to be gathered from
such phrases of speech, That God by taking away their liberty inforceth them
upon their sins.

Material and the Formal, which is, the substrate act, and the obliquity of
the act, and so grants God to be the cause of the material part, as it
denies him to be any cause at all of the formal, which is the repugnancy or
disconformity which the will of the Agent has with the law or will of God.
This distinction is a sound and a necessary distinction, and approved by all
judicious Divines whether Papists or Protestants. Penot. lib. 8. cap. 11.
De malo culpae quoad substratum and materiale, quod est actio naturalis cui
malitia est annexa, nulla est difficultas in inquirendo and explicando quidnam
illud sit, quoniam ex hac part malum culpae non est malum, sicut nullus actus
naturalis alis est de se malus. Ibid. 477.
Omnes Theologi convenient, quod Deus est author entitatis naturalis ipsius
peccati.

Against this is excepted, That all sins receive not this distinction. If all
sins subsist in some actual motion of the soul, body, or both, and this
motion abstractively considered be the material part of every actual sin,
and has God for the prime cause in whom we live, move, and have our being;
then no sin can be assigned wherein this material part may not be found. In
eating the forbidden fruit the material part of the sin in regard of the
soul was the Appetition thereof; in regard of the body, the Mastication and
Manducation and other bodily acts: Separate these from the formal part, which
is Modus appetendi, and contains a repugnancy to Gods command, and God was
the prime author thereof. The Act of desiring and of eating must of necessity
be reduced to God, without whom there neither is nor can be any motion of body
or soul: but the disorderly Manner of desiring and eating contrary to the law
of God, this is reducible (as being a defect) only to the defective will of
man. This is well observed by Ruiz; De vol. disp 39.. 3.
Aliqui modi se habendi in voluntate non reducuntur in Deum tanquam in causam,
praesertim quando culpabilis est modus se habendi. And more fully; Disp. 6.. 2
Potest voluntas Divina amando quamlibet actionem sub ratione actionis non
amare differentiam monstrositatis per quam positive repugnat Divinae legi.

He proceeds in opposing this distinction, not only of the action but of the
aberration or formal obliquity thereof, in making him the true cause of those
means which lead to damnation, which are sinful actions as sinful, not as
actions.

We answer, It is very true, the means which bring reprobated men unto their
damnation are sinful actions considered as sinful or as repugnant to the law
of God, and not considered barely and abstractively as actions: But we deny
that the decree of reprobation makes God a cause of those means or wicked
actions whereby men procure their own damnation. For though Predestination
makes God a proper efficient cause of those means whereby men are brought to
salvation, because they are good, holy, supernatural acts; yet Reprobation
makes not God the cause efficient of those means which carry men unto
damnation, because they are evil, impure, defective acts, and such as it is
repugnant to the very essence and nature of God to be a causer of them. It is
certain that infidelity, impurity, impenitency follow the decree of
Reprobation; but they follow it not as means prepared or wrought by God for
compassing the damnation of the Non-elect, but as the matter presupposed unto
their just damnation, growing out of their own perverse free will, Deo
permittente, praevidente, and circa hanc materiam justitiam suam vindicativam
exercere decernente. We assent unto that judicious determination of Cajetane;
In 1m qu. 23 art. 5.
Non est ide^ judicium de reprobatione and praedestinatione: quoniam in
reprobatione est aliquid extra totum reprobationis effectum, scilicet culpa;
non sic autem est in praedestinato, in quo totum ordinans ipsum in vitam
aeternam, est praedestinationis effectus.

For the simile retorted; If the decree of negative Reprobation be supposed by
any to make God deal with men as the master is here said to do with his lame
horse, we leave such wild imaginations to the forgers thereof, as not worth the
trouble of confutation, being senseless and godless.

To what is here alleged we answer, That by experience that Traitors and
Adulterers fully bent to commit such wicked acts, can and oftentimes do refrain
putting them in practice upon better deliberation. This is a demonstration,
that they can choose the doing or the forbearing to do such wicked acts: and
when they choose to do them, it is not the decree of predestination which
forces or necessitateth them thereunto; but they are directed thereunto by the
deliberate use of their understanding, and resolved to do such acts by the free
election of their own corrupt will.

S. Augustine, Prosper, Fulgentius were all defenders of absolute Election and
Non-election, and adversaries to that Election and Reprobation which the
Pelagians and Semipelagians founded upon contrary good and bad actions foreseen
in men, yet all of them disclaimed this Necessitation. Let Prosper speak for
them all three; Ad Cap. Gall. sent. 14.
Qui dicit quod qui Evangelicae praedicationi non credunt ex Dei
praedestinatione non credant, and quod Deus ita definierit ut quicunque non
credunt ex ipsius constitutione non credant, non est catholicus. Non
praedestinatus perit infidelitate voluntaria, non coacta. That which is here
determined concerning Infidelity, may as well be applied to Treachery,
Adultery, or any other transgression of Gods law: for in all such actions
non-praedestinati pereunt transgressione voluntaria, non coacta.

The reasons which the Author brings to prove that what necessitateth man's
will to sin is the cause of sin, make nothing against S. Augustines
doctrine of absolute Predestination, until he can prove that such a Coaction
or Necessitation does absolutely follow thereupon. Which because it was an
harder matter then he was able to undertake, he lets it alone; and so may we
his arguments.

Yet we must needs tell him his Philosophical is under the insuperable control
of no lord but it self, is but unsound Divinity. It is under the insuperable
control of him that made it; and so fully, that Gerson was not afraid to use
the word Necessity by this Author so much abhorred; Part. 3. fol. 333.
Etsi Deus non cogit liberum arbitrium, potest tame^ inducere necessitatem ad
illud volendum quod sibi placuerit. And Abulensis; In 3. Reg. cap. 12.
Stat libertas arbitrii cum Divina motione voluntatem nostram ad id quod vult
applicante. This S. Augustine terms Epist. 107
Omnipotentissima facilitate convertere, and ex nolentibus volentes facere. If
this doctrine of the supreme Dominion of man's will be maintained, Gods supreme
power in bending and turning men's hearts at his own pleasure, witnessed through
the whole body of Divine Scripture, must be abandoned. Yet for all this we
utterly deny that God by his insuperable and unconquerable power does at any
time make the wills of men not-predestinate servile instruments unto the
committing of sinful actions. It is the devils suggestion, their own lustful
provocations, their voluntary wicked elections which make them servile
instruments (not of God but of the devil) in committing their abominable
sins. God makes both the devil and them, even by their wicked actions, to be
instruments unwittingly and unwillingly accomplishing his most wise just and
holy purposes, and serving to the illustration of his glory.

The Divine dominion which Gods will has over man's does not nor cannot show it
self by any such influx or impression as should instill any malicious quality
into man's will, or wrest and force it unto any malicious action; neither does
the decree of absolute Reprobation import any such matter. Whatsoever therefore
is here further discoursed concerning this Necessitation and Servile usage of
man's will by God unto the committing of sinful actions, we passe-by, as
presumed and not proved to be a consequent of absolute Predestination and
Reprobation.

The doctrine of Aquinas is in this point of Predestination and Reprobation far
more sound then the doctrine of the Remonstrants: Part. 1. quaest. 23. art. 3.
ad 2m.
Aliter se habet reprobatio in causando quam praedestinatio. Nam praedestinatio
est causa and ejus quod exspectatur in futura vita a praedestinatis, scilicet
gloriae, and ejus quod percipitur in praesenti, scilicet gratiae: Reprobatio
vero non est causa ejus quod est in praesenti, scilicet culpae; sed est causa
derelictionis a Deo. Est tamen causa ejus quod redditur in futuro, scilicet
poenae aeternae. Sed culpa provenit ex libero arbitrio ejus qui reprobatur and
a gratia deseritur. If the Remonstrants could be brought to a true
understanding of this short decision, all their quarrels were at an end.

Sin is considerable either formally and as it is sin, or as it is a This
distinction is either not well conceived or at least not clearly expressed by
this Author.

Those who defend the decree of absolute Predestination and Reprobation do not
say that God predestinateth any man unto sin, but that God by his secret
counsel ordains what sinful events he will permit to be brought into act,
and what good uses he will apply them unto. Their distinction stands upon
these terms: That in sinful actions we may consider that which properly and
formally makes them faulty, namely their Repugnancie unto Gods law; and of
this God is not the Author or causer: Or else we may consider in them that
which makes them just punishments unto other men or unto the party himself
that commits them, or profitable corrections; and thus God challenges unto
himself the causing of them. For example; The theft of the Sabeans and
Chaldeans was a sin, as it was a wilful and free taking away of another man's
goods, proceeding from their own will, and contrary to the will or law of God:
and thus their own malice and not any influx of God into their will caused this
sinful and deformed act: But the same sinful outward act materially
considered might be a punishment of Job, an exercise of his patience, and an
experiment of his virtue unto the setting forth of Gods glory: and in these
regards God takes upon him the causing of it; Deus dedit, Deus abstulit. The
defiling of David's concubines by Absalom, as it was a sin contrary to Gods
express law, had no other true cause then the defective free will of Absalom
who committed it: But as it was a just punishment of David for his former
defiling the wife of Uriah, God makes it his proper act and deed; 2. Sam.
12.11, 12.
Tu fecisti occulte; ego facturus sum coram toto populo. And the reason hereof
is easily conceived: for peccatum quatenus peccatum is an unjust defective and
monstrous action; and therefore cannot be reduced unto God a most perfect
agent, but unto man an unjust defective and disordered agent: Yet peccatum
quatenus poena or judicium, as it is made a punishment or judgment lighting
upon another, is a just and orderly action, and therefore reducible unto God
the just Judge of the world. Suppose a Judge so orders the matter, that such
a traitor shall be strangled or beheaded by such an executioner: suppose
withal that the same executioner strangleth or beheadeth him not out of
obedience to the Judge but out of the malice of his own heart: here the same
act, which is the killing of a man, as it proceeds from the wicked will of
the executioner, is a sin, and not caused by the Judge; but as it is a
punishment inflicted upon the traitor, it is good and just, and caused by the
Judge himself. And this is all which Calvine mainteineth in saying, De occulta
Dei provid. page 747. G.
Pravos improborum affectus ad exsequenda sua judicia destinat and regit Deus.

Whereas it is objected, That a good end cannot moralize a bad action, because
the evil of sin is greater then any good can come by sin; it is true, if
the bad action and the good end be both referred only to the sinner: But if
the badnesse of the action be referred only to the sinner as the proper cause,
and the goodness of the end or good use only which God makes of it be
reduced unto God alone; then it does moralize it, making it a just and good act
so far as it respects God the ordainer and causer thereof. Neither is the
evil of a particular sin greater then the good which God can extract out of
it (for then he would never permit it) though it be greater then any good which
a sinful man does intend by it. That which the Jews did in putting Christ to
death was laesio Divinae majestatis Divino bono opposita: But that which God
did in causing the punishment of our sins to light upon Christ was not Divino
bono opposita, but such an action as tended to the setting forth of Gods
goodness and glory. We do not grant therefore, that God for any good end
either wills or works any sin qua peccatum: but we only say, that God
wills, orders, causes those outward actions or events whereunto sin
cleaves ex part impiorum agentium, as by him they are made just punishments
or great benefits unto men.

D.
Whereas it is yet further urged, If God wills the sin as it is a means of
punishment, he wills it as sin; for in no other consideration it is a means
of punishment: and so Gods decree is terminated to the very formality of sin;
here is a plain mistake. If God should will sinful actions as they are
deserts of punishment unto the sinner himself, then it were clear he wills
them sub formalitate peccati: for they no otherwise deserve punishment then as
they are formally repugnant to the law of God: But in willing the material
acts of diverse sins as they are inflictions of punishment upon other persons,
they are good and just, as all Gods punishments are; and they have nothing to
do with the formalitie of sin, which is a privation of rectitude in the will
of such sinful agents, and can be no otherwise caused then by themselves.

An answer to the Indignities.
TO the first we say, That Ortus and Vsus TH
peccati are things of a quite different nature. It is want of wisdom to cause
sin ^uoad ortum, or to be a cause breeding and ^cting it: But it is an high
point of the Di^ine Wisdom, to cause sin bred in the ^efective will of man
and acted by the will ^f man, to be a just punishment either unto himself or
others. And this is all which ^ajetane intended upon 2. Kings 12. in ^enying
God to be the author of sin as ^nne, and yet granting that he may be the
^thour of sin qua poena peccati. Which opi^^on of his, though it be quarrelled
by some ^her Papists in regard of the word Author, yet it is defended by Canus
lib. 2. De Loc. Theolog. cap. 4. where he has these express words, Resp. ad 7.
Recte, ni fallor, dici potest Deus author esse operis mali, non qua est malum
culpae, sed qua est malum poenae. But whether Cajetane and Canus have retained
formam sanorum verborum in terming God the author of that sin which he
causes and makes to be a punishment either to the party committing it or
others, I do not decide; but I rather think they have not. As for our Divines,
who think that party only to be the true author of sin ex cujus voluntate
egreditur sub ratione peccati or quatenus peccatum, they use not to term God
the author of any sinful act or work; and therefore Calvine De occulta Dei
provid. in Resp. 5, and 6. page 736.
detesteth it as a prodigious blasphemy, Maleficia non tantum Deo volente sed
etiam autore perpetrari. But that God wills and causes hominum maleficia to
be vindicative afflicting punishments to the offenders or others, which is
causare subratione poenae, is generally admitted by all Divines: And it makes
not God the author of them secundum rationem culpae, but the operative cause
of them only secundum ordinem quem illis indit ad finem providentiae suae. And
as God is more then a permissive cause in men's wicked actions as they do subire
rationem poenae to themselves or others, so likewise as they become means of
good to others: August. Enchirid. ad Laurent. cap. 101.
Deus quasdam voluntates suas utique bonas implet per malorum hominum
voluntates malas: Sicut per Judaeos malevolos bona voluntate Patris Christus
pro nobis occisus est. In which regard the same S. Augustine speaking of Judas
uses not the word, permisit Deus, but, elegit ad fundendum sanguinem suum.
This is not out of want of wisdom to bring-in sin for the glorification of
his justice, but to cause sin conceived in the wicked heart of man and acted
by his wicked hand to become a means for manifestation of his justice. And
therefore whenever God concurreth to the causing of any outward sinful act
as it serves to any good end of his own intendment, he appoints not men to
commit (nay he forbids them the committing of such acts) but he in himself
decreed and fore-appointed his own permission, and therewithal the causing of
all such real and positive effects without which the act could not be
produced, and of all such good ends or consequents as he produces out of it.

To the second we answer, L
That to will the event of sinful actions for good ends argues no want of
sincerity in Gods dealing with men. As to will the torturing of martyrs by
tyrants to the end that Christian religion might by their patient sufferings be
advanced and Gods name glorified, or to will that Paul should be buffeted by
Satan to the end his soul may be kept humble; is not to appoint the devil or
tyrants inevitably to commit such actions that so they may be damned for them,
as is falsely supposed, but to let loose the reins unto their wicked wills out
of which these actions did voluntarily flow, and to cause whatsoever positive
good can be conceived either in such material acts or from them.

X
To the third: The permissive decree, or decree of Reprobation, as it respects
the sins of Reprobates argues no want at all of mercy in God, though it
import a denegation of some mercy which God (were he so pleased) might have
bestowed upon them: but here is no cruelty at all. Aqu in.
Rationabiliter negatur quod nulla ratione debetur. Neither does it flow from a
desire of destroying souls, or cause the wicked to live and die in their
sins. All these are false inferences, and have been formerly confuted. And
therefore we conclude, That it is not yet proved that the Doctrine of
Reprobation makes God the Author of sin.

The Treatise.
II Inconvenience.
THe second inconvenience (A) is, the Overthrow of true religion and good
government among men.

To this this opinion seems to tend, for these reasons.

I. Because it makes sin to be no sin indeed, but only in opinion. We use
to say, Necessity has no law: creatures or actions in which Necessity
bears sway, are without Law. Lions are not forbidden to prey, birds to
fly, fishes to svvimme, or any brute creatures to do according to their kinds,
because their actions are natural and necessary: they cannot upon any
admonition do otherwise. Among creatures endued with reason and liberty Laws
are given to none but such as can use their principles of reason and freedom:
Fools, mad men, and children are subject to no law, because they have no
liberty. To men that can use their liberty Laws are not given neither but in
those actions which are voluntary: No man is forbidden to be hungry, thirsty,
weary, sleepy, to vveep, to laugh, to love or to hate; because these actions
and affections are natural and necessary: the will may govern them, but it
cannot suppress them. And so if To deal justly, To exercise charity, etc.
with their contraries, be absolutely and antecedently necessary too, whether
this necessity flow from a principle within, or a Mover without, we are as
lavvlesse in these as in the other. Now if Necessity have no law, then
actions in themselves evil, if under the dominion of absolute necessity, are
transgressions of no law, and consequently no sins. For Sin is a
transgression of the law, 1. John 3.4.

This that I say, has been said long ago. For Justin Mar^yr speaking against
the Destiny, has these words, Just. Mart. Apol. 2. a little beyond the
middle, Si fato fieret ut esset aut improbus aut bonus, nec alii quidem probi
essent, nec alii mali.
If it be by destiny (that is, by absolute necessity; for that the Fathers do
generally call by the name of Destiny;) that men are good or bad, they are
indeed neither good nor bad. A ^peech like to this he has a little after;
Videretur verum esse, nihil esse virtutem nec vitium, sed opinione solum bona
and mala judicari: quae, ut vera ratio docet, est maxima impietas and
injustitia.
It would seem, if ^his be so, that virtue and vice are nothing, but things are
^udged to be good or evil by opinion only: which, as good ^eason teaches, is
very great injustice and impiety. And ^urely well might he say so: For to
what purpose was the Son of God made man, and being man, made a sacrifice of
sin? why was the ministry of the word and sacraments ordained? ^o what
end are heaven and hell propounded? why are exhortations, dissvvasions, or any
other means to hinder men from sin applied, if sin be nothing but a mere
opinion? Christ, the Christian faith, the word and sacraments, and whatsoever
according to the Scriptures has been done for ^he applying of the pardon for
sin, are all but mere fables, nay very impostures, if sin be nothing. And
by consequence ^t is no matter at all whether men be Christians, Jews, Turks,
or pagans, of what religion, or whether of any religion at all. Now whither
tends this but to the overthrow of religion?

II. Because it takes away (B) the conscience of sin. Why should men be
afraid of any sin that pleases or may profit them, if they must needs sin?
or what reason have they to vveep and mourn when they have sinned, seeing
they have not sinned truly, because they sinned necessarily? The Tragedian
says, Pati ista culpa est: nemo fit fato nocens.
when a man sins, his destiny must bear the blame. Necessity freeth him
from all iniquity. Sins are either the faults of that irresistible decree
that causes them, or no faults at all. If either; then sorrovv, fear, or any
other act of repentance whatsoever, may as well be spared as spent. This
conceit being once drunk-in, religion cannot long continue: for the affections
have been the strongest planters and are the surest upholders of it in the
world: Primus in orb Deos fecit timor.

III. Because it (C) takes away the desert and guilt of sin. Offenses if
fatal, cannot be justly punished. The reason is, because those deeds for
which men are punished or revvarded, must be their own, under their own
power and sovereigntie: but such are no fatal actions or events. Neither
temporally nor eternally can sin be punished, if it be absolutely necessary.

1. Not temporally; as God himself has given us to understand by that law
which he prescribed the Jews, Deuteronomy. 22.25. which was, That if a maid
commit uncleanness by constraint, she should not be punished. His reason was,
because there was no cause of death in her: what she yielded to, was through
compulsion, being overborn by power: as a man that is wounded to death by his
neighbor, so was a virgin in that case, a sufferer rather then a doer. This
particular law is of universal right: No just punishment can be inflicted for
sin where there is no power in the party to avoid it. The speech of
Lipsius is but a mere crotchet contrary to reason, Fatali culpae fatalis poena,
Fatal faults must have fatal punishments. Did Magistrates think men's offenses
unavoydable, they would think it bootlesse and unreasonable to punish them.
Nay not only so, but we see by daily experience, that Judges follovving the
direction of reason, have very remissely punished such faults as have been
committed through the power of headstrong and exorbitant passions: yea, we
may read of some who have not thought it fit to punish such faults at all.
Val. Max. l. 8. c. 1.
Valerius Maximus tells that Popilius a Roman Pretour sitting in judgment on
a woman who had in a bitter passion slain her mother, because she had
murdered her children, neque damnavit neque absolvit, neither cleared her nor
condemned her. And Aulus Gellius reports of Dolabella the Proconsul of Asia,
Gell l. 12. c. 7.
that when a woman of Smyrna was brought before him who had poisoned her
husband and son for murdering a son of hers which she had by a former husband,
he turned her over to the Areopagus, which was the gravest and most renowned
judgment seat in the world. The Judges there not daring to acquit her being
stained with a double slaughter, nor yet to punish her being provoked with
just grief, commanded the accuser and the offender to come before them an
hundred years after. And so Neque absolutum mulieris venesicium est; quod per
leges non licuit: neque nocens damnata punitaque, quae digna venia fuit.
Neither was the woman's fact justified, the Laws not allowing it; nor yet the
woman punished, because she was worthy to be pardoned. If wise Magistrates
have spared such offenders as have been over-svvayed with passions, which did
but incline not determine them to their irregular actions, they would never
have punished any trespassers, if they had thought them to be such by
invincible necessity. Or if offenders did think that their offenses were
their d^stinies, and that when they murder, steal, commit adultery, make
insurrections, plot treasons, or practice any other outrageous villainies, they
do them by the necessity of Gods unalterable decree, and can do no otherwise;
they would and might complain of their punishments as unjust, as Zeno's
servant did: When he was beaten by his master for a fault, he told him out of
his own grounds that he was unjustly beaten, because he was fato coactus
peccare, constrained to make that fault by his undeclinable fate. The
Adrumetine (D) Monks, missed by S. Augustine, Epist. 105. ad Sixtum
Presbyterum, (which he calls a book wherein he sets down his opinion
concerning Gods grace) did so teach Grace that they denied Free Will. And this
S. Augustine confuted in his book De gratia and libero arbitrio. And thinking
the grace of God (as S. Augustine taught) to be such as could not stand with
freedom of will, they thought that no man could be punished for his faults,
but rather prayed for that God would give him grace to do better. Against this
S. Augustine directed his other book, De Correptione and gratia: In which
discourse though it be Grace that is still named, yet Predestination is
included. For as Kimedoncius says truly in his Preface to Luther, De servo
arbitrio, betvveen Grace and Predestination, there is only this difference (as
S. Augugustine teaches l. De Praedest. Sanct. cap. 10.) That Predestination is
a preparation of Grace, and Grace a bestowing of Predestination. As Zeno's
servant and these Monks did, so would all men judge, did they considerately
think that men could not choose but offend. And what would be the resultance
of such a persvvasion, but an inundation of the greatest insolences, and a
dissolution of all good government?

2. Nor, if this be true, can sin be punished eternally, or that tribunal be
just on which the sentence of eternal fire shall be denounced against the
wicked at the last day. To this I have the Fathers bearing witness generally
and plainly. Tertullian has these words, Tertull. lib. 2. contr. Marcion.
Caeterum nec boni nec mali merces jure pensaretur ei qui aut bonus aut malus
necessitate fuit inventus, non voluntate.
The recompense of good or evil can with no justice be given to him who is good
or evil not freely but of necessity. S. Hierome says, Liberi arbitrii nos
condidit Deus; nec ad virtutes nec ad vitia necessitate trahimur: Alioquin ubi
necessitas est, nec damnatio nec corona est.
Where necessity domineereth, there is no place for retribution. Epiphanius
says, Epiph. advers. haer. l. 1. haer. 5. number. 3. Sane quidem justius a
stellis quae necessitatem pariunt poenae repetantur, quam ab eo qui quod agit
(...), necessitate adactus aggreditur.
The stars which impose upon men a necessity of sinning, may be punished
with better justice then the men themselves. Aug. l. 2. contr. Faust. c. 5. Et
nos quidem sub fato stellarum nullius hominis genesin ponimus, ut liberum
arbitrium voluntatis, quo been vel male vivitur, propter justum Dei judicium ab
omni necessitatis vinculo vindicemus.
We place men's nativities under no fatal constellations, says S. Augustine,
that we may free the will by which a man lives either well or ill, from all
bands of necessity, because of the righteous judgment of God. Prosper
speaking of the judgment of God by which he decreed to render unto every man
according to his works, says, Prosp. ad Obj. 10. Vinc. Quod judicium futurum
omnino non esset, si homines Dei voluntate peccarent.
This judgment should never be, if men did sin by the will and determination
of God. Fulgentius also says the same; Fulgent. l. 1. ad Mon. cap. 22. Nec
justitia justa dicetur, si puniendum reum non invenisse sed fecisse dicatur.
Major vero erit injustitia, si lapso Deus retribuat poenam, quem stantem
praedestinasse dicitur ad ruinam.
It is great injustice in God to punish him whom he does not find but make an
offender. This was S. Bernards opinion too; Bern. l. De great. and lib. arb. p.
908. Sola voluntas, quoniam pro sui ingenita liberate aut dissentire sibi aut
praeter se in aliquo consentire, nulla vi, nulla cogitur necessitate, non
immerito justum vel injustum, beatitudine seu miseria dignam ac capacem
creaturam constituit, prout scilicet justitiae injustitiaeve consenserit.
It is only a will free from compulsion and necessity, says he, which makes
a creature capable of reward and punishment.

Out of these testimonies laid together may be collected three things. 1. That
the Ancients did use to call a necessity of humane actions good and bad by the
name of destiny, from what external cause soever this necessity did arise.
2. That they did use these two words, Necessity and compulsion,
promiscuously: and therefore thought that necessity as well as compulsion did
take away the wills liberty. 3. (Which is for our present purpose) That they
believed and contended that the judgments of God on sinners could not be just,
if they were held by the adamantine chains of any absolute necessity under
the power of their sins.

I will therefore conclude this argument with the words of Epiphanius
vvriting of the error of the Pharisees, who believed the immortality of the
soul and the resurrection of the dead, and yet held that all things come to
pass by necessity: Epiph. lib 1. adv. haer. 16. p. 35. number. 3. Est illud vero
extremae cujusdam imperitiae, ne dicam amentiae, cum resurrectionem mortuorum
esse fateare, ac justissimum cujusque facti judicium constitutum, fatum
nihilominus esse ullum asserere. Qui enim duo ista convenire possunt, Judicium
atque Fatum?
It is, says he, a point of extreme ignorance or madness rather, for him that
confesses the resurrection of the dead, and the great day appointed for the
revelation of Gods righteous judgment, to say that there is any destiny, any
necessity in men's actions. For how can the righteous judgment of God and
Destiny comply and stand together? And (let me add) how can the belief of
this and true piety stand together? For where this persvvasion, That men's
sins are necessary, and that therefore there can be no righteous judgment,
is rooted in, religion will quickly be rooted out.

IV. It tends to religions overthrow, because it makes the whole circle of
a man's life but a mere Destiny. By it all our doings are Gods ordinances, all
our imaginations branches of his Predestination, and all events in Kingdoms
and Common-vveals the necessary issues of the Divine decree: All things
whatsoever, though they seem to do somevvhat, yet (by this opinion) they do
indeed just nothing: The best laws restrain not one offender; the sweetest
rewards promote not one virtue; the povverfullest sermons convert not one
sinner; the humblest devotions divert not one calamity; the strongest
endeavors in things of any nature whatsoever, effect no more then would be
done without them: but the necessitating overruling decree of God does all.
And if laws do nothing, wherefore are they made? If rules of Religion do
nothing, why are they prescribed? If the wills of men do nothing, why are
men encouraged to one thing, scared from another? And if good endeavors and
onsets do nothing (being excited, continued, limited, controlled, and every
way governed by an active, absolute and almighty decree) to what purpose are
they used? Who sees not plainly vvhither these things tend? to nothing more
then the subversion of piety and polity, religion and laws, society and
government? This did the Romans see full well: and therefore they banished
Mathematicos the teachers and abettours of destiny out of Rome. These and the
like inconveniences which come from the upper way, did work so with Prosper
as that he calls him no Catholic who is of this opinion; Prosp. ad Cap.
Gall. sent. 1. Quisquis igitur ex praedestinatione Dei, velut fatali
necessitate, homines in peccata compulsos cogi dicit in mortem, non est
Catholicus.
Whosoever says that men are urged to sin and to be damned by the
Predestination of God as by a fatal (unavoidable) necessity, he is no
Catholic. They did also make the Arausicane Council denounce a curse against
such; Council. Araus. 2. can. 25. Aliquos ad malum Divina potestate
praedestinatos esse, non solum non credimus, sed etiam si qui siut qui tantum
malum credere velint, cum omni detestatione illis Anathema dicimus.
That any are predestined by the Divine power to sin, we do not only not
believe, but with the greatest detestation that we can, we denounce Anathema to
such (if there be any such) as will believe so great an evil.

Thus far of my reasons against the upper and more harsh and rigorous way.

An answer to the second Inconvenience inferred upon the Decree of absolute
Predestination and Reprobation.
THis Authors discourse concerning this Overthrow of all true religion and
government amongst men, and is divided into several branches (taking up six
pages at the least) is briefly answered thus; That whatsoever he has
discoursed concerning Fatal necessity and Coaction of men's wills following
upon the absolute decrees of Predestination and Reprobation, is a vain fancy
of his own, a beggarly Petitio principii, which because he knows not how to
prove, he never goes about it. Let him prove that absolute Predestination and
absolute Non-predestination or negative Reprobation draws after it such a
Necessitation or Coaction of man's will to good or evil, and we will presently
renounce it. But when he cannot do this, to bring reasons and Fathers against
the Coaction or Necessitation of man's will in actions good or evil, is pains
taken to no purpose, as being a thing which no man defends. Let this brief
reply therefore serve to this long discourse.

1. To his first reason. When he has proved that men reprobated sin as
necessarily as Lions prey, birds fly, etc. and that men absolutely
predestined perform their holy and just actions by the same necessity, let
him explode absolute Predestination and Reprobation, and set-up instead thereof
the Remonstrants conditionate Predestination and Reprobation upon foresight of
men's opposite acts good or bad, and we will presently subscribe to his opinion.

2. To his second we answer, That absolute take away the conscience of sin
then that conditionate Predestination and Reprobation which anciently the
Semipelagians and of late the Remonstrants found upon prescience of men's holy
or wicked actions. For as the eternal Prescience of God puts no
necessitation upon actions foreseen, no more does the eternal Predestination
of God. Gods decrees are immanent in himself after one manner, and the
temporal effects or events decreed are produced by men after another, that is,
contingently and freely according to the nature of the agents. They themselves
feel and find this by their own experience in all predestined events, and
therefore Gods eternal and secret decrees cannot nor do not take away the
conscience of men's sins. Judas his conscience told him that he had sinned in
betraying innocent blood, though the Scripture tells us that being delivered
by the determined counsel of God foreknown, Act. 2.23.
they took Christ, and by wicked hands they crucified him and slew him. Aquinas
resolves the point thus; Ordo praedestinationis est certus, and tamen libertas
arbitrii non tollitur ex qua contingenter provenit praedestinationis effectus.
And this is the same which S. Augustine long before had taught; Vide Esti^ms in
1. Sentent. did. 39.. 7. ^ag. 136.
Deus ita ordinat omnia ut proprios motus exercere sinat.

petitio principii, That all effects and events predestined are fatal, and
that the Agents have no liberty or choice in doing them: which is a gross
error, and rejected by School-divines and by modern Papists as well as
Protestants. His further amplifications are all to the same purpose, and
therefore we let them pass.

What Augustine writes for rectifying Adrumetine Monks, this Author might
have done well to have made use of for rectifying his own erroneous judgment.
They supposed that absolute Predestination could not stand together with man's
freedom unto actions predestined; but Augustine taught them the contrary,
and so reclaimed them. And we wish that this Author would out of S. Augustine
learn that his supposition is false and erroneous as theirs was.

For the Fathers which he brings to prove that it is injustice to punish men
for acts to which they are necessitated and enforced by Gods Predestination and
Reprobation, we subscribe unto their judgment, and we retort it against this
Author thus: Augustine, Prosper, Fulgentius, Bernard, and others named by him,
were defenders of absolute Election and Non-election, and yet they held that
men elected were justly rewarded for their good acts, and men passed-by justly
punished for their bad acts; and therefore they supposed not Coaction or
Necessitation to follow upon Election and Reprobation.

The conclusion, that men in their own actions do no more then would be done
without them by the necessitating decrees of God; is altogether false and vain.
For Gods decrees are not necessitating, though the events decreed are
infallible; and they leave the wills of men to as much liberty as the Divine
Prescience does. And this is the general opinion of Divines, though they
differ about the manner of according man's liberty with Gods Predestination.

Treatise.
THe arguments by which for the present I stand convinced of the untruth even
of the milder and lovver way (A) too, I will take from these five follovving
heads; namely, from 1. Pregnant testimonies of Scripture, directly opposing it.
2. Some principal Attributes of God, no^ compatible with it. 3. The end of
the Word and Sacraments with other excellent gifts of God to men, quite
thvvarted by it. 4. Holy endeavors much hindered, if not wholly subverted by
it. 5. Grounds of comfort (by which the conscience in distress should be
relieved) which are all removed by it.


It is I. Repugnant to SCRIPTURE. Ezekiel. 33.11.
FIrst, it is repugnant to plain and evident places of (B) Scripture even in
terminis, as will appear by these instances.

As I live, says (C) the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of a sinner;
but that the wicked turn from his ways, and live.

And lest men should say, It is true; God wills not the death of a repenting
sinner, the Lord in another place of the same Prophet extends the proposition
to them also that perish; Ezekiel. 18.32.
I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies.

In this Scripture we may note three things:

1. Gods affection to men, set forth -- Negatively; I have no pleasure in his
death that dies. Affirmatively; but that the wicked turn.


2. The persons in whose destruction God delights not; Wicked men, such as
for their rejecting of grace die and are damned. If God have no pleasure in
their death, much less in the death of men either altogether innocent or
tainted only with original sin.

3. The truth of his affection; As I live. Cupit credisibi, Tertull. lib. de
poen. c. 4.
God would fain have us believe him, says Tertullian, when he says, I will
not the death of him that dies: and therefore he binds his speech with an
oath. O beatos nos, quorum causa Deus jurat! o miserrimos, si nec juranti
Domino credimus!
Happy are we for whose sake the Lord vouchsafes to swear; but most unhappy,
if we believe him not when he swears!

Now if God delight not in the destruction of wicked men, certainly he never
did out of his absolute pleasure seal up so many millions of men lying in the
fall under invincible damnation: For such a decreeing of men to eternal death
is directly opposite to a delight in their repentance and everlasting life.

God has (D) shut up all in unbelief, Romans 11.2.
that he might have mercy over all.

In these the Apostles words are two ALLs of equal extent, the one standing
against the other; An ALL of unbelievers, and an ALL of objects of mercy. Look
how many unbelievers there be, on so many has God a will of shevving mercy.
And therefore if all men of all sorts and conditions, and every man in every
sort be an unbeliever, then is every man of every condition under mercy: and if
every man be under mercy, then there is no precise antecedent will of God of
shutting up some, and those the most, from all possibility of obteining mercy.
For these two are (...) and cannot stand together.

God so loved (E) the world, John. 3 16.
that he gave his onely-begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should
not perish, etc.

God loved the world, says the Text, that is, the whole lump of mankind:
therefore he did not absolutely hate the greatest part of men. Again, God loved
it fallen into a gulf of sin and misery: For he so loved them as to send his
Son to redeem them; and a Savior presupposes sin. He did not therefore
hate the most of them lying in the fall: for love and hatred are contrary acts
in God, and cannot be exercised about the same objects.

Many expositours (I know) do take World here in a restrained sense, and
understand by it the company of the Elect, or the world of Believers only:
But they have little reason for it, in my opinion. For,

First, I think there can be no place of Scripture alleged wherein this word
World, especially with the addition of whole, as 1. Epist. of John chap. 2.
verse. 2. (a place equivalent to this for the matter of it, and a comment upon
it:) I say no place (I think) can be produced where world does signify only
the Elect, or only Believers: but it signifies either all men, or at least
the most men living in some certain place and at some certain time, but
without distinction of good and bad. Or if it be used anyvvhere more
restrainedly, it is applied only to wicked and reprobate men, who in their
affections are vvedded to the world and its transitory delights; and therefore
do most properly deserve this name.

Secondly, Suppose it be granted, that World in some Scriptures is restrained
to the Elect; yet it cannot bear this signification here: Because

1. The words then would have a senseless construction: For thus would they
run, God so loved the elect, etc. that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, etc. And if they run thus, this would follovv; There are two sorts
of the Elect, some that do believe and shall be saved, others that do not
believe and shall be damned: which is a division or distinction unknown in
Divinity.

2. Believers and Unbelievers, Damned and Saved, comprehend all mankind: for
there is no man but he is one of these. Now World in this place includes
believers and unbelievers, the saved and the damned, as appears most plainly
to him that lays the 16, 17, and 18 verses together. Therefore it signifies
here all mankind without exception of any.

^. Tim. ^.4.
Who would (F) have all to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth.

In these words the Apostle delivers two things: 1. That it is Gods will
that men should enjoy a happy end, and be saved; 2. That it is also his will
they should have the means, and make a good use of them in coming to the
knowledge of the truth, that so they might be saved. There is no let in God,
but that all men may believe and be saved; and therefore there is no absolute
will that many thousand men shall die in unbelief and be damned.

Two answers are usually returned, which I confess give me little
satisfaction.

I. That by ALL here we are to understand all sorts, and not every particular
man in those sorts.

It is true, that ALL is sometimes so taken in Scripture; but (I believe) not
here: For the very context shows that we are to understand by it the
individualls, and not the kinds. In the first verse there is a duty enjoined; I
will that prayers and supplications be made for all men: and in this verse the
motive is annexed, God will have all to be saved: As if he should have said,
Our charity must reach to all whom God extends his love to. God out of his
love will have all to be saved; and therefore in charity we must pray for
all. Now in the duty ALL signifies every man: for no man, though wicked and
profane, is to be excluded from our prayers. Pray for them, says our Savior,
that persecute you, and, Pray, says the Apostle here, for kings and all that
are in authority; men in those days, though the greatest, yet the worst, the
very Lions, Wolves and Bears of the Church: Pray for them. And if for them,
then for any other. Thus in the duty it signifies every man: and therefore it
must have the same extent in the motive too, or else the motive does not reach
home, nor is strong enough to enforce the duty.

II. The second (G) answer is, That God will have all to be saved with his
revealed will, but millions to be damned with his secret will;

But if this answer stand, then (in my apprehension) these inconveniences
will follovv. 1. That Gods words (which are his revealed will) are not
interpretations of his mind and meaning; and by consequence are not true: for
the speech which is not the signification of the mind, is a lie. 2. That there
are two contrary wills in God, a secret will, That many sons of Adam shall
irrevocably be damned; and a revealed will, That all the sons of Adam may be
saved. 3. That one of Gods wills must needs be bad, either the secret or the
revealed will. For of contraries, if the one be good, the other is bad: and so
of Gods contrary wills, if one be good, the other must needs be bad. For malum
est contrarium bono.

2. Pet. 3.9.
Not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance,
etc.

This Scripture is not so liable to the exceptions against the former
testimony. For it is a negative proposition, and must be taken distributively:
and therefore speaks that in plain terms which is contrary to absolute
Reprobation.

That which is usually replied, is, That the persons here spoken of, are the
elect only and such as truly believe; God is not willing that any of them
should perish.

But the contrary appears in the text. For the persons here mentioned are
those tovvard whom God exercises much patience and long-suffering, as it is in
the words next going before. And who are they? Are they the elect? are they
believers only? No, but reprobates rather, who die for their contempt of
grace. For it is apparent by Scriptures, that God does patiently expect the
conversion even of them that are never changed but die in their sins: as we
may see 1. Pet. 3.19, 20, where we read that the patience of God was
exercised toward those who in the days of Noah despised it, and went to
prison, that is to hell, for it. Yea of all men reprobates are the truest and
most proper objects of Gods patience, as we may see Romans 2.4. where S. Paul
speaking of such as go on in sin, and treasure up wrath to themselves against
the day of wrath, says, that God uses patience toward them that he might
lead them to repentance. And Romans 9.22. He endures, says the text, with much
long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction. In the fifth of
Isaiah v. 2. and the 65. chap. v. 2. we may see the same thing. Reprobates
therefore as well as others, nay rather then others, does Peter here speak of,
and says that God would have none of them to perish: If they do perish, it is
through their own fault and folly, and not Gods absolute pleasure, who would
have no man to perish.

To these testimonies I may add these (I) conditional speeches:

1. Chron. 28.9.
If thou seek him, he will be found of thee: but if thou forsake him, he will
cast thee off for ever.

2. Chron. 15.2. Genesis 4.
If you seek him, he will be found of you: but if you forsake him, he will
forsake you.

If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? and if thou do not well, sin
lies at the door.

Heb. 10.38.
The just shall live by faith: but if any man withdraw himself, my soul (...),
shall have no pleasure, in him; shall not like him: he shall be a reprobate.

By all these and many other places that speak conditionally (for ought that I
can see) it is clear, that (K) God forsakes no man considered simply in the
fall, till by actual sins and continuance in them he forsake God. Now if God
reject no man from salvation in time and in deed till he cast off God, then
surely he rejects no man in purpose and decree, but such a one as he foresaw
would reject and cast off him. For Gods acts in time are regulated by his
decrees before time: Ephesians. 1.11. He works all things, says the Apostle,
according to the counsel of his own will: and therefore there must be an exact
conformity between them as between regulam and regulatum, the rule and the
thing squared thereby. By whatsoever therefore God does in the world, we may
know what he purposed to do before the world: and by his actual casting men
off when they grow rebellious and impenitent, and not before, we may certainly
gather that he decreed to cast them off for their foreseen rebellion and
impenitency, and not before.

Besides, it is in substance all one, to cast a man off indeed and to entertein
a resolution to do it. Our velle and facere are all one in Gods account: and
the reason is, Because where there is a deliberate and settled will, the deed
will follow if nothing hinder. Much more is Gods will and deed all one, seeing
his will is omnipotent and irresistible, and whatsoever he wills directly and
absolutely, is certainly done when the time comes.

Well; all these plain and express Scriptures, with the whole course and
tenor of Gods word, this opinion flatly contradicting, though it do (perhaps)
shroud it self in some dark and obscure speeches of holy Writ, I take it to be
an untruth. For what S. Augustine says in another case, I may safely say in
this; Nunquid ideo negandum quod apertum est, quia comprehendi non potest quod
occultum est.
Shall we contradict plain places, because we cannot comprehend the obscure?
Secundum plura pauciora sunt intelligenda: and ne unus sermo subvertat alios,
secundum omnes potius quam adversus omnes intelligendut erit.
A few testimonies, says Tertullian, must receive an exposition answerable to
the current of Scripture, not contrary to it.

This is my first reason.

An Answer to the objections against the Lower way.
BEfore we come to answering particular objections we must put this Author in
remembrance of these few things which he has not well considered.

1. First, whereas he troubles himself with distinguishing the Supralapsarian
and Sublapsarian Doctrine, calling them Supralapsarians who in ordering the
eternal decrees of God concerning Election and Preterition or Reprobation
place them before the consideration of the fall, and those Sublapsarians who
place them after; this pains might well have been spared. For Priorities and
Posteriorities in the eternal immanent decrees of God are but imaginations of
man's weak reason, and framed diversely (nay contrarily) as well by Schoolmen and
Papists as by Protestants or those which are termed Calvinists; and finally
they have little or no use in this controversy, as has been formerly showed.
Aquinas thought it no such matter of moment whether Predestination be
considered before man's fall and state of misery or after: Part. 1. qu. 23.
art. 1.
Motus non accipit speciem a termino a quo, sed a termino ad quem. Nihil enim
refert quantum ad rationem dealbationis, utrum ille qui dealbatur fuerit niger,
aut pallidus, aut rubeus: and similiter nihil refert ad rationem
praedestinationis, utrum aliquis praedestinetur in vitam aeternam a statu
miseriae vel non. And for Reprobation, he seems rather to incline to their
opinion who place it in order of consideration before the fall in making it
such a part of the Divine providence as permits some men Ibid. art. 3
deficere a fine. So that this Distinction of Supralapsarians and Sublapsarians
has served this Author to no other purpose but to the inculcating of the same
objections again and again.

2. Secondly, this Author should have considered that there is no medium
assignabile ex part Dei betwixt the decrees of Predestinating some men and
Not-predestinating some others; nor ex part hominum, betwixt men absolutely
predestined unto the atteinment of life eternal and absolutely pretermitted
and left infallibly deficere ab adeptione vitae aeternae, which we call
absolute Reprobation. As for example, let us suppose the number of mankind to
be two millions of men: If out of these by the decree of election one million
only be infallibly appointed or ordained to eternal life, and these certainly
and absolutely distinguished from others not only quoad numerum, but quoad
personas, who can deny but one million also, and those certain quoad personas,
are as absolutely comprised under the decree of Non-election or Reprobation as
the others were under the decree of Election or Predestination?

It is true that the manner of Gods bringing the elect in time unto eternal
life is by giving them repentance, faith and perseverance; and the manner of
Gods permitting the Non-elect to run themselves upon the rock of eternal
death, is by suffering them to continue in their infidelity and impenitencie.
But the formal decree of Predestination contains an absolute eternal
preparing of this effectual grace for some; and the formal decree of negative
Reprobation or Non-predestination an absolute eternal decree of not-preparing
this effectual grace for any others. From whence it is plain that the Divine
prevision of final perseverance in the elect, and final impenitency in the
non-elect, does not nor cannot go before the forenamed decrees, as the
Remonstrants imagine. Let him be judge who is no friend to Calvinists: Vasq. in
1. qu. 23. did. 95.
Praedestinari est gratiam illam quam Deus novit in nobis effectum habituram
nobis praeparari: and non praedestinari, gratiam illam nobis non praeparari. No
mention of foreseen faith or infidelity in the one or in the other.

Thirdly, I could wish this Author had more advisedly weighed that proposition
whereupon he groundeth his whole discourse, namely, That Gods eternal and
absolute decrees of Producing such and such good actions in some men, and his
opposite eternal and absolute decrees of Not-producing the same good actions
in others, cannot stand with the liberty of man's will, but is a coacting and
necessitating cause in men's doing or not-doing the foresaid actions. This he
takes as a postulatum unquestionable through his whole book: and if this be
not freely granted him, he has said little or nothing against absolute
Predestination or absolute Reprobation. Now I must tell him, that this
postulatum which he so boldly presumes upon is generally held for an erroneous
and false opinion. I will cite only the testimonies of Calvine's and Beza's
known Adversaries. Bellarmine; Tom. 3. De great. and lib. arb. cap. 8.
Credimus Deum absoluta voluntate velle salvare multos, and absoluta voluntate
alios non velle salvare. Here you see an absolute will in God to save some, and
a negation of this absolute will in God concerning the salvation of others. Now
what is this absolute will of saving some (which we call Predestination) but
that special providence of God Ibid. cap. 9
Qua per infallibilia media in vitam diriguntur aeternam? Does this absolute
Predestination take away the freedom of the predestinate in the actions of
repenting and believing? Cap. 15.
Respondeo; Potest ille libere gratiam repudiare; sed certum est non
repudiaturum, quia Deus vocabit illum sicut videt congruum illi esse ut
vocantem non respuat.

Now for negative Reprobation; This is absolute as well as Predestination: Cap.
16.
Nulla datur ejus causa ex part hominum, sicut neque praedestinationis. Does
this Reprobation draw after it a coaction or necessitation unto wicked actions
for which the Reprobates are afterward condemned? No: Bell. De lib. arb. l. 3.
c. 6.
Si peccat, libere peccat, quia potest deponere pravum affectum si velit
gratiae Divinae cooperari. Bellarmine then was of opinion that absolute
Predestination and Reprobation might be defended, and yet no necessitation of
man's will thereupon inferred. Suarez; De Auxil. 2. c. 5. p. 174
Si sermo sit de non-electione (quam nonnulli Reprobationem negativam vocant)
verum est causam illius esse solam Dei voluntatem, nulla exspectata causa ex
part hominis. But will not this Reprobation make all the evil and damnable
acts whereinto the Reprobates infallibly fall subject to coaction and
necessitation, by depriving the agent of his free will in the exercise thereof?
No; Ibid. lib. 3 c. 17. p. 354
Divina providentia impletur interdum sola permissione actuum liberorum, quando
illi male facturi sunt. Deus non est author mali actus; but out of general and
special reasons flowing from his providence he so disposes of causes and
circumstances as he withal permits a wicked man by his free will to abuse
them unto evil actions. Ruiz proves at large, Ruiz. De praedest. disp. 7.
Sect. 4. and disp. 53. Sect. 8.
Nullam esse causam ex part nostra concessae aut negatae praedestinationis.
Here you see absolute decrees of Predestination and Non-predestination
maintained, and yet all coaction or necessitation of the wills of persons
not-elected, unto their sinful actions is by him denied. Vide De voluntate
Dei, disp. 20.. 5. page 223. Vide Aquin. par. 1. qu. 22. art. 4. and Cajet.
ibid. and qu. 23. art. 3, and 6.

Having thus laid open the false supposition whereupon this Author has
founded his discourse, let us now consider the following reasons against
absolute Reprobation.

Answer to his five Reasons against Absolute Reprobation: and First, to his
Testimonies of Scripture.
Whereas these five reasons are bent of the settled doctrine of our own
Church. If they were intended only against some particular Divines, either of
foreign Churches or of our own, he should have called this discourse, A
disproving of their erroneous opinion who from the absolute decree of
Non-election or Reprobation infer an absolute prime decree of particular men's
damnation. Amongst which exorbitant Divines he shows himself to be one of the
principal.

in Electos and Non-electos, or in Praedestinatos and negative Reprobatos, be
an absolute prime decree, or a subsequent decree built upon men's foreseen
goodness and badnesse, all such testimonies as confound the judicial decree
of man's Damnation with the negative Reprobation, will be impertinent: For
though the former be absolute, yet the latter is respective unto man's sins.
Again, all such places as prove God has a will of saving all men under this
condition If they believe and persevere, and of Damning of no man but for his
iniquity or infidelity, prove sufficiently that the temporal bringing of men
unto eternal life stands upon conditionate decrees; and so likewise the
temporal adjudging of men unto eternal death: but they are of no force at all
to prove that Election and Non-election are conditionate decrees, or to
disprove an absolute decree of negative Reprobation. Last of all, such places
as prove a general love or a general mercy extending to every singular man in
the world, do not overthrow the decree of absolute Non-election; because love
and mercy may be shown even to the Non-elect. This in general. Now in
particular to every testimony alleged.

To the first out of Ezekiel. 33.11. and the 18.32. we answer, This Author quite
certitudine praescientiae Divinae but ordinis and causalitatis, as the
Schoolmen speak. Now the will spoken of in the testimonies alleged is that
voluntas simplicis complacentiae, or voluntas conditionata, which in regard of
the good intended and promised unto men depends upon the good behavior of
their own free will for the obteining of life and avoiding of death.
Notwithstanding, this will which extends unto all, it is the Divine will and
decree, that in some men Ruiz. De volunt. 18. Sect. 4.
Creata libertas possit impedire effectus consecutionem; Et hoc vult permittere
Deus propter majora bona. So that this will of exempting Judas or Cain from
eternal death under condition of Turning from their wicked ways, and yet
permitting them finally to run on in their wicked ways, is so far from proving
that they were not under any such decree of Reprobation, as we maintein that it
evidently demonstrateth the truth thereof. It proves strongly that neither
man's sin nor man's eternal death do fall sub voluntate simplicis
complacentiae: for then they should be bona and amabilia per se: But it proves
not but God may decree the permitting of some men finally to die in their
sins, and eternally to be punished for their sins: wherein we place the
decree of Reprobation.

The inference or collection, That God delights not in the destruction of
wicked men, we willingly grant. For he is only said to delight in that
whereunto he has a natural inbred propension: But this puts no necessary
obligation upon God by special mercy to free all men from destruction, though
he could most easily do it.

As for sealing up of many millions under invincible damnation; it does
manifestly import an invincible act of God thrusting men first into sin and
then into hell, and both out of his mere pleasure. We utterly deny that
Reprobation infers any such dealing of God with men Not-elected.

And for the Scriptures alleged, or others of the same kind; they do not
affirm a conditionate Election upon foreseen faith and perseverance, but they
show us Calv. De aetern. Dei Praedest. p. 706.
Quid omnibus ad fidem and paenitentiam adductis facere paratus sit Deus.

To the second. The main scope of this verse. 4, 5, 6.
obtained it by virtue of that free Election which works upon some,
enlightening, mollifying and converting their hearts, leaving others to the
voluntary blindness and hardness of their hearts; a man would think that
nothing could have been picked from hence to establish Election and
Non-election founded upon the good and bad acts of men.

But the Apostle expressly says, That God has shut up ALL under unbelief,
that he might have mercy upon ALL. The two ALLS are of an equal extent. How
many unbelievers there be, on so many God has a will of showing mercy. And if
every man be under mercy, then there is no precise will of shutting out any
from possibility of mercy.

The Apostles meaning is this; That God in his providence permitted both Jews
and Gentiles to be entangled in the guilt of just damnation, that so whosoever
is saved might ascribe his salvation not to any foreseen merits or any good
works of his own, but to the free mercy of God. So that every man being by
nature sinful and incredulous, all men lie alike at his mercy, and he may
have mercy upon whom he pleases. The Apostle is so far from affirming that
God shows this special mercy unto all unbelievers which he shows unto
some, namely the Enlightening of their dark minds, and the Mollifying of their
obdurate hearts, that he says the quite contrary; verse. 7.
Electio consecuta est, caeteri vero excaecati sunt. Estius, in locum.
Maluit dicere Electionem quam Electos, ut vim gratuitae electionis innueret, a
qua totum habent electi quod habent. The Apostle meant not to contradict his
former doctrine, Romans 9.18.
Miseretur cujus vult, and quem vult indurat: and not to make the mercy of
Election of equal extent with the misery or guilt of sin; but to show that
it is mercy on Gods part, and not worth or desert on ours, whenever any
saving grace is bestowed upon any of us all. And yet if this Author plead for
no more then a general mercy, we will easily grant him, That all men are not
only in an estate needing mercy, or in a possibility of obteining mercy, but
have an actual participation of many and great mercies from the hand of
almighty God. But when from hence he suddenly concludes, That there is no
precise antecedent will of God of shutting up the most men from all
possibility of obteining mercy, he has forgot the question. He should have
concluded, Therefore there is no absolute will of God mercifully electing some
to the infallible atteinment of grace and glory, and by a negation of the same
special mercy leaving others through their own default infallibly to fall into
final sin and misery. Till he conclude this he concludes nothing against
absolute Reprobation or Non-election.

God so loved the world, etc. Therefore he

We grant the conclusion, and more then he asks: For God did not absolutely
hate any one man in the world. Neither will we make advantage of that opinion
defended by many Schoolmen, Aquin. contra Gent. 1.96.
Non proprie sed similitudinarie dici Deum odire. But our answer is, That
absolute Reprobation, which is nothing else but Gods absolute will of denying
the special benefit of infallible direction unto eternal life, and permitting
some men by their own defective free will deservedly to fall under the misery
of eternal death, is not an argument of hatred toward any man, but of a less
degree of love toward some men then toward others; which less degree of love
is sometimes expressed by the name of hatred. Thus God is said to have loved
Jacob and hated Esau, and that before they were born, or had done either good
or evil. Vasqu. in 1. q. 23. disp 95. c. 8.
ODISSE idem est quod MINUS DILEXISSE. Thus Lea was said to be hated by Jacob,
because she was less beloved then Rachel, Genesis 29.31. In this sense we grant
that the decrees of absolute Predestination and absolute Reprobation do clearly
prove that amongst Angels and men God has loved some more and some less: but
that he has absolutely hated any creature of his own making, they do not
prove. Diligis omnia quae sunt; and nihil odisti eorum quae fecisti, Wisd. 11.
God hates sin, because he made it not: And this hatred does redundare in
peccatorem qua talem, because God made him not so. But God hates not
non-electum, non-praedestinatum, or negative reprobatum qua talem: neither does
he condemn him, or decree to condemn him propter reprobationem, which is Gods
act, but propter transgressionem, which is man's act.

Let us hear what Calvines most deadly Adversaries the Jesuits hold in this
point:

Ruiz. De Volunt. Dei, disp. 54.. 3. Vide eundem, De Praedest. disp. 2.. 3. and
disp. 8.. 2. and disp. 15.. 6.
Nullum Reproborum prosequitur Deus odio inimicitiae, sed tantum ejus peccatum
odio detestationis. Suarez Opusc. 2. c. 5.. 7. p. 174.
also makes Reprobation a sign only of a less degree of love, and not of an
absolute hatred, as this Author conceives. Nay Molina Concord. Quaest. 23.
art. 4. disp. 4. page 402.
himself makes this Reprobation we now speak of to be only a lesser degree of
love.

Whereas it is further urged, That God did not only love the whole lump of
mankind; but that he loved it even after it was fallen into the gulf of sin
and misery, this also is granted. But to prove Gods love, it is sufficient that
he extends his goodness unto every man, though he extend not the top and
height of his goodness unto every man, which consists in the eternal
preparation and temporal donation of such special grace as God knows
infallibly will and decrees infallibly shall bring them unto glory.
Reprobation imports a denial of this rich grace and of this special love of
God, but imports no absolute denial either of grace or love, much less an
absolute hatred of any person not-elected, Aquin. 1. part. qu. 23. art. 3.
resp. ad ^m.
Deus diligit omnes homines, in quantum omnibus vult aliquod bonum: non tamen
quodcunque bonum vult omnibus. In quantum igitur quibusdam non vult hoc bonum
quod est vita aeterna, dicitur eos Odio habere vel Reprobare.

We stand in no need of their exposition who by the WORLD understand the Elect:
Let them therefore defend themselves if they can.

Who would have all to be Hence this Author gathers two things 1. That it is
Gods will that men should be saved; 2. It is his will that they should mak^ use
of the means of salvation, that so they may be saved; and God hinders no man
from believing and being saved: therefore there i^ no absolute will that
thousands should die unbelievers and be damned.

We answer, That Ariba, p. 112.
in this act or decree o^ Gods will, Volo hunc salvum fieri, or, Vo^^ hunc
fidelem fieri, is not comprised or expressed the proper act of Predestination:
but it requires a further determination of the Divine will, Ruiz. De Praedest.
disp. 1. 7. n. 12.
scilicet, Volo hunc salvum facere; Volo hunc fidelem and perseverantem facere.
That which includes not the will of Predestination does not exclude the
opposite will of Reprobation, as it respects the same persons, whether few or
many* But this proposition, Volo Judam salvum fieri, or this, Volo omnes
homines salvos fieri, does not include a particular Predestination of Judas or
a promiscuous Predestination o^ all men either unto the end or means o^ their
salvation: and therefore the Reprobation of Judas and of many millions more may
be defended, and yet the truth of this admitted.

I, but where God has such a will as is here intimated (says our Author)
there he is no let or hinderance to any man from believing, and so being saved.

These men have too high an opinion of the strength of man's free will that
conceive, if God will be pleased not to hinder them, they will upon such grace
as is offered believe, and so attein eternal life. But as we (with the common
consent of orthodox Divines) place Election and Predestination in such a will
of God as infallibly works faith and infallibly guides the elected unto
eternal life, Ruiz. De Praed. disp. 2.. 3. n. 10. and. 4.
and not in the will of Not-hindering them from the means or end of their
salvation; so we place the Non-election or negative Reprobation of others not
in a will of Hindering them from believing or walking in the way which leads
unto life, but in a will of Not-preparing for them and Not-bestowing upon them
those infallible means which would certainly bring them to eternal life. He
whom God thus permits to run into perdition, to whom he gives (as I may
so term it) pereundi licentiam, it is clear he is not comprised within the
number of the elect: and therefore (there being no middle sort of men) it is as
clear that he apperteineth unto the number of the Non-elect.

That which has bred this man's mistake, is, the not-conceiving of any
difference betwixt the will of God termed voluntas simplicis complacentiae and
that which is termed voluntas absoluta or efficax, which infallibly works
that good which it wills and intends unto any man.

Vide Ruiz. De volunt. disp. 20. page 215, 216. etc.
These two may well stand together; Deus vult ut omnes credant and salvi fiant,
voluntate Complacentiae; Deus vult and decrevit permittere ut quidam increduli
maneant, and salvi non fiant sed pereant, voluntate Absoluta. The former will
is in effect but a conditionate will: As if the Apostle had said, God will have
all men to be saved, if all men shall believe in Christ: and to believe in
Christ is an act so well-pleasing and so agreeable unto Gods will that
wheresoever it is found it shall be rewarded. But notwithstanding the extent of
this will unto all men, there is in God an absolute will of permitting some to
continue in their unbelief, and so perish: and this we call Reprobation.

For the two Answers opposed by this Author we need not much trouble our
selves. If we understood the place de voluntate efficaci and infallibiliter
producente effectum volitum, as many do, we would answer with them, that by ALL
of necessity we must understand genera singulorum, not singula generum: But
because we conceive it spoken de voluntate simplicis complacentiae, we allow
the extent unto all, but deny that it contradicts the decrees of
Predestination or Reprobation: because they imply a will in God of infallibly
working or not-working the same in singular persons.

For the second Answer which he takes upon him to confute, namely of the
revealed secret will of God; he should first have rightly set it down, and then
have tried his strength in confuting it. We say that there is in God a true
will revealed in the Gospel of Saving all men that shall believe; and a true
will Liking, Embracing, Rewarding faith, holiness, perseverance in all men
whomsoever without any distinction of persons: And this is the will called
voluntas simplicis complacentiae; which neither decrees nor determines any
thing infallibly concerning the being or not-being of such good acts in this or
that singular person. This will we know; and therefore we call it his Revealed
will. There is also in God a secert will of Bringing some men unto faith, unto
perseverance, unto the kingdom of heaven; of Not-bringing some others unto any
of these, and of Permitting them to fall into the contrary evils through their
own default: This will we know not; and therefore we call it the secret will of
Election and Reprobation. Notwithstanding the former will of God many millions
of men are neither saved nor brought to the saving knowledge of the truth: but
the latter will is always answered by the infallible event. This no Divine can
deny: Vide Ruiz. De Vol. disp. 19.. 12, 13. and Penott. lib. 4.. 20.
And therefore under pretense of the former general conditionate will, which
is voluntas Approbationis in regard of the object, and which fails of the
event oftentimes in regard that many singular persons fail in performing the
conditions, to go about the cancelling of a secret and more effectual will of
God, which decrees the production of that good in some persons which he likes
and allows in all, is no fair dealing. Albeit therefore we grant a general
declared will of God for saving all men which shall believe in Christ, yet
therewithal we maintein a special and secret will of God extended unto some
part only of mankind, purposing eternally and in time working faith and
perseverance in all those which de facto are saved. Prosp. De vocat. 2.31
Est pars quaedam humani generis quae specialibus beneficiis ad aeternam
salutem provehitur. And of these we say with Augustine, De Praed. sanct. 1.18.
Tales erant futuri, quia elegit Deus praedestinans ut tales per gratiam ejus
essent.

The inference, That Gods word is not true unless he will have all men to be
saved, is granted de voluntate Complacente, denied de voluntate Decernente.
Unless we admit of this distinction we make that word of God untrue, Quicquid
voluit fecit in coelo and in terra.

Neither are these wills contrary; Volo omnes fieri salvos, Volo omnes fieri
credentes; Nolo aliquos facere salvos, August. Enchir. ad Laur. c. 97.
Nolo aliquos facere credentes. For the event proves the truth of the latter,
and the Scripture of the former. Vide Ruiz. Disput. 17.. 3. 5.

2. PET. 3.9. God is patient toward us, and This is a negative proposition,
and must be taken distributively: and therefore it flatly contradicts
absolute Reprobation.

Take it distributively, yet it no way contradicts that absolute Reprobation
which is opposed to absolute Predestination. Ruiz describes it thus; De Praed.
disp. 2.. 4.
Reprobatio formaliter and ultimo constituitur per imperium intellectus Divini
ordinantis tali modo per talia media cum talibus circumstantiis permittendum
esse peccatum, and finalem reprobati impoenitentiam, and propter illam
ordinantis aeternam ejus punitionem.

If the Apostle had said, God never decreed to permit that any man should
finally perish in his impenitencie, he had quite overthrown the difference
which we make betwixt men predestined and notpredestinated: but telling us
only what God would have us do and what God would not have us wilfully to run
upon, here is nothing at all which makes against absolute Predestination or
Reprobation. They are decrees containing what God is resolved to work in some
men and not to work in others; these are words showing what God would have men
do or not do: and therefore they cannot be contradictorie or contrary one to
the other. Powerfully to work the conversion of singular persons, is a certain
proof that they were never under the decree of the Divine Reprobation: But
voluntate complacentiae only to will their conversion, and patiently to expect
it, using such means as they frustrate, is so far from evincing that such men
were not under the decree of Reprobation, that it is a strong argument to prove
it. Vide Estium in 1. Sent. Did. 46. Malderus (a professed enemy to the Synod
of Dort) grants In 1m 2. quaest. 79. memb. 4. p 247.
that the final obduration or impenitencie of Reprobates is not a foreseen
antecedent condition but a following event of negative Reprobation. He was not
of this Authors judgment then, who thinks Gods patient expectation must
needs cross the decree of Reprobation.

In a word; If this Author will bring Scripture to overthrow the absolute
decree of Predestination and Reprobation, he must bring such places as prove
God has not decreed the infallible conversion and salvation of certain
singular persons, and God has not decreed the permission of some men's
obduration and perdition: which we know he can never do.

His sixth Testimony out of Scripture is conditional propositions, If they
seek him, If they do well, If they believe, If they persevere, etc. and which
suspend his wrath and utter desertion upon their Sinning and Forsaking of God.
Upon these premises whereas we expected this conclusion, Therefore in God there
is no eternal decree of absolute Predestination and absolute
Non-predestination, Preterition or negative Reprobation, he starteth aside from
the question, and infers, That God forsakes or rejects from salvation no
man in time and in deed till he have first in time and deed cast-off God. Upon
the truth of which conclusion we shall not much stand with him.

But to answer more clearly to the point in hand; We must first consider that
mere or purely conditional decrees or conditional volitions agree not with
the perfection of the Divine nature. Ruiz. De volunt. disp 20.. 1.
Volitiones pure conditionales sunt alienae a sapientia and prudentia Dei.
Vasq. in 1m. disp. 83. page 511.
Voluntas Dei conditionata dici potest, non quia actu feratur in objectum sub
condition, sed quia ex illa voluntate quae praesens est alia oriretur si
conditio in objecto poneretur. The speeches therefore above cited out of
Scripture do not imply a Conditional will in God suspended for any moment of
time, and then post purificatam conditionem becoming an Absolute and Effectual
will, Vide Ruiz. De scient. disp. 71.. 7
as the like conditional propositions do in us, who have neither knowledge
whether the condition will be certainly performed or no, nor yet power in our
selves to work the condition whereupon the future act of our will was
suspended. Ruiz. De volunt. disp. 8.. 7.
But in God, who knows eternally what every man will do or not do, and who in
himself has an absolute power and freedom to make men do any good whereunto
he makes promise of reward, and to leave them to their own defective Free Will
in doing those things for which he has threatened desertion and destruction,
these conditional decrees or volitions must be far otherwise conceived;
namely, not purely but mixtly conditionalia, that is, grounded in some absolute
revealed decree of God to the performance whereof he has tied himself. For
example; It is an absolute decree of the Divine will published in the Gospel,
That whosoever repents, believes, persevereth, shall be saved: From hence is
derived that mixed conditional decree, If Cain, if Judas, if any other repent
and believe, they shall be saved. Now such mixed conditional decrees carry no
contradiction to the absolute decrees of Election and Non-election or
Reprobation. For who sees not that these two propositions may well stand
together, I will that if Judas repent and believe he shall have remission and
salvation; I will not give unto Judas the gift of repentance, of faith, and of
eternal life? The former conditional proposition contains all which this
Author can truly collect from the testimonies alleged; and the latter does as
truly infer that absolute Reprobation for which we contend. For the absolute
decree of God resolving not to give faith, repentance, and eternal life unto
Judas, is that which we understand by the word Reprobation: and this is never
abrogated by any conditional promise founded in any universal absolute decree
of God.

Now for this inference, That God forsakes (as before was intimated) it is not
the concluding of the true question. Temporal Desertion or Damnation is one
thing; and Non-election or negative reprobation, another. Temporal forsaking
is a withdrawing of grace or favor formerly bestowed upon a man in regard of
his ingratitude and other sins. And here we assent unto Augustine and
Prosper, the strong mainteiners of Absolute Predestination and opposers of
Conditionate; Deus non deserit nisi desertus. Temporal rejecting from
salvation is an adjudging of men unto damnation as being liable thereunto for
their own sins and misdeserts. And here we accord with the same learned
Fathers; Misericorditer liberat, just damnat. Now Reprobation is Gods absolute
decree of not-preparing for some that grace which would preserve them from
forsaking God, and consequently permitting them to lose eternal life; even as
Predestination is Gods absolute decree of preparing for others that effectual
grace which will keep them from falling away from God, and so consequently
infallibly bring the^ unto the kingdom of God. These decrees be they which we
deny to be founded upon any different foreseen acts of men: and therefore we
refer them to the absolute will of God. As for temporal Desertion or
eternal Punition or Damnation of any man, we grant they all wait upon Sin as
the antecedent deserving cause thereof.

Whereas this Author further replyeth, That Gods acts in time are regulated by
his decrees before time; and therefore by what God does in the world we may
know what he purposed to do before the world: But he actually casts no man
off till he grow rebellious and impenitent; therefore he decreed to cast no man
off before his foreseen rebellion and impenitency.

This reply runs upon the self-same error with the former, namely the
confounding of the decrees of eternal Predestination and Preterition with the
decrees of temporal Desertion and Damnation, which are founded upon distinct
causes, and ought to be distinguished. But let us retort his reason against
himself. By what God does or not does in time we may know what he absolutely
purposed to do before all time: but God in time gave to Peter repentance faith,
and eternal life; and God in time permitted Judas to die in unbelief and
impenitency* and to incur eternal death: Therefore he decreed before all
time to give Peter all those benefits, and he decreed before all time to permit
Judas to die in unbelief, impenitencie, and in an estate liable to damnation.
Grant this, and absolute Predestination is clearly granted. For as it were
senseless to say Gods decree of giving faith and perseverance unto Peter was
suspended upon Peter's foreseen faith and perseverance, so as senseless it is
to say the decree of permitting Judas to die in unbelief and final impenitency
was grounded upon his foreseen unbelief and final impenitency.

We may now conclude, That absolute Election and Non-election is surely founded
in the authority of many and manifest places of Scripture; but for conditional
Election and Preterition, it has neither many nor any, clear nor obscure.

Treatise.
II. It is incomp^ti^^e with Gods ATTRIBUTES.
SEcondly, it crosses (A) some principal Attributes of God: therefore it
cannot be true. For God uses not to make decrees contrary to his own most
glorious nature, and such as are incompatible with those excellent Attributes
by which he has discovered part of himself to men. Voluntas Dei semper
sequitur naturam suam, is a rule among Divines, Gods will always follows his
nature. The reason why, is given by the Apostle, 2. Tim. 2.13. God cannot deny
himself.

Two things are here to be premised:

I. That Gods chief (B) attributes are those perfections in the manifestation
of which by acts conformable to them God is most glorified: which are Mercy,
Justice, Truth, and Holiness. For God is more honored by the exercise of
these among men then by the putting forth of his unlimited Power and
Sovereignty; as a King is more renowned among his subjects for his equity,
candor and clemency, then for his dominion and authority, or any thing that is
done only for the manifestation thereof. And there is good reason for it. For

1. Power is no virtue; but Holiness, Mercy, Justice, and Truth are. Acts of
Power are not morally good in themselves, but are made good or evil by their
concomitants. If they be accompanied with Justice, Mercy, etc. they are good;
if otherwise, they are naught. For justum oportet esse, quod laudem meretur;
Nothing deserves praise, unless it be just.

2. Power and Sovereignty may as well be showed in barbarous and unjust actions
as in their contraries. Saul showed his Authority and Power to the full in
slaying the Lords Priests; and Nebuchadnezzar in casting the three children
into the fiery furnace, and Daniel into the lions den; but no Mercy, nor
Justice, nor any thing else that was good.

II. The second thing (C) to be preconsidered, is, That Justice, Mercy, Truth,
and Holiness in God are the same in nature with these virtues in men, though
infinitely differing in degree; (as light in the air and the sun are the
same in nature, not degree:) and that which is just, upright and merciful in
men, is so in God too: And by these virtues in our selves with acts conformable
to them, tanquam ex pede Herculem, we may safely measure what are so in God.
For otherwise these things will follow;

1. The common and received distinction of Divine Attributes into communicable
and incommunicable would fall to the ground. For against it this might be said,
That the Holiness, Mercy, Justice, and Sincerity, with other virtues that are
in us, are not the perfections of God in a lower degree communicated to us, but
things of a different nature.

2. Men cannot be truly said to be Genesis 1.27.
made according to Gods image; nor when they are regenerated to be Col. 3.10.
renewed after the same image, and to be 2. Pet. 1.4.
made partakers of the Divine nature. That picture cannot be the picture of
such a man, which does not in his parts and lineaments truly resemble him: no
more can we be truly called the picture or image of God, if in our graces (in
respect of which we are principally so called) there be not a lively
resemblance of Gods attributes.

3. We may not safely imitate God, as we are commanded, Matthew. 5.48
Be ye perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect: and 1. Pet. 1.16.
Be ye holy, as I am holy. Nor when we show forth holiness, mercy, justice and
sincerity in our doings, can we be properly said to imitate God, if these be
one thing in God and in men another.

These two things being thus premised, viz That Gods Holiness, Mercy, Justice
and Truth are four of his chief attributes, in the exercise of which he takes
himself to be much glorified; and, That we are to measure these attributes by
the same virtues in our selves: I come to the proof of my second reason against
absolute Reprobation stated even in the mildest and most plausible way.

It opposes Gods principal Attributes; particularly his Holiness. Mercy.
Justice. Sincerity.


Answer. Whether Absolute Reprobation cross Gods Attributes.
WE grant that God makes no decrees contrary to his nature: If therefore
cross Gods attributes unless we admit the Remonstrants conditionate
Predestination and Reprobation, we will subscribe to it.

chief attributes: and therefore what contradicts any of these we will
presently renounce. As for an absolute unlimited power separated from Justice
or other Divine attributes, we say with learned Calvine, De aetern. Dei Praed.
page 728.
Sorbonicum illud dogma in quo sibi plaudunt Papales Theologastri detestor,
quod potentiam absolutam Deo affingit. Solis enim lucem a calore evellere
facilius erit quam Dei potentiam separare a justitia. Nay it is as impossible
for any unjust action to proceed from God, as it is for the Creator to become
a creature.

himself when easily he might do it: Not so in God. Under the name of Virtues,
when we ascribe them to God, a permanent propension or inclination unto good
actions conformable to the perfection of the Divine nature must be understood.
I say a propension in actu primo. For if God had never wrought any outward work
of mercy or justice, he had notwithstanding been as virtuous as now he is. He
wanted neither mercy nor justice before he created the world.

We may safely affirm that there is an analogicall conformity betwixt Divine
and humane virtues: but that there is an identity of nature, is not so easily
to be proved. Pictures of men resemble those whose pictures they are: but they
are not the same in nature with them. We may and must imitate God in the
actions of such virtues as he has commanded: but from hence it will not follow
that the word virtue applied to God signifies the self-same thing which it
does when it is applied to men. But to come to particulars: we will not contend
about words. Let this Author only look to it that he take his measure right,
which must be resecatis omnibus omnium virtutum partibus quae involvunt
imperfectionem inferioritatis, etc.

Treatise.
I. Repugnant to Gods HOLINESS.
FIrst, it fights (A) with Gods Holiness, and makes him the principal
cause of sin in the greatest number of men. I know that the defenders of it
do not think so. For the main reason which moved the Synod at Dort (B) and
some other Divines before and since to bring down Predestination thus lovv,
and begin their Reprobation after the fall, was that they might maintein a
fatal and absolute Reprobation of m^n, and yet avoid this imputation as Dr
Twisse Vind. Great. l. 1. part. 1. c. 4. initio.
Dr Tvvisse has noted. But what they intended (for ought that I can see) they
have not compassed. For it follovveth evident enough, even from their
conclusions too, that of all the sins of Reprobates, which are the greatest
number by many degrees, God is the true and principal author.

Two things (C) they say, vvch taken together (me thinks) infer it: 1. That
God of his own will and pleasure has brought men into an estate in which
they cannot avoid sin. 2. That he leaves the Reprobate irrecoverably in it.

I. That God of his own will and pleasure has brought men into an estate in
which they cannot possibly avoid sin: that is, into the estate of original
sin, which consists of two parts: 1. The guilt of Adams transgression; 2.
The corruption of nature. In both these they say mankind is interessed, not
through the force and efficiencie of natural generation, because we all
derive our nature from Adam as our first principle; but by Gods free and
voluntary order and imputation: Calvin. Instit. l. 3. c. 23. sect. 7. Non enim
factum est naturaliter, ut a salute exciderent omnes unius parentis culpa.
It came not to pass by any natural means (says Calvine) that all men fell
from salvation by the fault of our first parent: Cunctos mortales in unius
hominis persona morti aeternae mancipatos fuisse Scriptura clamat: hoc cum
naturae nequeat asscribi, ab admirabili Dei consilio profectum esse minime
obscurum est.
that all men are held under the guilt of eternal death in the person of one
man, it is the clear and constant voice of Scripture. Now this cannot be
ascribed to any natural cause: it must therefore come from the wonderful
counsel of God. A little after he has the same again with as great an
emphasis; Quomodo factum est, ut tot gentes una cum liberis eorum infa^tibus,
aeternae morti involveret lapsus Adae absque remedio, nisi quia Deo ita vis^m
est?
How is it, that so many nations with their children should be involved in the
sall without remedy, but because God would have it so? As roundly does Dr
Tvvisse affirm the same; Twisse Vind. great. l. 1. part. 1. digr. 4. v. 3. prope
finem; Originalis peccati reatus non nisi imputatione, lues non nisi
propagatione ad nos derivatur: quorum utraque non nisi a liberi Dei
constitutione proficiscitur.
The guilt of original sin is derived to us only by imputation; the filth
only by propagation: and both these only by Gods free constitution. A little
before he has these words, Etenim naturae vitium non est cuique suum
voluntate propria contractum, sed sola imputatione aut propagatio^e derivatum;
quarum utraque sit voluntate Dei. Deus enim nulla necessitate, sed pro mera sua
voluntate nobis imputat peccatum Adae.
The fault of our nature comes from Gods free appointment: for he does not out
of any necessity, but of his mere will only impute the sin of Adam to us.
To this purpose he speaks a great deal more in the same place. To these
sayings S. Bernard has the like: Speaking of Adams sin, he says, Bern.
Sermon. 1. Dom. 1. post Epiph. Aliena est, quia in Adam omnes nescientes
peccavimus; nostra, quia etsi in alio, nos tamen peccavimus, and nobis justo
Dei consilio imputabatur, licet occulto.
Adams sin is another, because we knew not of it; and yet ours, because it
was through the just though secret judgment of God reputed ours.

And this that they say is agreeable to reason. For if we be fallen into the
guilt of the first sin and the corruption of nature, only because we were
in Adams loins when he sinned and derive our being from him, then these two
things will follovv.

1. That we (D) stand guilty of all the sins which Adam committed from his
fall to his lives end. For we were virtually in his loins as well after his
fall as before, and in every passage and variation of his life he was still a
principle of mankind. But where do we read that we are guilty of any other
of his sins? To the first sin only does the Scripture entitle that sin
and misery which entered into the world and invaded all mankind, as we may
see Romans 5.15, 16, 17, etc.

2. That children (E) are guilty of the sins of all their progenitors,
especially of their immediate parents: For they were in their loins when they
sinned, and more immediately then in Adams. But children are not guilty of
their parents faults, nor obnoxious to their punishments, because they are
their children, as we may see Exodus 20.5. where God saying that he will
visit the sins of the fathers upon the children to the third and fourth
generation in them that hate him, plainly implies, that children are not
simply charged with their fathers sins, but conditionally if they be haters
of God as their fathers were; if by imitating their wicked parents they become
partakers of their sins. In Ezekiel. 18.14. etc. The Lord signifies thus much
in his apology against the cavil of the Jews. For first he says, That if a
wicked man beget a son that sees his fathers sins, and does not the like,
he shall not die for the iniquity of his father. This implies that the
derivation of being from the parent does not render the child obnoxious to the
punishment of the fathers sin, nor consequently to the sin. For the good
child is not obnoxious, and yet the good child is equally in the fathers loins
with the bad, and equally receives nature and being from him. And then verse.
20. the Lord tells them expressly thus much in two propositions: 1.
Affirmatively, The soul that sins, it shall die. And that it may be known
that he speaks exclusively, Only the soul that sins, shall die, he
delivers his mind 2. Negatively, The son shall not bear the iniquity of the
father, neither shall the father bear the iniquity of the son, etc. Our
Savior in that woeful speech of his to the Pharisees, Matthew. 23.32, 34.
Fulfill ye also the measure of your fathers. -- Behold I send unto you
Prophets, etc. them ye shall kill and crucify, that on you may come all the
righteous blood, etc. intimates apparently, that the Pharisees were not
inheritours of their fathers sins and punishments by birth; but by the
commission and imitation of their fathers sins, they came to inherit both
their sins and plagues. Miserable would our case be on whom the ends of the
world are come, if children should be guilty of all their ancestors
prevarications. What a world of sins should we be to answer for, Personal
sins, Parents, Progenitors sins, to a thousand past generations? A thing
with no reason to be imagined. This is the first thing.

II. Secondly, they say (F) that God had immutably decreed to leave the far
greatest part of mankind in this impotent condition irrecoverably, and to
afford them no power and ability sufficient to make them rise out of sin to
nevvnesse of life: and this decree he executes in time: and both these he does
out of his only will and pleasure.

Of this proposition there be three branches:

1. God decrees to leave them. 2. He does leave them. 3. He does both out of
his alone pleasure.

1. God (say they) has (G) decreed to leave them without sufficient grace,
and consequently under an everlasting necessity of sinning. This is the very
Helen which they fight for, the main act of that absolute Reprobation which
with joint consent and endeavor they labor to maintein.

Most of them cast their Reprobation into two acts: a Negative, which is a
peremptory denial of grace and glory to some men lying in the fall; and a
Positive, which they say is a preordination of men thus left to the eternal
torments of hell. Others among them define Reprobation by an act merely
negative, and call it Non-electionem, decretum quo statuit non eo usque
misereri, etc. Thus our Divines Suffrag. Brit. Art. 1. de Repr. these. 1.
in their Suffrage define it: and in their explication of the definition which
they give, they say that the proper acts of Reprobation, as it stands opposed
to Election, are no other then a denial of that same glory and grace which
are prepared in the decree of Election for the sons of God. But in this (H)
they all agree, that by the decree of Reprobation grace necessary for the
avoiding of sin is flatly denied to Reprobates. And if at any time we hear
them say that God has gratified Reprobates with some grace; (for so says
Walaeus, Reprobates are left Wall. Defens. Anat. Armin. c. De Repr. In statu
pristino and sub exercitio arbitrii sui, and administratione communis
providentiae.
under the common providence of God, and consequently under some common
endowments: And our Divines in the Synod say, Suffr. Brit. these. 4. de Reprob.
Hos etsi non electos, percipere tamen multa gratiae Divinae effecta non negamus.
Reprobates though they are not elected, yet receive many of Gods graces) they
are to be understood of such gifts and graces as are insufficient to make them
avoid sin, as we may see in these two cited places and many more.

2. God does (I) actually according to his eternal and unchangeable decree
leave the Reprobates in their several times and generations, without his
grace, under a necessity of final sin and impenitencie. This is the second
branch of that second proposition. And this must they needs say. For Gods
decrees cannot be frustrated: What he purposed before time, without fail he
does in time. I shall not need therefore to prove that they say so.
Nevertheless, to let it be seen how positively and categorically they say so,
I will give an instance or two. The Divines (K) of Geneva at the Synod among
their Theses of Reprobation have this for one, Act. Syn. Suffr. Genev. de
Reprob. Easdem personas in tempore, ex eodem placito voluntatis vel non vocat,
vel vocatos in Ecclesiam Spiritu regenerationis non renovat penitissime, non
inserit Christo mystice, non justificat, etc.
Those whom God has reprobated, out of the same will by which he has rejected
them, either he calls not at all, or being called, he renews not thoroughly
by the Spirit of regeneration, ingraffeth not into Christ mystically, nor
justifies, etc. Like to this is the speech (L) of Lubbert, who speaking of
Reprobates, says, Act. Syn. Suffr. Lubbert de Reprob. Iis vel non revelat viam
salutis, vel non donat eos side and cognitione Jesu Christi, non regignit eos,
non justificat, sed relinquit eos in peccato and miseria, etc.
To them either he reveals not the way of salvation, or gives not faith and
regeneration, but leaves them in sin and misery. The same Author speaking
against the position of the Remonstrants, viz. that God does supply to all men
sufficient and necessary means of salvation, with an intention of saving them,
sets down this antithesis, -- Deus non subministrat omnibus hominibus
necessaria and sufficientia media ad salutem, idque cum intention servandi.
God does not administer to all men means needful and sufficient to salvation,
and that with an intention of saving them. And to this his antithesis
Polyander, Walaeus, and Thysius, three other Professors of Divinity in the
Low Countries, did set their hands.

3 God both (M) decrees and executes this leaving of men to themselves, of
his alone absolute will and pleasure.

This is the third branch. That they say so, witness the Suffrage of our
English Divines; Suffr. Brit. art. 1. de Reprob. explic. these. 1. orthodox.
Hanc non-electionem in liberrima Dei voluntate fundari dicimus.
We affirm, That this Non-election is founded in the most free pleasure of God.
And, Ib. these. 3. heterodox. Neminem post lapsum mera Dei voluntate praeteritum
esse.
That no man lying in the fall is past over by the mere will of God, is numbered
by the same Divines among the heterodox positions. To this purpose also speak
the Ministers of the Palatinate, Act. Syn. Jud. Palate. these. 3. Causa
reprobationis est liberrima ac justissima Dei voluntas.
The cause of Reprobation is the most free and just will of God. -- Ibid. these.
4. Quod Deus nonnullos praeterit gratia praedicationis evangelii, ejus causa
est idem beneplacitum sive eadem libera voluntas.
That God passes over some and denies them the grace of the gospel, the cause
is the same free pleasure of God Judic. Theol. Hassiac. Decrevit Deus quosdam
in lapsu and miseria relinquere pro suo beneplacito.
God decreed to leave some in the fall, of his own good pleasure. Thus the
Divines of Hessen. The proof of this they fetch from the execution of this
decree in time; Deus in tempore quosdam e genere humano derelinquit in miseria
sua, nec media ad fidem and conversionem ipsamque etiam salutem obtinendam
necessaria eis consert, etc. idque pro liberrima sua voluntate.
God does in time leave some of mankind fallen, and does not bestow upon them
means necessary to believe, etc. and this out of his most free pleasure. This
they jointly affirm, and prove it by this reason especially; All men were
looked-on as sinners: If sin (N) therefore were the cause that moved God to
reprobate, he should have reprobated or rejected all. But he did not reprobate
all: Therefore for sin he reprobated none, but for his own pleasure, in which
we must rest without seeking any other cause.

Now from these two things laid together, viz. 1. That God did bring (O) men
into a necessity of sinning; 2. That he has left the reprobates under this
necessity: it will follow that he is the author of the reprobates sins.

1. Because Causa causae est causa causati, The cause of a cause is the cause
of its effect, (if there be a necessary subordination between the causes and
the effect;) whether it be a cause by acts negative or positive: But God is the
chief or sole cause (by their doctrine) of that which is the necessary and
immediate cause of the sins of Reprobates, namely their impotencie and want
of supernatural grace: Therefore he is (by the same doctrine) the true and
proper cause of their sins.

2. Because Removens (P) prohibens, etc. That which withdraws or withholdeth
a thing which being present would hinder an event, is the cause of that event:
As for example; He that cutteth a string in which a stone hangs, is the cause
of the falling of that stone; and he that withdraws a pillar which being
put-to would uphold a house, is the true cause in men's account of the falling
of that house: But God (by their opinion) withholdeth from Reprobates that
power which being granted them might keep them from falling into sin:
Therefore he becomes a true moral cause of their sins. Tertull. l. 1.
contr. Marcion. c. 22. In cujus manu est quid ne fiat, ei deputatur cum jam fit.
In whose power it is that a thing be not done, to him it is imputed when it is
done, says Tertullian.

It will not suffice to say, that God by withholding grace from Reprobates
becomes only an accidental not (Q) a proper and direct cause of their
sins. For a cause is then only accidental in relation to the effect, when
the effect is beside the intention and expectation of the cause. For example;
Digging in a field is then an accidental cause of the finding a bag of gold,
when that event is neither expected nor intended by the husbandman in digging.
But when the effect is looked for and aimed at, then the cause (though it be
the cause only by withholding the impediment) is not accidental; as a Pilote
who withholdeth his care and skill from a ship in a storm, foreseeing that by
his neglect the ship will be drowned, is not to be reputed an accidental but a
direct and proper cause of the loss^ of this ship. This being so, it follows,
that God by this act and decree of removing and deteining grace necessary to
the avoiding of sin from Reprobates, not as one ignorant and careless what
will or shall follow, but knowing infallibly what mischief will follow, and
determining precisely that which does follow, namely, their impenitencie and
damnation, becomes the proper and direct cause of their sins.

Whether Absolute Reprobation fight with Gods Holiness.
THe absolute Reprobation which we maintein is nothing else but an absolute
purpose in God of not-bestowing grace infallibly bringing unto glory upon some
men, which he has absolutely purposed to bestow upon others. And this we
evidently ground upon the Doctrine of our Church, which acknowledges
Predestination to be a special favor or benefit extended to ^ certain number
known only to God, from whence faith, perseverance and eternal life do flow
as effects from the cause. And because the affirmation ferveth to measure the
negation, our Church speaking in the article nothing at all of Non-election or
Non-predestination, leaves it obvious to every man's understanding that all not
comprised within the number of the elect must needs fall within the number of
the non-elect, as being permitted deficere a gratia and gloria by their own
default. And further, our Church in adding, Notwithstanding the decree of
Predestination and Election Gods general promises must be received as they are
propounded in the Gospel, intimates, That the decrees of Election and
Non-election or Reprobation may stand firm cum possibilitate ad eventus
contrarios though not cum eventis contrariis. For Peter notwithstanding his
Predestination might have been damned if he had voluntarily continued in his
impenitency, and Judas notwithstanding his Reprobation might have been saved if
he had not voluntarily continued in his impenitency. The absolute decrees of
Election and Non-election are not contradictory to the general conditional
promises of salvation or threats of damnation. As therefore we condemn the
opinion of the Remonstrants, who by reducing Election and negative Reprobation
unto foreseen good and bad acts of men err upon the one hand, so we condemn
also their opinions who confound the decree of Damnation with this of
Non-election, or who derive the causes of damnation, namely sin, infidelity,
impenitency, from the forenamed decree; which is to err further upon the
other hand. These things premised we will now go along with this Author, and
see how he proves this absolute Reprobation or Non-election which we defend to
oppose any of Gods principal Attributes.

He says it sighteth with his holiness, because it makes him the principal
cause of sin in all persons not-elected or not-predestinated.

If he can prove this we yield. His nibbling Synod of Dort, and charging them
with maintenance of a fatal decree, is to little purpose. If he call that
fatal which is certain and immutable, we are not afraid to affirm that all
Gods eternal decrees are certain and immutable; and that very eternal decree
of Reprobation which he imagines to follow upon the foresight of men's final
impenitency is as absolute, as immutable, and in this sense as fatal as that
which we defend. S. Augustine did not abhor Fatum: De great. lib. 5. c. 1.
Si propterea quisquam res humanas fato tribuit, quia ipsam Dei voluntatem vel
potestatem Fati nomine appellat, sententiam teneat, linguam corrigat. Others
admit the word, and give this definition of it, as Boethius; Fatum est
immobilis dispositio rebus mobilibus inhaerens. Aquinas; Part. 1. qu. 116. art.
4.
Fatum est ordinatio secundarum causarum ad effectus Divinitus provisos. I
might cite infinite Authors who rejecting Fatum astrologicum admit Fatum
Theologicum or Catholico sensu acceptum. Vide Parisiensem 1. part. De universo,
part. 3. cap. 24. page 746, 747. Halensem part. 1. quaest. 27. Albertum part.
1. tract. 17. Durandum, lib. 1. did. 39. quaest. 4. I have quoted all these
because this Author through his whole book thinks he has beaten down
absolute Predestination to the ground if he can but fasten the name or bare
conceit of Fatalitie upon it.

As for the Synod of Dort, it considered not Predestination and Reprobation in
massa corrupta to maintein a fatal decree. For consider it before or after the
decree is alike fatal, if immutability of events decreed by God be termed
fatality. And put it before or after, it neither way makes God the principal
cause of sin: which is clear in non-elect angels, in whom Reprobation
considered before the fall is by no judicious Divine conceived to make God the
cause of their sin.

But he goes about to prove that absolute say two things from whence (he
thinks) it may be inferred That God is the principal cause of sin. Suppose
some who hold absolute Reprobation should therewithal hold not two only but
ten false tenants, is the falsity of these a necessary medium to conclude the
falsity of the other? As if he that holds two false propositions, might not
for all that hold a third which is true.

His first Proposition wherewith he charge the defenders of absolute
Reprobation, is, That God of his own will and pleasure has brought men into an
estate in which they cannot avoid sin, namely, into the estate of original
sin, and that both in regard of the guilt and of the corruption.

This is both odiously and falsely set down. No man holds that God brought
Adams posterity either into the estate of their guilt or of their corruption:
but all maintein that it was Adam himself who by his voluntary prevarication
inwrapped himself and his posterity both in the guilt and contagion of
original sin. Romans 5.12.
Per unum hominem peccatum in hunc mundu^ intravit, and per peccatum mors. So
that both the sin and the punishment were brought in by man and not by God.
Or if a further cause must needs be found of bringing-in sin and death, the
devil must be charged therewithal. Wisd. 2.24.
Invidia diaboli, etc. It is true, and acknowledged generally by Divines both
of our Church and of the Roman, That it was not by any natural necessity that
Adam falling his posterity should be either universally tainted with original
sin or liable unto death, but that both these depended a libero Dei decreto,
or as some call it a pacto, wherein it was agreed that if Adam persevered in
his righteousness he should transmit it to his posterity, if he rebelled he
should make his whole posterity liable both to the corruption of sin and
danger of punishment.

And that this Author may see that others (who deny God to be the cause of
sin) do hold as much as Calvine, or Dr Twisse, I will quote him some
Authors. And first to begin with the Master of the sentences; He teaches that
not God but Adam brought men into their estate of sin. Lib. 2. did. 30.
Per Adamum peccatum simul ac poena transiit in posteros. Ex Adamo damnationem
simul ac culpam suscepimus. Nemo nascitur nisi trahens poenam and meritum
poenae. Ex Adami inobedientiaemanavit and in posteros demigravit. So that there
is no question Who brought in this sin: All the question is, How it comes to
pass that so unavoidably and generally it lays hold upon all the sons of
Adam. Here even the Roman Divines are driven to confess with Calvine, that
this depends upon a free constitution or decree of the Divine will: because
natural propagation would not have stripped Adams posterity of any habitual
righteousness which God had bestowed upon him, or charged them with the guilt
of any sin personally committed by him, had not God enacted and constituted a
decree that so it should be. Vasquez is clear of this opinion; In 1m 2^, qu. 23
disp. 132. cap. 9.
Primo parenti ita fuit gratia and justitia donata, ut non tantum sibi sed
etiam posteris transmittendam illam acceperit, non quidem ex natura rei, sed ex
Dei pactione. And more plainly; Disp. 133. cap. 1.
Causa originalis peccati fuit primus parens ratione suae transgressionis, non
quidem physica and naturalis, quia nihil reale in posteros traducere potuit
virtute propria aut virtute peccati quod commisit. And a little after; Negare
non possumus ex voluntate sola Dei constitutum fuisse ut gratia originalis
traduceretur in posteros si Adamus in gratia perseveraret, and amitteretur si
peccaret. Malderus also grants that the contagion and guilt of Adams sin is
not derived unto his posterity but by Gods free constitution; In 1m 2c, qu. 81.
art. 1.
Notandum, cum Deus totum humanum genus in uno homine condidisset, indebitam
naturae justitiam originalem isti homini dedisse, non pro se tantum, sed pro
tota posteritate; adeo ut si ipse perseverasset, omnes posteri nascerentur
justi. Paulo post; Deus cum Adamo quasi pactum quoddam iniit, quo praevaricanti
statueret non tantum ipsi sed toti naturae mortem animae and corporis. Ibid.
Fuit quoddam Dei decretum, ex quo decreto accessu peccati superfuit illud
chirographum decreti contrarium nobis. And last of all he adds, ^bid. page
260.
Voluntarium voluntate primi parentis sufficere ad very nominis peccatum in
parvulo: est enim illa voluntas Adae quodammodo voluntas parvuli, ex Dei
decreto. These and many more agree with Calvine, in attributing the unavoidable
imputation of Adams offense and transmitting of his corrupted nature unto a
voluntary and free constitution of God, in whose power and pleasure it stood
(if in his wisdom he had seen it more fit) to have ordered it otherwise. If
this decree make God the principal cause of sin in Adams posterity, not
only Calvine but all other Divines lie open to this Authors accusation.

But he is utterly mistaken, and pinneth a false consequent to a true
antecedent. For though Gods will was the cause of making the former decree,
That all Adams posterity should be liable to the loss of righteousness and
punishment of sin upon Adams disobedience, even as if themselves had
singularly and personally transgressed; yet neither God nor this decree of God
was the cause either of Adams transgression personally committed by himself, or
of the corruption and guilt of damnation which seized upon his posterity. The
law or decree, That if a noble man become a traitor, he with all his
posterity shall be tainted in blood, and stripped of the privileges of
nobility, is not the cause either of the fathers treason or of the childrens
loss and punishment: but the true proper working cause thereof is the
rebellious will and act of the father. Even so here, Gods decree revealed unto
Adam, That if he sinned all his posterity should be liable to corporal and
spiritual death, was so far from being the cause of his sin or his
childrens misery, that it was in its own nature a strong retractive or
preservative to have kept him and his children out of sin and out of misery.

If Adams disobedience (which was the only true cause of his own and childrens
misery) had followed as a necessary consequent effect upon such an antecedent
law, then had God been the cause both of the sin and misery whereinto he
plunged himself and his children: But the law which enacteth a certain
punishment against sin committed, is by no wise man made the cause of sin
committed against that law, but a rule only according unto which, if the sin
be committed, the punishment shall be inflicted. Albeit therefore natural
generation considered alone in it self without the forenamed free constitution
of God, would not have propagated Adams sin or misery unto his posterity,
yet we acknowledge (and so did Calvine) that it is now propagated by way of
natural generation; because God had enacted that Adam should beget children in
his own likeness, that is partakers of the same original righteousness which
he had, supposing he kept it; and partakers of his sin, supposing he infected
himself with the act and guilt of sin.

If we be fallen into the guilt of the first sin and the corruption of
nature, only because we were in Adams loins when he sinned, then are we in
like manner guilty of all the sins he committed afterward:

We answer; Though Adams voluntary rebellion was the only cause why he lost
his original righteousness both for himself and for his children, and though
his children be entangled in his sin and guilt only by being in his loins
when he sinned, or because they are his children, yet it will not follow that
his posterity stand in like manner guilty of all the sins which Adam
committed from the fall unto his lives end. The reason is; Because though
natural propagation be the means of conveying Adams sin unto us, yet (as
before was touched) it would not have done so had there not been a liberum
decretum established by God to that purpose. And therefore Adams sin can no
further concern his posterity then is regulated by God himself. Now the Divine
decree or constitution did not so order it that any sin of Adam should be
imputable to all that were virtually in his loins, but that his first sin
only, in which he did sustinere personam generis humani, should be imputed.
And therefore Aquinas excluding his after-sins committed when he was himself
fallen and corrupted; says, 1a. 2^, q. 81. art. 1.
Secundum fidem catholicam est tenendum quod primum peccatum primi hominis
transiit in posteros. And he is so far from collecting (as this Author does)
that by being in his loins his posterity becomes guilty of all his other
sins, that he accounts it impossible. Art. 2.
Impossible est quod aliqua peccata ^roximorum parentum vel etiam primi
parentis (praeter primum) per originem traducantur. De amiss. great. 4.10.
Bellarmine gives the reason; because whilst Adam stood invested with
original righteousness, totius humani generis gessit personam: and therefore
that first sin which alone put him out of this estate was only imputable to
us, as being voluntary to us voluntate primi parentis. Malderus more clearly
and punctually; In 1m 2ae q. 81. art. 2.
Nulla peccata primi parentis praeter primum per originem traducuntur in
posteros. Quando enim amisit nobis semel justitiam, jam amisit qualitatem
capitis, and non amplius in ipsius tanquam capitis voluntate mansimus. Ratio
est, quod decretum sive pactum Dei, quo in Adamo constituebantur posterorum
voluntates, non extendebat se ad alia ipsius peccata, utpote qui gratiam
capitis moralis primo peccato amiserat. I might quote many more; but by these
it is clear that whilst this Author thinks he disputes only against
Calvine and Calvinists, he opposes the received doctrine of the Catholic
Church.

That children should be guilty of all the sins of their other Progenitors,
is like the former, and upon the same grounds rejected by all Divines: and
therefore it needs no particular answer.

And when he goes about by testimonies of Scripture to prove it, that they are
not guilty of their Parents sins, he makes himself work in proving that
which no man denies.

All that I will say is this; That the Pelagians from such testimonies of
Scripture went about to overthrow the imputation of Adams sin unto his
posterity, and the derivation of his corruption; but for their pains they were
held and condemned as heretics. Vide Bellarm. de amiss. Great. lib. 4. cap. 8.
and Mald. 1.2. q. 81. art. 1. page 254. where he brings in the Pelagian
objections.

Our own IXth Article of Original or Birth-sinne insinuates a guilt and a
corruption caused by Adams first transgression; and yet our Church never taught
that there was the same or like guilt proceeding from his after-sinnes, or from
the sins of our other progenitors. Vide Vasq. in 1.2. quaest. 83. disp. 135.
cap. 2. p. 883. Thus much of the first.

He would in the second place prove that That God has immutably decreed to
leave the greatest part of mankind in this impotent condition irrecoverably,
and to afford them no sufficient power to make them rise out of sin: and this
decree he executes in time, and both these he does out of his own will and
pleasure. A bundle of words, but little substance in them. We answer first in
general; That many who stoutly defend absolute Predestination and Reprobation,
and oppose the conditionate Election and Preterition of the Remonstrants, do
notwithstanding detest and confute that blasphemous error, That God is the
cause of sin. Neither do I now speak this of Calvinists, but of Jesuits,
Dominicanes and Romanists of all sorts. Again, the greater part of those who
hold absolute Predestination and Reprobation and reject the Predestination and
Reprobation which by the Remonstrants is founded upon prescience, do hold
notwithstanding a general sufficiency of grace, Si per homines non steterit
quo minus: Which is all the Remonstrants themselves do defend.

As for the executing of Gods decree out of his own will and pleasure, I wonder
it should be objected as false and offensive. For by Gods decrees concerning
man's Election and Preterition absolute or conditional, it is certain they are
executed as they were enacted, that is, according to the will and pleasure of
God, and not of the creature. But to come to his propositions particularly.

God (by those which oppose the Remonstrants conditionate Election and
Reprobation, and make them both depend upon Gods absolute will) is said to
leave the Non-elect without sufficient grace, and consequently under an
everlasting necessity of sinning. This is the Helen, etc.

The most of those who defend absolute Predestination and Reprobation say and
teach, necessitatem infallibilitatis quoad eventum, but not necessitatem
compulsionis quoad modum agendi and eveniendi. The decree of Reprobation left
not Cain under the necessity of killing his brother, nor Absalom under a
necessity of defiling his fathers concubines, nor Judas under a necessity of
betraying Christ: All these sinful actions and the like are committed by
Reprobates out of their own free election, having a power whereby they might
have absteined from committing them. And therefore to think that the decree of
absolute Reprobation must needs leave them under a necessity of committing
their several sins, is a false and vain imagination, as every man's
conscience is able to witness.

Those who cast Reprobation into two acts do not by the negative act thereof
understand a peremptory denial of all grace, but a peremptory denial of all
such effectual grace as infallibly would bring them unto glory, and a
peremptory permitting them in the use of grace to their own defective
free will. This negative Reprobation in the judgment of most Divines does
stand with the actual administration of sufficient grace, and in the judgment
of all it may stand with it, Vide Jacob. Bayum, Institut. lib. 1. cap. 116.
as it did in the Non-election of the apostaticall Angels. It is doubted both
by some Protestants and Papists, whether sufficient grace be de facto prepared
for and offered to all the Non-elect: But that Gods absolute decrees of
Election and Non-election might stand firm though it were so, there is no great
cause of doubt.

For the positive act, which this Author describes to be to a preordination
unto helltorments; those who comprise them both under this one word
Reprobation, do notwithstanding make this act or decree respective unto sin,
as we have already showed. As for those of our Church in this controversy;
whether Predestination and Non-predestination be grounded upon the prime
absolute will of God, or upon his prescience of good and bad acts to be
performed by men, they do and must understand by the word Reprobation not the
decree of damning any particular persons, but only the absolute decree of
not-preparing for them that effectual grace qua certissime liberarentur, and
of leaving them to such means of infallibiliter ruunt ad interitum voluntarium.
Thus our English Divines in their suffrage have described it, and thus the
reverend and judicious Bishop of Norwich conceived it, when he made both
Remonstrants or Arminians and Contra-remonstrants or Puritanes (as he terms
them) to err out of the true middle way which the Church of England holds in
opposition to them both. In Election he makes this the error of the
Remonstrants, That they ground the absolute decree of men's particular
Elelection upon the prescience of their faith and perseverance (as this Author
does) whereas that reverend Prelate holds with the Church of England, and S.
Augustine, Electio non invenit eligendos, sed facit. As for the errors of the
Puritanes about Predestination or Election, he reduces them to these heads,
the excluding of the conditionate decree or evangelicall promise, the
disordering of the decree of Predestination by bringing it in before the fall
and the decree of Christ's incarnation. As for the preparation and donation of
such a special grace per quam non solum possint credere aut obedire si velint,
sed and jam actu velint, credant, obediant, he makes it the proper fruit and
effect of Election: whereas he grants unto the Non-elect only salutem
gratiamque communem and sufficientem in mediis Divinitus ordinatis, si verbo
Dei spirituique sancto deesse noluerint. Unto which add that wherein all
Divines of all sides agree, That God administreth this common grace with an
eternal and infallible prescience that it will be rejected or abused by the
Non-elect, and with an absolute decree of permitting it so to be; and then it
is clear, the English Divines with the Church of England nec divertisse ad
dextram in illorum sententiam qui ex praescita fide and perseverantia per
liberam cooperationem arbitrii humani gratiae praevenientis and sufficientis
auxiliis instructi praedestinationem deducunt, nec ad sinistram deelinasse in
illorum opinionem qui promissionem generalem and gratiam sufficientem tollunt,
etc. They are the words of that reverend Prelate Dr Overall. To return to our
Author; Whereas he says that all the defenders of absolute Predestination and
Reprobation (that is, all who oppose the Remonstrants conditionate Election and
Non-election) do agree, that by the decree of Reprobation necessary grace for
avoiding sin is flatly denied to Reprobates, it is quite otherwise. For
saving grace, many confess that in causis universalibus it is sufficiently
prepared for all men: They confess that under the Evangelicall covenant, Si
credideris, salvus eris, every man has a true claim unto eternal life: They
confess, that wheresoever is Christ's Church, there is such a sufficient
administration of grace as would have saved the Non-elect, had they not opposed
a malignant voluntary act of their own will against the motions and operation
of Divine grace; according to those words of our Savior, John 3.17. and 12.47,
48. and Acts 13.46. Calvine says as much; In Joh. 3.
Mundi nomen iterum iterumque repetit, ne quis omnino arceri se putet, modo
fidei viam teneat. We therefore, as well as the Remonstrants, grant a
conditional possibility of grace and salvation to all men: but here is the
difference; We say the Elect by a special mercy of God are so guided and ruled
that they and they alone perform the condition, and that the Non-elect are
always permitted to fail in the performance of the condition.

Now whereas this Author says, that whatsoever we speak of grace afforded to
persons Not-elected must be understood of such grace as is insufficient to make
them avoid sin, he is a very bad interpreter of ou^ meaning. We think and
teach, that God has not prepared for them, and therefore never gives unto
them such grace as finally freeth them from sin: but we say, that God does
give them oftentimes such a^ measure of grace as keeps them from committing
many particular sins whereunto they are prone and bent of themselves* We say
further, that God gives them such a measure of illumination, such excitations
unto doing good and eschewing evil, as leaves them convicted in their own
consciences (whatsoever brabblers may say to the contrary) that wittingly and
willingly they commit their several sins, not out of insufficiency to avoid
the acts of adultery, robbery, theft, deceit, etc. but out of malignity desirng
and choosing to do them.

God does actually according to his eternal and unchangeable decree leave the
reprobates in their several times and generations without his grace, under a
necessity of final sin and impenitency, surely they never chose him to be
their speaker. If this man will give them leave to speak for themselves, this
it is they say, That God does in time according to his eternal decree withhold
from all persons Not-elected that special mercy or effectual grace which he
knows would infallibly free them from final sin and impenitency, and
leaves them (not without all grace, nor under a necessity of living and
continuing in the practice of their sins, but) under grace committed (as the
Remonstrants would have it) to the dominion and good usage of their own
free will, and under a permission of their final sinning and impenitency out
of their own free will: From both which God infallibly foresaw their final
impenitencie, and respectively thereunto decreed their eternal punishment.

But how does he prove that they must needs say as he would have them? His
reason is, Because Gods decrees cannot be frustrated: What he purposed before
time, without fail he does in time. We agree that quoad eventum Gods decrees
cannot be frustrated. But this impossibility of frustration arises not from a
necessity put upon the agents to do thus and not otherwise (as this Author
perpetually but most falsely does suppose) but from that infallible providence
of God, who can and does bring into act events decreed according to the nature
of the next causes or immediate agents. Natural agents work naturally in
producing decreed events: necessary agents work necessarily: and free agents
such as are Angels and men, work freely. It is a flat Non-sequitur, Events
decreed cannot be frustrated; Therefore the agents are under a necessity of
sinning. And it is further to be considered, that albeit all Gods decrees are
infrustrable, yet there is a main difference betwixt Gods decrees of producing
good saving acts in his Elect, and of permitting the Non-elect to produce their
wicked actions, and finally to continue in them. The former he does by using
his own hand in framing their hearts unto such good actions, and guiding their
wills indeclinably in the voluntary practice thereof: but as for the latter,
their wicked hearts are not wrought by God, nor their wicked wills guided by
God unto their wicked actions, but they are permitted out of their own
free will to commit such wicked actions. Here is no necessity put upon the
agents by either of the forenamed decrees.

Divines of Geneva; they have set down nothing in their testimony alleged,
but either that God calls not the Non-elect, or that he calls them not
vocatione secundum propositum, which always follows Predestination, and
draws after it Justification, Sanctification and Glorification. In the first
they speak of an Evangelicall vocation, by revealing Christ in the preaching of
the glorious gospel, which vocation experience shows has been denied to
many. Prosp. ad Cap. Gall. Resp. 4. and Sent. super 4.
Vocati non sunt qui nec spem vocationis audiverunt. In the latter they speak
of that special grace which the Catholic Church has defended against the
Pelagians to be a special gift, and not prepared for all nor given to all.
Vide Aug. De Praed. Sanct. cap. 9. and Epist. 167. Prosp. De Voc. 1.13.

Lubbertus says the same in effect, and no De great. Christi contra Pelag. cap.
12. And not he alone, but the Synod of Bishops in Sardinia, De gratia non digne
sentit, etc. For the other saying of Lubbertus, That God does not administer
unto all men necessary and sufficient means unto salvation, with an intention
of saving them; It is to be observed 1. first, That he does not speak of a
provision in universalibus causis, nor of means sufficient, Si non defuissent
sibi, si non fecissent inutilia interveniente libero actu propriae voluntatis:
for all this he may well grant; but he speaks de Mediis Divina providentia
applicatis. And here, if the Remonstrants think faith to be a necessary means
to men's salvation, and the word preached a necessary means to the begetting of
faith, Romans 10.
they must (will they nill they) subscribe to Lubbertus. 2. Secondly, it is
worth the observing, That when the Remonstrants have said all they can for the
universalitie and sufficiency of saving grace, they are forced by convincing
arguments and evidence of Scripture to retreat unto the same universalitie and
conditional sufficiency which I spoke of but now, and wherein no man opposes
them. Nay we are of opinion, that to have sufficient means of salvation
administered, which shall prove no otherwise effectual then under this
condition, Si homines sibi non desint, is an argument of the Divine
Non-election: as on the contrary, not to have their salvation thus suspended
upon their own free will, but upon that special mercy of which S. Augustine
spoke when he said, Deus nullius frustra miseretur, is a demonstrative argument
of the Divine Election. 3. Last of all, whereas Lubbertus says that God does
not administer sufficient grace unto all with an intention of saving them,
nothing more true, nothing more clear. For what God does eternally decree or
intend to do, that he in time infallibly does: For he does all according to the
eternal counsel of his own will. But he does not in time save the Non-elect by
that sufficient grace whereof this Author speaks: therefore he had not an
eternal intention of saving them by that grace which from all eternity he
knew would never save them. The intention of Gods will cannot but take effect;
Vide August. Enchir. cap. 95, and De Cor. and Great. c. 14.
quia nec in se nec in mediis potest impediri. An omnipotent will always
obteineth its intent, because the willing is the working, the Fiat is the
Factum est. Aquinas has well expressed this efficacy of the Divine will, 1.
part. qu. 19. art. 6.
Est impossible, quod Divina voluntas non effectum consequatur suum. Ibid.
Quicquid Deus simpliciter vult, fit; licet illud quod antecedenter vult, non
semper fiat. art. 8.
Cum aliqua causa efficax fuerit ad agendum, effectus consequitur causam, non
tantum secundum id quod fit, sed etiam secundum modum fiendi. This Author
therefore mistaketh Lubbertus, who by the Divine intention of saving this or
that particular person understands that absolute will which never fails in
producing the effect willed, not a will affected with this exception, Nisi per
homines steterit quo minus salventur. The former intent of saving all men by
the means of salvation tendered unto them, is only denied; not the latter,
which is improperly called the Divine intention of saving any man, because it
includes an intention of permitting his own free will justly to procure his
ruin.

We must come to the third branch; God (in our opinion) decrees and executes
this leaving of men to themselves of his alone absolute will and pleasure. If
he mean the leaving of men Not-elected utterly forlorn of all such grace as
would save them if themselves were not in fault, and the necessitating of them
to their transgression and perdition, we acknowledge no such decree, no such
manner of executing any Divine decree, no such absolute will and pleasure in
God to follow upon the decree of Non-election. Our English Divines affirm that
this Non-election is founded in the most free pleasure of God: So our Spanish
Divines, our Italian Divines, French Divines (who never saw the Synod of Dort)
and in a word, all Divines who know what they affirm when they dispute of
Non-election or negative Reprobation. And yet neither the English Divines nor
they ever dreamed of such a passing-over the Non-elect by the mere will of God
as this Author would fasten upon the decree of Non-election. He has already
been fully answered, that the absolute decree of Non-election implies not an
utter denying of sufficient grace in the limited and conditional acception of
Sufficiency, which the Remonstrants themselves are content to admit of.

It is to as little purpose which he has out of the Palatine Ministers
Suffrage, or the Divines of Hessen, the sense of which propositions has been
already cleared, and the truth proved: and therefore we let them pass.

As for sin, which is considered equal tanquam communis affectio subjecti,
whether elected or not-elected, it is plain, that it makes all and every man
reprobabiles: but it must needs be out of his own pleasure and free will, that
all being in a state unworthie of the riches of Gods special mercy, he should
notwithstanding prepare it for some, and decree the giving it in due ^ime,
which we call their Predestination, and not prepare nor decree to bestow it
upon others, but to leave them under common grace, and to permit them to the
deficient ^ule of their own will, which we call nega^ive Reprobation.

The ground of the Remonstrants error ^s a false fancy, which they have
enterteined unto their understandings concerning the very nature, formalitie or
essence of the decrees of Divine Predestination and negative Reprobation. For
whereas in deed and in truth they are decrees finding all men in a miserable
and damnable estate, and out of it determining to bring some and to fit them
for eternal happiness, and not to bring others by fitting them thereunto;
these men make them decrees finding and seeing some by the acts of their own
will fitted for heaven and hell, and thereunto appointing them according to
their deserts and misdeserts. This is with Faustus the Semipelagian to make
Predestination an act of remunerative justice, and to make Non-predestination
or Non-election an act of vindicative justice: both which are rejected as
erroneous not only by Calvinists or Contra-remonstrants, but even by the
common consent of the Roman Divines. God at the last day shall crown the Elect
and condemn the Non-elect according to their final perseverance in faith or
infidelity and impenitency. But this difference of their final estates
absolutely foreseen is a consequent not an antecedent to the decrees of
Election and Preterition.

bringing men into a necessity of sinning, and leaving Reprobates under this
necessity, because I have showed no such thing can be deduced from that
absolute negative Reprobation which we defend. But let us hear what he will
say. He reasons thus; CAUSA CAUSAE EST ETIAM CAUSA CAUSATI, where there is a
necessary subordination betwixt the cause and the effect, whether it be a cause
negative or positive: But by the doctrine of absolute Reprobation we make God
the chief or sole cause of the sins of Reprobates, namely through their
impotency or want of supernatural grace. For the ordinary Axiom, we admit it
ubi secunda causa non egreditur ordinem primae, that is, where the second cause
works or does any thing by virtue of that influx or motion that it has from
the first.

As for this distinction of Negative and Positive causing, it is obscure and
improper. The air has heat and light from the positive causing of the
sunne-beams; darkness, fogginesse, coldness follows upon the negation of
the sunne-beams: and yet neither the sun nor his beams nor the retractions of
his beams, are true or proper causes of coldness or darkness in the air. The
reason himself has touched upon, Because those dispositions or qualities in
the air issue not from the sun per subordinationem effecti ad causam, but
out of the nature of the air only: That is a cause per quam res est id quod
est. Thus the sun is the true cause that the air is hot and light. If by
virtue flowing from the absent sun it be made dark, then might we call the
sun a cause of the darkness. In proportion we say the same of God: If from
his decree of Non-election there flow any darkness or pravity into man's will,
or any crookedness and sinfulness into his actions, there were some color in
terming him a negative cause of man's sin: But this he shall never be able to
demonstrate.

He says, that God by his decree of negative Reprobation is the sole or chief
cause of that impotencie and want of supernatural grace which is the
necessary and immediate cause of all the sins which they commit. Want of the
grace of Predestination is neither chief nor sole, nor any cause at all of the
sins of the Non-predestinate. Non-Election or negative Reprobation does not
involve any such impotencie of avoiding sinful acts, or any such necessity of
committing sinful actions, as this man imagines. For though Preterition or
Non-election be not a preparing or bestowing of such grace as would infallibly
make men better, yet it must not be conceived to be the working of any thing in
them whereby they are made worse. Again, though negative Reprobation be a
denial of such grace as does effectually produce the faith, perseverance, and
eternal happiness of the Elect, yet it is no such absolute subtraction of
grace as is a necessary and immediate cause of any man's particular sins, or
of his final perseverance in sin. The Non-elect Angels were under the
eternal decree of negative Reprobation before they were created; yet were they
not by want of sufficient grace at their creation made impotent to stand, much
less constrained by any necessity to rebel and sin against God. Adam in
the state of his innocence was not predestined to perseverance; nay, (which
is more) God had positively decreed the permission of his fall: yet the want of
a decree predestinating his perseverance in that estate did neither affect him
with an impotencie of standing nor with a necessity of falling. Vide Prosp. ad
Vincent. Resp. 10. 15.

REMOVENS PROHIBENS, That which withholdeth a thing which being present would
hinder an event, is the cause of that event: But God withholdeth from
Reprobates that power which being granted might keep them from falling into
sin: therefore he becomes a true moral cause of their sins. His major
proposition is a most inconsiderate and false assertion; which if he will
justify, he unanswerably makes God the cause of all sin. For no Divine will
deny but it lies within the compass of Gods power to give unto any man that
effectual grace which both might and infallibly would make him freely and
voluntarily believe and persevere, and which both might and would infallibly
hinder the event of unbelieving and final perseverance in incredulity and
impenitencie. And it is as evident, that God does withhold from some that grace
which being present would hinder those bad events: Who sees not what the
conclusion must be, were the major proposition true? Christ withheld from
Lazarus that Divine operation which being present would have hindered the event
of his death: Yet Martha says only unto him, Lord, Joh. 11.
if thou had been here, my brother had not been dead. She says not, Lord,
thou did withhold a thing which if it had been present would have hindered
this event of my brothers death: and therefore I find thee t^ have been the
moral cause of his death. If Judas had had a sister, she might truly have said
unto Christ, If thou had been present in my brothers soul by the special
grace of Predestination, this might and would have hindered these woeful events
of his sinning unto death of his dying impenitent in sin, of his being damned
for sin: But she could not charge God to be the cause of those events only
for withholding that which would have hindered them.

As for the example he uses, of cutting a string where^n a stone hangs and
so causing the fall thereof, it were to some purpose if the decree of
Preterition had been it which cut the string, and so caused man's fall into
sin. But it was the devil and man's voluntary defective act which cut the
string. Reprobation or Preterition was only a decree of not giving such a
string as neither the devil nor the sinner himself should be permitted to cut?

As for that which he further urges, that direct cause of the event when it is
not beside his intention or expectation, We answer, that God is no otherwise
said to intend outward events then by providing orderly means for producing
such events. Non-election provideth no means of making men sin, and therefore
it includes no intention of God to make men sin, though it include a
prevision of sinful events, and a decree to permit them. We say the same of
expectation, which is only metaphorically attributed unto God, and cannot
respect wicked actions. God is said even from the Non-elect exspectare uvas non
labruscas, because he affords them ordinary means for producing the one, but
they themselves by abuse of the means are the only causes producing the other.
So that neither intention nor expectation of sinful events can be ascribed to
God, because both have a reference unto good things not unto bad.

A Pilote withholding his care and skill from a ship in a storm, foreseeing it
will be drowned, is a proper cause of the loss of the ship: therefore God by
this act and decree of Reprobation, etc. I answer, If one pilote wilfully has
brought a storm upon his ship, if wilfully he run her upon the rocks, though
another look on and foresee she will split herself, he makes not himself a
cause of her drowning, unless he were necessarily bound to preserve her. Thus
the case fares betwixt God and the Non-elect: therefore he is no proper cause
of their Sin or Perdition.

Treatise.
2. Contrary to his MERCY.
SEcondly, it opposes Gods Mercy.

God (A) is merciful: A part it is of his title, Exodus 34.6. merciful and
gracious. He is Mercy in the abstract, 1. Joh 4.16. God is love; a Father of
mercies, and God of all consolations, 2. Cor. 1.3. a Savior of men. 1. Tim.
4.10. And thus the Church has always taken him to be: And therefore has o^
old styled him in her Liturgy, A God whose nature and property is a^wayes to
have mercy and to forgive.

Two ways is Gods mercy spoken of in Scripture, absolutely and comparatively.
1. Absolutely; and so it is set o^ (B) in high and stately terms. It is called
rich mercy, Ephesians. ^4. great kindness, Jonah 4.2. Abundant mercy, 1. Pet. 1.^
love without height or depth, length or breadth, or any dimensions, love
passing knowledge, Ephesians. 3.18. So great it is, that Jonah could not entreat him
to punish the little, infant, harmless Ninevites with temporal death for the
sins of the^ guilty parents, Jonah 4.11. 2. Comparatively. With tw^ things it
is compared; 1. His own Justice, 2. The Lo^^ that dwells in the creature: and
is advanced above both.

I. With his own Justice it is compared, and advance above it: Not in its
essence (for all Gods excellencies an^ infinitely good, and one is not greater
then another) but i^ its expressions, and some things that have relation to it;
particularly in these;

1. In its Naturalnesse (C) and Dearnesse to God. It i^ said of Mercy, it
pleases him, Micah 7.18. But Justice is called his strange work, alienum a
natura sua, Esaias 28.21. He dot^ not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children
of men, Lam. 3.33

2. In the frequent Exercise (D) of it self. He is said to b^ slow to anger,
but abundant in goodness, Exodus 34.6. Mercy are bestowed every day;
judgments inflicted but now an^ then, sparingly, and after a long time of
forbearance, when there is no remedy, 2. Chron. 36.15. All the day long have
stretched out my hands to a gainsaying and rebellious people Esaias 65.2. that
is, I have been patient a long time, and in that time I have not been idle, but
employed in exhorting, promising, and showing mercy, that so I might do you
good. God waits a great while for the conversion of sinners, as mariners do
for their tide: and at last with much ado, if there be a necessity, he chideth
and fights.

3. In its (E) Amplitude or Objects to whom it is extended: Visiting the
iniquities of the fathers upon the children to the THIRD and FOURTH generation,
but showing mercy to THOUSANDS, Exodus 20.5. In these words God implies that
his mercy reaches further then his justice, and that look how much three or
four come short of a thousand, so much does his justice come short of his
mercy in the exercise of it.

4. In the Occasions (F) that move God to exercise them. It is a great matter
that moves God to punish, as we may see Genesis 6.5, 6, 7, 12, 13. When the
wickedness of man was great in the earth, and all flesh had corrupted his way,
then God thinks of a flood. He would not destroy the Amo^ites till their
wickedness was full. How ost would I have gathered thee (says Christ to
Jerusalem, Matthew. 23.37. that is, I have not taken advantages against thee, nor
upon the first, second or third unkindnesse cast thee off: small matters have
not moved me to destroy thee, O Jerusalem. But how small an occasion does God
take to spare men? When he had examined Sodom, and found their sins to be
answerable to the cry, yet then for ten righteous men's sakes would he have
spared Sodom, Genesis 18.32. Nay, he would have spared Jerusalem, if the Prophet
could by his searching have found one man who did execute judgment and seek
the truth, Jer. 5.1. What a slender humiliation made him to spare wicked Ahab
and his house a long time? 1. Kings 21.29. And the repentance of Nineveh, whose
wickedness cried to the Lord for vengeance, Jonah 1.2. did easily procure her
a pardon. Thus is Gods Mercy advanced above his Justice.

II. It is compared (G) also with the Affection of a father ^o his son, of a
tender mother to her child, and of the most affectionate bruits to their brood,
and set above them all. It goes beyond a fathers to his son, Matthew. 7.11. If
ye that are evil, can give good gifts to your children, how much more will your
heavenly Father give good things to them that ask him? What does this quanto
magis imply, but that Gods love outstrippeth a fathers! And so it does a
mothers too, Esaias 49.15. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should
not have compassion upon the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet I
will not forget thee. Women are compassionate toward their children, because
they are the fruit of their wombes, and a part of themselves: but most
indulgent are they toward those children to whom they are Nurses as well as
Mothers, to their sucking children: and yet mothers may forget even their
sucking children: But as for God, he can never forget his children. Again, God
compares himself with one of the most affectionate females among unreasonable
creatures, the Hen, Matthew. 23.37. O Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered
thee, as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings? etc. No Bird (says S.
Augustine) expresses such tender love to her young ones as the hen does: Aug.
tract. 15. in Joh. page 46. Videmus nidificare passeres quoslibet ante oculos
nostros; hirundines, ciconias, columbas quotidie videmus nidificare; quos nisi
quando in nidis videmus, parents esse non agnoscimus. Gallina vero sic
infirmatur in pullis suis, ut etiamsi ipsi pulli non sequantur, filios non
videas, matrem tamen intelligas. Ita fit alis demissis, plumis hispida, voce
rauca, omnibus membris demissa and abjecta, ut (quemadmodum dixi) etsi filios
non videas, matrem tamen intelligas.
No fowls discover themselves to be mothers so much as hens do. Others, when we
see them in their nests with their young, we know them to be mothers, but no
way else: but the hen discovers her self to be so even when her chickens do
not follow her: her feathers stand up, her wings hang down, she clocketh
mournfully and goes feebly; so that we may know her to be a mother, when yet
we cannot see her brood. Such another speech he has in another place, and
concludes it with these words, Idem in Psalm. 58 p. 212. B.C. Quare ergo
Dominus, nisi propter hoc, gallina esse voluit, in sancta Scriptura dicens, O
JERUSALEM, JERUSALEM, QUOTIES VOLUI TE CONGREGARE UT GALLINA, etc.
Our Lord did therefore compare himself to a hen rather then to any other
creature, because of her singular expressions of love to her young ones, even
when they are out of her sight. By these things we see how highly the
Scriptures speak of Gods mercy, especially in its expressions to mankind, to
whom he has born a greater love, and for whom he has declared himself to have
done far greater matters, then for the angels; the wisdom of God delighting
it self in the children of men, before the world was, Prove. 8.31. and
gratifying them in the fullness of time with the assumption of their nature;
Heb. 2.16. and the redemption of their souls with his blood, 1. Pet. 1. etc.
Now with such a Mercy cannot stand such a decree: Absolute Reprobation being
once granted, we may (me think) more properly call God a Father of cruelties
then of mercies, and of hatred rather then of love: and the devils names,
Satan, and (...), an adversary, a destroyer, may be fitter for him then (...),
a Savior: which I tremble to think. Does mercy please him, when he has made a
decree which shows far more severity toward poor men then mercy? Is he
slow to anger, when he has taken such a small and speedy occasion to punish
the greater part of men for ever, and for one sin once committed has shut
them up under invincible sin and damnation? Is his mercy abundant, does it
reach further then justice, when it is tuckt up so short, limited to a very few
selected ones, when a hundred for one at least (take-in all parts of the world)
are unavoydably cast away out of his only will and pleasure? Or does his love
pass knowledge, when we see daily far greater love then this in men and
other creatures? What father (H) and mother (that have not only cast off
fatherhood and motherhood, but humanity too) would determine their children to
certain death, nay to cruel torments worse then death, for one only offense,
and that committed too not by them in their own persons, but by some other, and
imputed only to them?

But to deliver (I) things a little more closely; Four things (in my conceit)
being well and distinctly considered, do make it apparent that this decree is
incompatible with Gods mercy. 1. That Adams sin is the sin of man's nature
only, and no man's personal transgression, but Adams: It was neither committed
nor consented to by any of his posterity in their own persons. 2. That it was
the sin of our nature, not by generation (as I have showed) but by Gods own
voluntary imputation. 3. That God did pardon it in Adam, (for so it is
generally believed) who did actually and freely commit it in his own person. 4.
That Christ came into the world to take away peccatum mundi, the sin of the
world, Joh. 1.29. That God either did or might have satisfied his wronged
justice in the blood of the Covenant for all mankind, and without any
impeachment to justice have opened a way of salvation to all and every man.
These considerations (I think) being well digested, will make any man to think,
that either there is no decree of (K) absolute Reprobation, or that God is not
merciful to men at all, much less more merciful to them then to other
creatures, but more sharp a great deal and severe then he is to 1. any
creatures in the world. 2. the very devils themselves.


1. Then to any other creatures. For they, even the basest among them, though
perhaps they have but a despicable being, yet they have such being as is far
better then no being at all: whereas men are determined by his omnipotent
decree to such a woeful being as is a thousand times worse then no being at
all. What man would have accepted of life, when first he entered upon possession
of it, if he had known upon what lamentable conditions it was to be tendered? Or
(did men firmly believe this doctrine) they would at a venture with Job curse
their birthday, be released willingly from the right of creatures, and desire
their immortal souls might vanish into nothing. Malunt exstingui penitus quam
ad supplicia reparari, as Minutius Felix speaks in another case. Minut.
Felix, page 113.
And parents out of mere compassion to their children would wish that they
might be born to ads and serpents rather then men, creatures whose beings at
last shall be resolved into nothing, rather then immortal spirits.

2. To the very (L) devils also (supposing this decree) is God more merciful
then to men; and yet the devils are set forth in Scripture for the greatest
spectacles of Gods irefull severity. In one thing this decree makes most men
and devil^ equal; Vtrisque desperata salus, they are both sure to be damned:
but in three things men are in a far worse condition by it.

I. In their (M) appointment to to hell, not for their own proper, personal
sins, for which only the devils are damned but for the sin of another man
that lived and sinned long before they were born.

II. In their (N) unavoidable destination to endless misery, under a color of
the contrary. The devils, as they are decreed to damnation, so they know it,
they expect it, they look for no other: but men, who are appointed to wrath,
are yet fe^ up with hopes of salvation, and made to believe that the whole
business is put into their hands; so as if they perish, it i^ not defectu
misericordiae, because God will have no mercy o^ them, but defectu voluntatis
propriae, because they will not b^ saved: when yet indeed there is no such
matter. Now if it be worse to be deluded in misery then simply to be miserable,
the^ is the condition of men in this respect (by this decree) much worse then
the state of devils.

III. In their (O) obligation to believe, and the aggravation of their
punishment by not believing. The devils, because they must be damned, are not
commanded to believe in Christ nor is their punishment heightened by their not
believing: bu^ miserable men, who by this decree have no more liberty t^ escape
hell then the devils, must yet be ti^d to believe in Christ and have their
torments increased if they believe not. These things being so, (I think) I may
conclude with the words (P) of Prosper; Sent. super 8. c. Gall. Qui dicit quod
non omnes homines velit Deus salvos fieri, sed certum numerum praedestinatorum,
durius loquitur quam loque^dum est de altitudine inscrutabilis gratiae Dei.
He which says that God would not have all men to be saved, but a certain set
number of predestinate persons only, he speaks more harshly then he should
of the height of Gods unsearchable grace. Nay, he speaks that which cannot
stand with his infinite grace and mercy, especially to the sons of men.

Nor does that give me satisfaction which is usually answered, namely, that God
by this absolute decree does fully manifest (Q) his justice and his mercy too,
his justice toward Reprobates, his mercy toward the Elect; and that it is
necessary his decrees should so be ordered as that both these may be clearly
declared by them. For, 1. Gods mercy is revealed to be rich mercy abundant,
long-suffering, surmounting justice, and beyond understanding. Now such a mercy
set forth with such titles, clothed with such properties, is no ways
manifested by this decree. 2. Neither is Gods pure and spotless Justice set
forth by it, as I now come to show: This being my third argument drawn from
Gods Attributes against absolute Reprobation.

Whether absolute Reprobation oppose Gods Mercy.
What the Author discourses in general concerning Gods Mercy considered
absolutely, comparatively, in its naturalnesse, in the amplitude of its object,
etc. is to no great purpose, unless upon such antecedents this conclusion will
certainly follow, Therefore Predestination and Reprobation cannot be absolute
acts of Gods free will, but must needs proceed according to his prevision of
men's future acts and deservings. The weakness of these consequents shall in
particular be showed hereafter, when I have first set down some general
considerations concerning the Mercy or Justice or other virtues in Scripture
ascribed unto God.

Vide Ruiz. De vol. disp. 3.. 3. Et disp. 35.. 1.
And first we must know, That though the names of habitual virtues be
attributed unto God, yet it is impossible that any such habits should truly and
really belong unto the Divine will; Quoniam habitus non dantur, nisi tanquam
supplementa potentiarum earum quae intra ordinem potentiae non sunt perfectae.
Unless therefore we hold Gods power of willing in it self to be imperfect and
to want supervenient rectifying habits, we must not avouch with this Author
tha^ Justice, Mercy, Holiness, etc. are in Gods will the same in nature which
these virtues are in men, and only differing in degree.

Secondly, though in God there be a permanent inclination or natural
disposition to produce those outward effects which in us proceed from habitual
virtues, as To endow his creatures with many good things, which we term Bounty
or Liberality; To help them out of their miseries, which we term Mercy; To
punish them according to their misdeserts, which we call Justice, and the like:
yet God should not have been covetous or niggardly, had he never diffused drop
of his bounty to any creature, but kept and enjoyed his goodness within
himself, as he did before the creation: He should not have been cruel or
unjust, had he freed no man out of that misery whereinto all mankind was
fallen: neither should he have wanted any virtue, or done contrary to justice,
had he freed all men out of their misery, and brought them to eternal
felicity. The outward temporal acts therefore of Divine Justice or Mercy may
be terminated or not terminated unto any man according to the absolute
free will of the most wise God, and that without opposing any attribute of his.
To this purpose Carthusianus, In 4m, did. 46. Vide Aquin. part. 1. q. 2.
Cum Deus sit bonorum omnium dominator, and in ipsum peccat qui peccat, ipse
potest plus confer de bonis quam sit alicui debitum, and minus infer de
malis, seu totam poenam relaxare, nec in hoc contra sed praeter institutum
facere. Vide Halens. part. 1. quaest. 39. art. 4. and 5.

Thirdly, it is to be observed, That howsoever mercy and justice are by us
considered as distinct virtues or operations in God, yet his remunerative
justice should never find a fit object, had he not by some benefit of free
mercy and grace himself fitted it thereunto: And this is the benefit which we
call absolute Election or Predestination. Neither should his vindicative
justice find any objects fitted for it to pass upon, had he been pleased to
grant the said free benefit to all men: And therefore we term the negation of
this benefit or free favor, absolute Non-election, Preterition, or (in a more
harsh word) negative Reprobation. The foreseen faith and perseverance of Peter
had not made him an object fit by way of remuneration to be invested with
eternal life, had not a former absolute and free act of Gods mercy fitted him
with the gifts of faith, holiness and perseverance. Aquinas has well set down
and demonstratively proved this theoreme, Opus Divinae justitiae semper
praesupponit opus misericordiae, and in eo fundatur. There is the theoreme it
self: now for the demonstration. Part. 1a. q. 22. art. 4.
Creaturae non debetur aliquid nisi propter aliquid in eo praexsistens vel
praeconsideratum. Et rursus, si illud creaturae debetur, hoc erit propter
aliquid prius. Et cum non sit procedere in infinitum, oportet de venire ad
aliquid quod ex sola bonitate Divinae voluntatis dependeat, quae est ultimus
finis. Let all the Remonstrants lay their heads together, and tell us what is
primum indebitum which depends upon the will of God alone, but the grace of
absolute Election or Predestination, for which we plead. Again, Judas his
final damnation had not been fore-appointed, had not his final impenitencie
been preconsidered. His final impenitencie had not been foreseen, had that
primum indebitum which depends only upon Gods absolute will and free mercy
been bestowed upon him as it was upon Peter. Aquin. qu. 23. art. 4.
Nam voluntas Dei qua vult bonum alicui diligendo, est causa quod illud bonum
ab eo prae aliis habeatur. And without all prejudice to his justice he might
out of his absolute will thus have elected Judas, and by the grace of election
have freed him both from final impenitencie and eternal misery. And
therefore Carthusianus truly says, In 4m, qu. 1a. did. 46.
Causa naturae and proprietatum ejus est Divina voluntas: ideo totus ordo
justitiae originaliter ad Divinam voluntatem reducitur. And again, In 1m Sent.
did. 41.
Dico quod Deus ordinavit A ad effectum praedestinationis, and non B, etc.
Quamvis si voluisset, ita potuisset misericordiam manifestare in B, ipsum
praedestinando, sicut in A. All this tends to show that the preparing and
giving of that which we call primum indebitum beneficium in ordine ad
infallibilem vitae aeternae consecutionem, is an act of Gods absolute will and
love or free mercy, and yet not contrary to his justice: and on the other
side, the not-preparing and not-giving of the same benefit is also a decree or
act of his absolute will, and yet no act of cruelty, or contrary act either to
the nature of the Divine mercy or justice. But let us see how he will prove
that absolute Reprobation cannot stand with the mercy of God.

His premises are these: God is so merciful, that mercy is a part of his
title. Gods mercy absolutely is set forth in high and stately terms, RICH,
GREAT, etc. Gods Love and Mercy is his natural work, his Justice a strange
work: He is more frequent in the exercise of his Mercy then Justice: He
extends it to more objects, upon less occasions, etc.

All this granted will not infer this conclusion, Therefore Election and
Non-election (or negative Reprobation) depend not upon Gods absolute will, but
upon the different foreseen will and acts of men. What a vain labor is it to
amplify and exaggerate premises which are of no force to induce the conclusion
intended, nay which for the most part are rather of force to overthrow it? Let
us weigh the particulars.

God is merciful. True: but the dispensation of his mercy is different, to
some more, to some less, according to the absolute purpose and counsel of his
own will. This absolute Non-election is not a denial of all mercy, much less
an act of unmercifulness or cruelty. It is only a purpose of not bestowing
upon some persons that choice mercy and effectual grace which would
infallibly bring them unto glory, and a permission of them by their own
free will to abuse those means of salvation which are afforded them. And
hereupon follows Gods absolute prescience of their final impenitencie, and
his fore-appointment of them to their just punishment. The Master of the
Sentences speaks fitly to this purpose; Lib. 1. did. 40. lit. D.
Reprobatio Dei qua ab aeterno non-eligendo quosdam reprobavit secundum duo
consideratur: quorum alterum praescit, and non praeparat, id est, iniquitatem;
alterum praescit and praeparat, scil. aeternam poenam. I would know what can be
found in this negative Reprobation, qua Deus non-eligendo quosdam reprobat,
which proves him unmercifull. Not the negation summi and indebiti beneficii;
for that is an act of absolute liberty, not of cruelty and injury: not the
foreseeing of their future iniquity; for that is an act of the understanding,
not of the Divine will: nor the resolution to punish them; for that being with
respect unto their sins is just, not cruel.

God is Mercy in the abstract, a Father of Mercies: His nature and property
is always to have mercy and to forgive. These and such like places prove two
things: First, that acts of mercy flow unto us many times from Gods natural
bounty, unpromised, undeserved, undesired on our parts. But we answer, that
this prime mercy, which is not promised upon condition to any particular
person, is at Gods own absolute will for the bestowing or withholding: and this
we retort against the Remonstrants. For the mercy which shows it self in
Election being of this kind, it is an error to make either the bestowing or
not-bestowing it to depend upon conditions foreseen or not foreseen in men.
Secondly, the Scriptures above alleged prove that God extends his mercy at
all times and to all persons indifferently according to the tenor of the
promise: that is, He never fails to forgive the penitent sinner, to bestow
the crown of eternal life upon the faithful and constant believers. If he
could have alleged any Scripture which had avouched that it is Gods nature and
property to give repentance, faith, perseverance to all men, he had quite
overthrown absolute Election and Non-election: But since God, who could have
prepared and bestowed the gift of faith and perseverance as well upon this man
as upon that, and who according to his ordination and promise has bound
himself to forgive and to save this man if he repent, if he believe, if he
persevere, as well as that, and yet neither decreed to give nor gives to this
as to that, surely he has elected some, and not-elected others, out of his own
absolute will and pleasure.

Gods mercy is set out in high and stately titles,

Most of these places speak of that rich and special Mercy which God has
extended to some in their effectual vocation, justification, sanctification,
and which he will most certainly extend toward them in their glorification; as
will appear to any man that shall particularly weigh them. From these places if
I should reason thus, God has showed GREAT, RICH, ABUNDANT mercy unto some, in
choosing them before the foundations of the world were laid, in effectually
calling them, even when they were dead in sin, in freely justifying them, in
mercifully glorifying them; and he has not done thus for many others:
Therefore Election and Non-election depend upon the absolute will of God, and
not upon the foreseen acts of men, this were a good conclusion: But to
conclude, Therefore there is no decree of absolute Election and Non-election,
it is not only inconsequent, but contrary to the premises. And yet further, if
such places of Scripture should be applied to that rich mercy which God is
ready to extend to every man who performs the conditions of repenting,
believing, persevering, they make nothing against the decrees of absolute
Election and Preterition, unless he can show that God has prepared the same
riches of his mercy to make all men fulfill the conditions. For if this
preparation be made for some and not for others, and that according to Gods
absolute will, and not according to the foreseen differences of good and bad
wills in men; this rich mercy of God which this Author has mentioned for the
confuting of absolute Election and Non-election is rather a confirming thereof.

natural and pleasing unto God: vindicative Justice is a strange work. He does
not willingly afflict, etc.

That is said to be natural and pleasing unto God, which comes originally
from himself, and is not an act depending upon the misdeserts of the creature.
But this naturalnesse of Gods mercy and bounty does not show it self in the
outward effects thereof, as natural agents do, who work according to the
uttermost of their power, and as far as the sphere of their activitie can
reach. Let bounty and mercy therefore be never so natural to God, it forces
him not in the same measure and manner to extend the effects of his mercy unto
all, but he always guides the dispensation thereof according to the absolute
and free decrees of his own will: So that the naturalnesse of his mercy
hinders not the limiting of that special mercy which flows from Election
unto such singular persons as himself intends it unto; neither does it forbid
him to withhold the same from such singular persons as he has decreed to
passe-by in the dispensation thereof. And this absolute liberty and supreme
dominion which God has in the preparing or not-preparing of effectual grace,
wherein the absolute decrees of Election and Non-election do show themselves,
is a thing as natural and as pleasing unto God as his Mercy.

As for vindicative Justice, it may be called a strange work, because it is
opus occasionatum by man's transgression. But as Predestination is no act of
remunerative Justice, no more is negative Reprobation or Non-election of
vindicative Justice: but they are both acts of Gods absolute dominion and free
liberty, in giving or withholding his own according to his own will and
pleasure.

God is more frequent and forward in the of his Mercy and Bounty then of his
Anger and vindicative Justice.

A strange argument, grounded upon a manifest error, namely, That the absolute
decree of Non-election is the exercise of Gods anger and vindicative justice
upon persons not-elected. There were Angels elected and not-elected according
to Gods decree, before the world or Angels were made: but there was no exercise
of anger or vindicative justice upon them till after they had rebelled.
Non-election is an absolute decree of withholding an undue favor, but it is no
absolute decree of inflicting any undeserved punishment. Neither does it follow
from the absolute decree of Non-election, that God is less frequent in the
acts of Mercy then of Anger. For though he have not exercised this special act
of Mercy, yet he exercises daily innumerable acts of Mercy toward the
Non-elect beyond all desert of theirs.

In the amplitude of objects to whom it is extended Mercy surmounteth Justice.
God visits the third and fourth generation; shows mercy to thousands. His
mercy reaches as much further, etc.

Showing of mercy to those which love God, and punishing those which hate him,
are the exercising of Gods remunerative and vindicative Justice according to
his own ordination: But the preparing of that special grace for some men which
being given them causes them to love God and constantly to walk with God; and
the not-preparing the same for others is the act or decree of Election and
Non-election. Now what a loose and wild manner of reasoning is this?
Remunerative Justice reaches further then vindicative; therefore there is no
absolute decree of Non-election. Justice in the number of objects comes short
of Mercy; therefore there is no absolute decree of Non-election? Justice must
needs come short of mercy, because (though not the special mercy of Election,
yet) mercy, yea manifold mercies are bestowed upon every singular man in the
world. So that the Elected by special grace being freed from becoming objects
of Gods vindicative Justice, and both Elected and Non-elected being objects of
his Mercy in diverse measures and after diverse manners, we may grant a larger
extent of Mercy then of vindicative Justice, and yet without all prejudice to
absolute Election and Not-election. For as long as God deals unjustly or
cruelly with no man, his dealing more mercifully with Peter in preparing
effectual grace for him by the decree of Predestination, and less mercifully
with Judas in not preparing for him such grace by an opposite decree of
Preterition, is no denial of the generality of his mercy, but an affirmation
of more mercy to one then to another. Carth. in 4. did. 46. qu. 1.
g Misericordia respicit absolute Divinum effectum, non concernendo aliquam
aequalitatem in ipso. Vnde secundum majorem vel minorem misericordiae effectum
dicitur misericordius cum uno quam cum alio agere. And yet he deals
unmercifully with no man.

In the occasions that move God to exercise It is a greater matter that moves
God to punish, a smaller, etc.

All this is quite beside the question, unless it be first proved that
Preterition, Non-election or Non-predestination are acts of vindicative
Justice. This has formerly been denied, and as yet was never proved; and
therefore whatsoever is here discoursed of Gods deferring punishments, of small
occasions which he takes to hold his hand, and the like, are impertinent.

Gods mercy or love is compared with the nay, of a tender Mother, and with the
most affectionate females, as with the Hen, etc. Now with such a Mercy cannot
stand a decree of absolute Reprobation.

This Author (by his continual manner of speech) seems to attribute unto
God such a natural affection toward men as is found in Fathers, Mothers, in
Birds and brute Beasts toward their young. But we must know first, that
Halens. p^rt. 1. q. 29 memb. 1.
Misericordia ponitur in Deo, non secundum affectum, sed secundum effectum.
Secondly, as where love or pity is found secundum passionis affectum, there it
does the uttermost it well can in relieving the persons pitied or loved; so
where it is only secundum relevationis effectum, there it works more or
less according to the free determination of the agent. Thirdly, the natural
affection of love or pity toward their young ones does not in brute beasts so
equally determine their affection, but they inwardly may bear and outwardly may
show more affection and more effects of their affection to one then to another.
And in men the natural affection of love does not so determine Fathers or
Mothers, but it leaves Jacob free to love Joseph more then his brethren, and
to give unto him more effects of his love then unto the rest: It leaves
Rebecca free to love Jacob more then Esau, and to do more for him then for
Esau. If the natural affection in Beasts toward their young ones excludes
not all difference of more and less in their love; if the natural love of
Parents to their children be no hindrance but they may show more effects of
this love to one, and less to another; then God, in whom Love or Mercy are
effections and not affections, may freely both in natural and supernatural
things do more for some, and less for others. The decree therefore of
Non-election or negative Reprobation, being not a decree which denies all
effects of Love or Pity to the Non-elect, but a decree only denying them that
high and choice effect of infallible direction unto eternal life, this decree
may well stand with the Mercy and Love of God.

For those inferences therefore, that if absolute Reprobation be granted, God
may more properly be called a Father of cruelty, (...), (...) marvel how he
trembled to think of them, an^ never trembled to utter them. That wherein he
perpetually is mistaken, is the makin^ of Non-election or negative Reprobation
(...) vindicative act, the confounding it with the judicial sentence of
Damnation, the conceiving it to work in the Non-elect an invincible necessity
of committing sin, with suc^ other monstrous fancies which he takes for
principles needing no proof; whereas the^ are such gross errors as need no
confutation. Non-election takes not up Gods Mercy so short, but every man in
the world hat^ a share in it, though not an equal share. An^ if Gods Mercy and
Love must be understoo^ secundum effectum and not secundum affectum let him
find out any man or any creature i^ the world which has conferred so man^ and
so great effects of mercy and love upon his young ones as God did upon Cain,
Judas, or any other reprobate, and then let hi^ advance their love above the
love of God.

An Answer to his objections taken from imputation of original sin.
WHat Father or Mother would determine for one only offense, and that
committed too not by themselves in their own persons, but by some other, and
imputed only unto them?

Three things are here presupposed: First, determination of any man to cruel
torments worse then death, but an absolute determination immanent in the Divine
will of not-bestowing upon some angels and men that special effectual grace
which would certainly bring them to the incomprehensible joys of eternal
life. And the judicial decree of Damnation unto eternal torments is a
distinct decree from this of negative Reprobation, and depends respectively
upon the guilt of the party preconsidered, who for it is justly to be
punished, as has already been shown. Again, whereas he supposes that Adams
sin cannot be truly accounted a personal offense in his posterity, both the
Scripture and the common consent of Divines run against him. For though it be
not personal in the same sense wherein actual sins done by men having the
use of reason and free will are said to be their personal actions, yet it is
in another sense voluntary and personal, because it was so done that every
singular person of mankind is involved in that very voluntary sin and in the
guilt of punishment or death due thereunto. So says the Apostle, Romans 5.
Sin and death entered into the world by one. but how? In quantum in eo omnes
peccaverunt. And again, By one man's disobedience many were made sinners.
Halensis to this purpose says, Part. 2. qu. 105. memb. 1. page 296.
Secundum Augustinum concedimus quod non punitur parvulus pro culpa patris, sed
pro culpa sua, proprie loquendo. Non enim dicit Apostolus quod solum Adam
peccavit, sed dicit quod omnes peccaverunt in Adam. Erat enim in Adam non solum
voluntas unius singularis personae, sed voluntas universalis naturae. Adamo
cadente a justitia originali, cecidit etiam quaelibet voluntas posterorum.
Caret enim voluntas cujuslibet illa rectitudine quam habuisset si Adam
stetisset. Aquinas and Cajetane hold Adams sin to be voluntary unto all his
posterity, 12 2ae qu. 81. art. 10.
in quantum sunt membra Adami. Bellarmine, De amiss. great. l. 5. c. 18.
Peccavimus aliena voluntate, id est, Adami: quae tamen voluntas nisi fuisset
aliquo modo totius naturae, ac per hoc etiam nostra, nullo modo vere peccavisse
diceremur. Last of all, Malderus (as professed an enemy to the Synod of Dort as
this Author) dares not deny Adams first actual transgression to be voluntary
in regard of every singular person propagated from him. In 1m 2 a qu. 81. art.
1. page 260.
Patet voluntarium voluntate primi parentis sufficere ad very nominis peccatum
in parvulo. Est enim illa voluntas Adae quodammodo voluntas parvuli ex Dei
decreto. Last of all, whereas he takes it for granted, that Adams sin is
only imputed unto his children, and so they are determined to death and
eternal torments for a sin only imputed, he is contrary to the judgment of
the Catholic church. For it is generally held against the Pelagians, That as
Adams sin was the sin of every person that was a member of him, so likewise
Adams crookedness of will was not barely imputed but actually propagated to
every singular person derived from his loins.

But this Author promises to come more closely to the point: let us follow
him as closely. The reasons which he is now to press, are in effect the same
which have before been urged and answered, and therefore a shorter answer will
serve.

Adams sin is the sin of man's nature only, and no man's personal
transgression but Adams: It was neither committed nor consented to by any of
his posterity in their own persons.

gessit personam generis humani, was every man's personal sin, and was
consented unto by every man's will; because in Adam there was not only the will
of one singular man, but the universal will of all mankind and of every
singular person, as before has been declared. And I would fain know, if Adams
first transgression was his only and no man's else, how every singular person
is by God himself for that very transgression esteemed liable unto death.
Durandus answers the doubt: Though it were not Lib. 2. did. 30. qu. 2.
voluntary actu personali infantium (who were not yet in rerum natura) yet it
was voluntary voluntate primi hominis, quae fuit interpretative voluntas
omnium. And if God himself and the catholic Church interpret this will of Adam
in disobeying Gods commandment to be so far forth our personal sin, that
every singular person stands culpable of it, and liable unto punishment for
it, we must not give credit either to the old Pelagians or new Remonstrants,
when they tell us that such a decree cannot stand with Gods mercy.

That it was the sin of our nature, not by

Original sin sometimes notes that Vide Bellarm. De Amiss. great. 5. 17.
Sometimes again it notes that corruption or pravity of the will and of the
whole soul which remained in Adam after his rebellion, and which by him is
traduced unto every singular person descending naturally from him. Neither of
these becomes the sin of any particular person otherwise then by generation,
though not without a free constitution of Gods will. And as for the latter, it
is in all singular persons of mankind, not only by imputation but by real
inhesion or contagion, as the whole Church confesses.

God pardoned Adam who did actually and

God pardoned Adam, upon the same conditions shall assuredly obtein the like
pardon. The conclusion which he should prove is this, Absolute Non-election or
negative Reprobation cannot stand with Gods mercy: His reasons are, Adams sin
is the sin of man's nature only; It is ours, not by generation, but by
imputation: It was pardoned in Adam. Were all these true, show me any necessary
connection betwixt the premises and the conclusion, and take the cause.

Christ came to take away the sin of the world; God either did or might have
satisfied his wronged justice in the blood of the Covenant for all mankind, and
have opened a way of salvation unto every man.

though this last consideration of his be admitted.

Admit of absolute Reprobation, and we less merciful to men then to any other
creatures.

Admit not only of absolute Non-election, which (as has been often said) is
neither any penalty nor any misery of the creature not elected, but let us
further admit, that angels and men not elected or negatively reprobated do
always infallibly draw upon themselves by their own default extreme and
endless misery; yet it will not follow that God has been less merciful unto
such persons not elected (suppose Cain or Judas) then to the brute creatures.
First, because in every person not elected there are innumerable effects of
Gods mercy and goodness whereof the other creatures are incapable. Secondly,
because what effects of Gods goodness or mercy are found in the other
creatures, are mercies or benefits rather bestowed upon men for whose uses they
serve, then upon the creatures. Now these serving to the use of the Non-elect,
as much and oftentimes more then of the Elect, the mercy or goodness of God
imparted to the creatures redoundeth more unto them. Suppose therefore the
creatures are in a better condition of being then the Non-elect finally bring
themselves unto, yet this good being of the creature is a mercy of God
principally exhibited unto the men who have the use thereof. But this loose
manner of reasoning comes from the false conceit, That Non-election is the
determining of persons not-elected by an omnipotent decree to their woeful
being: Whereas Non-election or negative Reprobation is an eternal decree in
the will of God of not doing that for the advancement of some men unto a
supernatural blessed being which he has freely and graciously determined to
do for others, and contains not any thrusting of them into a woeful being by
an omnipotent operation, but a permitting them to fall into such a woeful being
by their own voluntary default and transgression.

As for his questions, What man would have accepted of life, if he had known
upon what lamentable conditions it was to be tendered? or who would not curse
the day of his birth, if he did firmly believe that there were any absolute
decree of Election and Non-election?

To the former I answer, That eternal Election and Preterition are no
capitulations with the creature, no conditions tendered unto the creature, but
only immanent absolute resolutions in the Creator. And yet if God had
revealed unto Cain or Judas the decree of his Preterition when they first
entered upon possession of this life, it had not been an act of right reason or
an orderly will to have refused it with many other good things freely given
unto them by God, for fear of a future bad condition which they might cast
themselves into by their own voluntary wickedness. If God had revealed his
decree of Non-election to the angels which proved apostaticall, it had been
folly and madness to have refused that excellent being which God bestowed upon
them, for fear of that woeful being which by his permission they brought
wilfully upon themselves. Lastly, God in his wisdom has made the decrees of
Election and Non-election secrets to be concealed only in his own bosom: and
therefore it is vain and idle to frame arguments upon supposal that God should
make them revealed and commonly known to singular persons.

Now to his latter question; Who, if he did believe the decrees of absolute
Predestination and Reprobation, would not curse his birthday? etc. I answer,
No well-instructed Christian who understands what the absolute decrees of
Election and Preterition do import. If the decree of Reprobation imported a
necessary causing of any man's sins by the Divine powerful operation, or an
absolute decree of damning any singular person, whether innocent or sinful,
whether a believer or not-believer, there were some reasonable motives for men
Not-elected, knowing such a decree, to curse their birthday. But this false
imagination has been often refuted. Lomb. l. 1. did. 40. D. and did. 41. E.
Non sicut praeparavit Sanctos ad justitiam percipiendam, sic praeparavit
iniquos ad justitiam amittendam; quia pravitatis praeparator nunquam fuit. I
add Carthusian; Lib. 10. did. 40. qu. 3. page 580. Vide Aquin. part. 1. qu.
23. art. 3.
Bonum subjacet providentiae Divinae tanquam ordinatum and causatum ab ea: ideo
praedestinatio est causa gratiae and gloriae. Sed quoniam malum culpa non
subjacet providentiae Divinae ut intentum and causatum, sed solum tanquam
praescitum and ordinatum, hinc reprobatio est solum praescientia culpae, non
causa, etc. Lastly, the eternal decree of Reprobation (as the Remonstrants
themselves hold it) is as unchangeable, as fixed, as certainly drawing after it
the woeful being of Cain and Judas and all other Reprobates, as that which we
admit. We may therefore ask of the Remonstrants, What man would accept of life,
or who would not curse his birthday, if he knew that upon an eternal and
infallible praescience of his final impenitencie God had passed the sentence
or decree of his Reprobation?

Suppose absolute Reprobation, and God is more merciful unto the very devils
then unto men. They are equal only in this one thing, UTRISQUE DESPERATA
SALUS; but in three things men are in worse condition then the devils.

The decree of Non-election or absolute negative Reprobation truly understood
is a denial of special mercy which by Gods power and free will might have
been prepared both for men and devils, and might have been bestowed upon them
as well as it was for and upon the elect. The withholding of this mercy is no
unmercifull cruel decree, no vindicative or punitive act: and therefore it is a
bad consequence to say, God was less merciful to men then to the devils;
Therefore cruel or unjust to either. More or less mercy is a confession of
mercy unto both: and therefore from less mercy to one then to the other to
conclude cruelty or injustice toward, either, is to infer a conclusion
contradictory to the premises.

Whereas he further says that the decree of Non-election or absolute
Reprobation is equal to men and devils in this, quod reddit salutem utrisque
desperatam, he is quite besides the matter. For the decree of distinguishing
angels into Elect and Non-elect was established in voluntate Divina before the
creation of either, and at the instant of their creation (notwithstanding the
forenamed decree) their salvation was so far from being desperate or
impossible, that it was most easy and possible, and never was desperate till
their wilful rebellion had made it so. What more easy to be obtained then
that which cannot be lost unless the party himself by a wilful act of his
own lose it? Upon these terms stood the salvation of the Non-elect angels, now
(by their own default) devils. As for the decree of non-election concerning
men; it made the salvation of no children of Adam desperate as they are
considered in him according to his estate of justice and innocence; for in
that he had both a possibility and a sufficiency to have atteined salvation
for himself and them. Neither does it now make any man's estate desperate, as he
is considered lying in the fall: for by Christ sufficient means of salvation
are provided for all sinners whatsoever; and God secundum legem ordinariam may
apply them to any singular person whatsoever, whilst he is in statu viae. And
he now adjudgeth no man to the woeful estate of torment or damnation in hell,
that does not willingly put himself out of the way which leads unto heaven.
It is not the secret and eternal decree of Non-election or Reprobation which
makes God do this; but the open acts of man's voluntary rebellion cause his
damnation and torments in hell. Nothing does or can make any man's salvation
desperate but his own desperate wickedness and obstinate wilfulness. Aquin.
part. 1^. qu. 23. art. 3.
Cum dicitur quod reprobatus non potest gratiam adipisci, non est hoc
intelligendum secundum impossibilitatem absolutam, sed secundum
impossibilitatem conditionatam, quae non tollit libertatem arbitrii.

But let us now see how he will prove that God is more merciful to devils then
to men, supposing the absolute decree of Non-election or negative Reprobation.

Men were appointed to hell, not for their whereas the devils are damned only
for their own proper personal sins. Ergo.

This Author runs continually upon one string, appointment of men and
angels unto hellfire. The eternal decree distinguishing angels into Elect and
Non-elect was neither grounded upon the righteousness of the one nor upon the
wickedness of the other; though the judicial decree distinguishing them in
glorificandos and damnandos were respective to the loialtie of the one and
rebellion of the other. The same we say of men. As for the very damnation of
men not-elected it is for a proper and personal contagion of sin, and for a
transgression which God and the catholic Church esteems to belong personally
to every child of Adam as has been already declared. We mus^ not therefore be
so addicted to the new fangled opinions of the Remonstrants treading in the
very footsteps of the Pelagians, as for their sakes to think the condemning of
men for original corruption and Adams transgression, is hard, unmercifull,
cruel dealing; since the Scriptures and the judgment of the catholic Church
and of our own particular Church has acknowledged this decree. And yet were
al^ granted which this man asks, this conclusion would not follow, Therefore
God is more merciful to angels not-elected then unt^ men. For the more or
less mercy of God must not be weighed by any one singula^ act or decree of
God toward angels an^ men, but by the universal course of hi^ dealings with
both. Now cast all the merciful decrees and dealings of God with men into the
one balance, and all the merciful dealings of God with devils into the other,
and it will easily appear that God has showed more mercy to any non-elected
or damned man then to any of the non-elected angels, now damned devils.

Men not-elected are unavoidably destinated endless misery under a color
whereas the devils decreed unto damnation, know it, expect it, look for no
other. But men are fed up with hopes of salvation, and made believe, etc.

Non-election is not a destinating of the person not-elected unto endless
misery or torment: Nay, and to the atteining of eternal happiness.

Whereas he makes the case of the non-elected angels better then of men,
because they know and expect damnation (he might have added, and feel the
torments of damnation) and men not-elected are fed up with vain hopes, and made
believe that they cannot perish but defectu voluntatis propriae; We answer,
First, That those which are now damned devils, were not damned for their
Non-election, or because they were not elected from eternity, but for the
temporal act of their apostasy. And the same we say of men not-elected.
Secondly, we answer, That the now-damned devils did not know or expect their
damnation when they were first created, and whilst they were viatores; though
now they be under damnation, they must needs both know it and feel it. And the
same we say of men not-elected. Thirdly, Whereas he says devils are in a
better case, because they are out of hope, and men are deluded with vain and
impossible hopes of salvation, he is deceived in both. The devils themselves,
though not-elected, were in a far better case when at their first creation
they had hope of happiness, then they are being quite out of hope under the
state of their irrecoverable damnation. And Judas though eternally not-elected
or eternally reprobated in Gods decree, yet he was in a better condition
whilst he lived upon earth in the company of Christ, and might hope for
happiness, then now he is actually damned and out of all hope. And lastly we
answer, That the Non-elect are not thereby appointed to wrath, but the wrath of
God lays hold upon them for being children of Belial and disobedience, and
not for being persons not-elected. And it is most true, that if they perish,
they perish not defectu misericordiae Divinae, who has offered them means of
grace, pardon, and salvation; but defectu voluntatis propriae, wherein there is
always found a voluntary pravity, a neglect, a contempt, or a wicked abuse of
the means of salvation tendered unto them. This Authors saying only, There is
no such matter, is no material proof.

Men not-elected or reprobated are obliged are free from such a command, etc.

A strange argument to prove God less merciful to men not-elected then to
devils the grace of God into wantonness; but the Remonstrants only go about
to turn it into cruelty. Those who have so far forth a power of being saved
by faith in Christ, that the event is hindered only by their own malignant
rebellious will, have more liberty and possibility to escape hell then the
devils, unto whom salvation after their fall was upon no condition ever offered.

God would have all men saved: but we say not with the Remonstrants, That God
would have all men predestined or elected.

manifestation of Gods justice and of his mercy, no man supposes that the
immanent secret eternal decrees of Predestination and Reprobation can in
themselves manifest the justice and mercy of God; but in the temporal effects
and consequents they serve to set forth Gods merciful dealing with the Elect
and his just dealing with the Non-elect, misericorditer liberando hos, just
damnando istos.

Treatise.
THirdly, this absolute Reprobation is incompatible with Gods Justice. 3
Against Gods JUSTICE.


The Lord (says (A) David) is righteous in all his ways, Psalm. 145. The
judgments of the Lord (says Solomon) are weight and measure, Prove. 16.11.
exact and without exception. So apparently just is God, that he offers the
justice of his decrees and ways to the trial of humane understanding: Esaias
5.3. Judge, I pray you, between me and my vineyard. Those to whom the vineyard
was committed, slew their masters heir being sent unto them: What will the Lord
of the Vineyard, think ye (says Christ) do therefore, when he comes, to those
husbandmen? Matthew. 21.40. In which words he appealeth to their judgment. Nay,
he is content to prove himself and his dealings to be just by plain and evident
arguments, Ezekiel. 18.25. etc. Are not my ways equal, and yours unequal, O ye
house of Israel? And he permits Abraham when he was in his greatest
humility, acknowledging himself to be but dust and ashes, yet to reason with
him about the equity of his doings; Will thou slay the righteous with the
wicked? Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? Genesis 18.23, 25. And
Moses also is suffered to argue Gods justice in the same manner; Shall one man
sin, and will thou be wroth with all the congregation? Numb. 16.22. In a
word, so evidently just is God in all his proceedings, that many both good and
bad, who have felt his justice, have cleared God, and deeply charged
themselves. Witness Ezra, Nehemiah, and Daniel in their ninth chapters, and
Adonibezek, Judge. 1.7. and the Emperor Mauricius, who having seen his children
butchered, and waiting every minute for the bloody stroke of death, brake out
into these words, Osiand. Eccl. hist. cent. 6. page 261. Justus es, Domine, and
justum est judicium tuum.
Righteous art thou, O Lord, and just is thy judgment.

With this inviolable justice of God cannot absolute Reprobation (of such
especially as are commanded to believe and are called to salvation) be
reconciled. My reasons (B) are these.

I. Because it makes God to punish the righteous with the wicked.

The Supralapsarians say directly in plain terms, that God decreed to
destruction men considered without sin, and therefore yet righteous. And the
Sublapsarians say as much in effect; for they say two things: 1. That God did
lay a necessity upon every man of being born in original sin, as I have
noted before; 2. That he has a determined for that sin to cast away the
greatest part of mankind for ever. And so they make God to do that by two acts,
the one accompanying the other, which the other say he did by one. This is so
clear a case, that Calvine with some others have not sticked to say that God
may with as much justice determine men to hell the first way as the latter. See
Instit. l. 3. c. 23.. 7. where against those who deny that Adam fell by Gods
decree, he reasons thus; All men are made guilty of Adams sin by Gods
absolute decree alone: Adam therefore sinned by this only decree. Quid eos
prohibet fateri de uno homine, quod inviti de toto humano genere concedunt?
Quid enim tergiversando luderent operam?
What lets them to grant that of one man which they must grant of all men?
And a little after he says, Bonos istos justitiae Dei patronos perplexos
haerere in festuca, altas vero trabes superare, nimis absurdum est.
It is too absurd that these kind patrones of Gods justice should thus stumble
at a straw and leap over a block. God may with as much justice decree Adams
sin and men's damnation out of his only will and pleasure, as, out of that
will and pleasure, the involving of men in the guilt of the first sin and
their damnation for it: that is the substance of his reasoning. To the same
purpose speaks Maccovius; From hence we may see, says he, what to judge of
that opinion of our adversaries, viz. That God cannot justly ordain men to
destruction without the consideration of sin. Maccov. disp. 18. p. 16. Nam
dicant, quaeso, nobis quid majus sit, imputare alicui culpam alterius, and
propter ipsam illum morte aeterna plectere; an vero ordinare ad interitum. At
hoc potest sine ulla laesione justitiae suae: ergo multo magis potest illud
posterius.
Let them tell me which is greater, to impute to one man the sin of another,
and punish him for it with eternal death, or to ordain simply, without looking
at sin, to destruction: Surely no man will deny the first of these to be the
greater. But this God may do without any wrong to justice: much more therefore
may he do the other. To these consents Dr Twisse, and says, Dr Twiss. V^nd.
great. l. 2. digr. 1. page 15. Quod potest Deus intercedente libera sua
constitutione, illud etiam absolute poterit vel sine aliqua constitutione
intercedente.
If God may ordain men to hell for Adams sin, which is derived unto them by
Gods only constitution, he may as well do it absolutely without any such
constitution. And it is most true, it is all one in substance, simply to decree
the misery of an innocent man, and to involve him in a sin that he may be
brought to misery. Neither of these decrees (I take it) are just.

II. The second reason why it is (C) against Gods justice, is, because it
makes him to require faith in Christ of those to whom he has precisely in his
absolute purpose denied both a power to believe and a Christ to believe in.
That God binds Reprobates to believe as well as others, it is the constant
doctrine of Divines: Among whom Zanchius delivers it for a Thesis, Zanch. l.
5. De natura Dei, cap. 2. q. 1. de praed. sanctorum. Quisque mandato Dei
tenetur credere se ad salutem aeternam in Christo suisse electum; maxim autem
is qui sidem in Christum profitetur. Cum dicimus unumquemque teneri hoc
credere, neminem, ne reprobos quidem, qui neque unquam credent nec credere in
Christum possunt, excipimus; and nisi credant, gravissime omnium peccant.
Every man (especially he that prosesseth Christ) is bound to believe that he
is chosen in Christ to salvation; every man without exception, even the
reprobate himself: and if he believe it not, he commits a most grievous
sin above all others. This he proves by that speech of Christ, John 16.9.
The Spirit shall convince the world of sin, because they believe not in me.
Reprobates therefore are bound to believe. Mr Perkins also says something to
the same purpose; Perk. lib. De Praed. page 89. object. 3. Quisque in Ecclesia
mandato Dei CREED EVANGELIO tenetur credere se redemtum esse per Christum,
etiam improbus perinde ac electus, sed alia tamen and alia ratione: Electus
tenetur credere, ut credendo particeps fiat electionis; reprobus, ut non
credendo fi^t inexcusabilis, etiam ex intention Dei.
Every one in the Church by virtue of this commandment BELIEVE THE GOSPEL is
bound to believe that he is redeemed by Christ, as well the reprobate as the
elect, though for a different reason: the Elect, that by believing he may be
saved; the Reprobate, that by not believing he may be without excuse: and this
out of the very purpose of God.

But now they cannot in (D) justice be bound to believe, if they be absolute
Reprobates, for three causes.

1. Because they have no power to believe: they want it, and must want it for
ever. God has decreed they shall never have any to their dying day. Nemo
obligatur ad impossibilia, No man can be justly tied to impossible
performances. Because no man can fly like a bird, or reach heaven with the top
of his finger, therefore God cannot with justice exact of any the performance
of these actions: nor can he of Reprobates the obedience of Faith, if it be not
possible to them.

2. Because it is (E) not Gods unfeigned will they shall believe. No man will
say that it is Gods serious will that such a man shall live, when it is his
will that he shall never have the concourse of his providence and the act of
preservation. Nor can we say that God does in good earnest will that those men
should believe, whom he will not furnish with necessary power to believe. It
may rather be said, it is Gods unfeigned will they shall not believe, because
it is his will they shall want power to believe. For it is a Maxim in Logic,
Qui vult aliquid in causa, vult effectum ex ista causa profluentem, He who
wills a thing in the cause, wills the effect that necessarily flows from
that cause. Now if it be the certain will of God that Reprobates shall in no
wise believe, he cannot with reason and equity tie them to believe: for then
he tieth them to an act contrary to his determinate will.

3. Because they have (F) no object of faith, no Christ to believe in. Credere
jubet, and fidei nullum objectum ponit, He commands to believe, and affords
no object to believe in: this sounds not well. The devils have no part in
Christ or the new covenant: we will not therefore say that God can justly bind
them to believe, or punish them as transgressors of the covenant because they
believe not: How then can we say that God can justly require faith of
Reprobates, or destroy them for not believing, if they have indeed no more part
in Christ or in the covenant then the devils have? If a man should command his
servant to eat, and punish him for not eating, and in the mean time fully
resolve that he shall have no meat to eat, would any reasonable man say that
such a man were just in the command or punishment? Change but the name, and the
case is the same. Again, that Christ died for Reprobates (by the doctrine of
absolute Reprobation) is a lie; and can God justly bind men to believe a lie?

This is the second reason.

III. The third reason why the absolute decree infringeth Gods justice, is,
because it will have him (G) to punish men for omission of an act which is made
impossible to them by his own decree: not by that decree alone by which he
determined to give them no power to believe, having lost it; but by that decree
also by which he purposed that we should partake with Adam in his sin, and be
stripped of all that supernatural power which we had by Gods free grant
bestowed upon us in Adam before he fell.

These are the reasons which move me to think, that this absolute decree is
repugnant to Gods Justice.

Three things are usually answered.

I. That Gods ways may be very just, and yet seem unjust to man's erring
understanding: and so is this decree, though flesh and blood will not yield it
to be so.

This answer (H) I take to be false, and the contradictorie to it to be true;
namely, That nothing is truly just which humane understanding purged from
prejudice? corrupt affections and customs, has in all ages, places and
persons judged to be unjust. The reason is, Because God has by the light of
nature, and those general impressions of good and evil, honest and dishonest,
just and unjust, made in the hearts of men, sufficiently instructed and enabled
them to judge what is just and what is not. When a thing is done, reason so
qualified is able to say, This is just, or, This is unjust, whether it be done
by God or man. For (virtues in men being but the image of those perfections
that dwell in God) Justice in men and God are for substance but one and the
same thing, though infinitely differing in degree, as the greater and lesser
light. That this power is ingraffed in men, God himself (who best knows with
what endowments he has beautified his creature) has sufficiently signified in
those Scriptures where he calls on men to be judges of the equity of his
ways: Judge, I pray you, between me and my vineyard, Esaias 5. Judge, O ye house
of Israel; are not my ways equal, and your ways unequal? Ezekiel. 18.25. God
would never put them upon the trial of reason, if he had not made it able to
examine them. The incarnation of the Son of God, his birth of a virgin, his
dying, the resurrection of the body, and such mysteries as are peculiar to the
Gospel and the proper objects of the Christian faith, God has not offered to
the trial of our understandings, but rather derideth those that presume to
judge of them by reason: 1. Cor. 1.20. Where is the scribe? where is the wise?
where is the disputer of this world? And the reason is, Because these things
being supernatural, and therefore not discernable by natural power, man is no
competent judge of them by his natural understanding, nor may adventure upon
the trial and judgment of them with less danger then Uzzah looked into the
ark: for scrutator majestatis opprimetur a gloria, He that prieth into Gods
majesty, will be overwhelmed of his glory. But of the justice of his decrees
and ways he makes him a judge, because the common notions of just and unjust
being imprinted in nature, he ^s able by natural reason to apprehend what is
just in Divine acts as well as in his own.

II. It is answered, That these decrees are set down in Scripture to be the
will of God; and therefore they must needs ^e just: For Gods will is the rule
(l) of all righteousness.

To this answer I have these things to reply.

1. This rule in Divinity is much abused by the maintein^es of absolute
Reprobation, and may not be admitted in their sense and meaning. For Gods will
is not a rule of justic^ to himself, as if things were therefore just because
he wills them and works them: but his justice rather is a rule of hi^
will and works, which are the expressions of his will. H^ therefore makes
decrees and executes them, because the^ are agreeable to that justice which
dwells in the Divine nature. As he makes nothing which has not potentiam
objectivam, a power of being created without implying contradiction to
himself or any thing in him, so he wills and does nothing but that which
may be willed or done salva j^stitia, Hieron. Prooem. in Hoseam.
without vvrong to his justice. S. Hierome speaking o^ the Prophet Hosea's
taking^ a wife of fornications, Hos. 1.2 says it was done in typo,
typically, not really; quia si fiat, turpissimum est, because if it had been
indeed done, it had been ^ most foul thing. But thou vvilt answer (says he)
Deo jubenit nihil turpe est, God commanding it, nothing is dishonest Thus much
we say, says the Father, That God commands nothing but what is honest: but
he does not by commanding dishonest things, make those things honest which are
abominable: plainly giving us to see what he thought, viz. that G^ does not
will a thing, and so make it good; but wills it because it is in it self good
antecedently and before the act o^ Gods will about it. And thus much does
Zanchie (though a rigid mainteiner of absolute Reprobation) not obscurr^
confess in his Treatise De natura Dei: Where he lets s^ such speeches as
make Gods justice antecedent to his will, an^ therefore the rule of it, rather
then a thing regulated by i^ Zanch. l. 3. De not. Dei, c. 4. qu. 9. these. 2.
Neque aliquid velle potest quod justum non sit.
Neither can God will any thing, says he, which is not j^^ And again, Quod
placet principi, legis habet vigorem.
The Princes pleasure has the strength of a l^^ is a rule, says he, among the
Canonists: but Ibi maxim verum est, ubi rex justus est, and nihil vult nisi
justum. Quanto magis in regno Dei, etc.
this is true where the King is just, and wills nothing but what is j^^ In
which words he plainly makes the justice of the King a^tecedent to that will
of his which must be a law. Many mo^ speeches he uses there to the same
purpose. Gods will the^fore is not a rule of justice to himself, To whom
then? (...) us. For by it we are 1. to square all our thoughts, words, (...)
deeds; 2. To examine them when they are spoken (...) done: Primum in aliquo
genere est regula posteriorum, and supmum inferiorum.

2. I reply, That these absolute (K) decrees of men^ evitable salvation and
damnation are no parts of Gods vealed will. The Scriptures teach us no such
matter. A^ therefore to say they are, is but a mere begging of the que^on. It
has always been ordinary with false teachers to make Gods word a father to
their false opinions, that they may stand the faster and win the greater
credit. The Papists ground their Transubstantiation, and the Lutheranes their
Consubstantiation and Ubiquity upon the Scripture, HOC EST CORPUS MEUM, This is
my body, Matthew. 26. And the defenders of absolute Reprobation do so too: They
make their cause to be Gods, and entitle his word to it, because they see it
is the surest way to defend it; being herein like to some contentious people,
who being in law and having a bad cause which they are like to lose, they
entitle the King to it, that they may the better uphold it.

3. Absolute Reprobation can be no part of Gods revealed will. The reason is,
Because it is odious to right reason, and begets absurdities. For nulla
veritas parit absurda, no truth begets absurdities. Diverse truths are
revealed in Scripture which are above but not contrary to right reason,
whether they be matters of faith or life. Faith and Reason, Nature and
Scripture are both Gods excellent gifts: and therefore though there may be a
disproportion, yet there can be no repugnancy betvveen them. The worship
which God requires is cultus (...), a reasonable service, Rom, 12.2. and the
word of God is (...), milk reasonable and without guile, 1. Pet. 2.2. These
things therefore being laid together, it will appear to be but a mere shift
and evasion, when absolute Reprobation is proved to be unjust, and therefore
unvvorthy of God, to say, Gods will is the rule of justice: this is part of
Gods revealed will; and therefore most just, whatsoever reason may cavil and
say to the contrary.

III. Their third answer is, That (L) God is not bound to restore men power
to believe, because they once had it and have lost it through their own fault;
as a master is not bound to renew his servants stock, if he have waste it by
bad husbandry.

This answer does not satisfy me. For I grant that God is simply and
absolutely bound to no man, because he is agens liberrimum, a most free
dispenser of his own favors, where, and what, and to whom he will; and no
man is aforehand with God: Quis prior illi dedit ut retribuatur? Who has given
unto him, and it shall be recompensed again? Romans 11.35. But yet he is
conditionally bound: For he has determined and tied himself three vvayes
especially.

1. Decernendo, by Decreeing. The Almighty is eternally subject to his own
ordinances, or else he should be mutable. And therefore what gifts soever he
has decreed to men, he is bound to give them by virtue of his own decree.

2. Promittendo, by Promising. We use to say, Promise is debt: It is justice to
perform what it was free to promise. And whosoever he be that promises and
pays not, is guilty of a trespass (witness Ananias and Sapphira) and
unvvorthy of the kingdom of heaven, Psalm. 15.4. If therefore God has made a
promise of any gift or grace to men, his promise binds him to performance.

Nam semel emissum volat irrevocabile verbum. 3. Legem ferendo, by Giving men a
Law to keep which without supernatural grace they can no more keep then they
can eat a rock. By such a law the supreme Lavvgiver binds himself to his
people to give them such power as may enable them to keep that law, or else he
becomes (as the evil servant in the parable styled him) a hard master, reaping
where he sowed not, and the very true and proper cause of the transgression of
that law. We shall find God alvvayes giving strength when he gives a command.
When he commanded the creatures to increase and multiply, he gave them a
multiplying virtue: When Christ bade the lame man arise, take up his bed and
walk, he put into his limbs an ability of vvalking. When Adam had a spiritual
law given him to obey which without spiritual strength he could not, God
gave him strength answerable to the law, as Divines agree, consenting to that
noted speech of S. Augustine, That Adam had posse non cadere, though he never
had non posse cadere, a Power and Possibility though no Necessity of
continuing in obedience.

That I may bring this home to my purpose, I say, That God is bound to restore
unto men power to believe, supposing these things that follovv: 1. That he
has vouchsafed to enter into a new covenant of peace with men, when he
needed not; 2. That in that covenant he requires obedience at men's hands, even
at theirs that perish; 3. That he promises eternal life to every man, if he
obey and keep the covenant; 4. That he punishes the disobedient with
everlasting death. These particulars supposed, the most free God, who is
absolutely bound to none, is engaged to give ability of believing unto men:
Nor can he justly without this gift punish the disobedient, any more then a
Magistrate having put out a man's eyes for an offense, can command this man with
justice to read a book, and because he reads not, put him to death; or then
a Master (that I may return the Simile in the answer) when he has taken away
from his servant the stock which he has misimployed, can afterward exact of
him a just employment of the same stock, and punish him because he imployeth it
not.

I conclude therefore, That the absolute and inevitable Reprobation of such men
as are called to believe in Christ, and punished if they believe not, is
utterly repugnant to the Justice of God, and therefore can be no part of his
word.

Answer. Whether absolute Reprobation may stand with Gods Justice.
WE have often said, that by absolute Predestination and absolute Reprobation
or Non-election we understand only that eternal immanent act whereby God does
freely and absolutely purpose to give unto some of Adams posterity that
effectual grace which shall infallibly bring them unto glory, and whereby he
does as absolutely out of the sovereigne freedom of his own will purpose not
to give effectual grace unto others, but to permit them under the means of
common grace deficere ab aeterna beatitudine. These are the decrees which we
affirm to be absolute, and which we deny to be conditionate or dependent upon
the different temporal acts of men, foreseen eternally by God. If this Author
will overthrow these absolute decrees, he must not go about to prove that God
cannot justly decree the damnation of any man but with respect to his foreseen
sins, which we have always acknowledged; but he must oppugn that of the
Apostle, Miseretur cujus vult, and quem vult indurat, and he must say that God
had never any absolute decree of bringing Peter by the way of faith,
repentance, holiness, and perseverance unto the kingdom of heaven, but only
out of Peter's free will he foresaw him a penitent, faithful, holy, perseverant
man unto the last gasp. And he must likewise defend, that there was no absolute
decree in God of withholding from Judas that effectual saving grace which was
mercifully prepared for Peter, and had it been prepared for Judas, would as
infallibly have wrought his salvation as it did Peter's. Here is the very knot
of the controversy, which this Author in his whole book never comes near.
But now let us come to his discourse of the Divine Justice: Whereunto before we
give particular answers, some things must be premised in general.

Justice in a general sense is an equality or conformity cum obligatione seu
debito cujusque. And he is just that has a constant and perpetual will of
giving unto every one his due.

Now because the Albert. p. 1a, tract. 19. qu. 77. p^g. 181.
words debet and debitum do not properly agree unto God, the virtue of Justice
must needs belong unto him otherwise then unto men: And injustice must not be
ascribed unto him, in doing many things, or not doing, in which we should be
unjust if we should use the like liberty. Gods Justice is, Ibid.
Agere secundum condecentiam bonitatis aut veracitatis suae. Whilst he does
this, though he tie not himself to the rules of humane justice, it is blasphemy
to charge him with cruelty or injustice. From whence we infer these
corollaries which are undeniably true. 1. That God may without any injustice
absolutely decree from all eternity to give in time more natural gifts, more
civil honor, more supernatural graces and mercies to one man then to another,
without all respect to foreseen differences of goodness or badnesse in the
persons. The reason, Because it neither crosses his goodness nor his truth.
2. That God cannot justly subject men to the torments of hell but for their
sins and final ending of their life in sin. The reason, Because if he
should either punish an innocent man or a penitent sinner, he should do an act
contrary both to his goodness and truth: And this is only it which may be
termed injustice when we speak of God.

Unto the places of Scripture which he in a word, That Predestination and
Non-predestination, or Election and negative Reprobation, as they concern this
or that singular person, are not promised or revealed: and therefore to elect
Peter and not to elect Judas is not contrary either to the goodness or truth
of God, and so not to his righteousness or justice. For those places of
Scripture which aim at Gods vindicative justice, as it is threatened only
against men guilty of sin, they no way concern the point in question. For the
absolute distinct decrees of the Divine Predestination or Preterition are no
acts or parts of his vindicative Justice; but they are free and absolute acts
of that sovereigne dominion which he has in preparing and dispensing the
effects of his goodness (which by promise are due to no man) according to the
rule of his absolute will and pleasure.

Sublapsarians nor Supralapsarians opinion, neither did it lay a necessity of
original or actual sin upon any man.

It is Calvines opinion, De occult. Dei provid. resp. ad 2m.
Lapsum Adae non fortuitum fuisse, sed occulto Dei decreto ordinatum. God
foresaw Adams fall: he had power to have hindered it; but he would not, because
himself had decreed otherwise. This is the effect of Calvines doctrine. But as
for the involving of men in sin and damnation out of his only will and
pleasure, these are consequents falsely inferred upon Calvines doctrine, by
himself disclaimed, and formerly refuted. Ibid resp. ad 1m.
Totum illud de nudo puroque Dei arbitrio ex malitiae officina productum est.
It was not Gods absolute decree of Preterition but Adams voluntary act of
rebellion which brought sin and the guilt of sin upon himself and all his
posterity. God having justly decreed that Adams children should participate
with him in his state of righteousness, did as justly decree that they should
also participate in the state of sin.

If this Author deny the propagation of sin from Adam, he must acknowledge
himself a Pelagian. If he say it is unjust, which all Divines acknowledge to
have happened according to the decree of God, I see not how he can clear
himself from that crime wherewith he charge others.

His whole discourse concerning original sin and the propagating thereof
unto all mankind, is erroneous, in that he falsely presumes that the Divine
decrees must needs be effective or causative of all the events decreed: Whereas
if the events be actions sinful, Gods decrees are permissive and ordinative,
not decrees of causing, much less necessitating, such evil actions, as has
been often told him. Be it granted that it is all one in substance to decree
the misery of an innocent man, and to involve him in a sin that he may be
brought to misery: We deny that the opposite decrees of Predestination and
Preterition are decrees causing any innocent man's misery, or decrees involving,
that is, (as this man understands it) necessarily causing any man's sin
whereby he is brought to misery. For in Calvines opinion (with whom now he
deals) the decrees of Predestination and Reprobation find all men in the
state of sin and misery: That which comes after is never the cause of that
which went before. As for those who consider Election and Preterition before
the absolute prevision of sin, they will never grant that negative
Reprobation or Non-election was the adjudging or decreeing of innocent angels
or men unto eternal misery or punishment, but a decree of permitting innocent
angels and men to incur eternal misery and punishment, and of not delivering
them or freeing them out of that miserable estate. He is but dim-sighted in
this controversy, who sees not a formal difference in these decrees: So that
God may justly do the one, though he cannot without crossing the ordinary
revealed course of his Justice do the other.

His second reason why absolute Reprobation is against Gods Justice, is,
Because it And Zanchy says, That every man is bound to believe that he is
chosen in Christ to salvation, etc.

I hold it improper to say that God commands or binds any man to believe
his own Predestination or Election, but the doing of those things from whence a
posteriori, the Spirit of God bearing witness unto our spirit, we come to have
a comfortable and lively persuasion or assurance of our Adoption and
Predestination: So that this persuasion, assurance, or believing of a man's
singular Election, is rather solatium then mandatum, a comfort which God by his
holy Spirit works in those who endeavor to live a sober, just and godly
life, then a command which God by his Ministers enjoyneth this or that man
particularly to believe.

As for believing in Christ, we grant that God by the Ministers of the Gospel
commands all men to whom Christ is preached to believe in him: And in this
command our common and wel-known conditions of being sinners and standing in
need of a Savior are only to be respected, not the distinct unknown
conditions of men in Gods eternal and secret counsel predestined or
not-predestinated.

quoad non-electos? The decree of Preterition neither takes away any power of
doing well, wherewith persons not-elected are endued; as we see verified in the
non-elect angels, who were not stripped of their power of standing by Gods
decree of Not-electing them: neither is it a decree binding Gods hands from
giving them sufficient grace to do many good acts, which they wilfully refuse
to do. For Sufficient grace may stand with Non-election or Reprobation; though
Effectual grace does not, as Divines commonly teach.

And last of all, for power of believing; I would know what power many millions
of men have to believe in Christ (though reprobated no otherwise then the
Remonstrants acknowledge eternal Reprobation) who never heard nor ever shall
hear of Christ? When he has showed me what power of believing these men have,
I will more easily show him that any not-elected person living in the Church
has the same, if not a nearer and greater.

As for his terms of Possibilities and Impossibilities; they are so full of
equivocations that it is hard to ground a good argument upon them. That is not
impossible for any Viator to do for doing whereof it is possible for God to
give sufficient grace. Now it is easy for God to give any not-elected person
sufficient grace to repent and believe without any infringing of the eternal
decree of his Non-election. Again, that is not to be judged absolutely
impossible for a man to do which, if himself by a voluntary act of his own
hindered not, might by him be done. And thus we say the Non-elect have a power
or possibility to believe or repent at the preaching of the Gospel: which
power might be reduced into act, if the voluntary frowardness and
resistivenesse of their own hearts were not the only hindering cause. Other
power then this the Remonstrants know not how to find in all those whom
themselves acknowledge to be under the immutable decree of eternal
Reprobation. In their opinion therefore as well as in ours, when God commands
reprobated or non-elected persons to repent, believe and finally to persevere,
his commands should be contrary to justice, because supposing the perverseness
and voluntary resistance of their wills (which God has decreed to permit)
their believing and persevering is impossible.

It is not Gods unfeigned will they should believe, because he will not furnish
them with necessary power to believe; and therefore he cannot justly tie them
to believe: For then he should tie them to an act contrary to his determinate
will.

unfeigned will is that will of approbation wherein he makes known to us in
his holy word what he would have us do and what he would have us not do. God
was as far from feigning or simulation when he called Cain and Judas to
repenting and believing as when he called David and Peter. But there is another
will of God, ^hereby he decrees in himself infallibly to ^roduce the good acts
of repenting in David and Peter, and to permit Cain and Judas out ^f their own
perverse wills to continue in their unfaithfulness and impenitencie. This ^ill
is not revealed unto men, nor known ^ill it be effected; and therefore feigning
or ^imulation being ad alterum, it is ridiculous ^o charge these decrees with
simulation. So that if God voluntate approbante does un^eignedly like those
things which he com^andeth, there is no feigning in that will. ^f God voluntate
decernente do infallibly ^ork or not work according to his own se^ret counsel,
there is no falsitie in that de^ree neither. Nor is there any contrariety ^n
these wills: for many actions are in their ^wn kind and nature well-pleasing
unto God, which notwithstanding God has not ^etermined to produce in this or
that man. And yet we hold not that God has determined to produce any bad
actions in men, as ^mpenitency, unbelief, or the like; because God wills not
that perverseness or pravi^ie which is the effective or productive cause of
them, though he has decreed the permission, or not remotion, of that pravitie
^n omnibus non electis. Altissiod. lib. 1. c. 19. p. 22. b. Vide Carthus. in
1m, did. 10 q. 3.
Deus est causa non-ap^ositionis gratiae quodammodo, scilicet per mo^um
quiescendi, non agendi.

because the non-elect have no object of faith, no Christ to believe in, and
yet they are commanded to believe.

Si crediderint, Si perseveraverint; these promises are general, and shall be
truly performed unto all and every singular man that performs the covenants.
Non-election or negative Reprobation is not an absolute denial of Christ as an
object of faith to be propounded unto any man, nor a denial of salvation unto
any man performing the condition; but a denial of that special grace and
mercy without which God foreseeth they will trample the blood of the covenant
under their feet, and resolves to permit them through their own voluntary
wickedness so to do. Such men have part in the covenant, and are capable of
the benefit of the covenant, if they perform the articles of the covenant: And
the elect themselves are no otherwise capable of the benefit thereof then by
believing and persevering. Here is the difference; The elect have faith and
perseverance infallibly wrought in them by the grace prepared for them in their
Predestination; the non-elect, having not such effectual grace prepared for
them, continue voluntarily in their sins and unbelief. What the Remonstrants
have to say against this I know not: I am sure S. Augustine says, De Genesis ad
lit. 11.10.
Posset Deus horum voluntates convertere, quoniam omnipotens est; posset plane.
Cur ergo non fecit? Quia noluit. Cur noluerit penes ipsum est. Neither are such
men in the same case with the devils: For unto them Christ is not propounded
for a Savior upon any conditions: unto them God gives no means inducing them
to repentance; no encouragement, though they should repent: And yet (if De
perf. Divin. lib. 13. fol. 31.
Lessius, no enemy to the Remonstrants doctrine, may be credited) the devils,
if they might have had but that favor the non-elect have, would have repented,
and not traduced it for cruelty and injustice as the Remonstrants do.

And that this Author may see that the Contra-remonstrants put a difference
betwixt the damned devils and the reprobates, dum sunt in statu viae; In the
Collation at Hague, page 124.
Non negamus Christum, say they, mortuum esse pro omnibus. Etsi infideles
promeriti sunt condemnationem, p. 154.
tamen est adhuc via and ratio per quam condemnationem possunt evadere,
nimirum, si credant: p. 155.
Neque enim ^ulli homini praecise resecta est salutis spes. Potest peccator
aliquis, etiam antequam credat, p. 156.
scire Christum pro se mortuum esse, quod ad sufficientiam meritorum attinet,
imo vero quoad applicationem, si crediderit. The Remonstrants dare not promise
salvation unto any persons reprobated according to their decree founded upon
prevision of their final infidelity and impenitency, but under these
conditions, Si crediderint and poenituerint: We assure them of salvation under
the same conditions, notwithstanding the absolute decree of their Non-election.
The Remonstrants cannot assign any grace or gracious operation of the Spirit
of God which may stand truly with that decree of eternal Reprobation which
they admit, and will not stand with that which we admit. It is therefore as
true that Christ died for all men according to our doctrine of Predestination
and Reprobation as according unto theirs.

him punish men for omission of an act which is made impossible by his own
decree, etc.

in malis it is only antecessio ordinis non causalitatis. The decree of
Reprobation as the Remonstrants put it, is eternal and immutable, it is
antecedent to their act of sinning or misbelieving, which are all temporal;
and yet they would say we wronged them if we should charge that eternal decree
with causing their temporal rebellion or destruction. They wrong us as much.
For let Reprobation be absolute or conditionate, it leaves the same
possibilities and the same liberty unto the agents. And there are the same
difficulties in according the liberty of man's free will with the infallible
prescience of God, which are in according it with the absolute decrees of his
Predestination. Those who are versed in the writings of the ancient
Philosophers, Divines or Schoolmen, cannot be ignorant of this, though such as
have confined their reading or (at least) their belief to Arminius, Vide Ruiz.
De scientia Dei, p. 252, 253, etc. and 265. 273. 285.
Corvinus, and men of that stamp, think when they have founded Gods eternal
Predestination and Preterition upon an eternal prescience that they have
removed all difficulties.

To his oppugning our answers page 314, etc.
FOr the decrees of Election and Reprobation; indebita beneficia, or for
affording them in greater or lesser measure, according to the absolute will and
free pleasure of God the giver.

There is no well-instructed understanding that will conceive it contrary to
justice or contrary to mercy, for God in things o^ this nature to do as he will
with his own* No humane understanding purged from prejudice, corrupt
affections, corrupt opinions and other impediments of right judgment, will
think it unjust for God absolutely to decree the bringing of some men and
angels unto eternal blessedness by preparing for them and bestowing upon them
such means as he knows will and determines shall bring them thereunto. And
this we call absolute Predestination. Nor will he think it unjust for God
absolutely to decree the permitting of some other angels and men to lose
eternal blessedness by their own default, and to decree the putting them
under such an order of providence as he infallibly knows they will abuse to
the procuring of their certain misery. And this we call absolute Reprobation.
Neither of these are decrees of remunerative or vindicative justice: they are
not grounded upon any antecedent promise or indentment: And therefore his whole
discourse to prove that Gods justice is the self-same with the civil or moral
justice of men, is here altogether impertinent. I pass it over therefore with
this animadversion, That if he extend divine justice to all acts and decrees of
his absolute will, where by faithful promise he has not bound himself to do
the one way or the other, he will show himself much mistaken, if he accuse God
of injustice for every act which would be very unjust were it done by men.
Pride, fullness of bread, Ezekiel. 16.49.
abundance of idleness, neglect of the poor, were the sins for which Sodom
was burned with fire and brimstone from heaven: But poor sucking infants
guiltless of the same crimes were by God adjudged to undergo the same flames.
Put this to the trial of reason, and it will seem cruel and unjust. Young
indiscreet children for calling a Prophet Baldpate, were cast by God unto the
bears: If an earthly judge should condemn children to be cast unto the bears
or lions for the like fault, put him upon the trial of reason, and the judge
himself will be found to have done contrary to justice, and to have deserved
punishment. And to end in that example of infants, so often urged by this
Author; If an earthly king or judge, being able to hinder, should suffer
thousands of his harmless infant subjects to be tormented with pains, to be
vexed by devils, to be snatched away with sudden death, he would be deemed
careless, unjust, cruel: God sees, and oftentimes suffers all this to
befall poor little babes, being most able to prevent it: call these doings of
God to trial of humane reason, and it will never be able rightly to examine
them. It is folly therefore to suppose that whosoever has but the brain of a
reasonable man, is able to fathom the depth of Gods just judgments. We say
rather with learned and modest Saint Augustine, De civit. l. 2. c. 23. Vide l.
20. c. 2. and Gers. De cons. Theol. l. 1. prosa 2. Judicia tua, o Deus, abyssus
multa, Psalm. 36.
Cujus judicia nemo plene comprehendit, nemo just reprehendit.

This Author disliketh that we make rule of righteousness as that we may
certainly infer, God wills and works this; Therefore it is just he should
s^ will and work: Or, God wills not or not works this; Therefore it is just
he should neither will it nor work it.

But he deceives himself, First, in that he will needs parallel and square the
Divine justice unto the rule of civil and humane justice, not only where God
has brought upon himself debitum fidelitatis, by promising or covenanting to
do thus; but where he has reserved unto himself liberriman potestatem of doing
or not doing, of doing this or the contrary. For example, if God should not
show mercy upon every sinner that repents, reason would say he dealt not
justly; as it says of men when they break their promise: But if God decree to
soften one man's heart, and give him the grace of repentance and perseverance,
and not to give the same graces to another, here it is not right reason, but
blind and bold reason, which charge God with injustice. If God strike a petty
sinner presently and spare a grand sinner till he be old in wickedness,
suffering him to do much mischief, and knowing that he will do much mischief if
he be spared, neither the sudden striking of the lesser sinner nor the longer
sparing of the greater is contrary to Divine justice: and yet such dealing is
not according to the rule of humane civil justice allowable.

Secondly, this man is deceived, in supposing the Justice of God (which is to
do nothing contrary to the goodness of his own nature) to be such a rule as
restrains him, if he will be just in his dealings, to one part of the
contradiction. The rule of justice which tieth men to do justly, is such a rule
as shows them unjust when they do otherwise. But (as I noted formerly) in
things where there is no express covenant or promise on Gods part, if he
should pretermit that which he does, and do that which he pretermitteth, if he
should deal more mercifully with this man then he does, or more severely with
that, there were no injustice in it, nothing unbeseeming the Divine goodness.
Impossible therefore it is to reduce Gods justice in his decrees or acts to the
rules of reason or humane justice; since when these judge a decree or an action
to hold square with the rule of justice, they judge the pretermitting of it or
doing the contrary to be an act of injustice. But it fares not so with God:
and therefore by the general consen^ of all Divines the opinion of Abulandu^
tending to this purpose is exploded: and the Master of the Sentences concludes
against him, Lomb. lib. 1. did. 43.
Deus potest dimittere quae facit, and f^cere quae dimittit. God had not been
unjust^ if he had stricken David with sudden death in the midst of his
adultery; neither was h^ unjust in forbearing him and expecting hi^
repentance. Acts 12.
Gods will was just in executing present vengeance upon Herod for accepting
the profane acclamation of the flattering people; and Gods will had been just
if h^ had decreed to have forborne him longer a^ to have given him repentance.
God needed not rules of humane justice. Altiss. tract. 19. quaest. 77.
Justitia D^ essentia sua est, quae regula omnium est, and nul^ regulatur. Gods
will is ordinatissima in se, ^ propter hoc non indiget ordinante. Ordo eni^
ordinante non indiget. And Carthusianus In 4. did. 46. qu. 1.
Totus ordo justitiae originaliter ad Divine voluntatem reducitur. Quicquid
Deus vul^ justum est, nec proprie ejus voluntas restring^tur justitia. And our
Anselmus tells u^ Pros. c. 10
That when God punishes wicked me^ that it is just, because it is agreeable to
the deserts; and when he spares them, it is ju^ too, because it is agreeable
with his ow^ godnesse. No man therefore looking at the rules of humane justice
only, can say of God, as we may of an earthly Judge, If he decree this, he
decrees justly; if he does this, he does justly: but if he decrees or does
otherwise, he decrees or does unjustly; because where God has not limited
himself in his manner of dealing with men by his revealed word, there that is
always Vide Scot. lib. 4. did. 46. qu. 1.
just quod actualiter volitum est a Divina voluntate, and quia actualiter
volitum est a Divina voluntate. It is true, God cannot decree nor will any
thing but salva justitia; that is, He can do nothing contrajustitiam: yet he
may decree and do many things praeter justitiam: he may freely decree and do
many things where salva justitia he might as freely have decreed and done the
contrary. Gods will revealed is a rule of justice to us, and he commands us
nothing contrary to this rule: But Gods own absolute will is it which
regulateth his dealings with us in all those things where he has not made
himself as it were a debtor by some revealed ordinance of his own making. Now
the Predestination of Abel and the Preterition of Cain were decrees regulated
by no former promises or indentments: and hence it follows that it had been
no act of injustice in God which way soever he had decreed. Hence Suarez,
Opusc. l. 2. c. 5. p. 174.
Cum causa omnium aequalis esset, hunc elegit Deus suo arbitrio, illum non
elegit.

To his further reply we say, That the decrees of absolute Predestination and
Preterition do no more draw after them an inevitable damnation of any man then
the decrees of Predestination and Reprobation which the Remonstrants admit of.
This has been already proved, and therefore whilst he supposes this, he
beggeth a false principle which must never be granted him. We confess that
absolute Reprobation clogged with those calumnies which he lays upon it, of
Making God the cause of sin, of Necessitating men's wills unto their
inevitable damnation, must needs appear odious unto right reason: But it is
calumniation, not right reason, which imposes these consequents upon the
absolute decrees of Election and Non-election. Right reason rightly illuminated
and sanctified will never forbid a Christian to believe that God without any
injustice might absolutely have elected and predestined many whom he has
left inter non-electos, and might absolutely have left inter non-electos many
whom he has predestined.

power of believing, or eschewing this or that sin, then the conditionate
decrees for which he striveth. Secondly, because for Election and Non-election,
and for the preparation of effectual grace flowing from the one and denegation
of effectual grace following the other, God was not tied either way by any
revealed ordination or promise, as this Author erroneously conceives.

As for Gods law which cannot be kept without supernatural grace; we say, Men
are as capable of any supernatural grace, considered under the absolute
decrees maintained by S. Augustine and by the Church of England, as considered
under the conditional decrees of late framed by Arminius and embraced by the
Remonstrants.

For his further pains in laboring to prove that God is bound to restore unto
men power to believe; it needs no answer till he have proved that the decree
of Reprobation as it is fansied by the Remonstrants, affords God this
liberty, and as it is taught by us binds Gods hands. We have declared
already, that the decree of absolute Non-election or negative Reprobation may
stand with sufficiency of grace; and does stand in our opinion with that kind
of sufficiency which the Remonstrants themselves are forced to fly unto. For
they never dare maintein, that God gives unto every man reprobated in their
sense proximam potentiam credendi; nor dare they maintein a sufficiency of
saving grace administered and bestowed upon every singular person in the world.
But they come in with limitations and exceptions; In causis universalibus, Nisi
per eos steterit, Nisi defecerint gratiae oblatae, and the like. All this we
can admit as well as the Remonstrants, and turn it to our advantage. For as it
is a proof of absolute Predestination or Election, to have such grace prepared
for a man as absolutely effects the end to which it is given; so it is a
proof of absolute Non-election or negative Reprobation to have such grace only
prepared and given to a man as through the default of his own will works not
that good end to which it ought to have served.

I conclude therefore, That absolute Predestination and Reprobation are no more
contrary to the Justice of God then the Arminian Predestination and
Reprobation founded upon the prevision of such good or bad acts as men will do
after they are born into this world.

Treatise.
4. Opposite to Gods TRUTH.
FOurthly, it oppugneth the Truth and Sincerity of God.

God is a God of truth, Deuteronomy. 32.4. Truth it self, John 14.6. so called,
because he is the fountain of truth, and the perfection of truth without the
least mixture of falsehood. The strength of Israel cannot lie, 1. Sam. 15.29.
Let God be true, and every man a liar (says the Apostle:) that he might be
justified in his sayings, and overcome when he is judged, Romans 3.4. that is,
Men may lie; for all men are liars: but God can never lie. If any man would go
about to challenge him with untruth, his challenge would easily appear to be a
calumny: The truth of God like the glorious sun will break through all the
clouds of false accusations that seek to obscure it. Simile gaudet simili, Like
loves his like: God loves such as are true of heart, Psalm. 51.6. and has an
hypocrite in utter detestation: and therefore he must needs be true himself. No
man (for ought I know) doubts of it. But by absolute Reprobation God is made
untrue and hypocritical in his dealings with men, and in all matters
apperteining to their eternal state; particularly,1 in his Commands, 2 in his
Offers of grace and glory, 3 in his Threats, 4 passionate Wishes and Desires of
men's chief good, and 5 in his Expostulations, and Commiserations also.

I. In his (A) Commands. For by this doctrine God commands those men to
repent and believe whom he secretly purposes shall not believe. Lib. contra
Schafm. page 60. Etsi reprobos mandat Deus ut evangelio credant, non vult tamen
ut credant.
Though God command reprobates to believe the gospel, yet he will not have them
believe, says Piscator. Now whom God commands to believe and repent; those
he wills outwardly should believe and repent; for by his commandments he
signifies his good will and pleasure: and he must inwardly and heartily will
it too, or else he dissembleth. For words, if they be true, are an
interpretation of the mind: when they are not, they are mere impostures and
simulations.

II. In his (B) Offers of grace and glory, which he makes to such as refuse
them and perish for refusing them, as well as to those who do accept them to
their salvation. This is evident, Esaias 65.2. I have spread out my hands all the
day long. To whom? to a rebellious people. and Matt. 22. we read, that those
men were invited to the wedding that came not. and Acts 3.26. there it is said
to the Jews who had denied Christ, as verse. 14. To you has God sent his
son Jesus to bless you, in turning every one of you from your iniquities.
How often (says Christ) would I have gathered you? speaking of such as neglected
their visitation, and so lost their salvation. It is evident also by reason.
For as many as are under the commandment, are under the promise too, as we may
see Acts 2.38, 39: Repent, and be baptized every one of you, and ye shall
receive the gift of the holy Ghost: for to you and your children is the promise
made. In which words Peter makes the command and the promise of equal
extent, both universal. And there is cause why: For he makes the promise his
motive to persuade obedience to the command: and it would not have reached
home, if it had not respected all those to whom the command was given. No man,
reprobate or other, thinks any less, Every man that hears the Gospel
preached, takes himself to be under the gracious offer of eternal life, and
upon these thoughts has some desires, some hopes of it, and stirs up
himself to forsake some pleasing sins which otherwise he would not part
with, and do some unvvelcome duties which otherwise he would not do. But
now Gods meaning is (by this doctrine) that the most of those to whom he
offers his grace and glory, shall have neither. And so Piscator says, De
praed. cont. Schafm. page 74. Gratia non offertur a Deo singulis (licet
vocatis) animo communicandi eam, sed solis electis.
Grace is not offered by God even to those who are called, with a meaning to
give it, but to the elect only. In the same book he has such another speech;
Non vult Deus reprobos credere, licet lingua Profiteatur se velle, page 143.
Though God in words protest he would have reprobates to believe, yet indeed he
will not have them. They make God to deal with men in matters of salvation as
the poets feign the gods to have dealt with poor Tantalus: They placed him in
a clear and goodly river up to the very chin, and under a tree which bare much
sweet and pleasant fruit that did almost touch his lips: but this they did
with a purpose that he should taste of neither: for when he put his mouth to
the water to drink, it vvaved away from him; and when he reached his hand to
the fruit to have eaten of it, it withdrevv it self presently out of his reach,
so as he could neither eat nor drink. Just so deals God with reprobates, by
their doctrine: He places them under the plentiful means of salvation,
offers it to them so plainly that men would think they might have it when
they will, and yet intends fully they shall never have it, vvithholding from
them either the first grace that they cannot believe, or the second grace that
they cannot persevere. Did not those gods delude Tantalus? Yes doubtless. And
if God do so with reprobates, what does he but delude them and dissemble
with them in his fairest and likeliest offers of salvation that he makes
them? And this do Zanchius and Bucer grant by evident consequence, as appears
by a speech or two of theirs, which cannot stand with their conclusion, and
therefore (I suppose) fell unwarily from them. Zanchius tells us roundly,
that every man who is called, is bound to think that he is elected, otherwise
he does offer great injury to God, and Zanch. l. 5. De not. Dei, c^p. 2.
Perstringere Deum mendacii, qui illi in verbo dicit se velle salutem ejus, and
in hunc finem ad Christum vocasse.
accuse him of lying, which says to him in his word, that he desires his
salvation, and for this cause has called him. In which speech he plainly
implies, that if God call a man whom he has absolutely rejected, he does but
delude him when he calls him. The like speech has Bucer; Bucer. in c. 8. ad
Romans qu. de praed. Primum quod Deo debes, est ut credas esse te ab eo
praedestinatum. Nam id ni credas, facis eum tibi, cum te ad salutem vocat per
evangelium, illudere.
A man must believe that he is predestinate, or else he makes God to mook him
when he calls him. A man therefore that is not predestinate but an absolute
reprobate, when he is called to salvation, is but deluded: It is the necessary
resultance of their speeches. If a creditour should resolve upon no terms to
forgive his debtour one farthing of his debt, and yet make him offers to remit
the whole upon some conditions, and bind his offers with a deep and solemn
oath, would not we say that he were a rank dissembler and a mere deluder of
his poor debtour? We can say no less of God, if it be true that he has
irrevocably decreed at no hand to save such particular men, and yet promises
and svveareth that he will save them if they will believe his promises and
repent. What can such oaths and promises be but mere delusions of miserable
men?

III. In his (C) Threats and Comminations also by this doctrine is God made to
be hollovv and deceitful. For against what sins are threats denounced?
Always against actual sins: We never read that they are thundered out
against us for original sin: They intimate therefore that the sins for
which men go to hell, are their actual transgressions. But if it be true that
God decreed men to hell for original sin, that which those threats import
and signify is not true, and so God is not sincere in them. Besides, all
threatenings imply that the evil threatened may be avoided: for therefore are
they denounced, that men might by them be brought to repentance, and so escape
the evils threatened: But if some men be peremptorily ordained to destruction,
then their destruction cannot be prevented: and so the threatenings of damnation
in this respect also do signify an untruth, and God in them deals not
plainly with men.

IV. In all the (D) other things before mentioned is God full of guile too (by
this opinion;) namely, in his 1. Passionate Wishes, that even those men might
repent that repent not, and might be saved that through their impenitencie are
not saved. Of these we read, Deuteronomy. 5.29. O that there were such a heart in
them to fear me, that it might go well with them. and Psalm. 81.11. O that my
people had hearkened, and Israel had walked in my ways, etc. and Esaias 48.18. O
that thou had hearkened to my commandments, etc. 2. In his mournful
Expostulations. Esaias 5.3. Judge, I pray you, between me and my vineyard: what
could I have done more for my vineyard? And Jerem. 2. throughout the whole
chapter, especially verse 31. Have I been a wilderness to Israel, or a land of
darkness? and verse 32. Can a maid forget her ornaments, or a bride her
attire? yet my people have forgotten me days without number. Ezekiel. 33.11. Turn
ye, turn ye: why will ye die, O house of Israel? 3. In his melting
Commiserations of the woeful condition of foolish men who would not be
reclaimed. How shall I give thee up, O Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, O
Israel? My repentings ar^ kindled together, my heart is turned within me, Hos.
11.8* O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the prophets, and stone^^ them that
are sent to thee, etc. In all these there is but little sincerity, if there be
a secret resolution that the most of those toward whom those vvishes,
chidings and pitiful bemonings are used, shall be damned without remedy.
Gods fairest offers, his sweetest invitations, his greatest sympathies, and
amplest courtesies, if this doctrine be true, come little short (I think) of
Absaloms feast, Joabs congie, the kiss of Juda^ and the hyena's tears. For in
all these aliud animo vult, a^^ud verbis significat, he says one thing and
means another* and therefore dissembleth.

Nay, the whole Ministry (wherein God commands, offers, chideth,
entreats, lamenteth, etc.) if this be true, is but a mere imposture, a giving
of words without any meaning of answerable deeds, and an imposture so much
the greater, by how much the show of kindness is the heartier. For how can
a good thing be offered with stronger shows of a good meaning, then when it
is offered with exhortations and entreaties to accept it, with clear
demonstrations of the excellencies of it, with unfeigned vvishes that the
parties to whom it is offered would accept it, and bitter lamentations for
their folly in refusing it? With all these inforcements i^ Gods tender of
salvation to reprobates accompanied, and therefore in show most hearty and
serious. In a word, thus speaks (E) God (by his doctrine) to reprobates in
the ministry; O ye reprobates, once most dearly beloved of m^ in your father
Adam, but now ^xtremely and implacably hated, and by mine eternal and
uncontrollable order sealed up under invincible sin and misery; amend your
lives, and believe in the name of mine onely-begotten Son. If ye repen^ and
believe not, there is no remedy, ye must be damned: but if ye repent and
believe, ye shall be saved; though your sins be as red as scarlet, I will
make them as white as wool. Think not that I would have you die: for I swear,
As I live, I will not the death of him that dies; I would have no man to
perish, but all to come to repentance. I beseech you therefore be reconciled. I
have cried and called unto you, I have a long time waited upon you, that ye
might repent, and still am I knocking at the doors of your hearts for
entrance. O that there were a heart in you to fear me and keep my commandments,
that it might go well with you for ever. What shall I do unto you? how shall I
entreat you? Will ye not be made clean? When will it once be? Can God speak
thus to reprobates, who by his own decree shall never repent nor be saved,
without the deepest dissimulation?

That which is usually said to clear the absolute decree from this
crimination, is, That God wishes the salvation of the reprobate seriously,
but not absolutely: he would have those men saved who are not saved, but yet
upon condition they will repent and believe: And therefore, though they do
perish, yet God is candid and sincere in his offers of salvation to them: for
therefore do they perish, because they perform not the condition, and not
because God offers not salvation seriously unto them.

But this answer is too short. It is true (F) indeed, God will have all men
to be saved upon condition only that they will believe and repent, according
to that speech of S. Ambrose, Deus vult omnes salvari, si and ipsi velint, God
would have all to be saved, if they themselves would. For if he would
absolutely have it so, what can hinder it? who has resisted his will? And
it is true likewise, that a conditional promise may be serious as well as an
absolute: but then the condition must be possible to them to whom the promise
is made, and the performance of the condition must be a part of Gods will as
well as the salvation promised; or else the promise cannot be candid and
sincere. Conditio est oblata potestas aliquid eligendi, A condition is the
offer of a power of choice. Where there is no liberty of choice afforded,
there ^is no true condition appointed. In substance it is all one to offer a
courtesy under a condition (G) not possible, and not to offer it at all; and
in circumstance it is much worse. In substance all one. The Lawyers tell us
that a contract made sub condition impraestabili nullus aestimatur, under a
condition not possible, is esteemed no bargain. And the Logicians rule is, That
Conditionalis propositio quae habet annexam conditionem impossibilem,
aequipollet simpliciter neganti.
a condition^ll proposition which has an impossible condition annexed to it,
is equivalent to a bare negation. It is all one for me to offer a piece of
money to on^ blind man upon condition he will open his eyes and tell me what
piece of money it is and what stamp it has, and to deny it flatly to another:
For the one has it no more then the other. And it is all one for a man that
has a daughter to bestovv in marriage, to tell her suitor, I will give you my
daughter, i^ you will span the earth, or touch the heavens with your finger,
and to tell him plainly, Set your heart at rest; I will never bestow her upon
you: For the suitor speedeth both vvayes alike. And it is in circumstance a
great deal worse. For it is a denial under color of the contrary, a denial
joined with a scoff, a derision, as was that of the Jebusites, 2. Sam. 5.6.
who told David that he should not enter into the fort of Zion except he took
away the blind and the lame. Their meaning was, They would never deliver it up
unto him: and because they thought it impossible for him to take away the
blind and the lame, they told him if he did so, then they would yield it up.
It was an ironicall and scoffing denial of his demand. If the King should
make an unrepealable law, that no Germane should be made a citizen of London or
free denison of the Kingdom, and then make a decree to give some bountiful
gratuities, but to the citizens of London or to the subjects of the Kingdom
only, and to none but them; and yet for all this should command it to be
proclaimed, that he will give them to the Germans upon condition they will be
made freemen of London, or be incorporated into the Kingdom: would not any
man say, that the King in this case did dissemble and delude the poor
Dutchmen? And if any should say, there would be no dissembling in it; for if
they would become citizens or subjects, they should have the promised
gratuities: a man might truly answer, that therefore the King does counterfeit
and cosen them, because he makes a tender of them upon a condition not
possible by his own decree. In like manner, if God have made a decree, that
such men shall never believe, and yet offer them heaven on condition they will
believe; it may most truly be said, that God does not only deny them heaven,
but deny it with a bitter derision, which is far from that candor and
goodness that dwells in him.

And thus have I showed the contrariety of this opinion to four principal
Attributes of God: which is my second general reason against it.

Answer. Whether absolute Reprobation oppugn the Truth and Sincerity of God.
WE grant it is impossible for God to be either untrue in his sayings and
promises, or hypocritical in his dealings or actions: And here we might in one
word cut the sinews of his whole discourse with this general Answer, That the
eternal decrees of Election and Reprobation, as they were terminated unto
singular persons before they had any being in nature, are not uttered or
declared by any revealed word, promise, ordination, or convention made betwixt
God and us. Be the decrees therefore whereby some are elected eternally, others
eternally non-elected, never so absolute, they cannot oppugn the truth of Gods
word or fidelity of his promise, where no word or promise was ever revealed or
made to any man. As for Gods dealings and temporal actions with men, there is
no more difficulty in clearing them from hypocrisy holding Election and
Reprobation as we do, then there is, holding it as Arminius does.

But let us come to satisfy his particular reason is, Because when God
commands any thing which is good, just and holy, he truly and unfeignedly
likes and loves such actions, and can do no other, his own natural goodness
and holiness terminating voluntatem Divinae complacentiae unto all holy
actions by whomsoever performed. If God should command any person not-elected
to believe, to live soberly, justly and godlily in this present world, and
should dislike him for so doing, here were dissembling: but to command Cain or
Judas to repent and believe, though God from all eternity purposed to deny
them that special effectual grace without which he knew they would never
repent or believe, here is no dissembling. Gods commands intimate what is
well-pleasing unto him, if it be done, not what himself by special grace
prepared for some men has eternally and infallibly purposed to make them do.
God is not truly said to purpose that the reprobate should not believe, unless
it could be showed that the causes of their unbelief flow from his eternal
decree or purpose of Non-election.

The Remonstrants will not deny that the decree of Cains or Judas his
Reprobation was both eternal and immutable; Corvinus.
neither can they affirm that God eternally and secretly in his own counsels
purposed to make them repent or believe, but only to administer such graces
unto them as should either convert them or leave them inexcusable. We say the
same: and therefore a secret purpose of making them not believe, can be no more
fastened upon our doctrines then upon theirs; because that is only a defect or
an omission, and therefore must be reduced only to the defective will of man,
and not to Gods will or purpose, which cannot be the cause of deficiencie.

Secondly, absolute Reprobation does Decl. seat. page 47.
quo Deus decrevit singulares and certas personas salvare and damnare. And
reason tells us, that every conditional proposition, purificata condition,
transit in absolutam. God therefore, who eternally saw Judas as finally
impenitent, and with whom Judas his final impenitencie was not considered as a
future uncertain condition, Vide Coll. Hag. 111.
but as a thing certain and present, according to the Remonstrants own
doctrine) could pass no other then an absolute decree of Reprobation upon him.
Now if this decree hinders not the offers of Divine grace unto any man, nor
falsifieth the universal promises, no more does the other. For the absolute
decree of Election as we conceive of it is not of this form or tenor, I will
save Peter whether he will believe or not believe, repen^ or not repent, but, I
will save Peter by preparing for him such special grace as shall infallibly
cause him to believe and repent. And the decree of Reprobation is not thus to
be conceived, I will damn Judas whether he believe or not believe, repent or
not repent; for this were contrary to the truth of the evangelicall promises:
but thus, I am absolutely determined not to give unto Judas that special grace
which would cause him to believe and repent; and I am absolutely purposed to
permit him to incur his own damnation by his voluntary obstinacy and final
impenitencie. These promises or indentments upon which the temporal atteinment
of salvation is suspended, or the temporal incurring of damnation, are as
universal, as firm, as truly on Gods part performed according to our doctrine
of absolute Election and Preterition as according unto theirs.

For grace offered; Gods meaning must always be interpreted according to the
known nature of the means, and not according to the unknown will of God
concerning the infallible event or success of the means. Gods meaning when he
offers any grace unto men, is, that they should perform such actions
whereunto such grace conduces: And his meaning when he promises glory to any
man if he believe and persevere, is, truly to perform it if he do so. But it is
not always Gods absolute will to cause men to use his grace unto their own
good, nor to cause them to perform those conditions unto which eternal glory
is promised. If the Remonstrants will have nothing termed Gods meaning but this
absolute will, in their opinion as well as in ours it will follow that God had
no meaning to give Cain or Judas saving grace or glory.

As for his poetical fiction, it will make no more against us then himself;
because there is no power or grace by his conditionate Predestination and
Reprobation afforded unto persons not-elected, which may not be as well
afforded according unto our doctrine, as we have often already showed.

For Zanchius and Bucers opinion concerning the command of believing a man's
singular Election or Predestination, I have formerly expressed my judgment,
which I submit unto the learned. If there were such a necessary universal
command, only upon this reason, because the grace of vocation is infallibly
frustrated by all the Non-elect, this being true as well in the Remonstrants
opinion as ours, this mandate of believing a man's singular Election would reach
unto them as well as unto us. And all which they talk of mere delusions of men
not-elected (in regard there is an eternal purpose of God to permit them to
make all grace offered unto them fruitless) fights against themselves as
much as against us. For they dare not deny this evident truth; and they
acknowledge an eternal, an immutable, irrevocable decree o^ Reprobation as
well as we. Which decre^ being established (as they would have it upon the
eternal Divine Prescience before the foundations of the world were laid they
are as absolutely reprobated at the time of their calling according to their
opinion as ours.

For his comparison of a Creditour and (...) Debtour, it has no more force
against absolute Predestination and Reprobation the^ against that
Predestination and Reprobation which himself admits: For the conditional
offer of pardon stands alik^ firm unto both. As for the power of believing,
whether Judas be considered as eternally reprobated upon the eternal
prescience or otherwise, nothing hinders but God may give him the same power
both ways. Last of all, for the decree of Damnation, it is every whit as
irrevocable in Arminius his new opinion as in the opinion of S. Augustine. If
then the offer of grace and salvation unto men eternally and irrevocably
reprobated be not merely delusorie in their opinion, no more is it according to
our doctrine.

For Gods threatening of punishment against actual sins committed by this and
that singular person. Mortem morieris, Rom 5.14.
was in the judgment of the Catholic Church a punishment denounced against
Adams posterity as well as against himself; and by that personal sin of his
every singular person descending from his loins is by nature the child of
wrath. And, Ephesians. 2.3.
if this Author will give us leave to believe our ixth Article, that
corruption of nature which we draw from Adam deserves Gods wrath and
damnation. Unto what manner or degree of punishment infants unregenerate are
condemned, we will not curiously debate; but for this man's reasons who goes
about to exempt them from all sin and punishment, they savor so ^ankly of
Pelagianisme that we will not meddle with them.

Wishes, Expostulations, Commiserations, and the like, it will not follow that
they are feigned and mere delusions, because the eternal immanent decrees of
Election or Reprobation are absolute and unchangeable: For were it so, the
Remonstrants can no better defend themselves from these objections then we. But
it must here be first of all considered, that Reprobatio aeterna nihil ponit in
reprobato. It puts only in God a firm decree of permitting such persons to
fall into final sin, and for it a firm decree of condemning them unto
eternal punishment. This being granted on all sides, it cannot reasonably be
conceived that God should properly be said to wish the repentance or salvation
of Cain, Judas, or any not-elected person. They are (as before has been
touched) things in the first consideration simply good; and therefore simplex
complacentia Divina does properly agree unto them: and that is all which can be
truly inferred from such wishes, either in our doctrine or the doctrine of the
Remonstrants. And this is enough to defend them from being delusory, though God
have eternally decreed to permit Cain and Judas to abuse the means of
repentance, and to continue in their impenitency.

For Expostulations, we say they imply displicentiam Divinam against such
persons and actions as cross the revealed law of Gods will: and this is a true
and not feigned displeasure: But they do not import that God wanted power to
have converted such persons, and to have wrought their wills unto the practice
of the contrary good actions, had he eternally decreed to show them this
special mercy. Neither do they import that God had made no such decree of
denying or withholding from Cain and Judas that special grace without which he
knew they would rush upon their everlasting perdition.

As for the Divine Commiseration of sinners, it shows that their death and
damnation are not things primarily well-pleasing unto God: but it shows not
that God must become an hypocrite and a dissembler, if he have eternally
decreed to permit them to incur death and damnation by their own default. For
Gods mercy being actio sublevantis and not passio condolentis, it tieth him not
to do all he can for redeeming any man out of his misery; but his action is
ordered and limited by his own free will. It is the height and riches of Gods
mercy which from everlasting has prepared for the Elect only, and in time
bestows upon them only that special and effectual grace which infallibly
brings them unto glory. It is a lower degree of mercy (and yet true mercy
too) which is showed to the Non-elect or Reprobate, in preparing for them and
bestowing upon them such means of grace as by their own default are made
ineffectuall.

And it is not contrary to Divine mercy to decree this permitting of them to
the deficiency of their own free will, that so the Elect may see what a broken
reed they lean upon, who will have the eternal decree of their Election and
Salvation founded on their own foreseen good acts of repentance, faith and
perseverance, and not upon any special mercy of God predestinating them to
these good and gracious acts, and so infallibly bringing them unto the kingdom
of glory.

To discover briefly the main point wherein this Author deceives himself in
this whole discourse, it is this; He thinks all is feigned and hypocritical
which God does or offers unto men not-elected in ordine ad salutem, if he
have eternally decreed to permit them to fail in the use of such means and to
continue impenitent, if he have eternally decreed to condemn them for this
their voluntary rebellion. Other absolute Reprobation then this we defend not:
and if this makes Gods dealings with the Non-elect hypocritical, we must deny
the decrees of Predestination and Reprobation, or at least deny them to be
eternal, which no judicious Divine will ever do.

For his speech uttered in the person of deep dissimulation; many errors may
be descried in those few lines.

First, he supposes the eternal acts and decrees of Predestination and
Reprobation to be uncertain quoad eventum, and to be mutable in time into the
contrary. A gross error even in the school of Arminius. Secondly, he
supposes Non-election or Reprobation to be an act of hatred toward angels and
men not-elected; which has been proved false. Thirdly, he imagines the
decrees of Predestination and Reprobation to seal men up under a necessity of
doing well and being saved, or of sinning and being damned: whereas they stand
well with freedom of man's will. Fourthly, he implies that whereas God uses
means to effect any good end in men, if he have eternally decreed to permit
them to abuse those means, and to condemn them eternally for abusing them,
that this argues dissembling in God. All these erroneous imaginations discover
themselves in that short speech. And that which yet more discovers the
weakness of his inference; The eternal and immutable decrees of
Predestination and Reprobation (as they are conceived by the Remonstrants
themselves) should make all Gods temporal sayings and dealings with reprobated
persons, feigned and hypocritical, if there were any manner of strength in his
manner of reasoning.

promises, then the Arminian or Remonstrants Reprobation: neither does it make
the conditions one jote less possible then theirs: neither does it deny any
will in God of such men's conversion or salvation which they according to their
opinion can truly affirm to be in God. We profess ingenuously, that the
eternal decree of Non-election or negative Reprobation, does put in mente aut
voluntate Divina, absolute denial of that special effectual grace whereby the
Creator intends to bring his creature infallibly unto glory. And if the
Remonstrants say that the eternal Reprobation of singular persons (as it is
laid down by themselves) does not contein the same negation, they say that
which they are never able to maintein. Let us clear this by example.

Before the foundations of the world were laid, and before the angels were
^reated, by an absolute decree of the Di^ine will they were distinguished in
Electos and Non-electos. For all this the not-elect angels had a possibility of
not-rebelling against God, a possibility of atteining eternal hap^inesse had
they not rebelled, a sufficiency ^f Divine grace given them to have preser^ed
them from rebellion, had they not by (...) voluntary act of their own abused
that ^race. And to come to the eternal and im^utable decrees of Predestination
and Re^robation, as they concern singular persons ^uoad numerum numerantem and
numeratum, ^ernally and immutably distinguished in ele^os and reprobatos; This
eternal decree hin^ered not God from creating Adam with a ^ufficiencie of
grace, with a possibility of ^anding, and by standing of preserving his
^osterity in the state of righteousness, and (...) bringing them to an estate
of happi^esse.

So that it is evident, that Sufficiency and ^ossibility of grace and glory may
stand to^ether with the absolute decree of Non-^^ection.

As for particular persons considered in the impossible conditions unto them:
It is some voluntary interven^ent act or omission which makes them so And if
this Author term their final repentance impossible, because never any of the
Non-elect repented and by repentance atteined salvation, he must yield that
even tha^ eternal decree of Reprobation upon presc^ence, which himself
admits, makes the^ repenting, final believing, and salvation impossible.
His rule of law therefore de cond^tione impraestabili does no more conce^us,
who place the distinct decrees of Pred^stination and Reprobation before the
abs^lute prescience of men's final perseveran^ and men's final impenitency,
then it do^ those that bring them in after. For possib^lities and
impossibilities are just the sam^ and neither greater nor lesser, in the one
wa^ then in the other. If the decree of Prete^ition or Reprobation were a
decree of fo^bidding or hindering any man's repenting believing, or a decree
necessitating the wi^ of men to obstinacy and infidelity, his sim^ of a Kings
unrepealable law were to so^ purpose: But this being altogether fal^ that is
altogether frivolous, because no su^ impossibility is caused by Gods decree
Reprobation.

Treatise.
THirdly, it is contrary to the use and end of Gods gifts bestovved upon men:
Which gifts are of two sorts: 1. III. It is contrary to the use and end of
GODS GIFTS to men.
Gifts (...) Nature; our Creation, Sustentation, Preservation, toge^er with
Health, Strength, Beauty, Wisdom, etc. 2. Gifts (...) Grace; which have a
more immediate relation to everlast^g life, and are means either of purchasing
salvation or of ^plying it. Means of purchasing it, are the coming of christ
into the world, and the Sacrificing of himself on the ^osse. Means of applying
it, are the Ministry of the word ^d Sacraments, the Long-suffering of God,
the Enlighten^g of men's understandings, the Plantation of many excel^t virtues
in their hearts, with many more of the like sort. ^ovv of these endovvments of
Nature and Grace what the ^e use and end is, the Scripture does plainly and
particu^y show us.

First, for gifts of Nature, we find (A) them bestovved ^n all that have them,
for the encouraging and enabling them to serve God and save their souls. For
Acts 14.16, the Apostle says, that God (even in those times in which suffered
the Gentiles to walk in their own vvayes, and vvith^d from them the light of
his holy word) did give unto the ^ple of the world rain from heaven and
fruitful seasons, ^ng their hearts with food and gladness, and in so doing
^eft not himself among them without witness. This im^h, that therefore he gave
them these good things that he ^ht make himself known unto them, and so might
dravv unto glorify him according to the knowledge which they (...) of him.
Acts 17.26. the Apostle says directly, that before men are made and placed in
this world and appoint^^ their several times and dvvellings, that they might
seek find God, that is, that they might serve him and save their (...). For
what is it to seek God but to serve him? and what to find God but to enjoy
his face and favor here and in ^en? To this purpose Prosper, Prosp. De voc.
Gent. l. 2. c. 4. p. 828 Coelum quippe, ac^ and ^^rare, omnisque creatura quae
videri and intelligi potest, ad hanc praecipue ^sita est humani generis
utilitatem, ut natura rationalis de contemplatione ^ecierum, de experimentis
tot bonorum, de perceptione tot munerum,, ad cul^ dilectionem sui imbueretur
Autoris, implente omnia Spiritu Dei, in quo vi^, movemur and sumus.
Therefore, says he, is ^y creature made and ordained especially, that
mankind, ^h is endued with knowledge and ability to discourse, might by the
sight of so many goodly sorts of creatures and the taste of so many blessings be
drawn to the love and service^ his and their Maker. And a little after he
says, in the sa^^ chapter, Ibid. Quod ergo in Israel per constitutionem legis
and prophetica eloquia gerebatur, hoc in universis nationibus totius creaturae
testimonia and bonitatis Dei miracula semper egerunt.
Look of what use the Law and Prophets were to t^^ Israelites, of the same use
were the gifts of Creation and Providence to the Gentiles. God never intended
to deal with the Gentiles as the foul-mouthed Manichees said he dealt vvit^
the Jews, to feed and fat them up with outvvard and mo^^ common blessings, as
so many hogs and swine with husks an^ akorns, but to dravv them up by these
to an expectation^ better things and a careful endeavor to please God, that
(...) they might obtein them. The end of all creatures and of a^ created gifts
bestovved upon man is subordinate to the end (...) man. Man's end is to glorify
God upon earth, and enjoy perpetual society with him in heaven; and the end
of those gil^ is to direct and encourage man to atchieve that high and
excellent end to which his Creator had appointed him.

Now for the gifts of grace, they likewise are given to (...) them that enjoy
them for the same use and end too.

For I. first, Christ came into the world, not that he mig^t be a rock of
offense at which the greater part of men sho^^^ stumble and fall, but to shed
his blood, and by that bloud^ purchase salvation for all mankind, not only for
those (...) are saved, but for those also who through their vvilfull unbelief
and impenitencie are not saved; as we may see John 3.11. God sent his Son
(says the Son) into the world, not (...) condemn the world, but that the
world through him might (...) saved. In which words the end of his coming is
set dow^ 1. Negatively, not to condemn the world; 2. Affirmativel^ but that
the world through him might be saved: and therefore very fully. The like speech
we have John 12.47. I cannot to judge the world, but to save it. These
negatio^ joined with affirmations show that the salvation of all me^ was the
only end of Christ's coming, the end exclusively: o^ other end was properly
intended by it but this. The Sonne^ man came to seek and to save what was lost,
Luke 19 1^ Therefore he came to save every man; for every man was lo^^ And
Acts 3.26. To you (says S. Peter) has God sent (...) Son Jesus; to bless
you, in turning every one of you fr^^ your iniquity; every one of you, you
that reject him as well (...) you that receive him. The end then of Christ's
coming in^ the world was the Salvation of all and every man therein.

II. The ministry of the Word and Sacraments is giv^ also and appointed for
the same end, and is in its own proper nature and use an instrument of
conveying the Spirit of regeneration to those that live under it, and to all
those. Better proofs for this I cannot have then those which our reverend
Divines (B) at Dort gathered to my hand. Esaias 59.21. Suffrag. Brit. page 30,
31. art. 2. These. 5
This is my covenant with them, says the Lord, My spirit that is upon thee,
and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth
nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor seeds seed for ever. HINC PATET (say
they) From these words it appears, that the Word and Spirit are joined in the
ministry of the Word with an inseparable band, by the promise of God. Hence is
is that the Ministers of the new Testament are called Ministers not of the
letter but of the Spirit; not of the letter that kills, but of the Spirit
that gives life, 2. Cor. 3.6. And the ministry of the Gospel is called (...),
the ministry of the Spirit, in the same place, verse. 8. Hence also is the
Gospel called (...) Grace bringing salvation, Tit. 2.11. and (...), the word
of reconciliation, 2. Cor. 5.19. To these let me add 1. Pet. 1.23. where the
word is called the seed of the new birth; and 2. Cor. 5.20. where Ministers
are called ^mbassadours for Christ to beseech men to be reconciled to God. They
are so called, to show that the word preached is by Gods appointment an
instrument to make men new creatures, and that the proper matter of Ministers
errands is reconciliation with God, and the natural fruit of it is in Gods
intent not the obduration and destruction but the conversion and salvation of
men. The same Authors out of John 15.22. IF I HAD NOT COME AND SPOKEN UNTO
THEM, THEY SHOULD NOT HAVE HAD SIN, do say it is evident, that Christ in his
preaching did administer so much inward grace (...) was sufficient (C) to
convince those that rejected the Gospel of positive unbelief, and render them
obnoxious to just pu^ishment; and by good consequence (say I) so much as
sufficed by their good husbandry to have converted and saved them: for that
grace leaves none without excuse which is not sufficient to convert them. I
will conclude what they say of this gracious intention of God in the
ministry of the word with that speech of Prospers cited by them in the same
place; Prosper. ad cap. Gall. resp. ad obj. 4 Non omnes vocari ad gratiam eos,
quibus omnibus evangelium praedicatur, non recte dicitur, etiamsi sint qui
evangelio non obaudiunt.
They that say that all those to whom the Gospel is preached (even those that
obey not the Gospel) are not called ^o grace, they say an untruth. God looked
for Grapes, says ^he text, Esaias 5.2. What does this imply, but that it was
Gods principal aim in the husbandry which he bestovve^ upon the Church of
Israel, that it should bring forth goo^ fruit, though in the event it did not?
How often would I have gathered you, says Christ to Jerusalem, Matthew. 23.37.
These things, says he, have I spoken to you, that ye might be saved* But ye
will not come to me, that ye might have life, John 5* 34, 40. in those words
intimating no less then this, That i^ was his full intent by his preaching to
gather and to save thos^ very particular men that in the end were not gathered
nor saved through the contempt or neglect of Christ's ministry.

Touching the (D) Sacraments, this is also the use and end f^^ which they
were ordained: as we may see, Luke 7.30. where we have these words, But the
Scribes and Pharisees and expounders of the Law despised the counsel of God
against themselves, and were not baptized of John. In which words the much is
evidently included, That it was Gods counsel and purpose in John's baptism to
bring them to Christ, and in him to heaven. So much also is said of his
baptism, Mark 1.4. John did baptize in the wilderness, and preach the
baptism of repentance and remission of sins. If this were the end of John's,
much more is it the end of Christ's baptism; it being more excellent then John's
was, not in substance, but in the fullness of grace administered and dispensed
by it. All that have be^^ baptized into Christ (says the Apostle) have been
baptized into his death, Romans 6.3. All ye that have been baptized into Christ,
have put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. The very phrases there used show that Baptism
is in its original intention an instrument of uniting men to Christ, and
giving them communion with him in the benefits of his death. Except a man be
born again of water, says our Savior, and of the Spirit, he cannot etc. John
3.5. In which words are these two things: 1. The necessity of regeneration,
Except a man be born again. 2. The vvorking cause of it: Efficient, the Spirit;
Isntrumental, the Sacrament of Baptism, there called Water from the outvvard
matter of it. Baptism therefore is appointed to be a means of regeneration to
all those that are baptized; and does effect it in all who do not put an
obstacle in the way to hinder it. So much does the Apostle ascribe to
Baptism, Ephesians. 5.26. and for this cause does signify it with this title, The
laver of regeneration, Tit. 3.5. I will shut up this with Acts 2.38. where
Peter says, Repent, and be baptized every one of you for the remission of
sins, plainly implying, that therefore is Baptism ordained to be received,
that those who do receive it might have their sins remitted.

This is also Gods intent in the Lords Supper. This is my ^ody, says Christ,
and this is my blood, Matthew. 26.26, 27. in those words teaching us, That in
that Sacrament there is an exhibition of Christ and his benefits intended on
Gods part, and received of those by whom no obstacle is interposed: and
therefore does the Apostle call it in express words, 1. Cor. 10.16. The
communion of the body and blood of Christ.

For this end also is the Patience (E) of God (another singular dignation of
God) exercised among men: as we may see Romans 2.4. Despisest thou the riches of
his goodness and forbearance, not knowing that the bountifulness of God
leads thee to repentance? but thou after thy hardness and heart that cannot
repent, heapest-up wrath to thy self, etc. In these words may be noted for our
purpose 1. Gods intent in forbearing sinners; which is the leading of them to
repentance, and so on to salvation: for repentance is per se ordinata ad
salutem, by him ordained to salvation, as a means to the end. 2. The persons to
whom God intends this good by his forbearance: And they are such as despise
the riches of his goodness, and have hard and impenitent hearts. 3. The issue
and event of this their contempt of Gods patience, and that is a treasuring-up
of wrath unto themselves against the day of wrath. Out of all which laid
together arises thus much, That God by sparing wicked men who have hard and
impenitent hearts, intends their everlasting good, though they by the abuse
of his patience and refusal to repent do treasure-up unto themselves wrath and
misery everlasting. The like to this is delivered in 2. Pet. 3.9. God is not
slack, says Peter, (as some men count slacknesse) but patient toward us? that
is, us men. And why patient toward us? because he would have none to perish.
The end therefore of Gods patience is man's Salvation and Repentance.

In the last place those other gifts of God, by which men's understandings are
enlightened and their souls beautified, namely Knowledge, Faith, Repentance,
Fortitude, Liberality, Temperance, Humility and Chastity, and such like, are
bestowed upon all that have them (among whom are many who prove reprobates in
the end) that by the exercise of them and continuance in them they might come
to eternal life.

That reprobates are adorned with many of these graces, appears by sundry
Scriptures, especially Heb. 6.4. where the Apostle says, That it is impossible
for them that have been enlightened, tasted the heavenly gift, been made
partakers of t^ holy Ghost, tasted the good word of God and the powers of t^^
world to come; if they fall away, to be renewed by repentanc^ The graces which
the Apostle here speaks of, are not ordinary and common, but special and
excellent graces, Illumination, Faith, a Relish of Gods word, and a Taste of
heaven and the persons spoken of are apostates, such as are under (...)
possibility of falling-away for ever (for upon a danger no^ possible cannot be
built a solid exhortation) and consequently reprobates; and the thing
intimated, is that upon apostate and reprobates are these excellent gifts many
times bestowe^ The like speech we have Heb. 10.26. For if we sin willing^^
after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more
sacrifice for sin, etc. From whence we may collect, That men who sin
willingly and unpardonably, may receive the knowledge of the truth, yea and be
sanctified by the blood of the Testament and the Spirit of grace, verse 29. In
the 2. Pet. 2.20. They may, says Peter, escape the filthiness of the world;
that is, be washed from their form^ sins by repentance: The unclean spirit
may go out of the^, Matthew. 12.43. They may receive the word with joy, Matthew.
13.20. And many more excellent graces they may have besides. Now all these
virtues and graces are not therefore given them that they (F) might abuse them,
and so purchase to themselves the greater damnation; or that they might do good
to others with them, but none to themselves: but rather that (as by the former
gifts of nature, so) by these of grace they may obtein salvation. For if God
aim at this in those gifts that are farther off, much more in these which make
those that have them (like the young man in the Gospel) not far from the
kingdom of heaven. My proof for this I borrow of our Divines (G) at the Synod,
who in their Suffrage have these two positions: 1. Suffrag. Brit. page 41.
these. 2. and page 43. these. 3. Sunt quaeda^ effecta interna ad conversionem
praevia, quae virtute verbi spirit usque in nondum justificatorum cordibus
excitantur; qualia sunt, notitia voluntatis Divinae, sensus peccati, timor
poenae, cogitatio de liberatione, spes aliqua veniae.
There are certain internal works preparing ^ man for justification, which by
the power of the word and Spirit are wrought in the hearts of men not yet
justified; such a^ are the Knowledge of Gods will, a Sense of sin, Fear of
punishment, etc. that is their first. 2. Their second position is this, Quos
Deus, mediante verbo, per Spiritum suum in hunc modum afsicit, eos ad fidem
conversionemque, vere and serio vocat and invitat.
Those whom God by his word and Spirit affects afte^ this manner, those he
truly and serio^sly calls and inviteth (...) conversion. Out of these two
theses thus much arises, That God works the knowledge of his will, the sense
of sin, fear of hell, hope of pardon, and consequently many other excellent
graces in the hearts of men, that by these they may be converted, and so
eternally saved.

We see by these things what end God aims at in his gifts of men.

But there are some Scriptures that seem to say the contrary; namely, Romans
1.20. where God is said to reveal himself to the Gentiles by the creatures,
(...), that they might be without excuse. and Luke 2.34. Simeon says of
Christ, that he is appointed for the falling and rising again of many in
Israel. and 1. Cor. 1.23. I preach Christ, says S. Paul, to the Jews a
stumbling block. and 2. Cor. 2.16. We are the savor of death to death, etc. By
these places it seems that God gives these things to some to make them
stumble and that they might be left without excuse. What shall we say therefore
to these places?

Of all these places in general I may say this, That they are to be understood
of the end which is many times effected by these gifts of God, and not of the
end which is primarily intended in them; and they show what Christ, the word
preached, and the gifts of nature and grace are occasionally to some men
through their voluntary rebellion against God and his ordinances, and not what
they are intentionally in Gods first thoughts and resolutions: He intends
them for their good, though many times they receive them to their hurt. It is
with Gods ordinances and gifts (and that very often too) as it is sometimes
with physic; It is given (H) by the Physician for the patients good, but many
times through the distemper of his body it does him hurt: And as it is with the
sun; God intends by the shining of it the enlightening and clearing of men
and other creatures in this inferior world; and yet some men are hurt by the
light of it, others are scorched by the heat of it accidentally, by reason of
the climates wherein they live, or the ill-affectednesse of their eyes and
bodies. So the blessings of God, which out of his abundant goodness are
bestowed on men for their eternal good, through their ill frame and temper of
heart do effect their hurt: partly because lighting on naughty hearts, they
lose their edge; for quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis: and
partly because of the severity of God, who as he has an antecedent and
gracious will to do men good, so he has a consequent and judiciarie will of
giving-up obstinate men to their own hearts lusts, and of permitting them to
dash against Christ and other means of eternal life, and so to fall into
endless misery and mischief, as we may see Psalm. 81.11, 12. and Rev. 22.11.
Which made Prosper say, Prosp. Resp. ad object. 16. Vincent. Qui voluntatem Dei
spreverunt invitantem, voluntatem Dei sentient vindicantem.
They that have despised Gods inviting will, shall feel his revenging will. Now
if this be the meaning of these Scriptures, then do they not thwart that which
has been said of Gods gracious intent of promoting the eternal good of men by
his blessings bestowed upon them. For argumentum ab eventu ad intentionem Dei
non valet: because no sinful event is properly under Gods decree, but his
prescience only, or at most under a permissive decree; and many things happen
in the world which are beside the antecedent and principal purpose of God: not
because there is any want of power in God, but because his will is oftentimes
conditional, and therefore not effected because the condition is not performed.

But by the opinion of absolute Reprobation the gifts both of Nature and Grace
have another (I) end: Either God does not mean them to those that perish,
although they do enjoy them, because they are mingled in the world with the
Elect, to whom only they are directed; or if he do, he means they shall have
them, and be lifted up by them above the common rank of men, ut lapsu graviore
ruant, that their fall may be the greater. And so much is said by the chief
defenders of it. Calv. Instit. l. 3. c. 24. n. 13. Ecce, vocem ad eos dirigit,
sed ut magis obsurdescant; lucem accendit, sed ut reddantur caeciores;
doctrinam profert, sed qua magis obstupescant; remedium adhibet, sed ne
sanentur.
God sends his word to reprobates, says Calvine, that they might be made
more deaf; he sets up a light before them, to make them the blinder; he
gives them a remedy, that they might not be healed. And, Bez. Praelud. in c.
9. ad Romans p. 434. Absurdum videri non debet, Deum reprobis quibusdam, qui in
Ecclesia Dei versantur, gratiam suam in verbo suo sive etiam per sacramenta sua
offerre, non eum in finem ut per eam serventur; sed contra, ut minus habeant
excusationis quam reliqui, and tandem gravius puniantur.
It should not seem absurd unto us, says Beza, that God should offer his grace
in the word and Sacraments to some reprobates in the Church, not to this end
that they might be saved by it, but that they might be less excusable then
others, and obnoxious to the sorer punishment. Speeches like to these has
Maccovius in his Disputations, Macc. disp. 14. page 11, 12. Pulsat Christus ad
ostium reproborum, quos novit nec posse nec velle aperire; non ut intret, sed
partim ut exprobret illis impotentiam sua ipsorum culpa contractam; partim ut
condemnationem in illis augeat, etc.
Christ, says he, knocks at the hearts of reprobates, who he knows neither
can nor will open unto him; not that he may enter in, but partly that he may
upbraid them for their impotencie, and partly that he may increase their
damnation. And immediately after to a place in John, 15.22. he gives this
exposition, Nimirum ideo locutus est iis, ut ex contemtu odioque Filii
unigeniti gravior condemnatio esset.
Therefore did God speak to them, that by the contempt and hatred of his Son
they might procure the greater damnation. In another place likewise of his
Disputations he speaks the same thing four or five times over very
positively; Disp. 2. p. 3. Deus reprobis verbum suum proponit, non alio fine
quam ut inexcusabiles reddantur.
God does propound his word to reprobates for no other end then that they might
be left without excuse. p. 16. Si Evangelium consideres ratione intentionis
Dei, finem ejus esse per se and non per accidens inexcusabilitatem ratione
reproborum.
If the Gospel be considered in respect of Gods intention, the proper end of
it, and not the accidental, in reference to Reprobates is their
inexcusablenesse. And very consequently do these writers speak to their main
conclusion. For how can God intend the means or gifts of grace for the
salvation of them whom he has by his absolute eternal decree rejected utterly
from grace and glory?

More particularly (K) by this Doctrine,

I. Christ came not into the world to procure the salvation of them that
perish, because they were inevitably ordained to perish.

II. The word of grace is not sent to them; or if it be, it is sent that they
might slight it or contemn it, and so increase their damnation by contemning
of it. Which being so, these inconveniences will arise; 1. That God is a (L)
mere deluder of miserable men, whom he calls to salvation in the name of his
Son by the preaching of the word. For what else can he be that fairly
pretends their good whom he fully intends to ruin? 2. That Ministers (M)
are but false witnesses; because in their ministry they offer salvation
conditionally to many whose damnation is determined absolute^y. 3. The
Ministry of the word cannot leave men without excuse. For Reprobates may have
this just (N) plea; Lord, do thou punish us for not believing in thy Son,
when ^hou did call us to believe by the preaching of thy word? Why? ^hou
did decree to leave us (woeful men) in Adams sin, to ^ive us neither power
to believe, nor a Christ to believe in. How ^anst thou justly charge us with
sin or increase our punishment for not believing in him whom thou did
resolve before the ^orld was that we should never believe in? Certainly that ^
Ministry gives men a fair excuse that is given for no other and then to
leave them without excuse. Neque enim ea fingi potest homin^s ^eddere
inexcusabiles per verbum and Spiritum vocatio, quae eo tantum sine exhi^^tur ut
reddat inexcusabiles; Suffrag. Brit. de 3. and 4. art. de Antecedaneis ad
Con^^^s. thesi 3. page 43.


III. The Sacraments (O) also (by this opinion) do signify nothing, seal-up
nothing, confer nothing to such a^ are not saved; but are mere blanks and
empty ordinances a^ the best unto them, not through the fault of the men, but
by the primarie and absolute will of God.

IV. Lastly, Gods other gifts (P) which he bestows upon men, of what nature
soever they be, are to the most tha^ receive them in Gods absolute intention,
1. Unprofitable, such as shall never do them good in reference to their
eternal^ condition; 2. Dangerous and hurtful, given them not out o^ love but
extreme hatred; not that they might use them well, and be blessed in so doing,
but that they might use them ill* and by ill using of them procure to
themselves the great^^ damnation. God lifts them up (as the devil did Christ)
^^ the pinnacle of the temple, that so they might fall; and loadeth them with
knowledge and other goodly endowments, tha^ with the weight of them he might
sink them down to hell* And so by good consequence, Gods choicest gifts are
intende^ and used as snares to entrap men's souls. Men that have th^^ have
little cause to be proud of them; for they are the more unhappy because they
have them: or small reason to be thankful for them, or to love the giver of
them, but to hate his rather; because they are but giftlesse gifts, of the same
natu^ with a griping usurers bounty, Jaels courtesy, Saul's mar^ing of Michol
to David, or a bait for a poor fish which (...) swalloweth with a hook to
boot: Munera magna quidem misit, sed misit in hamo:
Number piscatorem piscis amare potest?


Answer. Whether the decree of absolute Reprobation ^^ contrary unto the use
and end of Gods gifts bestowed upon men.
IN the following discourse concerning the end and use of Gods gifts these
general^ points are to be premised:

1. First, That if we speak exactly and properly, Aquin. part. 1. qu. 19. art.
1.
Nihil aliud a Deo est finis Dei sed ipsemet est finis respectu omnium quae ab
eo fiunt. It is therefore a false imagination to think that the Divine will is
moved by any thing but by it self. And as God himself is the end cujuslibet
volitionis Divinae, so is he likewise cujuslibet operationis Divinae. Prove.
16.4. The Lord has made all things for his own sake, yea the wicked for the
day of evil.

2. Secondly, it is to be noted, That albeit Gods eternal volitions or decrees
depend not upon any temporal object or causes as the prime motives thereunto;
yet God by his eternal absolute decree may and does ordain that this event in
the temporal execution shall not follow but upon that going before: as, that
the benefit of eternal life, in the actual introduction unto the heavenly
kingdom, shall depend upon the acts of repenting, believing and persevering;
and that the punishment of eternal death, in the actual abjection of men into
hell, shall depend upon their own final impenitencie and sin-guiltinesse. This
is not to make the eternal decrees of Election and Reprobation dependent upon
the foreseen contingent acts of man's freewill, as the Remonstrants do; but to
make temporal events, acts, or things, one to depend conditionally upon
another for their being or not-being in time, which we willingly acknowledge.

3. Thirdly, It is to be observed, That when we say this or that is the end of
such an action of God or of such a gift of God, we must not conceive that it
was the end which caused the Divine volition, but it is the end whereunto men
should use such gifts, and the benefit which they ought to make of such
temporal gracious actions vouchsafed unto them. So that when we say, God
gives or does such a thing to such an end, the meaning is, The things
considered in their own nature, as they come from God, have a fitness or
aptness to produce such an end. And thus God is said in his gifts or actions
to intend an end two ways: The one is in the order of common Providence, where
the means have a natural fitness to produce some good end, though abused by
men they oftentimes produce the quite contrary, God foreknowing it and
decreeing to permit it so to be. The other is the order of special
Predestination, where such gifts or actions of God have not only a fitness in
their own nature to produce such good effects or ends, but they have from the
absolute will of God an efficacitie actually and infallibly producing those
intended ends. Of this intention only that rule must be understood, Aqu. in 1.
part. qu. 10. art. 6.
Quicquid Deus simpliciter vult, fit; and that of Caietane, In 1m, qu. 23. art.
6.
Nullus ordo deficiens a proprio intento cadit sub praedestinatione.

4. Lastly, no decree of God can truly be said to cross the good end whereunto
his gifts ought to be used, unless it can be proved that by such a decree the
abuse of them is enforced or at least caused in wicked men. As for example; The
honor and exaltation of Pharaoh unto a kingdom was a gift or a good means
fitting him to the administration of justice; yet he abused it unto oppression:
The plagues inflicted upon his country were fit means to have humbled him, and
to have made him yield unto Gods command; yet he turned them to greater pride
and obstinacy: Yet because no decree of God caused the obstinate wickedness
of Pharaohs heart, the decree of permitting him to abuse such gifts unto his
own destruction was not contrary unto the use or end whereunto those gifts and
actions of God had a fitting ordination in their own nature. These things
premised we come unto our particular answers.

What he says concerning the gifts of Nature namely, That they are given for
the good of those upon whom they are bestowed, we willingly yield. And
therefore we let the 363 and, 364. pages pass without contradiction. Only let
this be remembered, That the intent, which is measured by the nature of the
means, for the event is often frustrated by the default of man's will, and yet
Gods simple and absolute will never frustrated. Nay, it was Gods absolute will
to permit some men to fail in reaping that good which by such means was
intended unto them. Neither does this infer any contrariety or crossing
betwixt Gods Decrees and his Gifts or Graces. We do not therefore deny that
man's salvation is the end of those means, gifts and graces which God offers
unto any man in ordine ad suam salutem: But we affirm that this may stand with
an eternal absolute decree of not-preparing for some men any such effectual
grace as God knows would easily convert and save them, and with an absolute
decree of permitting them by their own voluntary rebellion to incur eternal
damnation. And this is the absolute decree of Reprobation, which is not
contrary to the end of Gods gifts: because to permit men to abuse them, does
neither alter the nature of the gift nor the ordination which it has in it
self to produce such an end, nor cause the sinner to turn those good means to
his own perdition.

Our Divines at Dort did truly teach, That the word, and the illuminations and
motions of Gods Spirit, are ordained by God for the producing of repentance and
faith in men's hearts, and for the saving of their souls. And they further
taught, That where such spiritual and supernatural means fail to produce
those ends, no positive, actual, proper or true cause can be alleged besides
their own defective and rebellious will.

The saying of Prosper is unadvisedly brought-in by this Author. For every man
knows that Prosper, as well as his Master S. Augustine, held absolute
Predestination and Preterition or negative Reprobation; and therefore in his
opinion the absolute decree of Reprobation is not contrary unto any ends which
God has in bestowing the means of grace and salvation upon those which abuse
them: For it is impossible that God should cross himself in his decrees,
gifts, or actions. Again, Prosper, in affirming a gracious vocation to be
afforded unto all those who have been enlightened by the preaching of the
Gospel, does imply, that where the Gospel was never preached nor Christ known,
there is no such vocation unto saving grace. How this will agree with Arminius
his new-moulded Predestination and Reprobation, who in his third decree
bringeth-in God decreeing Doct. Sent. page 47.
media ad resipiscentiam and fidem necessaria sufficienter and efficaciter
administrare, it will pass this Authors cunning to tell us. Prosper
propounds a question which had been here more fit for this Author to have
mused upon, namely De voc. l. 1. c. 1.
Cur hoc donum sine quo nemo salvus est, ab e^ qui omnes salvare vult, non
omnibus conferatur.

sufficiency of grace which ou^ Divines at Dort granted to accompany the
preaching of the Gospel, it does little advantage the Remonstrants, who
undertake to prove a sufficient administration of saving grace where the sound
of the Gospel and the name of Christ was never heard of. And they acknowledge
no decree of Reprobation where such an administration has not gone before.
This is more then the Divines at Dort or the Jesuits at Rome dare avouch. But
let us grant, that sufficient means to produce faith, and repentance and
salvation were administered to every singular person in the world, yet the
absolute decrees of Election and Non-election may stand firm and good: For he
is absolutely predestined to whom God administreth grace with a merciful
intent of making it effectual unto salvation: and he is absolutely
not-predestinated or rejected, to whom God in time administreth grace with an
absolute purpose of leaving the good success to the good husbandry of his own
free will, which is in nothing more careless or prodigal then in misspending,
wasting and quenching Gods grace. Prosp. De vocat. l. 1. c. 6.
Ita humana natura in primi hominis praevaricatione vitiata, etiam inter
beneficia, inter praecepta, and inter auxilia Dei, semper in deteriorem est
proclivior voluntatem, cui committi non est aliud quam dimitti. So that if in
the establishing of the eternal decrees of Election and Reprobation God had
been a foreseer only or a looker-on how every man committed to the freedom of
his own will would behave himself in the using of grace sufficiently
administered, the whole world (if Prosper tell us true) had been under the
decree of Reprobation.

That is said to be Gods aim in bestowing means of grace upon any man, which
the nature of the grace should lead a man unto, though God in giving that grace
had not a simple and absolute will to make it effectual unto the salvation of
the receiver; nay, though God had an absolute will of permitting the receiver
to abuse it finally to his own damnation. Where Gods will is thus affected,
there administration of grace may and does stand with eternal Reprobation.

Touching the Sacrament of Baptism, or man to abuse them unto a contrary end*
And in this consists that absolute decree of Reprobation which we defend.

I wonder this Author should make Baptism a necessary means unto
regeneration, and so consequently unto the atteinment of salvation; since
millions of children, capable of no other known and revealed means of salvation
or regeneration, have not this means by Divine providence administered unto
them, or so prepared for them that by any humane care or industry it is
appliable unto them. For from this must needs follow an absolute Reprobation of
such children, and not a conditionate, grounded upon their foreseen bad acts.
As for those who by Gods goodness are ingrafted into some visible Church, we
concur with him, that Baptism is appointed to be a means of regeneration;
and that it is so indeed where no obstacle is found in the person baptized.

For the Lords Supper we say the same. And if he instance in a thousand other
particulars, our answer will be, That Gods revealed ordination or intention
that we should use such means unto such a good end, may stand with an absolute
eternal unrevealed will of God To withhold from some men that more special
grace which would de facto make them use Gods grace unto that good end
whereunto it is ordained, and hinder them from abusing it to their destruction.

Let the Remonstrants grant us an absolute decree preparing from all eternity
effectual grace, and in time mercifully working the conversion and salvation
of Peter and Paul, and we desire no other absolute decree of Predestination.
And let them grant us in God an eternal will or decree of not-preparing
effectual saving grace for Cain and Judas, and of not-working by his special
mercy their conversion, but permitting them to continue in their obduration,
and we urge no other absolute Reprobation. How they can deny this I know not,
unless they will deny that of the Apostle, Romans 9.
Cujus vult miseretur, and quem vult indurat. Which induration is by some of
our adversaries referred to this decree of Reprobation which we avouch, and was
usually so applied by S. Augustine. Vide Ruiz. De Praed. and Repr. disp. 2.. 2.
number. 3. p. 19. where he has these words, Non esset libera praedestinatio, Vide
Penot. page 414. disp. 38.. 4.
si non esset libera negatio praedestinationis. Porro, negatio
praedestinationis esset ipsa reprobatio negativa. And Malderus Antisyn. page 9.
10, 11, 12, 13. usque ad 21.
ingenuously acknowledges these two eternal absolute decrees, the one of
preparing saving grace for the predestinate, and of making it infallibly
effectual unto their salvation; the other of preparing for the non-elect such
helps of grace only as God eternally foresaw would never bring them unto
salvation, albeit their damnation was not intended by God, but only with
respect unto their foregoing sins. And for these eternal distinct decrees of
Election and Non-election or negative Reprobation, he foundeth them not upon
any different foreseen acts of men, but subscribeth to Prosper, Cessat opus,
cessat meritum, nihil editur impar; and does in these few words quite
contradict the Remonstrants Election, Page 12.
Homines non ideo quia perseverantes sunt, sunt electi; sed quia electi sunt,
perseverant. Page 13. Vide eundem in 1m, 2a, qu. 111. page 486.
Aliter Deus in hac vita agit cum electis, aliter cum reprobis. Reprobis offert
quidem suam gratiam, sed efficaciter non facit ut acceptent oblatam. Quod autem
eam sibi oblatam acceptet electus, fructus electionis est. Permittit reprobos
cadere, and in suo lapsu in finem usque manner jacentes, etc. I might add the
ancient Schoolmen, who acknowledge the eternal distinct decrees of Election
and Reprobation without founding them upon the contrary foreseen acts of men,
as this Author with the Remonstrants do. All the forenamed Authors, with many
more which might be cited, acknowledge an ordination of such means and graces
as are afforded to the Reprobate unto the ends by this Author urged; and yet
withal they acknowledge an eternal absolute will in God of permitting them to
abuse them to their own destruction. In their judgment therefore such an
absolute eternal decree is not contrary unto the end of Gods gifts bestowed
upon persons not-elect. Lessius, a stiff defender of Predestination and
Reprobation founded upon prescience of men's final perseverance or final
impenitencie, when he is pressed with the argument taken from that special
vocation of the Predestinate, which is termed vocatio secundum propositum, he
is forced to confess, Opusc. De Praed. and Repr. page 573.
that others dicuntur vocati non secundum propositum, quia non est tale
propositum in Deo ad cujus impletionem illa vocatio referatur. Huic tamen non
repugnat, quin sit in Deo sincerum propositum and desiderium salutis eorum
conditionatum, si gratiae cooperari velint.

I marvel how it should be contrary unto the end of Gods graces or gifts, when
we say, According to his eternal decree he calls the Predestinate or Elect
with an absolute purpose to make the means of grace effectual to their
salvation; and he calls the Reprobate, non secundum tale propositum, but
only under a conditionate decree, Si gratiae cooperari velint, which from all
eternity he foreknew they would never do: I say, it is a marvel, how the same
thing avouched by us should be contrary to the use and end of Gods graces
bestowed upon such men, and affirmed by themselves, no such inconvenience
should follow upon it. Molina himself, when he comes to the point, grants in
God such eternal distinct decrees o^ preparing effectual grace for some an^
not-preparing for others, as infer absolute Predestination and Reprobation in
tha^ sense wherein we defend it, and contradic^ that conditionate Election
which the Remonstrants defend, depending upon an antecedent absolute prevision
of the future good and bad acts of men. His words are these; De Conc. page 368.
Punctum vero praedestinationis and abyssus inscrutabilis Divini consilii in eo
sunt posita, quod cum Deus infinitas alias provident non-praedestinatis
rations noverit, quibus p^^ eadem ipsorum liberate in vitam devenisse^t
aeternam, fuissentque proinde praedestinati; itemque infinitas alias noverit
rations providendi pradestinatis, quibus sua liberate beatitudine^
amitterent, fuissentque reprobi: pro sua tantum liberate, and non pro
qualitate usus liber^ arbitrii praevisi, ne ut condition quidem si^ qua non,
eum providendi modum utrisque eligerit per quem praevidit illos in vitam
aeterna^ pro sua liberate non perventuros, etc. If it b^ not contrary to the
end and use of Gods gifts out of his own free will to provide for some men no
other grace but such as he eternally knew would never bring them to eternal^
life; how does it cross the end of such gifts and graces as are temporally
afforded to the Non-elect, that God has made an absolute decree to permit that
abuse of grace which he could have prevented, and which he foreknew from all
eternity would follow if by more special grace it were not prevented? Vide
Jacobi Baii Institut. lib. 1. c. 118, 119, etc. usque ad 125.

The end whereunto Gods long-suffering leading of men to repentance. But there
is no contradiction betwixt these two propositions, The end of Gods admonition
and patience toward Cain, was to lead him unto repentance; God had absolutely
decreed, not to give unto Cain that special effectual grace without which God
knew he would continue finally impenitent. In this decree Non-election is
involved, and this is antecedent to the absolute prevision of Cains final
impenitencie; and yet it made not the means of grace offered unto him delusorie
or contrary to any decree of Gods will.

The decree of negative Reprobation hinders not but the gifts bestowed upon
such persons may have a proper and fitting ordination unto the atteinment of
eternal life, si tali gratiae cooperari velint. Thus were they ordinated in
the non-elect angels, although before they were created God had absolutely
decreed to permit their voluntary apostasy, and to punish them for it with
eternal misery. Thus the end of those excellent gifts and graces which Adam
had bestowed upon him in his state of innocence was to continue him in
obedience to Gods will, and so to bring him with his posterity unto eternal
life; and yet God had eternally decreed to permit both him and them to fall
into the guilt of eternal death. Divine eternal decrees therefore, whereupon
may infallibly be inferred the abuse of grace temporally offered, do not cross
the end for which such grace is administered to persons not-elected. The
Jesuits themselves cannot deny, that the eternal decree of negative
Reprobation is Ruiz.
a negation illorum mediorum quibus Deus praescivit adhibendum fuisse
consensum; hujusque primam causam esse liberam Dei voluntatem. To which purpose
are these words of S. Augustine, De bono Pers. c. 11.
Quibus non vult subvenire, non subvenit; de quibus in sua praedestinatione
occulte quidem sed just aliud judicavit. And elsewhere, Ad Simpl. lib. 1. qu.
2.
Si vellet ipsorum (nempe non-praedestinatorum) misereri, posset ita vocare
quomodo illis aptum esset, ut and moverentur and intelligerent and sequerentur.
All these acknowledge an absolute eternal decree of withholding all such grace
from all persons not-elected as God knows would effectually convert them and
say them. And yet for all this they all agree that those gifts and means of
salvation which he is pleased to afford them, have a true and due ordination
unto the bringing of such men to faith, obedience and eternal life. They have
indeed no infallible ordination to such an end; for then they were consequent
fruits of Predestination: but this hinders not, but they may have a true
ordination, as all such means have which by the Divine more common providence
and general love are instituted and afforded for the good of men, howsoever by
the voluntary perverseness of the wicked they are turned to their own hurt.
And therefore God may truly say to these as the Apostle did to the Galatians,
Gal. 5.7.
Quis vos impedivit, non obedire veritati? It was not Gods eternal decree of
denying more abundant and effectual grace, nor his eternal absolute decree of
permitting them voluntarily to abuse the grace bestowed upon them, from whence
this contrary usage of Divine grace was necessitated or effected. That is but a
cavil of the Remonstrants. Learned Prosper points us to the true and only
cause of this inverting Gods benefits contrary to their proper end; De vocat.
Gent. lib. 2. cap. 13.
Quae beneficia licet obduratis nihil remedii and emendationis attulerint,
probant tamen aversionem eorum non Divinae fuisse constitutionis sed propriae
voluntatis.

contrary to the end and use of Gods gifts, we will subscribe to his
conditionate Election and Reprobation. If he hope to infer this conclusion,
his premises must be, Every absolute decree of God to permit the final abuse
of any of his good gifts or graces, is contrary to the use or end of bestowing
them upon men: But that decree of absolute negative Reprobation which we defend
is an absolute decree, etc. ERGO, it is contrary, etc. The major proposition
will be denied by all judicious Divines, and can never be proved by the
Remonstrants. Tertull. advers. Marc. l. 1.
Non institutio bona rei, sed exorbitatio reprobanda est.

That God wills the good of men in bestowing any good gifts or graces upon
them, needed no proof at all: We have always willingly granted this
proposition. Yet for the true understanding thereof it must be observed, That
when we say, This is Gods will, This is Gods aim or intent, these words have
not always the same signification. This Author by confounding the diverse
meaning of these and the like words does strangely entangle himself through his
whole discourse. First therefore; according to Gods will, which considered in
it self is according to the goodness and pureness of the Divine nature. This
is a perpetual and necessary volition in God, qua Deo placet omne bonum. And
this Vide Ruiz. De vol. disp. 6.. 2. page 38.
simplex complacentia toward all good actions of men, or events unto men, is
possible circa creaturas omnes etiam nunquam futuras: For there is no goodness
imaginable, which has not an agreement with the good will of God, which we
call amorem simplicis complacentiae. Ruiz. disp. 19. page 214.
Satis constat hujusmodi complacentiam Dei versari circa poenitentiam, gratiam
and gloriam possibilem Judae aut cujus libet damnati. But this is not it which
we now speak of. 2. Secondly, will, desire, or aim-at that good, for the
obteining whereof he affords fitting means, though withal he wills that it
shall be in the liberty of the creature to hinder and frustrate those means,
and though he have absolutely decreed to permit the creature to abuse them unto
his own destruction. This is that which usually is termed by Divines voluntas
antecedens, voluntas conditionata, voluntas simplicis complacentiae. And thus
God is said to aim-at or to will and desire the conversion, justification and
salvation of those who never shall be converted, justified, or saved. Neither
must we think that by these men Gods omnipotent will is crossed, because his
voluntas simplicis complacentiae is not fulfilled. For the absolute will of God
was, that in such persons their own free will might hinder the good effect of
his gifts and graces, which he was absolutely resolved to permit for voluntas
beneplaciti or his absolute will, which is not only a liking of the good
willed unto the creature, and an ordering of fit means whereby the creature (if
his own free will hinder not) may attein it; but a merciful decree of so
ordering the means and the very will of the creature, that it shall infallibly
and infrustrately obtein the good end whereunto such means were accommodated.
And of this will Ruiz truly affirms, Disp. 18.. 4. p. 185.
Sola haec voluntas absoluta simpliciter amplectitur objectum, and ideo sola
simpliciter and absolute meretur nomen voluntatis Beneplaciti. We grant
therefore, that in the second acception of the word will God truly wills,
likes, desires the repentance, faith, perseverance, and salvation of all to
whom the Gospel is preached and Christ offered. But in the last and most proper
acception, God wills the perseverance and salvation only of his Elect, in
whom he never cease working till the happy effect be produced.

Our Divines at Dort granted a true and will, but not according to the last.
Which will simplicis complacentiae may stand with absolute Reprobation.

If this Author can be content to acknowledge that for a true, serious and no
delusorie will, which affords the creature means of repenting, believing and
being saved, though under an eternal absolute decree of permitting the final
disobedience and perdition of the creature, we will free him from the trouble
of answering the places of Scripture, and with him embrace the interpretation
of Damascene, who tells us, that albeit the Scriptures do in such places seem
to make Gods benefits causes of man's sin and ruin, yet they must be
understood De orthod. fide, lib. 4. cap. 20.
(...) not (...).

A Physician does give his patient physic Psalm. 135.
Omnia quaecunque voluit Deus, fecit in coelo and in terra* Fulgentius gives
the reason; 1. ad Mon. c. 12.
Quia cui semper subest cum volet posse, non aliud est in illo velle quam posse.

The will of God inviting or moving men to perform such good acts as tend to
their salvation, is Gods true and serious will, though he have not decreed by
such means to produce their salvation: Vide Baii I^stitut. lib. 1. cap. 104,
etc. etc. 115, 116.
This will is often despised by men to their own damnation. But there is a will
not only ordaining means to the end, but of causing men to use the means unto
the consecution of the end. And thus by giving them special grace God wills
the kingdom of glory only unto the Elect. The former will is not to be
baffled with the name of dissimulation, because this latter is only it which
brings men unto glorification. And we further add, That the Reprobates in
resisting the former will, which is vera voluntas simplicis complacentiae, do
always fulfill the latter, which is Gods absolute will of permitting this
resistance, and of gathering out of it a greater illustration of his own glory.

The blessings and means which God out of his goodness afforded to the angels,
to Adam, and which he continually affords unto wicked men, by the ill frame
of their hearts may be and have been turned to their own hurt: and yet we
cannot but acknowledge in them an antecedent and gracious will to do them good.
But we do acknowledge, over and above this will of complacencie, an absolute
will of efficiencie, by which God has mercifully decreed to work in some
persons the will and the deed, and by the means of grace de facto to bring them
unto glory. These two different manners of willing and working the salvation of
men, do demonstrate an absolute will in God of Saving some, which we call the
absolute decree of their Election; and an absolute will of Permitting others to
draw upon themselves damnation by voluntary abusing the means of grace, which
we call absolute Reprobation. Chrysostom (who is no depressour of man's
free will) was not ignorant of this absolute will of God, turning and bending
man's which way he pleases: Si Deus voluerit, nullus impediet Plura vide hom.
2. in Psalm. 50.
. And of this will S. Augustine speaks, Ench. cap. 97.
In coelo and in terra non quaedam voluit and fecit, quaedam vero voluit and
non fecit, sed omnia quaecunque voluit fecit. And S. Hierome, speaking of the
Samaritanes, says, Apud Petr. Diac.
Si voluisset, ex indevotis devotos fecisset. And that prayer of Basil is
famous, De incarn. c. 8.
Malos, quaesumus, bonos facito; bonos in bonitate conserva. Omnia enim potes:
quem enim volueris, salvas: and non est qui resistat tibi. Since therefore the
Scriptures, and the Fathers, and all orthodox Divines, who confess that to be
a true will which by affording ordinary means aims at the 1 Thessalonians. 4.3.
Sanctification and 1. Tim. 2.4.
Salvation of all men, do notwithstanding intimate unto us an absolute will
eternally predestinating and in time infallibly working the salvation only of
some men; it is but a weak kind of reasoning, from the affirmation of the one
to conclude a negation of the other.



Calvine usually speaks in the Scripture Phrase, even in those points which
seem harsh to the ears of the Remonstrants. But this Author having before
truly explained ^ow such phrases are to be understood, ^amely of the end
whereunto Reprobates ^lwayes finally abuse them, and not of the end whereunto
God has ordained them, he had done much better to have afforded Calvines words
this charitable construction. And as for Beza; he denies not a proper and true
ordination of the Divine grace unto the effecting of salvation in all to whom
^t is afforded, nor a true will of complacencie in God, that by them it should
be used to that good end: but he denies an absolute will in God of saving them
by that grace; and he shows the end which the wicked always come to by
abusing it, which is, ut gravius puniantur. That Calvine had no other meaning,
appears by these words of his, which shut-up the section out of which the
former are taken; Quid sibi vult Dominus eos docendo a quibus ne intelligatur
curat? Considera unde vitium, and desines interrogare. In verbo enim
qualiscunque sit obscuritas, satis tamen semper est lucis ad convincendam
impiorum conscientiam. The drift of Calvine is not to affirm that God works
either by any positive action, or by proper ordination of his word unto any
such end, that deafness, blindness, senselessenesse whereunto the Reprobate
grow only by their own default: But because God, who could soften their heart^
and would if they were in the number o^ his elect, has ordained not to do it,
thi^ ordination is intimated by the event which perpetually follows upon it,
namely deafness, blindness, etc. So that all which Calvine intends is this,
Vide.. 14, 15. ubi mentem suam explicat.
That where Go^ has not comprised men within his merciful decree of
Predestination, there he has decreed to hold-off his hand from effectually
opening their ears and eyes; and the^ suo vitio obsurdescunt, etc. And Beza had
no other intent, but to show, Beza, Opusc. p. 30. and de Praedest. did. page
434.
That the word preached unto the Reprobate, non eo usque conjunctum cum
Spiritus ministerio, u^ illos vera fide, qua propria nota electi a reprobis
dignoscuntur, Christo ut palmites frugiferos inserat. Whence follows that
woeful event, ut justo exitio devoti magis ac magis reddantur (...).

For Maccovius; if his speeches tend to show the intentionall end of the gospel
preached, and not the eventuall success, we utterly disclaim his opinion. For
God properly intends no end of his volitions or actions but himself; unto
whose glory all things have naturam mediorum, not inten^i finis. The intention
therefore of means by God unto any lower or inferior end, is nothing else but
the fitness of such means considered in themselves (and not abused) ^or the
producing of that end: And this in^ention is not altered by the decree of
Re^robation; for that decree as it is imma^ent and eternal in voluntate
Divina, nihil ^enit in reprobato: And when the temporal ^xecution comes, It
puts no malice in^o his will, it puts no necessitation unto wicked
actions upon his will; it only put^th in God an absolute will of not-giving
^ffectuall grace, and of not-working in him ^alutiferous actions; whereupon
follow^th Perditio tua exte.

Answers to his more particular objections.
THe doctrine of Reprobation upon prescience inevitable as that which we
refer to the absolute will of God. As for Christ's coming into the ^orld to
save sinners, it was not to save the Elect, but under conditions of repentance
and perseverant faith: And no decree of Reprobation excludes any man from
salvation, provided always that he repent and believe.

But the Reprobate (in our doctrine) inevitably die impenitent and unbelievers.
Infallibly they do: but no more inevitably then in theirs. I think, neither
this Author nor any Remonstrant will show himself so ignorant, as to affirm
that any one man eternally reprobated according to their sens^ did ever die a
true penitent and a perseveran^ believer.

For the word of grace, it is in our doctrine sent unto all men to whom it is
sent, no otherwise then it is in theirs. In both opinions it has (in its own
nature) an ordination to produce repentance, faith, salvation in all who obey,
etc. In neither opinion it is sent to any not-elected with an absolute will of
God to make it effectual unto their salvation, by working in them repentance,
faith, true obedience. So that our doctrine is in this far more sound then
theirs; that we introduce such an Election and Reprobation as suspendeth all
saving good actions of the Elect upon the special mercy and effectual
operation of God himself, and all wicked acts of the Non-elect upon their own
perverse and rebellious free will; whereas the Remonstrants Vide Coll. Hag.
page 91, 92, etc. 95.
suspend both alike upon man's natural free will, making God, as in the evil
acts of the Reprobate only an eternal foreseer or looker-on; so in the
salutiferous acts of the Elect, namely their repentance, believing,
persevering, they ascribe unto God only an intuitive prescience of what they
will do, but they deny any absolute eternal decree, or any temporal operation
flowing from such a decree, and causing them to repent, believe, and persevere.
Corvinus is so confident herein, that he doubts not to affirm, Corv. Resp. ad
Bogorm. page 263.
Certum est, nullius conversionem praecise intendi. Duo fines sunt spiritus,
etc. So that the Remonstrants, who at first pleaded for Gods intention of
converting and saving all men, come about at last to plead against his absolute
will and intention of converting and saving any man.

For his collection, That God is a mere deluder, call men to salvation by
Christ, whom he intends to ruin; we say, That if God should call men to
salvation by Christ, intending to ruin them though they obediently answer to
his calling, this were delusion: Or if God calling them to salvation by faith
in Christ, should intend to ruin them by forcing or causing their
impenitencie, infidelity and disobedience, this were worse then delusion. But
if God in time calls to salvation by Christ those whom before all time he
decreed to permit to their own faultering and defective free will for
production of the very act of repenting and believing, and who he foresaw would
voluntarily continue in their impenitencie and unbelief, and whom with respect
to this their final impenitencie and infidelity he from all eternity
destinated unto everlasting punishment; here is no delusion at all: And if
there be, the Remonstrants ar^ in a poor case, who must of necessity
according to their doctrine of Reprobation yield unto all this, and according
to ours we need yield to no more.

absolutely determined from all eternity to permit some men to incur
damnation for contemning the conditional promises offered by the Ministers.
The Ministers witness nothing but this, That God will save every man that
believes in his Son. Where is there any falsehood in this testimony? where
any contradiction to the forenamed determination? where any absolute
determination contradicting the conditional offer of salvation? Let any
Remonstrant show it in our doctrine, and I will presently show it follows as
well in his.

plea for Reprobates will not hold good. For (as has been already often
proved) Reprobation takes away no power from persons reprobated according to
our doctrine which it takes not away according to theirs. It debarreth not God
from giving any power to believe, or repent, or perform any good act, being
admitted according to our doctrine, which it will permit him to give according
unto theirs. For Reprobation may stand with Possibility of obeying God and
being saved, as it did in the angels reprobated; it may stand with Sufficient
grace: but the truth is, neither in the Remonstrants opinion nor in ours it
ever does or can stand with Effectual grace. Before the world was, God had
resolved never to give unto Cain or Judas or any other person reprobated
according to the Reprobation allowed by the Remonstrants, that special grace
which should cause them to believe in Christ, and free them from their
voluntary impenitencie. Yet it is a false assertion, That God wills they
should never believe, never repent: For here the word Will notes voluntatem
complacentiae; and the acts of believing and repenting are always
well-pleasing and agreeable unto this will of God, though it be his eternal
absolute will in some men not to work them.

The Sacraments in the Remonstrants opinion, seal an infallibility of special
grace or salvation unto any man reprobated from before the foundations of the
world were laid: for then they should seal a manifest falsehood. But let them
show any grace or benefit which a reprobate may partake by the Sacrament, and
is according to our doctrine excluded from it, without his own default, only
by the absolute will of God, and then he speaks to some purpose.

Gods gifts by the decree of Reprobation unprofitable nor dangerous. For (as
has been formerly manifested) the decree of Reprobation changes not the
proper nature or true ordination of Gods gifts toward persons not-elected. If
we speak of the future event only, it is most true, that they will never do
them good in reference to their eternal glorification. And this Author cannot
truly affirm that ever they shall, unless he can also truly affirm that some
men reprobated, as the Remonstrants hold Reprobation, become afterward
glorified or saved. And yet he will not grant, that God out of hatred gives
his gifts unto reprobates, that they should use them ill, and so be damned: No
more will we. It is a weak or rather non-consequence, That Gods choicest gifts
are by God intended as snares unto men reprobated by his eternal decree,
because he has decreed to permit them so to abuse those gifts, and has
decreed to withhold from them that special mercy and effectual grace which
only makes men de facto use Gods grace to the atteining of salvation. So that
I may now conclude, There is no one amongst so many objections brought against
Reprobation, as we teach it, that is of any validity: or if it be, it makes
as much against that eternal immutable decree of Reprobation which the
Remonstrants themselves are forced to acknowledge.

Treatise.
MY fourth general reason against this absolute Reprobation is, It is a
hindrance to Piety. IV. It is prejudicial to PIETY.
It is a doctrine that serves greatly to discourage holiness and encourage
profaneness: It makes Ministers (by its natural importment) negligent in
their preaching, praying, and other services which are ordained of God for the
eternal good of their people: It makes people careless in hearing, reading,
praying, instructing their families, examining their consciences, fasting and
mourning for their sins, and all other godly exercises: In a word, it
cutteth asunder the very sinews of religion, and pulls away the strongest
inducements to a holy life. Therefore it is no true and wholesome doctrine.

That it does so, it will appear by these reasons that follow.

I. It takes (A) away Hope and Fear; Hope of atteining any good by
godliness, Fear of susteining any hurt by wickedness: and so it takes away
two principal props of Religion. This reason may be resolved into these two
branches.

1. Hope and Fear uphold Godliness. Were it not for these, it would come to
ruin: by these are men strongly led on to virtue, and vvithheld from vice.
Hope does excitare, stir men up to begin, and corroborare, strengthen them in
the doing of any good action begun. By this hope of heaven did our Savior
stir up himself to endure the cross, and despise the shame, Heb. 12.2. By
this he heartned his disciples to do and to suffer for his sake, Matthew. 5.11.
and Matthew. 10.32. By this have all the godly in all ages encouraged themselves
in well-doing: as we may see in general, Phil. 3.20. Col. 1.9. Tit. 2.12, 13.
and in particular, Heb. 11. Abraham left his country and kindred at Gods call,
because he looked for a city whose builder and maker was God, verse. 8.9, 10.
Moses left all the pleasures and treasures of Egypt, and endured afflictions
with the people of God, because he saw him that was invisible, and had respect
to the recompense of reward, v. 25, 27. The Martyrs (B) endured racks, gibbets,
lions, svvord, fire, with a world of other torments, because they looked for a
better resurrection, verse. 35. Paul endeavors always to keep a clear
conscience, through the hope which he had of a blessed resurrection, Acts
24.15. All the noble and heroic acts of active and passive obedience have
sprung from the hope of eternal glory. Soldiers, Merchants, Husbandmen, all
are vvhetted-on by hope to diligence in their callings, as daily experience
shows us. Aquin. 1.2, qu. 40. art. 8.
Hope, says Aquinas, confert ad operationem, conduces to action: and he
proves it, first by Scripture, 1. Cor. 9.10. He which eareth and thresheth,
must ear and thresh in hope. and then he proves it by a twofold reason; 1.
From the nature of Hopes object, which is bonum arduum and possibile haberi,
some excellent good atteinable by industry. Existimatio ardui excitat
attentionem, Hope to get that by pains which is conceived to be a thing of
vvorth, stirs up to pains-taking. 2. From the effect of Hope, which is
delectatio, an inward pleasure, which the party that lives under hope is
affected with by his hope. There is not any man which has an inward
contentment and satisfaction of heart in the work he has to do, but goes on
merrily. The Hope of heaven therefore is a great encouragement to piety.

The Fear (C) of hell also is a strong curb to hold men in from impiety: And
therefore (says one) God has planted in men a fear of vengeance, that by it,
as the ship by the rudder, the soul may presently be turned aside from any
rocks, gulfs or quicksands of sin, when it is near them, and may steer its
course another way. For this cause fear of God and absteining from evil are
often joined together in Scripture Job 1.1. Exodus 1.17. and the want of this
fear is made the root of all licentiousness in sinning, Genesis 20.11. Nor does
fear only hinder a bad action, but it promoteth a good. It hinders a bad
action directly, because it is fuga mali, a flying from that evil of misery
which is annexed to the evil of sin: and it promoteth a good action
accidentally, because men think that they are never so safe from the mischief
which they fear, as when they are exercised in such employments as tend to
the getting of a contrary state. Work-out your salvation (says the Apostle)
with fear and trembling; implying that the vvorking-out of salvation goes not
on handsomely, except the fear of missing it be an ingredient into the work.

2. The second (D) branch of this reason is, That by the absolute decree Hope
and Fear are taken away. For Hope is properly exercised about bonum possibile
haberi, some good thing which may be obtained, not which must be obtained of
necessity: and the object of Fear is malum possibile vi^ari, an evil that may
be escap^d. For metus est fuga mali, fear is a fleeing from evil; and therefore
supposes the evil to be avoydable. For no man will flee from an evil that
cannot be prevented; but will yield up himself to it, as Caesar did his body to
the murderers in the senate house. Now, by this decree, heaven and hell are
not objects possible but necessary: Heaven shall unavoydably be obtained by
those that are elected, and hell must as certainly be endured by those that are
reprobated. For men have no power to alter their eternal states: All men by
this decree are precisely determined ad unum, to one state, to necessary
salvation or necessary damnation, without any power or liberty to choose
whether.

And from hence this conclusion is clear, That the absolute decree takes away
the chiefest inducements to holiness and deterrements from wickedness, and
consequently hinders a godly life exceedingly.

II. The injuriousnesse of this doctrine to a godly life may further appear by
these considerations that follovv, one depending upon another.

1. Absolute and peremptory (E) decrees are inevitable, whatsoever the things
be about which they are exercised: and men's everlasting states if they be
absolutely determined, are altogether undeclinable. Stat fati lex
indeclinabilis, The law of Destiny is undeclinable. And the reason is, Because
it has an inevitable cause, the adamantine decrees of almighty God, which are
indeclinable two ways. 1. Irreversible, liable to no repeal (as the statutes
are which are made in our Parliaments) but far more unalterable then the
laws of the Medes and Persians. As I have spoken, so will I bring it to pass:
I have purposed, and I will do it, Esaias 46.11. Men do many times bite-in their
words again, because they utter things rashly; and do repeal their statutes
and ordinances, because they see some inconvenience in them being made, which
they could not foresee: but God never calleth-in his decrees, because they are
all made in great vvisdome. 2. Irresistible. It lies not in the power of any
creature to disannull them. Who has resisted his will? Romans 9.19. Our God is
in heaven: he does whatsoever he will, Psalm. 115.3. Whatsoever is once
concluded by his absolute will, is no vvayes alterable by the will of man. It
is more possible for a man to hinder the rising of the sun or to stay his
course in the heaven, to stop the revolutions of the year, and overturn the
whole course of nature, then to make the least change in any of Gods absolute
decrees.

2. Men's actions (F) about ends and things determined by an absolute decree are
vain and fruitless: And the reason is, Because they cannot make them
otherwise then they are determined to be. It is absolutely decreed, the devils
shall be damned: Were it not a fruitless thing in them by prayers, tears, and
endeavors to seek to alter it? It is also simply decreed, that the soul of man
shall be immortal: Is it not a labor in vain for any man to use means that
his soul may be annihilated? It is ordained that the sun shall rule the day,
and the moon the night; that the one shall finish his proper course in a year,
the other in a month: Would not a man's endeavor to make an alteration in
these things be unprofitable and ridiculous? Without doubt it would. So
likewise in vain do men labor to obtein everlasting life and avoid eternal
death, if there be no power and liberty in their hands to choose life or death,
but must of necessity take that which is assigned them, be it life or death:
For by their labor they effect just nothing. If they be absolutely appointed
to destruction, their hearing, reading, praying, almsgiving, and mourning for
their sins cannot possibly procure their salvation: damned they must be: And
if they be absolutely ordained to salvation, their neglect of holy duties,
their ignorance, their love of pleasures, and continuance in a course of
ungodliness cannot bring them to damnation: they must be saved. If so many
souls in a parish be in this manner decreed to heaven or hell, the Minister (G)
preaches in vain, and the people hear in vain. For there cannot one soul be
saved by all his or their pains which is ordained to hell, nor one soul be
cast away by his or their negligence which is appointed to heaven. It is hard
for thee, said Christ to Saul, to kick against pricks, that is, to endeavor by
thy persecutions and slaughters to root out my Church out of the world; because
the preservation of it is absolutely decreed in heaven: teaching us by that
speech, that a man's labor in any thing whatsoever is never profitable, except
it be exercised about an end atteinable thereby, and without which the end may
be lost.

3. Men are not willing to be employed in fruitless actions, if they know it.
I so run, says S. Paul, not as uncertainly: so fight I, not as one that be
ateth the air: But I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection, lest
that by any means, when I have preached to others, I my self should be a
castaway. The meaning is, I endeavor to keep Gods commandments; I fight with
the temptations of the devil, the allurements of the world, and mine own
corruptions; I keep my body low by watchings and fastings and other severe
exercises of holy discipline. But cui bono? Do I all this at random? uncertain
whether I shall obtein any good or prevent any mischief hereby? No; but I do
this, as one that is sure (H) that by so doing I shall attein everlasting life,
and without so doing I cannot avoid eternal death: intimating in these words
the common disposition of men, which is, to labor where some proportionable
good is to be gotten, or evil prevented; otherwise to spare their heads and
hands too. To be employed in fruitless (I) affairs, is both a Folly and a
Misery. 1. A Folly: For de necessariis nemo sapiens deliberat, No man uses
deliberation about things necessary, says the Philosopher. And our Savior
speaking of things above our power, Cur estis soliciti? says he to his
disciples, Matthew. 6.27. Luke 12.25, 26. Why take ye thought about such things?
Which is as much as if he had said, It is an argument of folly in you to
trouble your selves about such things as lie not in your power. 2. It is a
Misery in the opinions of all men, as the fable of Sisyphus implies; Who (as
the Poets feign) is punished in hell for his robberies, with the rolling of a
great stone to the top of a steep hill, where it cannot rest, but presently
tumbleth down again. The moral of that fable is, That it is torment, and a
torment fit for hell, for a man to be set about any work that is fruitless and
in vain. Men will rather be exercised in high and hard employments that produce
proportionable ends, then pick straws, play with feathers, or with Domitian
spend their times in flapping and killing of flies, or do any other easy work
which ends in nothing but air and emptiness, except they be fools or
self-tormentours. And therefore when Balaam once saw that the Lord had fully
determined to bless Israel, Number. 24.1.
and that all his sorceries could not effect the contrary, he presently
gave-over and set no more enchantments. And reason teaches every man to do the
like. If any man were fully possessed with a persuasion that his temporal
estate were determined in heaven, and that he should be worth just so much,
neither more nor less; he would conclude in his thoughts, that his care and
pains could nothing profit him, nor his idleness impoverish him: and so would
quickly be persuaded to take his ease. And were it evident that every
Commonwealth had terminum magnitudinis, a condition appointed for it which
could not be altered, and a fatal period which could not be avoided, then
would the King call no Parliaments, use no privy Counselors, make no laws and
ordinances for the preventing of a Kingdoms ruin, or the procuring of its
prosperity and continuance, (for it would be to little purpose, as once a
famous privy Counselor told our late Queen Elisabeth) but would follow the
Poets counsel, Manilius.
Solvite mortales animos, curisque levate,
Totque supervacuis animum deplete querelis:
Fata regunt orbem, certa stant omnia lege.


From these three premises (K) laid together it follows directly, That the
doctrine of an absolute decree, which determines men's ends precisely, is no
friend at all to a godly life. For if events absolutely decreed be unavoidable,
if men's actions about unavoidable ends be unprofitable, if in unprofitable
employments men will have no hand willingly; whosoever they be that believe and
consider this, will have nothing to do with the practice of godliness: For
their ends being absolutely pitched and therefore unavoidable, they will
conclude that their labor in religion will be unprofitable, and so will not
labor in it at all.

III. That which has been said may be yet confirmed by two witnesses. The one
of them is (L) Mr Calvine: Who in his Institutions has these words; Instit. l.
3. c. 23. sect. 14. Si quis ita plebem compeller, Si non creditis, ideo sit,
quia jam Divinitus exitio praedestinati estis; is non modo ignaviam sovet, sed
etiam indulget malitiae.
If any man, says he, should speak thus to the people, If there be any among
you that believe not, it is because ye are ordained to destruction; this man
would not only cherish slothfulness, but wickedness also. Which is as much
to say (me thinks) as this, If a man should set forth the doctrine of
Reprobation in its colors, and explain it to people in a clear and lively
fashion, he would hereby open a door to liberty and profaneness. The other
witness is a man of another stamp, the miserable Landtgrave of Thuring: Of
whom it is recorded by Heisterbachius, that being by his friends admonished of
his vicious conversation and dangerous condition, he made them this answer,
Heist. l. 1. De memor. hist. c. 27. page 38. Si praedestinatus sum, nulla
peccata poterunt mihi regnum coelorum auferre: si praescitus, nulla opera mihi
illud valebunt confer.
If I be elected, no sins can bereave me of heaven; if I be reprobated, no
good deeds can help me to heaven.

I conclude therefore, That by this opinion (which is taught for one of Gods
principal truths) Religion either is or may be made a very great loser: which
is my fourth general Reason against it.

But there are three things which are usually answered to vindicate this
opinion from this crimination. First, That many (M) of them which believe and
defend this doctrine, are holy and good men: and therefore of it self it
opens no way for liberty of life, but through the wickedness of men who use
to pervert the sweetest and surest truths of Scripture to their own damnation.

The like defense to this did the Epicures of old make in favor of their
sensual and swinish doctrine; which was, That happiness consisted in
pleasure. They said that many of their sect were honest men: and so much Tully
grants to be true, but with exception still against their doctrine; Cic. l.
2. De sinib. bon. and mal. page 117. Ac mihi quidem videtur quod ipse vir bonus
fuit: and multi Epicurei fuerunt, and hodie sunt, and in amicitiis fideles, and
in omni vita constantes and graves, nec voluptate sed officio confilia
moderantes.
I take, says he, Epicurus himself to be an honest man: yea and many Epicures
have been and are faithful in friendship, square and constant men in all
conditions of life, ordering themselves and their lives not by pleasure but by
duty. But (says he) Hoc videtur major vis honestatis, minor voluptatis.
this proceeded not from the principles of their opinion, but from their own
virtuous inclination: and the force of honesty by their so doing, appeared to
be more prevailing in them then the force of pleasure, which they pleaded for.
A little after he has other words to the same purpose; Atque ut caeteri
existimantur dicere melius quam facere, sic hi mihi videntur melius facere quam
dicere
As other men's doctrines are esteemed to be better then their deeds, so these
men's deeds seem to me to be better then their doctrines. Like to this answer of
Tully to the defenders of Epicurisme, will I shape mine. It cannot (I confess)
be denied that many of this opinion are godly men: but it is no thanks to their
opinion that they are so (the true and natural genius of which is to (N) beget
sloth, to drown men in security, and to countenance carnal liberty;) but to
something else, either to Gods providence, (who will not suffer this doctrine
for his own glories sake and the good of men to have any great stroke in their
lives;) or to men's incogitancy, who think not of reducing it ad praxim, to
practice, and drawing conclusions out of it, but rest in the naked speculation
of it, as they do of many others; or lastly, to some good practical
conclusions which they meet with in the word of God and apply to their lives
(as they do not the former deductions;) such as these are for example, Be ye
holy as I am holy. Without holiness no man shall see God. If ye consent and
obey, ye shall eat the good things of the land. Godliness has the promises of
this life, and of the life to come, etc. And hence we may learn to measure this
opinion, not by the lives of some few of the men that hold it, but by the
sequeles which the Logic even of simple men, if they should apply their brains
to consider it, would fetch out of it. No man that has thoroughly sucked it in
and understands the force of it, but will either quite relinquish it, or live
according to the natural importment of it, that is, licentiously.

Secondly, it is said, that albeit this doctrine teach, The men are absolutely
elected or absolutely reprobated, y^ 1. It tells no man who in particular is
elected, who rejecte^ 2. It teaches that men must get the knowledge of their
El^ction by good works, and so by consequent does rather enco^rage then stifle
holy and honest endeavors.

For answer to the first of these; The ignorance (O) of man's particular state
(in my judgment) does not alter i^case a jote. For he that believes in
general, that many, a^ they the greatest company without comparison, are
inevitabl^ ordained to destruction, and a few others to salvation, is about of
these two general propositions to make these particula^ conclusions, and to
reason (P) thus with himself; Either I (...) absolutely chosen to grace and
glory, or absolutely cast off fr^ both. If I be chosen, I must of necessity
believe, and be saved If I be cast off, I must as necessarily not believe, and
be damne^ What need I therefore take thought either way about mean^^ end? My
end is pitched in heaven, and the means too: (...) final perseverance in
faith, and my salvation; or my c^^tinuance in unbelief, and my damnation. If I
lie under the necessity of believing and being saved, or of dying in un^^lief
and being damned, in vain do I trouble my self ab^^ means or end: I have my
Supersedeas; I may take m^^ ease, and so I will: enough it is for me to sit
down (...) wait what God will do unto me. Thus (it is likely) d^ Tiberius (Q)
reason with himself. For Suetonius report^^ of him, that he was Suet. de vit.
Tib. cap. 69. page 180. Circa Deos and religiones negligentior, quippe addictus
Mathematicae, persuasionisque plenus omnia fato agi.
the more negligent in religion, because (...) was fully persuaded that all
things came to pass by destiny. An^ in this manner (it is to be feared) do too
many reason in the^ hearts, and by this very ground (though they will not
perhap acknowledge it) encourage themselves in profaneness. Thoug^ men cannot
hide their wickedness, yet they will hide the^^ grounds which flesh them in
it, either through modesty, or (...) avoid some further ignominy: The fool has
said in his hear^ There is no God, Psalm. 14.

To the second I answer, That men ordinarily will not thi^ the getting of the
knowledge of their Election (if that be al^ worth all those painful duties of
religion that are to be pe^formed, and all those sweet and pleasing sins
which are (...) be relinquished: They will rest contented without it for a
while rather then pay so dearly for it: and the rather, because 1. Wh^ they
have gotten it, it is in most but a weak and conject^rall knowledge, obscured
with many clouds and uncertainties. 2. It must be maintained with a great deal
of pains and ^are, or else it will be lost again. To the reteining of it is
^equired a continual endeavor to keep a clear conscience, which is irksome
and tedious. Men therefore had need of a ^tronger motive to obedience then this
is, or else they will do nothing.

Thirdly, they that defend and teach this absolute Reprobation (say they) do
earnestly exhort men to good works, and deny that any man can be saved, except
they live honestly.

So much was also said in the behalf of Epicurus, viz. That he denied that any
man that lived not honestly, could live pleasantly. But Tully answers
roundly, Cic. Offic. l. 3. prope finem; Quasi ego id curem quid ille aiat aut
neget? illud quaero, quid ci qui in voluptate summum bonum putat, consentaneum
sit dicere.
As if I cared what he affirms or denies: this I ask, what is meet for him
to say who places happiness in pleasure. And so it mattereth not what these
men teach, but what they should teach if they will speak consequently to their
own conclusions.

An Answer to his fourth Reason, That it is prejudicial to Piety.
IF absolute Predestination and Reprobation taken in that true sense which
formerly has been explained, be of it self subject to these mischiefs, we will
renounce it; or if it be more subject then their conditional Predestination
and Reprobation, presupposing only that the decrees of Election and
Reprobation are eternal and unchangeable quoad singulares personas electas aut
non-electas; which no Remonstrant will or can deny who understands what the
very terms of the Divine Election and Reprobation do import.

That Hope and Fear lead men unto virtuous actions, and restrain them from
vicious actions, we confess: There needed not s^ much pains for proving of
that which no man denies. But the solemn practice o^ this Author is, to be
large in proving a^ antecedent which would have been grante^ without further
proof, and to presuppos^ or beg the consequence which he is unable to make good.

Martyrs did not endure racks, gibbets, lions, etc. out of an hope that upon
prescience of faith and perseverance they were elected or predestined before
the foundations of the world were laid, whereas others out of Gods eternal
prescience of their final impenitencie and infidelity were passed-by, (which
is the Election and Reprobation only allowed by the Remonstrants) but out of a
certain belief grounded in the revealed word, that whosoever persevereth unto
the end shall be saved. This hope of persevering is no less (nay it is more)
strong in those who fetch their faith and perseverance from the special mercy
of God extended unto them in their Predestination, then it can be in those who
fetch their Predestination from Gods foresight only of faith and perseverance,
upon the condition of general grace growing out of man's own free will.

Yea, but (says the Remonstrant) I am utterly ignorant what God has decreed
^oncerning me in his secret counsel of Pre^estination; this therefore can
afford me ^o hope of salvation. I demand, Art not thou ^s utterly ignorant what
God has eternally ^oreseen concerning thee in thy conditio^ate Predestination?
how then can more hope arise from this then from the other?

If a Remonstrant shall further reply, I am uncertain whether it be Gods will
to give me the grace of perseverance or no, and therefore I cannot build my
hope of salvation upon his unknown will. I demand again, Art thou certain that
thine own free will, with help of that grace which is offered thee, will make
thee persevere in faith and godliness unto thy lives end? how then can thou
build thy hope of salvation upon the prescience of that which is more uncertain
then the other? Hear this very objection long ago answered by S. Augustine; De
Praed. sanct. c. 11.
Incerta est mihi (inquit) de meipso voluntas Dei. Quid ergo? Tuane tibi
voluntas de teipso certa est, nec times? Qui videtur stare, videat ne cadat.
Cum igitur utraque voluntas incerta sit, cur non homo firmiori quam infirmiori
fidem suam, spem charitatemque committit? And Prosper gives the same answer in
effect; Ad excerpt. Genuens. Resp. 9.
Absit a vobis ideo desperare de vobis, quoniam spem vestram in Deo habere
jubemini non in vobis. We do not say therefore that hope of salvation or future
blessedness can spring from an immediate knowledge of that Election which we
ascribe unto Gods absolute decree: And we do say, that no more hop^ can arise
to any man from the immediat^ knowledge of that Election which the Remonstrants
ascribe unto the conditionate decree founded in Gods eternal prescience. In
both opinions therefore, if we will have a lively hope of atteining the
heavenly kingdom, it must immediately arise from an experimental sense in our
selves that we are walking in that way which leads unto the heavenly
kingdom, and from a steadfast persuasion that God our Father will,
notwithstanding our own weakness and all our mighty enemies, bring us safely
unto the heavenly kingdom. And for this latter, our doctrine of Election or
Predestination, built upon mere mercy, affords far better hope then theirs,
built upon mere prescience. See Jer. 32.38, etc. John 10.28, 29. and Phil. 1.6.


Now for the curb of fear; it is as strong, and more strong, to hold men in
from vicious actions, in our doctrine, who held faith and repentance and
holiness of life to be the fruits or effects of Predestination, then in the
Remonstrants, who hold the Divine Predestination to be rather an effect of man's
free will preconsidered or foreseen by God as believing and persevering in
faith and godliness. For suppose a man somewhat ^arefull of his salvation; he
will be fearful ^f living wickedly, when he beleiveth that ^o man shall de
facto escape the torments of ^ell but he whom God out of mere mercy ^ath
predestined, and that no man can have any comfortable assurance or taste of
his Predestination, unless he have first a true con^tant endeavor to do good
and eschew ^vil. Suppose a man careless and unmindfull of his salvation; yet
if he hold the forementioned doctrine, he must needs be many times in the midst
of his lewd courses stricken with fear of hell, when he sees none of those
fruits in himself which he holds to be the effects of Predestination unto
life and the only means to bring him to heaven. On the other side; Take a man
of the Remonstrants opinion, though not altogether careless of his salvation;
yet he need not greatly to abstein in the present from vicious actions for fear
of hell torments or eternal damnation, because his Predestination depends
upon his own free will to the very last moment of life; and he has such a
strong persuasion of a continual power which he has in his free will to
repent and believe, that he will not in all likelihood be very fearful of
enjoying the pleasures of sin for a season. Suppose a Remonstrant careless
of salvation; this doctrine, That Reprobation is founded upon prescience of
what a man shall be found doing at the very last moment of his life, will make
him more careless: for no man, but in his hopes of future amendment is
overfavourable to himself, and so lesseneth the present fear which his wicked
life might otherwise raise up in him.

second branch of this reason whereby he goes about to prove that absolute
Predestination and Reprobation destroy both Hope and Fear; it is grounded upon
an error confuted and rejected by the common consent of all Divines, namely,
That the eternal decrees of God concerning future events do make the contrary
events unpossible, do make the temporal and immediate agents to do all they do
out of an absolute necessity, having no liberty in modo agendi to abstein from
so doing or to do the contrary. Were this true, the Remonstrants, who
acknowledge eternal and absolute decrees upon presupposall of an eternal
absolute prescience, should by their doctrine destroy hope and fear as well as
we. For the Divine eternal prescience of future actions or events infers as
absolute a certainty, immutabilitie, necessity of such events, as the decrees
of absolute Predestination and Reprobation do. And therefore the Schoolmen are
as much troubled in answering the question, An praescientia Divina, vel
providentia, necessitatem afferat rebus praescitis, as in the other, An
praedestinatio Divina imponat, etc. And the Philosophers, who never dreamed of
Predestination or Reprobation, were yet much troubled to show how any thing
could be fortuitum or contingens, admitting an eternal and infallible
prescience of all future events in God. Aquinas first enquireth Part. 1. q. 22.
art. ^.
Vtrum providentia rebus provisis necessitatem imponit? And here it is that
subtle Cajetane is driven to confess, In ignorantia sola quietem invenio. And
concerning Gods eternal Knowledge of future contingents he had before moved
the like difficulties, Quaest. 14. art. 13. concerning Gods eternal Will,
Quaest. 19. art. 8. The like may be found commonly in all the Schoolmen. So
that if this Author, or any other Remonstrant, will but take the pains to
consider how the School-Divines clear the eternal and infallible Prescience,
Will and Providence of God from imposing fatal necessity upon events
foreseen, willed, provided, he may with the same facility know how to clear
the eternal absolute decrees of Predestination and Reprobation from imposing
upon men's actions any fatal irresistible necessity. As Gods absolute
prescience does not take away the possibility of the contrary action or event,
no more does his absolute decree. Part. 1. qu. 14. art. 13.
Scita a Deo, says Aquinas, sunt contingentia propter causas proximas, licet
scientia Dei sit necessaria. And so he speaks concerning Predestination;
Quaest. 23. art. 6.
Ordo praedestinationis certus est, and tamen libertas arbitrii non tollitur,
ex qua contingenter provenit praedestinationis effectus. And concerning the
decree of Reprobation; Art. 3.
Quod reprobatus non potest gratiam adipisci, non est intelligendum secundum
impossibilitatem absolutam, sed conditionatam. Men are no more precisely
determined ad unum in our doctrine of Predestination and Reprobation then in
that of the Remonstrants. In mente ac voluntate Dei the decrees are eternal,
immutable, necessary, subject to no variation or contingency, as well in the
one opinion as in the other: In temporali exsecutione, where men are the
agents, the actions which lead to heaven or hell are subject to contingency in
both.

To all this we may add, That Hope or Fear cannot immediately arise from any
decrees of God altogether unknown to men: But who shall be saved, or who shall
be damned, as it is only determined in the eternal decree of Predestination
and Reprobation, is a thing altogether unknown.

are peremptory, inevitable, irreversible, irresistible, I cannot conjecture.
It should seem, in his opinion the eternal decrees of Predestination and
Reprobation are ambulatorie, avoidable, reversible, resistible by the creature.

Though the decrees considered in themselves are peremptory, inevitable, etc.
yet the actions of men whereby at length they arrive at heaven or fall into the
pit of hell, are free, contingent, etc. Reprobation includes a will or
absolute decree of God to permit such singular persons to fall into final
sin-guiltinesse, and to inflict eternal punishment upon them for their sins:
does this make their particular sinful actions necessary, inevitable, etc? No:
Aquin. part. 1. qu. 23. art. 3.
Quod in hoc peccatum vel illud labantur, ex libero illorum arbitrio contingit,
unde and merito imputatur in culpam.

It is true, it lies not in the power of any creature to disannull the
eternal absolute decrees of Gods will: But yet it lies in the power and
choice of free creatures (such as are angels and men) to do or not to do those
things whereby such decrees are in time accomplished. It was not in David's or
Peter's power to disannull the eternal decree of God concerning their
Predestination and Salvation: Yet the actions of Repenting, Believing,
Persevering were free actions proceeding from their free will and upon
deliberation. So it is true, it lay not in the power of Judas or Cain to
disannull the eternal decree of their Reprobation and Damnation; for Omne
aternum necessarium and immutabile: yet it lay in Cains power freely to commit
or not commit a murder upon his own brother, and in Judas his free will to
betray or not betray his Master; and so in all other sinners, to choose or not
to choose the doing of those things which procure their just damnation.

men's actions about ends and things determined by Gods absolute unrevealed
decrees are in vain and fruitless, is a vain and false opinion, and exploded
by the very heathen under the name of Cic. De fato.
(...) or ignava ratio, cui si pareamus, nihil est omnino quod agamus in vita.
For though our endeavors do not make them otherwise quoad eventum then God had
fore-determined, yet the thing was so determined by God as it neither could nor
should have ever come into effect without such actions and endeavors of men.
His instances are as frivolous and far from the purpose, as his opinion is
from all truth. For his instance in the devils now damned, it is not to the
point. He should have instanced in the angels not-elected before their
damnation, and have showed that their obedience had been vain and fruitless;
and then he might have inferred that the good actions of men dum sunt in via
are vain and fruitless. Now he can infer nothing, but that it were a vain
thing for Judas damned in hell to hope by any endeavors of his to alter the
decree of his damnation.

For his instance in a decree of the immortality of man's soul and of the
vanity of using means for the annihilation thereof, it is no whit better then
the other. We do not deny but it is a fruitless and a vain thing for any man
to go-about by his temporal endeavors to alter Gods eternal decrees
concerning the nature or properties which he has allotted unto his creatures,
as to make an elementarie body eternal, or an immortal soul mortal. And as
ridiculous it is (though in another kind) for any Remonstrant to suppose that
the eternal decrees of Gods Predestination and Reprobation (as himself holds
them) can be altered by any temporal actions which men shall do or not do.

And yet though it be a vain and idle endeavor to refer our temporal
actions to the alteration of any of Gods eternal decrees (for Vide August.
Cons. l. 12. c. 13.
de ratione aeternitatis est immutabilitas;) yet it is no vain or idle
endeavor for any man elected or not-elected to aim at eternal life by doing
good actions and by absteining from evil: For if a man be elected, there is no
other way to come unto salvation: if he be not elected, some good endeavors
would serve to mitigate his damnation; and every man continuing in his good
endeavors may assuredly hope for salvation and shall assuredly obtein it.
There is an eternal, absolute, immutable decree, revealed unto us in Gods
word, That whosoever believes in the Son of God, and leads a sober, just
and godly life, shall be saved; and whosoever does not truly believe, but
leads a lewd, unjust and wicked life, shall be damned. It is not the
alteration of Gods decrees which men's actions must aim at, but the obteining of
happiness and escaping wretchedness according to the tenor of his decrees.
And herein no man's actions can be vain or fruitless. For God does not by the
absolute decree of Election absolutely determine to save Peter, whether he
believe or not believe, repent or not repent; and therefore Peter's faith and
repentance are not vain and idle actions. Neither does he by the absolute
decree of Non-election or negative Reprobation absolutely determine to damn
Judas, whether he believe or not believe, repent or not repent (such absolute
decrees are the absolute mistakings of the Remonstrants;) and therefore such
good actions had not been vain and fruitless. We may truly say to every man in
the world, elected or not-elected, as God himself spoke to desperate Cain, Genesis
4.7.
If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? Yes questionless: for Romans 2.
to every man that does good, shall be glory, etc. No man shall be damned quia
ab aeterno non electus aut reprobatus, sed quia in tempore infidelis and impius.

For the Ministers preaching; if this man hold it vain, Vide Aug. tract. 48. in
Joann.
unless by it some souls of those ^. Tim. 2.10.
the power of God unto their salvation. And unto them (though unknown Aquin.
part. 1. qu. 23. art. 8.
quoad singulares personas) do the Ministers principally refer their labor
and pains. For though the decree of Predestination, which is eternal, cannot
be procured by any endeavors of men, yet the effects or benefits flowing from
Predestination may be promoted by the Ministers. Secondly, it is not in vain in
regard of the Reprobate: For though it bring none of them to salvation, yet
sometimes it makes them do some good things, and abstein from some evil, which
otherwise they would not have done: and it is a means to convict their
consciences that their damnation is just. Last of all, the Ministers painful
preaching is not in vain in regard of himself: For hereby he escapes that Vae
mihi si non evangelizavero: he gets comfort of conscience here, and a crown
hereafter.

If labor be to no purpose where the thing is not atteinable by man's labor,
then to go-about by our labor to attein the decree of Election for our selves
or any other man, is a vain labor: But if labor be profitable when a good
thing may be atteined by it, and without it cannot; then to labor to bring our
selves or others to the kingdom of heaven, is never a vain labor: for by this
every man may, and without this no man can enter into the kingdom of heaven.

sure of atteining everlasting life as Paul was. Neither will the eternal
decree of Reprobation, be it absolute or be it conditional, ever stand an
obstacle in any man's way.

No man who by the preaching of the fruitless or vain. De necessariis nemo
deliberat; and therefore no man deliberateth how to get himself predestined:
but to be saved, is a thing depending upon our free actions, which require
deliberation.

Here he discovers his erroneous conceit of Predestination and Reprobation,
namely, That Predestination is an absolute appointment of men to enjoy the
kingdom of heaven, whether they live well or ill; and that Reprobation is also
an absolute appointment of some men to the torments of hell, whether they live
well or ill. Such an absolute Predestination and Reprobation we disclaim and
detest.

If a wise man were persuaded (as he ought to be) that he shall never be one
farthing richer then God has determined, yet he would use the ordinary means,
as knowing that men cannot be brought to the end determined by God but by using
such means without which God has also appointed that such an end shall not be
effected. As if God had determined in heaven and revealed to man upon earth
that he shall live fifteen years just, and neither more nor less, he were a
fool or a madman that should conclude, I will neither eat nor drink these
fifteen years; I will run when I list into the fir^ etc.

Therefore the absolute decrees of eternal Predestination and Reprobation must
be abandoned, and Arminius his conditional Predestination and Reprobation be
embraced, otherwise all care of pietie^ and good living must needs be
extinguished.

First, because he is quite mistaken in the sense of this word Absolute.
Eternal Predestination is not termed an absolute decree of saving David,
Peter, Paul, or any man else, as if it absolved persons predestinate from the
necessity of using the means of salvation which Gods revealed word has
enjoined; (This were rather a dissolute then an absolute Predestination.) but
because God eternally predestinating David, Peter, Paul, and the rest, has in
his special mercy absolutely determined to give them that special grace which
shall move, enable, and make them use all the necessary means unto their
salvation. And for eternal Reprobation; it is not termed an absolute decree of
damning Cain, Judas, or the Devil himself, as if God were absolutely resolved
to damn them though they should never entangle themselves in any guilt of
damnation, and should do all those good acts which God himself has decreed
shall be means to bring any who uses them unto salvation: but because God
eternally passing-by them and not-predestinating them, has absolutely resolved
to withhold from them that special mercy, more abundant and most effectual
grace, without which he infallibly knows by their own voluntary rebellion
they will incur damnation, which he is absolutely resolved to permit and not
to prevent.

Secondly, all his premises are too weak to induce his conclusion, because
eternal absolute determinations of God concerning events which shall betide unto
particular men, do neither encourage nor discourage them from using the
ordinary means of atteining good and avoiding evil, whilst they are only
known in the general, and altogether unknown as they concern this and that
singular person. No man doubts but God has eternally determined who shall be
Psalm. 75.
promoted unto worldly honors and who shall not, who shall attein unto riches
and who shall not. The very Heathen were not ignorant of this truth, who
ascribed these different conditions of men Hesiod. (...).
(...). But because singular persons know not whether God have determined to
advance them to honor and wealth or not, they judge not all care, pains and
study to attein honor or wealth to be vain and fruitless. Yet i^ temporal or
external good things there were more color a great deal to ground idleness
upon Gods eternal determination; because let a man take never so good courses
and so true pains to attein honor or wealth, he shall never compass it if God
have otherwise appointed: But in spiritual and eternal blessings, let any man
take the course and use the means which God has prescribed to attein them, and
he may assure himself they are infallibly appointed for him.

for atteining it was fruitless and vain. And if God had revealed to Judas
(which in his wisdom he has judged unfit) the eternal immutable decree of
his Reprobation, yet should none of his endeavors to do good and eschew evil
have been unprofitable.

Fourthly, because if men should reject nihil ponunt in electis aut reprobatis,
they only suppose in God a determination of bringing the one infallibly unto
eternal life, and of permitting the other as infallibly to come short of
eternal life, and by their own sinful acts to plunge themselves into the gulf
of eternal death. In the Remonstrants decree of eternal Predestination and
Reprobation the same determination of God concerning the same particular men
with the same infallibility and immutability of their contrary ends is
established. If therefore the distinct decrees of Predestination and
Reprobation thus irrevocably established before the world was made, make all
labor in religion unprofitable, the Remonstrants own doctrine does it no less
the^ ours. Again, absolute and eternal determinations of God concealed in
mente Divina, though never so infallible and immutable, cannot in singular
persons hinder piety or nourish profaneness, where there are decrees as
immutable, as infallibly revealed unto the same singular persons in Gods word,
promising life to all without exception that do well, and threatening death to
all those that do ill. How can it probably be supposed that those unknown
Divine determinations should work upon men's wills, when these so well known and
so continually published do not.

If any Remonstrant shall say, Make me sure of mine Election, Viole Thom. a
Kempis, l. 1. c. 25. page 68.
and that no immutable eternal decree of Reprobation shall keep me out of
heaven, and then I will labor, I will toil, I will sweat to attein eternal
life; I answer, No other man can make thee sure of it: but do what thou say,
and thou may make thy self sure of it. And if thou will not for such a
price adventure thy pains unless God will first make thee of his privy
counsel, eternal damnation is but a just reward of thine idleness and
profaneness.

Last of all, the immutability of all Gods eternal decrees whatsoever is a
thing out of all question amongst orthodox Divines (I need not except Vorstius
the Remonstrant, because no man reckons him amongst orthodox Divines:) I
wonder therefore how this Author should think he has said any thing against
the Divine absolute decrees of Predestination and Reprobation, only because
they are peremptory, inevitable, irreversible, etc. If God upon the eternal
prescience of Judas his final impenitency conceived an eternal decree of his
Reprobation and Damnation (as Arminius himself grants) Ruiz. De vol. p. 166.
implicat contradictionem, velle non facere eandem rem, aut revocare illud
decretum, etc. Fulg. ad Monim. l. 1 c. 12.
Sempiterna voluntas Dei nunquam mutabilitati subjacet, quia initium exsistendi
non habet. It is a thing unbeseeming the Divine majesty, not to decree from all
eternity whatsoever he will do or not do for men or unto men in time; or when
he has so decreed, to revoke or change any of his decrees. If therefore the
Remonstrants Predestination and Reprobation be reversible decrees, we will none
of them; for we are sure they were never of Gods making.

Calvines saying is most true: For the decree of Reprobation is no cause of
infidelity; though the decree of Predestination prepares for men that grace
which works faith and sanctification in their hearts.

The Landtgraves profane speech makes as much against the Arminian
Predestination as against that which we hold. For suppose a Remonstrant had
told him, If you be elected, it is because God has eternally foreseen that you
will die a penitent and a faithful man: If you be reprobated, it is because
God has eternally foreseen you will die a faithless and a wicked man, this in
all likelihood would have been so far from taking away his desperate
profaneness, that it would have increased it: for God cannot be deceived in
his foresight.

holiness, but from holy Scriptures: we therefore passe-by this discourse as
wholly impertinent. All that he says of the Epicures might as well be said by
us against the Remonstrants opinions: but we take no pleasure in idle vagaries.

Men's practice cannot be guided by decrees of God concealed from their
knowledge, though they be decrees concerning their good or evil. But if men
will show themselves reasonable men and not mad men, they must take their rules
of practice from such revealed decrees as teach what actions are means to
attein good, and what are means to draw evil upon our selves.

He has a crazed brain that will draw or logical sequeles from decrees or
antecedents whereof he knows not the particular tenor, or how in singular
they concern himself.

For his objection against the second answer, we say, Let him understand
absolute Reprobation and absolute Election as by us it has been formerly
explained, and not according to his erroneous fancy, which has been often
confuted; and it no more begets sloth or carnal liberty then the
Remonstrants eternal Election and Reprobation springing from Gods infallible
and eternal prescience, nay much lesser. For according to our position no man
can have so strong a persuasion that he is elected and shall be saved whilst he
continues in sloth, carnal security or sinful actions, as he may in theirs.
If it be once conceived that the eternal decrees, which distinguish men
elected and reprobated, stand founded upon the foreseen final goodness of
men, such is the vain confidence which most men have of their own free will and
of the sovereigne dominion which their will has over its own acts, that though
they be never so wicked for the present, yet they are most ready to flatter
themselves that they will turn good and holy men before their death. And thus
they spend their whole life in sin and carnal security, whilst they hope to
put themselves within the number of the Elect by their final penitencie when
they please. But he that believes that Predestination is an act of Gods
absolute will and free mercy, and that faith and holiness are the proper
effects thereof, he can have cold comfort of his Election or Salvation whilst
he continues in his carnal and wicked conversation; nay he must needs be in
fear of damnation: especially since he dares not trust to the broken reed of
his own free will for his repentance and perseverance, as men of a contrary
opinion are easily induced to do. He may have some slender hope of being
converted at the length, because it is within the limits of Gods power and
mercy to do it: yet he cannot (in all likelihood) so securely and carnally
presume upon his final conversion and perseverance as those who ascribe these
good acts unto their own free will, and the certainty of them to the intuitive
prescience of the Divine understanding, and not to an operative effectual
eternal decree of his will.

To this may be added, that whatsoever for fashions sake Remonstrants talk of
eternal Predestination and Reprobation, yet Vide Penot. p. 234. Et Grev. de
Elect. page 136. Et Rem. Exam. Censur. p. 192.
some hold them such incomplete acts or decrees as are never established in
mente ac voluntate Divina before man's free will has actually done all the good
or evil which it does in this life. So that the decree of Reprobation being
conceived by them ad modum sententiae pendentis, donec per liberum hominis
arbitrium omnia sint posita in esse and in actu quae per illud poni debent,
every man may guess what boldness this is likely to breed in most men of
deferring their repentance, and continuing in their carnal security till they
think their end is drawing near: which few think of until it suddenly
surpriseth them.

The Remonstrants lately in plain terms affirm, Falsum est quod electio facta
sit ab aeterno: By which it is plain what they think of the decree of
Reprobation. I have stood the longer upon this, that every man may see what the
Remonstrants principally aim at, when they are so bitter against absolute
Predestination and Reprobation, and so eager for their conditionate
Predestination and Reprobation: namely these two things: First, that reteining
the bare name of eternal Election and Reprobation, they may closely and
obliquely oppugn the eternity of those distinct decrees. Secondly, that they
may plainly reduce all the difference of those distinct decrees, as they are
terminated unto singular persons, unto the different acts of men's free will,
and exclude that difference which the Apostle testifyeth to have been in the
Divine will toward the sons of men, and that before the foundations of the
world were laid, Romans 8.30^ and 9.11. Ephesians. 1.4. and 11. Acts 13.48.

ignorance of Gods decree, whethe^ this or that singular person be in the
numbe^ of the Elect or no, does much alter the ca^ in the matter which is now
under debate We now inquire whether the Remonstran^ doctrine or ours be more
likely to nouri^ carnal security in a man who has yet ^^knowledge of his
particular Election or Reprobation, of his future Glorification ^ Damnation. We
say, that though men^ perverse minds, whilst they are occupied i^ wicked
courses, may out of both doctrine take occasion of carnal security and of
slee^ing in sin, yet that doctrine which breede^ a stronger presumption of
being elected an^ saved in the mind of a sinner continuing a^dicted unto his
sinful courses, is that which most nourishes and cherishes men in the^
present looseness and lewdness: And this ^ evidently the doctrine of the
Remonstrant^ and not ours. For any Remonstrant (thoug^ never so wicked) may
thus reason with himself leaning unto their principles, I am (f^ all my present
wicked condition) a man elected, and a man most certainly to be saved, if o^ of
mine own free will excited and enabled by Divine grace, I shall repent and
truly believe in the Son of God, and so end my life: But these being actions
which God has put within mine own power, I am resolved to perform them
hereafter: Therefore I shall be saved. It is the minor proposition which
nourishes a man in his present lewdness, and yet makes him presume upon his
future happiness. And the minor containing nothing in it but a promise of
doing that good for a man's own self which lies (as he thinks) in his own
power to do, no man thus affected will greatly fear to continue in sin, or
stand in any great fear of eternal damnation. But according to our doctrine a
man of common sense will reason thus, I steadfastly believe that if God have
elected me he will sanctify me with his grace, and bring me unto glory: and if
I be not sanctified with grace whilst I live here, I was never elected, I shall
never be saved: But mine own conscience tells me, that as yet I am
unsanctified, that I wallow in looseness and lewdness of life.

The true and natural genius of these premises truly apprehended is to rowse
a man out of sloth, and to quell groundless presumption of his future
salvation, and (in a word) to make him conclude, Till I alter my course of
life, I must not dream of any Election or Glorification.

Now for the manner of reasoning which this Author will needs teach us, it is
not worth the learning. Many, says he, are ordained enevitably to destruction,
and a few to salvation.

If by an ordination to destruction and salvation he mean an absolute and
peremptory will in God to damn some men whether they do well or ill, we hold
no such absolute ordination. If he mean an eternal absolute decree of God to
bring some men (fewer in number) unto grace and glory, and to permit some
others (far more in number) to abuse the means of grace, to lose the kingdom
of glory, to procure their own damnation, we cannot deny it, unless we will
deny our Saviors express words, Multi vocati, Matthew. 22.14.
pauci electi: Many run in the broad way which leads unto death, few in the
narrow way which leads unto life: which I think this Author will not say
happened without Gods eternal ordination.

For the word inevitably, it is thrust into this proposition very unfitly.
Things are said to be evitable or inevitable unto men, when by their actions
they may or may not be avoided: But as for the eternal ordinations of God
acted immanently in himself, he that terms them evitable or inevitable in
regard of us, who were not then in being, speaks he knows not what.

Either I am absolutely chosen to grace and glory, or absolutely cast-off from
both. If chosen, I must of necessity believe, and be saved: If cast-off, I must
of necessity not believe, and be damned. If by absolute Election and Abjection
he understand such an absoluteness as brings men to the means or end of
either without their own voluntary acts, we utterly disclaim it. If he mean
such an absolute Election and Preterition as prepares effectual grace for
some, and gives it them in due time, and prepares not such effectual grace
for others, neither gives it them at any time, we grant this absolute Election
and Reprobation. But whereas he says, If chosen, I must of necessity believe,
and be saved, the contrary follows, If chosen, I shall with a free will work
out mine own salvation. And whereas he says, If reprobated, I must necessarily
not believe, and be damned, the contrary likewise follows, If reprobated, I
shall out of the hardness of mine own heart, willingly and wittingly run in
the broad way which leads unto my damnation. As for the Necessity of
believing and not-believing, which he thinks must needs follow upon absolute
Election and Reprobation, in both we grant necessitatem infallibilitatis; in
neither coactionis: Vide Albert. part. 1. tract. 15. q. 61. p. 138. b. and q.
63. page 144.
In both we grant necessitatem positionis or ordinis; in neither necessitatem
eventus, or impossibilitatem eventus contrarii. God is according to his own
essence and nature Causa necessaria: yet the second and immediate causes are
not necessitated unto their actions, Albert. part. 1. tract 16. qu. 63. page
144.
quia prima causa non tollit modum suae causalitatis a secundis. There is need
therefore for any man to take thought both about the means and about the end,
not to get a new ordination or decree from God, but because the eternal
ordination of men unto glory cannot be effected without their own serious care
and endeavor, and because the eternal ordination of men unto punishment
cannot be avoided but by shaking-off sloth and carnal security.

Vide Aug. De bono persev. c. 16. and lib. 3. De lib. arbitr. c. 2.
Unto all this I add, That eternal Predestination and Reprobation, as it is
founded by the Remonstrants upon Gods eternal prescience, draws the same
necessity after it. For I reason thus after his pattern; I am either upon Gods
eternal prescience of my final perseverance in faith, absolutely chosen to
grace and glory, or upon Gods eternal prescience of my final impenitency
absolutely cast-off from both. If upon the Divine eternal infallible
prescience of my believing and persevering I was ordained unto salvation, I
must of necessity believe, and be saved: If upon the same eternal and
immutable prescience of my infidelity and impenitency I was ordained to
damnation, I must as necessarily not believe, and be damned. There is the same
force in this manner of reasoning to induce a carnal sluggish soul unto
carelessness which is in the other: There is as great necessity put upon humane
actions by the eternal Prescience of God as is by his eternal Predestination.
And if any man have looked into School Divinity, he cannot be ignorant that the
same objections which are made against Predestination, as overthrowing the
Liberty of man's will, and putting a necessity and inevitability upon his
actions, they are likewise made against the Divine Prescience, as doing the
same: and the self-same answers and distinctions which free the one from this
calumny, free the other.

Molina (no enemy to the Remonstrants doctrine) plainly affirms, Conc. qu.
22. page 299
In concilianda tam liberate arbitrii nostri circa actus peccatorum quam
evitabilitate eorum cum Divina providentia, non alius labor est quam in iisdem
conciliandis cum praescientia qua Deus praevidet eos esse futuros nisi
impediat. Malderus (no friend to the Contra-remonstrants) Antis. p. 14, 15, 17.
grants absolute Predestination both unto the actions of grace, as Believing,
Persevering, and the like, and to the end thereof, which is eternal Life. And
he detesteth their opinion who hold that the free acts of men cannot be
predefined eternally by God; Page 29.
Absit ut in illam concedamus sententiam quae docet actus nostros liberos non
posse ullo modo a Deo praedefiniri.

Vide Penot. page 231.
if he had thought that all things come to pass in time according to an
eternal immutable prescience of God, as he was in thinking that all things
come to pass according to an eternal immutable destination of God; Vide Ans.
de conc. lib. arbit. cum Praed. cap. 1. and 2.
so it is as much to be feared, that many Remonstrants ground their idleness
and profaneness upon this fancy, That what God has eternally foreseen will
come to pass in time, must of necessity so come to pass, as that any of our
opinion should ground it upon the like fancy, That whatsoever God has
eternally predestined to come to pass in time, must of necessity so come to
pass. And since whether we found Predestination upon prescience or otherwise,
still the knowledge and comfortable sense thereof can no otherwise be had then
in and by the temporal effects, no reason can be given why absolute
Predestination (as it is taught by our Church) should breed more carelessness
or presumption then the Remonstrants Predestination.

Treatise.
V. It is an enemy to true COMFORT.
I Come now to my last reason against it, drawn from the Uncomfortablenesse of
it. It is a doctrine (A) full of desperation, both to them which stand and to
those that are fallen, to men out of temptation and to men in temptation.

It leads into temptation. leaves in temptation.
And therefore can be no doctrine of Gods word: For that is (...), good news,
to men, a storehouse of sweet consolations for us in our turbidis and lucid is
intervallis, in our best and worst conditions and changes. These things are
written, Romans 15.4.
says the Apostle, that by patience and comfort of the Scriptures we might
have hope: implying that therefore was the word written and left to the
Church, that by the comforts comprised in it those poor souls that look
tovvard heaven might never want in any changes or chances of this mortal life
a svveet gale of hope to refresh them and to carry on their ship full merrily
tovvard the haven.

I. First, this doctrine (B) leads men into temptations, and into such a one
too as is as sharp and dangerous as any the Tempter has. The devil can easily
persuade a man that makes absolute Reprobation a part of his creed, that he
is one of those absolute reprobates: because there are far more absolute
reprobates, even a hundred for one, then absolute chosen ones; and man has a
great deal more reason to think that he is one of the most then one of the
fevvest, one of the huge multitude of inevitable castavvayes then one of that
little flock for whom God has precisely prepared a kingdom. Such a man is not
only capable of but framed and fashioned by his opinion for this suggestion.
Which is a very sore (C) one, if we may believe Calvine, Bucer and Zanchius.
Calvine tells us, Calv. Instit. l. 3. c. 24. sect. 4. Nulla tentatione vel
gravius vel periculosius sideles percellit Satan.
that the devil cannot assault a believer with a temptation more dangerous. And
a little after he says, that it is so much the deadlier, by how much commoner
it is then any other. Rarissimus est cujus non interdum animus hac cogitatione
feriatur, Unde tibi salus nisi ex Dei electione? electionis porro quae tibi
revelatio? Quae si apud quempiam semel invaluit, aut diris tormentis miserum
perpetuo excruciat, aut reddit penitus attonitum.
So ordinary is this temptation, that he which is at all times free from it, is
a rare man (we are to conceive that he speaks of those who hold absolute
Reprobation:) and so dangerous it is, that if it get strength, he which is
under it is either miserably tormented or mightily astonished. And a little
after he says again, Ergo naufragium si timemus, solicit ab hoc scopulo
cavendum, in quem numquam sine exitio impingitur.
He that will not wrack his soul, must avoid this rock. Bucer also has a
passage like to this; Bucer. in 8. ad Romans q. de Praed. Ut caput omnis noxiae
tentationis, repellenda est haec quaestio, Sumusne praedestinati. Nam qui de
hoc dubitat, nec vocatum se nec justificatum esse credere poterit, hoc est,
nequit esse Christianus.
This doubt, whether we be predestinate or no, must be repelled as the head of
every pernicious temptation: For he that doubts of this, cannot believe that
he is called or justified; that is, he cannot be a Christian. Praesumendum
igitur ut principium fidei, nos omnes esse a Deo praescitos.
Every man therefore must presume upon it as a principle of his faith, that he
is elected. Zanch. l. 5. De not. Dei, q. de Praed.
This very speech of Bucers Zanchy makes use of to the same purpose. We see
then by the testimonies of these worthy men, that this temptation is very
dangerous and ordinary too to such as think there be absolute Reprobates.

The truth of both will further appear by the example of Georg. Major, in 2.
ad Tim. 2. fol. 1109.
Petrus Ilosuanus (D) a Schoolmaster in Hungary, who going to hang himself,
signified in a vvriting which he left in his study for the satisfaction of
his friends and countrymen, the true cause of that his unnatural fact. In
that vvriting he delivered these three things. 1. That he was of Calvines and
S. Augustines opinion, That men are not dealt withal secundum bona aut mala
opera, according to their works good or evil; but that there are occultiores
causae, more hidden causes, of men's eternal conditions. 2. That he was one of
that woeful company of absolute Reprobates, vas formatum in ignominiam, a
vessel prepared to dishonor; and that therefore (though his life had been none
of the vvorst) he could not possibly be saved. 3. That being unable to bear
those dreadful apprehensions of wrath with which he was affrighted, he
hanged himself. For these are some of his last words there recorded, Discedo
igitur ad lacus infernales aeternum dedecus patriae meae. Deo vos commendo,
cujus misericordia mihi negata est.
I go to those infernal lakes, an eternal reproach to my country. I commend
you to God, whose mercy is denied to me. Out of this example, two things we
may safely collect: First, That men who think there are many whom God has
utterly rejected out of his only will and pleasure, may be easily brought to
think by Satan's suggestion that they are of that company. Secondly, That this
temptation is very dangerous.

I conclude therefore this first part of my last reason, which is, That
absolute Reprobation leads men into temptation.

II. It leaves men in temptation: And this it does two vvayes; by 1. Making
(E) the tempted incapable of true comfort; 2. Making Ministers unable to give
true comfort.

1. It makes the tempted incapable of true comfort: Like a Gorgons head, it
does so trouble their fancies and amaze them, especially in their paroxysmes
and fits, that the strongest arguments of comfort, applied with as much art
and cunning as may be, will not fasten upon them. With David they say in their
fear, that all men are liars, namely all such as come to comfort them in their
temptation. The reason is, because it is an opinion incompatible with any
word of comfort that can be ministered to the distressed soul in this
temptation. Gods Love to mankind, Christ's Death for all men, the Calling of
poor sinners without exception to repentance and salvation, with all other
grounds of consolation, the tempted will easily elude with the grounds of his
opinion. Which that we may the better see, let us imagine that we hear a
Minister and a tempted Soul reasoning in this or the like manner.

TEMPTED WOE is (F) me; I am a castaway: I am absolutely rejected from grace
and glory.


MINISTER. Discourage not thy self, thou poor afflicted soul: God has not
cast thee off. For he hates nothing that he has made, but bears a love to
all men, and to thee among the rest.


TEMPT. God (G) hates no man as he is his creature, but he hates a great many
as they are sinners in Adam. And God has a twofold love, as I have learned: a
general love, which puts forth it self in outward and temporal blessings
only; and with this he loves all men: and a special love, by which he
provideth everlasting life for men; and with this he loves only a very few,
which out of his alone will and pleasure he singled from the rest. Under this
general love am I, but not under the special.


MIN. Nay, but God so loves all men as that he desires their eternal good:
for the Apostle says, He would have all to be saved, and be would have no man
to perish, nor thee in particular.


TEMPT. ALL is (H) taken two ways: for all sorts and conditions of men, high
and low, rich and poor, bound and free, etc. and for all particular men in
these several sorts and ranks. God would have all men to be saved in the first
sense, that is, all sorts: but he would not have all to be saved in the second
sense, that is, all particular men of those sorts; some of my country, my
calling, my condition of life, but not all and every one, nor me in particular.
Or if it be true that God would have all particular men to be saved, yet he
wills it only with a revealed will, not with a secret: for with that he will
have millions to be damned. Under this revealed will am I, not under the secret.


MIN. Nay, but Christ came into the world to seek and to save what was lost,
and is a propitiation not for our sins only, viz. the sins of a fevv
particular men, or the sins of all sorts of men, but for the sins of the
whole world: Therefore he came to save thee, and to be a propitiation for thy
sins: for thou art one of them that were lost, and thou art one of the
whole world.


TEMPT. The WORLD, as I have heard, is taken two ways in Scripture; largely
for all mankind, and strictly in a restrained signification, for the elect or
for believers. In this latter sense Christ dyed (I) for the World, namely, for
the world of the Elect, for the world of believers. Or if it be true that he
dyed for all mankind, yet he dyed for them but after a sort: he dyed for them
all dignitate pretii, he did enough to have redeemed all, if God would have had
it so; but he did not die for all voluntate propositi. God never intended that
he should shed his blood for all and every man, but for a few selected ones
only, with whom it is my lot not to be numbered.


MIN. God has founded an universal (K) covenant of peace with men upon the
Mediators blood: and therefore he intended it should be shed for all men
universally. He has made a promise of salvation to every one that will
believe, and excludes none that do not exclude themselves.


TEMPT. God purposed that his Son should die for all men, and that in his
name should be preached and offered remission of sins to every one; but yet
upon condition they will repent, believe, and do that which he means the
greatest part of men shall never do, nor me among the rest.


MIN. God has a true meaning that all men who are called should repent and
believe, that so they might be saved. As he would have all to be saved, so he
would have them come to the knowledge of the truth; and as he would have no
man to perish, so he would have all men to repent: and therefore he calls
them in the preaching of the word to the one as well as to the other.


TEMPT. God has a double (L) call; an outward by the preaching of the word in
men's ears, an inward by the irresistible work of the Spirit in their hearts.
The outward call is a part of Gods outward will: with that he calls every man
to believe: The inward and effectual call is a part of his secret will: and
with that he calls not every man to believe, but a very few only, whom he
has inevitably ordained to eternal life. And therefore by the outward call,
which I enjoy among many others, I cannot be assured of Gods and will and
meaning, that I should believe, repent and be saved.


By this (M) we may see, that no sound comfort can be fastened upon a poor soul
rooted in this opinion, when he lies under this horrible temptation.

The example (N) of Francis Spiera an Italian Lawyer will give some further
light and proof to this. This Spiera about the year 1548. against his
knowledge and conscience did openly abjure his religion and subscribe to
Popery, that thereby he might preserve his life and goods and liberty. Not long
after he fell into a deep distress of conscience, out of which he could never
wrestle, but ended his woeful days in despair. To comfort him came many
Divines of worth and note: But against all the comforts which they applied to
him, he opposed two things especially. 1. The Greatness of his sin: It was a
sin (said he) of a deep die, committed with many urging and aggravating
circumstances; and therefore could not be forgiven. This argument they quickly
took from him, and convinced him by the example of Peter, that there was
nothing in his sin that could make it irremissible: Peter, that committed the
same sin, and with some more odious circumstances, repented and was pardoned,
and so (no doubt) might he. 2. He opposed his absolute Reprobation, and with
that he put-off all their comforts. Peter (says he) repented indeed and was
pardoned, because he was elected: as for me, I was utterly rejected before I
was born; and therefore I cannot possibly repent or be saved. If any man be
elected, he shall be saved, though he have committed sins for number many and
heinous in degree: but if he be ex repudiatis, one of the cast-awayes,
necessario condemnabitur, he shall be inevitably condemned, though his sins
be small and few. Nihil interest an multa an pauca, an magna an parva sint,
quando nec Dei misericordia nec Christi sanguis quicqua^ ad eos pertinet.
A Reprobate must be damned, be his sins many or few, great or little,
because Gods mercy and Christ's merits belong not to him.

In this story (recorded by Coelius Secundus and Calvine, with some others who
lived at that time and wrote of it to their friends) as in a glass we may see
the disconsolate condition of a poor soul that is strongly conceited that the
greatest part of the world are absolute Reprobates, and that he is one of them:
He sticks so sast in the mire and clay that he can very hardly be drawn out.

2. It makes Ministers unable to afford true comfort to the tempted: And this
it does, because it 1. Takes from them all solid grounds of comfort; 2.
Leaves them only weak and insufficient grounds.

I. It bereaveth them of all solid arguments of comfort which are these; the
universality (O) of Gods Love, of Christ^ Death, and of the new Covenant of
grace. That Ministe^ which does explain and apply these three things soundly
an^ wisely to him which is tempted in this kind, does that which is abundantly
enough for the relieving and releasing of hi^ from this temptation. And he that
does not apply these, leavet^ him as he found him, in the midst of the
temptation still; whatsoever may be said to the contrary in the heat of
disputation Melanchth. Loc. com. p. 526. c. de Praed. Etsi multa disputantur
durius, tamen necesse est in vero agone ad hanc arcem confugere, videlicet,
quod de voluntate Dei judicandum sit ex expresso verbo, and quod promissio sit
universalis, and quod sit mandatum Dei aeternum and immutabile, Audire Filium,
and assentiri promissioni.
Though (says (P) Melanchthon (there be many things disputed in this point
more harshly, yet when all is done, the universal promise of grace and
salvation is a Christians only bulwa^k in this temptation and comb^^.
Obtemperemus igitur, ne vagentur animi quaerentes electione^ extra verbum, and
relicto Christo and omisso mandato de amplectenda promissione; sed teneamus
certa and indubitata fide promissionem gratiae non inanem esse fabulam, sed
Deum vere patefecisse voluntatem suam in promissione, and vere praestare quod
promisit.
Let us not therefore (says he) leave Christ, and seek for an Election out of
the word; but let us judge of Gods will of saving men by the promise and
commandment, which are both universal. And in another place of the same book
he has these words, P. 230. de prom. Evang. Sicut est necesse scire Evangelium
esse promissionem gratuitam, ita necesse est scire Evangelium promissionem
universalem esse. Hanc universalem tenere necesse est adversus periculosas
imaginationes de praedestinatione, ne disputemus hanc promissionem ad paucos
quosdam alios pertinere, non pertinere ad nos. Non enim dubium est, quin omnium
animos haec cogitatio exerceat.
As it is needful to knew that the promise of salvation is free; so it is
needful to know that it is universal, against some dangerous conceits of
Predestination. By these speeches we see clearly what this learned man thought
to be the true balm of Gilead, whereby a wounded soul should be cured; viz. The
universality of the Promise, and of Gods Love, and of Christ's Death; for they
all hang together, and cannot be disjoined.

The reason why those grounds are able to help a man in such a case, is twofold.

1. Because they are directly contradictory to the temptation. A will to save
all, a giving of Christ to death for all, a serious offer of grace to all,
cannot possibly stand with an absolute antecedent will and intent of
casting-away the greatest part of mankind, or, to say the truth, of any one man
in the world. Upon this follows the second reason.

2. Because they serve to convince the tempted, that he cannot be in that
condition in which he supposes himself to be. For if two contradictories
cannot be true, he that evinceth the truth of the one, convinces the
understanding of the untruth of the other: and he that makes it appear, that
this contradictory, God would have all to be saved, redeemed and called, to
repent and believe, is true, puts it out of all doubt to the understanding,
that the other contradictory, God will have most men to be absolutely and
inevitably damned, must needs be false, and so raises up that poor soul
which was pressed down with an erroneous conceit and fear that it was true.
In this manner did (Q) Junius (though not in the same temptation) relieve a
woman perplexed exceedingly with a strong persvvasion that she and all her
children should be damned, because she was busied about her children at a
certain time when she should have been at Mass. Junius makes short work
with her, tells her that her employment about her children was a duty
pleasing to God, but the Mass was a mere vvill-vvorship; and so delivering
her of her error upon which the temptation was built gives her present ease
and comfort. In like manner tell a man who fears himself to be an absolute
Reprobate, that there are no such absolute Reprobates, and that his fear is but
mere fancy and his doubt a dream, convince him once by contradictory grounds,
that there is no man in the world in that state in which he thinks himself
to be, and you drive out one nail by another, and expel the temptation. These
are the svvord of Alexander, which will cut asunder this Gordian knot of
absolute Reprobation; and these are the true Nepenthes of a sick and
sorrovvfull soul.

But now these true grounds of hope and comfort no Minister can make use of
that holds absolute Reprobation; nor, if he do usurp them, can he possibly
maintein them against the replies of the tempted, unless he relinquish his
opinion: because (as I have said) there is a plain contradiction betvveen them,
and no man is able to maintein two propositions which speak contrary things,
to be both true, any more then he can make it good, that the same thing may
have a being and no being at the same time. For example; A Minister comes to
comfort a man that thinks himself to be an absolute Reprobate: and how does
he set about it? He tells him, That God would have all to be saved, that
Christ died for all, etc. But what right has he to these grounds of comfort
seeing he holds the contrary conclusions, viz. That God will have a great
many to be damned and to have no part in Christ? Well; he usurpeth them
notvvithstanding: But is he able to maintein them against the answers of the
tempted? or can he make a good reply? No certainly. For thus answers the
tempted, God (R) would have all to be saved with a revealed, but not with a
secret will: and Christ died for all men sufficiently, but not intentionally;
or if God did intend that he should die for all, yet he intended it upon a
condition which he purposed the most should never perform. What can the
Minister reply to this? If he will make a direct reply which shall take away
the answer, he must deny that God has two wills, the one opposite to the
other, a secret will that many shall unavoydably be damned, and a revealed
will that all men may be possibly saved. And he must also deny that God had an
intent that Christ should not die for a great many, or that he intended he
should die for all upon condition they would believe and repent, and yet
purposed that the most should never believe and repent. But can he deny these
things? He cannot, except he deny his own conclusion, which is, That there are
many thousands eternally and unavoydably rejected in Gods absolute purpose from
grace and glory. For that conclusion is all one with the answers of the
tempted, and contradictory to those arguments of comfort which he is glad to
make use of. Absolute Reprobation therefore bereaveth that Minister who
believes it, of all solid grounds of consolation, and so makes him unable to
recover a poor soul vvounded with this temptation.

II. Secondly, it leaves a Minister some vveak grounds only and insufficient
to quiet the tempted: and therefore it makes him unable to comfort him. The
grounds which it leaves him are insufficient, because they cannot (S)
convince, and make it evident to the understanding of the tempted that he is
not that which he fears, that is, a Reprobate. Out of temptation
probabilities will uphold a man's hopes (as they did Manoahs wife's, Judge.
13.22, 23. If the Lord would kill us, he would not have received a
burnt-offering at our hands, nor showed us all these things;) because men are
not so mistrustfull then: But in temptation men are usually very suspicious and
incredulous, like Jacob, who would not be persuaded that Joseph was alive
and a great man in Egypt, till he savv the chariots that were sent to fetch
him thither, Genesis 45.25. and like Thomas, who would not believe that Christ
was risen, till he savv the print of the nails and spear, John 20.25. They
will not believe any thing that is spoken for their comfort, till it be made
so apparent that they have nothing to say to the contrary. My self have known
some, who in their temptations have often put their comforters to their
proofs, to their protestations, nay to their oaths too, before they would
believe their words of comfort. And in this temptation we speak of, men are so
strongly possessed with the fear of eternal rejection from the face of God
that they will not easily without manifest conviction believe the contrary.
But grounds convincing and satisfying a Minister that mainteineth absolute
Reprobation has not in store. Nothing can he say that is able to make it
appear infallibly and undeniably to the understanding of the tempted, that he
is no absolute Reprobate. All that he (T) can say is, Be of good comfort: you
are a believer, a truly repenting sinner; therefore no Reprobate. For faith and
repentance are infallible fruits of Election, and arguments of a state contrary
to what you fear. But this the tempted will deny: He will say, that he is no
believer, etc. And how will the Minister convince him that he is? He must
prove to him by the outvvard acts of faith and repentance (for they only are
apparent to him) that he does repent and believe. But this proof is not
demonstrative, nor does convince; because opera virtutum simulari possunt, the
external acts of faith, repentance, or any other grace may be counterfeited.
The devil may seem to be an angel of light; wolves may go in sheeps clothing;
Judas may make the world believe by his preaching and following of Christ, that
he is a true Apostle; and Simon Magus, though he remain in the gall of
bitterness and bond of iniquity, may be thought by his receiving of Baptism
to be a true believer: and so may any hypocrite by some exterior acts of faith
and repentance delude the best discerner of spirits among men, and gain the
opinion and esteem of a true penitent and believer. Actions externally good, or
good in appearance, may be evil indeed for want of a good rule, manner, end,
or some other good circumstances with which an action that is good must be
clothed; (For bonum non oritur nisi ex integris:) and so by good consequence
cannot certainly prove the man who does them to be a good man, or to have the
grace of faith, repentance, or any other truly planted in his heart. Which
being so, I say that a Minister cannot (V) by the outvvard acts and fruits of
faith and repentance which he sees come from him, make it evident to the
tempted, to the silencing of all replies, that he is without doubt a true
believer and repenting sinner, and consequently no Reprobate. For still the
tempted may say, You may be deceived in me: for you cannot see any thing more
in me then has been seen in many a Reprobate. And if this be all you can say
to prove me to be none, I am not satisfied, I may be a Reprobate: nay I am a
Reprobate, and you are but a miserable comforter, a Physician of no value.

This that I say, Piscator (X) does confess ingenuously in Disput. de Praed.
contra Schafman. these. 85. where he says, 1. That no comfort can be possibly
instilled into the souls of Reprobates afflicted with this horrible
temptation: from whence it follovveth, that the far greatest part of men,
even an hundred for one, must bear their burden (if they fall into this
distemper and trouble) as well as they can: the Gospel is not able to afford
them any solid comfort. 2. That the Elect being in this condition may indeed be
comforted, but it must be by their sense of sin and their desire to be freed
of it by Christ: which proofs are but only probable to the best, and to a man
in temptation no proofs at all; and consequently either no comforts or very
small ones. In the end of the same Thesis also, where he says, that a man
should reason thus with himself, Grace is offered to some with a mind of
communicating it unto them; therefore it may be that I am one of those to whom
it is so offered: in this place (I say) he implies plainly, that the doctrine
of absolute Reprobation, which teaches the communication of grace to a very
fevv only, affords but a fieri potest, a Peradventure I am Elected, (and
that a very poor one too) for a poor soul to comfort himself vvithall.

An Answer to his last reason, drawn from the Vncomfortablenesse of this
doctrine.
LEt these few undoubted truths be always remembered; 1. That Predestination
and Reprobation are eternal immanent acts in mente ac voluntate Divina before
the foundations of the world were laid. 2. That as they are such immanent acts
or decrees, they work nothing upon men, because the men themselves as yet had
no being. 3. That when singular persons come into temporal being, the effects
or consequents of those decrees are always wrought according to the nature of
the subjects. 4. That the decrees of Predestination and Reprobation are
irreversible and immutable. 5. That there is no reasonable ground of any
particular man's persuasion that he is either under the one decree or the other,
but only what is collected a posteriori, from the effects. These being agreed
upon, it will easily be made appear that the doctrine of the Remonstrants is
more uncomfortable to men then ours.

That Gods Predestination and Non-predestination comfortable doctrine then that
of the Remonstrants, scilicet, That the forenamed eternal decrees were enacted
and founded upon the intuitive prescience of men's perseverance in good or bad
acts.

Now whereas he supposes it cannot be true Evangelicall doctrine which affords
not consolation unto all men in their best and worst conditions and changes,
this proposition of his must have many limitations, or it will prove utterly
false.

1. It must be understood only of those who seek consolation in the right way
wherein according to Gods will and word consolation is to be found: otherwise a
true doctrine may not only be uncomfortable but full of terror and affright.
For example; He that would be comforted with hope of his Predestination,
whilst he is resolved to sit idle or to run-on in the broad way, the Gospel
neither does nor ought afford him any sweet comfort: and it is a sign that
their doctrine is false, if to men thus affected it affords any comfortable
hope of being carried to heaven.

2. A doctrine which in the event is uncomfortable to millions of men, is not
by this convinced of untruth, unless it be so according to the nature of the
doctrine and according to right reason and judgment. For if it be a man's own
blind and corrupt reason, or his inordinate and distempered affection, which
makes it so quoad hunc, this is nothing to prove the doctrine untrue. Our
Saviors doctrine Luke 18.25. was so uncomfortable to his disciples, that it
made them cry out, Who then can be saved? yet it was not untrue.

3. Lastly, whereas we are now in a comparative question, Whether the
Remonstrants doctrine or ours be more or less comfortable; it is not enough to
show that accidentally, through the false apprehension or disordered affections
of men, disconsolation or desperation may arise from ours, unless he can clear
the Remonstrants doctrine from the same inconveniences; which we know he
cannot, and which we can and will prove to be more liable thereunto then ours.

Whereas he says our doctrine leads men because the devil may easily
persuade a man that believes absolute Reprobation, that he is one of those
absolute reprobates, there being an hundred absolute reprobates for one
absolute elect, and there being more reason for any man to think that he is one
of the most then of the fewest: We answer, That absolute Reprobation is Gods
absolute decree of not-giving unto many men that effectual grace without which
he infallibly knows they will never attein unto glory. And by absolute
reprobates nothing else can truly be understood, but persons thus absolutely
distinguished from the elect in the immanent act of Gods eternal and immutable
will. If this Author have any other meaning, when he so often inculcateth
absolute Reprobation and absolute reprobates, we leave him to fight with his
own fancies. Now the Remonstrants in this sense hold absolute Reprobation and
absolute reprobates. For albeit they set three eternal decrees in order of
consideration before they come to Election and Reprobation, yet they bring God
in the fourth upon an eternal prescience eternally decreeing to save these
singular and certain persons, and to damn these singular and certain persons,
and no other. If this last decree be eternal and irreversible, if it be
founded upon the eternal foresight of their final impenitency, God has as
absolutely rejected many men from special or effectual grace and glory in
their doctrine as in ours.

The devil may suggest, but he cannot more easily persuade a man that makes it
his creed, That ex statu lapso God-hath out of his good pleasure and mere mercy
elected some unto the atteinment of salvation, and out of his absolute will
left others to the losing thereof, then he may persuade those who make all men
eternally reprobated whom God eternally foresaw would out of their own
free will live and die impenitent. A man must be persuaded that his own
free will was a more likely means to put him within the decree of eternal
Election then the free mercy of God, or else our doctrine affords more hope
to any man of being predestined then theirs. Now there is no well-instructed
and humble Christian, who knows the corruption of his own free will and the
inconstancy thereof, though aided with sufficient grace, but will easilier be
persuaded to a comfortable apprehension of his Election or certain salvation,
when he conceives it as depending on Gods special and mere mercy, then if he
should conceive it as depending upon the special good acts of his own
free will and foreseen perseverance therein unto his lives end: For this is, as
S. Augustine speaks, Firmiori potius quam infirmiori spem suam committere.

As for his instance in the small number of the Elect and great number of the
Reprobate, though speaking of Christians, we allow not his account of an
hundred for one, yet we acknowledge the number of the Elect (great in it self)
to be smaller then the number of the Non-elect. But so it is likewise in the
doctrine of the Remonstrants: and there is far less reason for any sinful
man to hope that he is rather one of the fewest then one of the most, when the
discrimination must arise from the goodness of his own free will, then when it
is supposed to arise from the mere mercy of God. If God in his eternal decree
of Election say, I will have mercy upon whom I will have mercy, as every man is
under the same estate of misery, so every man has reason to conceive himself a
capable subject of this mercy, though de facto it should be extended to never
so few. But if in his eternal decree of Election he say thus, I will show this
special mercy unto none but those whom I have foreseen using well the grace
which I shall offer them, and continuing in the exercise of repentance, faith,
and holiness to their lives end, few or none can with probability otherwise
persuade themselves then they are reprobates; at least none of those whom he
imagines to be under the forenamed tentation. For the devil may thus suggest,
In your own opinion no man was elected out of Gods absolute free will and
mercy, but all were reprobated before the foundations of the world were laid
that were not foreseen embracing Gods grace when it was offered, exercising the
same in the acts of faith and sanctification, and persevering in so doing till
their lives end. You know that there is not one of an hundred that does this,
why should you think that you are rather one of the fewest then one of the
most? Nay, you know that hitherto you have resisted the motions of Gods Spirit,
and obeyed your own sinful lusts; that if at any time your will has had an
inclination to do good, it presently started aside like a broken bow: how can
you think that you are one of those in whom God eternally foresaw repentance,
faith and perseverance, and so put you in the number of his Elect? Surely you
are in the roll of Reprobates. The Remonstrants doctrine does so fashion men to
receive this suggestion, that unless he will forsake his opinion of
Predestination and Reprobation upon the foreseen good or bad acts of men, he
has nothing to keep him from despair, or to persuade him that he is not in the
number of those who were eternally reprobated. But in our opinion, though a man
for the present stick fast in the filthy mire of sin, and so cannot fetch any
true comfort from the assurance of his Election, yet he is better armed against
the devil suggesting the certainty of his Reprobation: For he may answer, I
confess, I find my self tied as yet and bound in the chains of my sins; I
acknowledge, I deserve nothing but eternal damnation. And if my Election or
salvation had depended upon Gods foresight what good courses out of mine own
free will excited by grace I should take and continue in, I could not otherwise
think of my self then of a man reprobated and appointed unto damnation. But I
know that Gods eternal Election is a decree of pure mercy and not of
retributive justice; that the bending of men's hearts to believe, repent and
persevere are the supernatural fruits of that eternal mercy, and not the
natural fruits of any man's free will. Albeit therefore I do not as yet find
any signs or effects which can put me in comfort of my Election, yet so long
as I am a capable subject of Gods saving mercy, all the devils in hell cannot
prove my Reprobation. Nay, this very diabolical suggestion which by Gods
providence has affrighted my soul with fear of Reprobation upon the view of my
sins, I take as a token of Gods eternal mercy, beginning to rouse me out of
the bed of security, and intending to do me good. So that whatsoever Calvine,
Bucer, Zanchius, or any man else has said concerning the danger of this
temptation, does as nearly concern the Remonstrants as it does us. For though
this Author think to help himself by putting-in the term ABSOLUTE, when he
speaks of Reprobation as we defend it, and by leaving it out always when he
speaks of Reprobation as he holds it, this helps not his cause at all.
For we are now disputing about the eternal decrees and immanent acts which
Divines call Predestination and Reprobation, and not about the temporal
effects and external accomplishment thereof, unto which some times the name of
Predestination and Reprobation is also given. The Divine immanent act of
reprobating Cain, Judas, or any other, is as absolute a Reprobation, as
irreversible and immutable, being conceived after the Remonstrants doctrine as
after ours. For albeit they place an act of absolute prescience before
Reprobation, which we place after, yet both they and we acknowledge it such an
absolute decree as never was nor ever will be altered. If the temporal
accomplishment, which is the actual Damnation of the Reprobate, be termed
their Reprobation, we say as well as they. That this depends upon temporal
conditions. For that one temporal effect should depend by way of condition upon
another, is agreeable to truth and right reason: but that an immanent eternal
act of Gods will should depend by way of condition upon a temporal act of man's
will, is contrary to true Divinity. Reprobation therefore as it is eternally an
act or decree immanent in voluntate ac mente Divina, must of necessity be
absolute.

His example of the Hungarian Schoolmaster secundum praevisionem operum bonorum
aut malorum, (for all men are foreseen alike plunged in sin and misery as they
are objects of Election and Non-election or Preterition) yet for salvation and
damnation at the day of judgment, all men shall be dealt withal secundum bona
aut mala opera. Secondly, if this man persuaded himself that he was one of the
woeful company of absolute Reprobates, and that therefore he could not be saved
I would know if he would have been otherwise persuaded had a Remonstrant told
him, There is indeed an eternal and immutable decree of Reprobation, but it
made no absolute Reprobates but such whom God eternally and absolutely foresaw
would die impenitent; God foresaw that you would by the help of his mercy and
grace die a faithful and penitent man. This cold comfort which the
Remonstrants doctrine gives against absolute Reprobation could never have kept
this wretch from hanging himself. For he would have choked his comforter with
the same answer which made him choke himself, I commend you to God, but I find
this mercy is denied to me, for I know I have an impenitent heart. Reprobation
therefore which is Gods eternal decree, being as absolute in their opinion as
in ours, it affords the devil the same matter of suggestion.

makes a tempted man incapable of comfort, and a Minister unable to give true
comfort, we answer, That the eternal Reprobation of Cain or Judas upon an
eternal prescience is more liable to this objection then that which we defend,
for the reasons above mentioned. No man ought to seek for comfort of his
Election but in the fruits thereof, nor to be utterly discomforted with
apprehending his Reprobation until he be incapable of the fruits of Election.
If any be so distempered in his reason or affection that upon the devils
suggestion he will like a wizard guess at his own Reprobation, and foretell
his own Damnation, it will be as hard for a Remonstrant to remove this
uncertain and ungrounded fancy as for us. The reason is, Because whatsoever he
tells him of Gods love, Christ's death, general vocation, etc. the tempted
will still ^elude with saying, These concern such whom God has not upon his
eternal and absolute prescience absolutely resolved to condemn: But I know
that I am one of those in whom God has foreseen final impenitency, etc. and
thereupon from everlasting has decreed me to damnation.

To his imaginary Conference.
IT is no hard matter to make any opinion seem absurd, where an Adversary
frames both objections and answers. If we shall take the same course, we can
burden his opinion of Predestination and Reprobation upon prescience of the
different acts of men's free will with more and greater inconveniences. In
general we say,

First, that whereas he is only careful to doctrine of conditionate
Predestination an^ Reprobation, For this makes every man believe that he may
be a predestined man when he lists. No man makes any great have to do that
which he conceives he may do well enough at any time.

Secondly, in this imaginary conference he supposes always that a man must be
rid out of dread and perplexity by the Minister assuring him that he is no
Reprobate: wherein he himself is quite deceived. For no Minister has any such
commission, nor any such revelation. He must go another way to work; wherein
our doctrine will further him better then that of the Remonstrants.

Lastly, there is no man so foolish as to think that a Minister can show him
whether he be in the number of the Elect or of the Reprobate; or that a wicked
man perplexed with this doubtful cogitation, can be so freed from it as to
incline to the more comfortable part, whilst he continues impenitent. All
that can be done for his good, whilst he continues faithless and impenitent,
is to persuade him to suspend the opinion of his Reprobation; whereof his own
reason recollected is able to tell him he has no certain knowledge. And it is
a rule, De quolibet praesumendum bonum donec constet contrarium. That doctrine
therefore must needs be more powerful to make a man suspend the opinion of his
being a Reprobate, which is more likely to bring him into some probable hope of
his future repentance. Now unto a man feeling the corruption of his own nature,
and perplexed with the conscience of his continual voluntary rebellion, and
thereupon conceiving himself a Reprobate, what hope of his future conversion
can the Remonstrants doctrine afford him? He must tell him, Thou art one of
those whom God eternally foresaw repenting, believing, persevering, and who
have all these acts in the power of thine own will: and therefore there is
great probability of thy future repentance. This poor tempted wretch finding
in himself for the present all things seeming quite contrary to what the
Remonstrant Minister tells him, will rejoyn, Thou lie unto me; God never
saw any such goodness in me: he foresaw that in me which I now see in my self,
a wicked will and a perverse heart, which will hold me fettered in sin unto
my lives end. I am therefore one of those whom according to thine own doctrine
God eternally reprobated. As for our doctrine, it cannot give such a tempted
person a certainty of his future repentance, but it may give him a more
probable and comfortable hope; because it will refer his hope to that
unspeakable mercy of God which this Author has so highly extolled) and to
that omnipotent power whereby God is able to work for us beyond our hope, and
to produce in us both the will and the deed of repenting when he pleases.
There is somewhat more likelihood of future repentance, when a sinner is thus
referred to Gods absolute will for it, then when he is referred to his own
absolute free will: and therefore the fear of his Reprobation may in all
probability be easiiyer diminished by our doctrine then by theirs.

But I come to his Conference betwixt the Tempted person and the Minister:
Where I will take leave to make our own answers: for I like not his.

Woe is me; I am a castaway: I am absolutely rejected from grace and glory.


MINIST. If thou speak of Gods eternal secret decree of Election and
Reprobation, why do thou affirm that of thy self which thine own reason must
needs tell thee is not known unto thy self? If thou speak of an absolute
rejection from grace and the kingdom of heaven which has already seized upon
thee in this life, why do thou affirm that which thou know and see to be
false? God has and does continually afford thee gracious illuminations and
excitations: and he will not leave thee destitute of them, if thou do not
voluntarily harden thine heart against them. God has promised forgiveness
unto any sinner at what time soever he shall repent; nay, he has promised
eternal life unto any sinner who shall believe in his Son. Thou art not
rejected from this covenant of grace nor excluded from the kingdom of glory
until by voluntary final impenitencie and infidelity thou excludest thy self.


TEMPT. God hates no man as he is his ^reature; but he hates a great many as
they are


MINIST. It is true, that God hates nothing which himself created; and yet it
is most true, that he hates sin in any crea^ure of his, and hates the
creature infected with sin, in such manner as Hatred may be ^ttributed unto
God. But for all this he so generally loved mankind fallen in Adam that he has
given his onely-begotten Son, that what sinner soever believes in him, should
not perish but have everlasting life. And this everlasting life or heavenly
king^ome is so provided for men by God, that ^o decrees of his can bring any
man thither without faith and repentance, nor no decrees of his can keep any
man out who repents and believes. As for the measure of Gods love exhibited
in the external effects unto men, it must not be denied that God pours out
his graces more abundantly upon some men then upon others, and works more
powerfully and effectually in the hearts of some men then of others; and that
out of his alone will and pleasure: But yet where this more special love is
not extended, his less special love is not restrained to outward and
temporal blessings only, (as you falsely imagine) but it reaches to
internal and spiritual blessings, even such as will bring men to an eternal
blessedness if their voluntary wickedness hinder not. As for your curious and
impossible desire, to be now ascertained that you are under Gods more especial
grace, Vide Thom. de Kempis, l. 1. c. 25. v. 2.
you ought not to desire the knowledge of it, neither have I any means or power
to breed such an apprehension in your understanding, until the experimental
sense of your repentance, faith, and resolution to cleave fast unto God, preach
unto your own soul and conscience this special love of God toward you. In the
mean time do not voluntarily harden your own heart, do not say unto your self,
I know I am a Reprobate, I know I am none of those unto whom God intends to
show his special love, since you know well enough that you neither know it,
nor can know it in the state you are.


TEMPT. God would have some out of all


MINIST. You misconceive the difference betwixt Gods secret will and his
revealed will, and ignorantly feign a contrariety and contradiction where
there is none. You must therefore know, that Gods revealed will teaches men
upon what terms or conditions he is willing to bestow eternal life upon them,
namely upon the condition of their repenting, believing and persevering. And
under these conditions God does not only desire the salvation of some men out
of every sort, but of every particular man in every sort of men. And he has no
secret will contrary to this revealed will, wherein he should purpose to damn
any one man repenting, believing and persevering. But you must further know,
that God has an eternal secret will wherein he has resolved within himself
to have that special mercy upon some which shall bring them to repentance, to
faith, to perseverance and eternal happiness. This will contains not a
contradiction of the former, but an accomplishment in such persons as God
vouchsafes this special favor. God has not made his Ministers privy to this
secret will of his: and therefore it is a vain desire in you to be assured of
this from the Minister. By laboring to perform Gods revealed will you may
attein a comfortable persuasion that you are under that his secret will. But
whilst you neglect to do that, it is unpossible that you should be freed from
your fear of Reprobation and Damnation, and unprofitable for you to be
possessed with a groundless comfort of your Election and certain Salvation.


Christ died only for the world of the elect. Or if he died for all mankind,
he died for them all dignitate pretii; he did not die for all voluntate
propositi. God never intended that he should shed his blood for all and every
man, but for a few selected ones only: of whose number I am not, for I am a
reprobate.


MINIST. Christ died for all and every singular person, who by repentance and
faith in his blood may, according to the tenor of the Gospel, have eternal
life given him through Jesus Christ our Lord. And Christ died thus for all, not
only because his death was in regard of the worth a sufficient ransom for all
and more then all, but because it is Gods settled purpose, by Christ's bloodshed
to save any man that shall believe truly in him, and to save no man that
continues an unbeliever. Christ died not to save any few selected ones without
their repentance and faith: and Christ died not with an exception or exclusion
of any one man in the world from the benefit of salvation, performing the
condition of faith and repentance. When any man has finished his course in
faith and godliness, and is arrived in heaven, the event undeniably proves
that God had an eternal absolute purpose of giving the grace of repentance and
perseverance unto such a man, and saving him by the blood of Christ. And when
any other man has finished his course in impenitency and infidelity, and is
plunged into hell, the event also undeniably proves that God had no eternal
absolute purpose to convert, sanctify, or glorify such a man. If this be that
voluntas propositi which you must be acquainted withal before you will seek
after salvation by repenting and believing in Christ Jesus, God never made me
of his counsel that I should be able to reveal such a secret unto you. But
without the revealing of this, I assure you there lies no such particular
exception against you, that can hinder you from the benefit of Christ's
bloodshed whenever you shall repent and believe in him. Desire to do this,
endeavor to do this, and then Gods Spirit will in due time bear witness unto
your spirit that you are the child of God, and no reprobate. Other course to
free you from this horrible tentation I know none.


TEMPT. Notwithstanding the universal covenant of peace with men upon the
Mediators blood yet this takes no effect, but upon condition that men repent
and believe. God never meant that the greatest part of men should do this: And
I by name am one of those whom God never meant should do it: for I am a
reprobate.


MINIST. It is most true, that Christ's blood is effectual to save no man, but
upon condition of his repenting and believing. And as you have well apprehended
this truth, so learn by it to apprehend another, namely, that Christ's blood is
effectual to save any man who repents and believes in him. And let not the
devils suggestions make you so profane, as to say that God means you should
never do that which he commands you to do, and for doing whereof he affords
you such means as cannot be frustrated but by your own voluntary default and
wilful wickedness. God wills that you should neither receive his word nor
his grace in vain: say not therefore when he calls upon you to repent, and
inciteth you thereunto, that his meaning is you should not repent. But I am
afraid you deceive your self with a false construction of these words Gods
meaning. You must know it is one thing to say, God truly means that men
should do what he commands, another thing to say that God certainly purposes
to make men do what he commands. The goodness of the action which God
commands, the word commanding, and the Spirit exciting thereunto, are good
proofs unto you that God means (that is, likes, desires, wills) that you
should do those good things which he requires: but they are not certain proofs
that God intends or means to remove all those wilful obstacles which your
self may put, or to make you do that which your self cares not to do, nay
striveth not to do. If you will not buckle your self to do any of those good
actions which God commands, until some Minister can assure you that you are
one of those whom God absolutely means or intends ex nolente facere
volentem, your desire is a disorderly desire, and of a thing impossible to be
known by man until it be wrought by God.


MINIST. God has a double calling of men: an outward calling, by preaching the
word in men's ears; an inward, by the irresistible work of the Spirit in their
hearts. The outward calling is a part of Gods outward will: the inward and
effectual calling is a part of his secret will. He calls me only with the
outward call: and therefore I cannot be assured of Gods good will and meaning
that I should believe, repent, and be saved.


MINIST. You misconceive Gods calling. His outward calling by preaching the
word in men's ears is a means to convey the sense of the word preached inwardly
to their understandings, and mediante intellectu inwardly to stirre-up their
wills to the doing of such things as they now see would make for their eternal
good. And I appeal unto your own knowledge and experience; Did the word
preached never pierce further then your ears? has it not enlightened your
understanding with the wholesome doctrine of the Gospel? Has not Gods Spirit
at some time or other by the word inwardly moved you to break off your sinful
and lustful courses, and to lead a sober, just and religious life? Why do you
contrary to your own conscience falsely accuse God of affording you a bare
outward calling, but no inward? Why do you traduce him as not willing that you
should believe, repent, and so be saved? Take it for a certain rule; God
always wills men should do those things which by his word written he
enjoyneth them to do, and by his Spirit inlightning and inciting he so helps
them to do, that it is only the voluntary perverseness and stubbornness of
their own wills resisting the word and the Spirit which hinders them from
doing those things which they should. It is true, that God can make any hard
and resisting heart a soft and obedient heart; and he does it where he has an
eternal purpose out of special mercy so to do: And it is as true, that God
may justly leave a stubborn heart to his own resistency and perverseness; and
this he does where he has purposed in justice so to do. Deus miseretur cujus
vult, and quem vult indurat. If you long to be assured of this secret meaning
or purpose of God toward you in particular before you resolve upon your
repentance, I can assure you that it is the devil who has stirred up in you a
longing after a thing impossible, that so he may procure your destruction.
Strive therefore to bring this foolish and wicked fancy out of your mind, and
to judge of the meaning of God, which belongs unto you, according to his word
revealed unto you, leaving his secret and unsearchable will unto himself.


By this which has been showed, we may For he that will go about to assure an
unfaithful man, that he is not in the number of men eternally reprobated, must
be able to assure him that he is in the number of men eternally elected. For
the Remonstrants themselves, who acknowledge eternal Election and Reprobation
as well as we, confess there is no middle sort of men which are neither
eternally elected nor eternally reprobated; and therefore if they can assure a
man he is not reprobated, they can assure him he is elected.

Francis Spiera, it makes no more against us then against any who hold
distinct opposite decrees of Election and Reprobation established in mente ac
voluntate Divina before the foundations of the world were laid. When the Devil
suggesteth unto a man, that by Gods decree he is in the number of persons
reprobated, he troubles him not with Jesuiticall or Arminian disputations,
whether a conditionate prescience or an absolute prescience must secundum
nostrum modum intelligendi be presupposed in the same eternity unto the
eternal decrees of Election and Reprobation: but he takes advantage upon that
wherein we all agree, that God is not now to make his decrees who shall he
elected and who not, but that this was a thing immutably ordered from all
eternity. Upon this true ground he troubles the fancy of a man with a strong
conceit that he is one of those singular persons not-elected. That this is a
rash groundless conceit, both we and the Remonstrants may convince the party
tempted: but to assure him that he is within the number of the Elect, it is
more then we are able to do.

I wish this Author had quoted the place in Caelius or Calvine, that so we
might have judged how truly he reports them. Sleidan reports the same
story, and tells us, Vide Comment. lib. 21. pa. 255.
De misericordia Dei coepit desperare; That when his comforters urged such
testimonies as express Gods great mercy, he denied not the truth of them, but
said they belonged not unto him; Et quod agnitam veritatem abjurasset,
destinatum se cruciatibus aeternis, illosque jam animo sese persentiscere atque
videre: neque Deum amare posse, verum horribiliter odisse dicebat. As for the
phrase or opinion of absolute Reprobation, which this Author here so often
harpeth upon, it is not once mentioned by Sleidan. And it is more probable,
that Spiera had his conceit of the doctrine of Predestination and Reprobation
from the Scotus and his followers.
Roman church wherein he was bred, or from the Lutheranes by whom he had been
converted, then from the Calvinists, with whom it appears not (in my Author)
that he had any acquaintance. If therefore Spiera would admit of no comfort,
until he were by the Minister assured that he was under the eternal decree of
Election and not of Reprobation, all the Remonstrants in the world with all
their new opinions could have done him no good: for he would still have
opposed, I upon Gods absolute and eternal foresight of my final impenitency
was ranked amongst the reprobates, as you your selves teach me all were whom
God eternally foresaw should die impenitent: I am one of those; and therefore I
shall never repent, I shall never be saved, I shall certainly be damned. Let
any Remonstrant show me a way how to persuade a desperate impenitent faithless
man, being in extreme fear that he is a Reprobate according to Gods eternal
decree made upon an eternal prevision of his final impenitency, and I will
easily show him how to do the same, admitting that decree of absolute
Predestination and Reprobation which we defend. Tell a man who is persuaded
that he is a Reprobate according to the Remonstrants decree of eternal
Reprobation, that the thief upon the cross, that Mary Magdalene, that S. Paul
repented, were pardoned, and saved, he will answer, These indeed did so,
because God had eternally elected them, foreseeing this their repentance: as
for me, God eternally foresaw my final impenitency, and ^hereupon passed in
eternity a decree of Reprobation upon me: and therefore that cannot be
reversed, neither can I repent and be saved. And if the greatness of the
number of Reprobates make any thing for strengthening the tentation, in all
likelihood the number of Reprobates must needs be greater, if Election and
Reprobation be conceived after the Arminian doctrine. For if Election and
Rejection be made ex massa corrupta and damnabili, more are like to be elected
and fewer rejected when absolute and mere mercy makes the discrimination then
when the absolute prevision of man's good using the Divine grace offered unto
him and constancy to the end of a man's life in this good usage make the
distinction.

The universalitie of Gods love, of Christ's are solid arguments of comfort to a
man repenting, believing and persevering in the way of true godliness; and
they bring with them a comfortable persuasion that such a man is an elect child
of God: But unto a man into whose head, upon occasion of his lewd life and
impenitent heart, the devil has put this strong fancy, I am one of those whom
God upon his eternal prevision of my final impenitency eternally reprobated,
those arguments can do little good. For put them into form thus, Gods love is
universal; Christ's death an universal ransom for the sins of all men; The
covenant, SI CREDIDERIS, SALVUS ERIS, universal: Therefore God did not foresee
thy final impenitency, and thereupon decree t^ exclude thee from eternal
life. No man can be so perplexed by the devil suggesting unto him his eternal
Reprobation, but he will easily see that such arguments can give him no
assurance of his eternal Election: Nay, they will rather increase his fear of
Reprobation: because at the very present he finds in himself an hard and
impenitent heart, and despaireth of the mollification thereof; which will
induce him to imagine that God eternally foresaw him a final impenitent man,
and upon that eternally reprobated him according to the Remonstrants doctrine.

Melanchthon spoke wisely and truly, that the promise of grace, pardon, and
salvation (upon repentance and faith) is our surest refuge in tentation. For as
for eternal Election and Salvation, God has not absolutely promised them unto
any singular person: and therefore no man can comfort himself from a decree
altogether unknown unto himself; but his comfort in tentation must be drawn
from the embracing of the conditions of life made known unto him in the Gospel.
But whilst a man stands possessed with a fancy of his own Reprobation and
with a knowledge of his impenitency and fear of final obduration, the
universal conditional promises cannot persuade him that he is one of the
Elect, or dissuade him from thinking he is one of the Reprobate. Melanchthon
therefore thought the Universalitie of the promise a good motive to encourage
any man unto repentance: but he thought it not a good argument to prove that
any man is a person elected, and shall most certainly repent, though he now
think the contrary. This is the scruple, this is the devilish suggestion, which
the conditional promises, though never so general, cannot remove out of the
fancy of an impenitent and desperate sinner, such an one as Spiera was.

These universal promises are not directly contradictory to the tentation. The
tentation is, I Spiera am a Reprobate, and shall die in my final impenitencie:
The universal promise is, Whosoever believes and repents, shall be saved.
Let this Author show the contradiction.

His often inculcated propositions, God will have all men to be saved, to
repent, God will have none to be absolutely damned, etc. have so often been
explained and proved impertinent to the purpose whereunto he applies them, that
they need no further answer.

The story of Junius his relieving a perplexed is far fetched: the
application further off from the present point. The tentation supposed is not
about the word Absolute, but about the very decree of eternal Reprobation.
This Author should show that there is no irreversible or immutable decree,
distinguishing men ab aeterno in electos and reprobatos: for this breeds the
scruple. To talk to a soul perplexed with fear of Reprobation, that there are
no absolute reprobates, and then to expound absolute Reprobates to be men
absolutely damned whether they repent or no, will afford him little comfort who
has a preconceit that God foresaw him finally impenitent, and upon this
prescience decreed him a Reprobate. He that shall go about to cut the Gordian
knot with telling a perplexed soul there are no men absolutely elected or
absolutely rejected, can do him little good; unless he prove also there were
no men eternally elected and eternally rejected upon the prescience of their
final perseverance or final impenitencie. For this man supposes himself to
be one of those whom God before the foundations of the world were laid foresaw
finally impenitent, and thereupon he concludes that he is one of those who
must of necessity be eternally damned. Ruiz De volun^. Dei, disp. 12. art. 7.
p. 175.
For in all Divines opinions these propositions are true; Deus nihil potest
velle ex tempore; Deus non potest non habere volitionem quam habet; non potest
habere volitionem quam non habet. Unless therefore it be demonstrated, that
God neither out of his absolute will nor out of his eternal will guided by his
absolute and eternal prescience has distinguished men in electos and
reprobatos, the perplexed soul cannot be rid from the forenamed tentation. And
a Remonstrant must relinquish his opinion of the eternal Election and
Reprobation of singular persons upon the Divine prescience, or he can never be
able to satisfy a tempted person who acknowledges himself to be faithless
and impenitent, and supposes that God, eternally foreseeing he would so remain
unto his lives end, has eternally rejected or reprobated him. For example; a
Remonstrant comes to comfort a man who thinks himself to be one of those
whose Reprobation God has decreed from everlasting upon the everlasting
foresight of his final impenitencie: He tells him, God would have all to be
saved; Christ died for all, etc. What can the Remonstrant Minister conclude
hereupon? Therefore no man was reprobated from everlasting upon the foresight
of his impenitencie: Therefore not you. This were to cross his own principles.
As for an orthodox Minister, he will never go about to prove unto the tempted
person that there is no such thing in the world as some men absolutely elected
and others absolutely not-elected: but he will show unto him, First, That
absolute Election and absolute Non-election or negative Reprobation are not (as
he fearfully and fondly imagines) decrees of absolutely saving any man whether
he repent or no, or of absolutely damning any man whether he repent or no.
Secondly, That it is a foolish and devilish kind of divination for any man to
put and place himself in the number of the Elect or Non-elect upon the mere
uncertain fancy of his own mind, or upon the malicious suggestion of the
Tempter. And therefore if he would be out of perplexity, he must no longer
conceive himself certain of that whereof his own reason awakened will show him
he cannot possibly be certain. His tongue must not say that wherein his own
knowledge gives him the lie. Lastly, when he is brought to confess, that he
neither is nor can be certain what God in his eternal counsel decreed of him
before the world was made, he is to be instructed to drive away the fear of his
Non-election, and to gain some comfortable assurance of his Election, by
laboring to do those things which become the Elect children of God, and to
avoid those things which are proper to the children of the devil. This was the
old and only way which the Apostles knew to gain a comfortable persuasion of a
man's Election, and consequently to drive away the fear or suspicion of being a
Reprobate. If the Remonstrants have a new way of doing this, I dare confidently
affirm it cannot be a good way.

For his objections against us, of Gods two opposite wills, the one secret, the
other revealed; of some men's impossible salvation and inevitable damnation:
they are his own erroneous collections. We have already showed that there are
no such opposite wills in God: and that for possibility of atteining salvation
and avoiding damnation, every man has as much according to our doctrine as
theirs. But because this Author never leaves inculcating absolute Reprobation
to be a doctrine that takes away all grounds of comfort, I must tell him again
and again, that if he admit eternal decrees in God, of giving repentance and
perseverance unto Peter, and of not-giving it unto Judas, of giving eternal
life unto Peter, and of not-giving it unto Judas, let him suppose or imagine
what act of Divine prescience he pleases to be precedent unto the forenamed
decrees, Judas was as absolutely under the decree of Reprobation, and so as
absolute a Reprobate, in his doctrine as ours. For the eternal will of God is
altogether absolute, which decrees a future event, consideratis conditionibus
adjungendis ut jam de facto adjunctis: But thus did God (by the confession of
the Remonstrants) decree the Reprobation and Damnation of Judas from all
eternity: The decree therefore of his Reprobation was absolute.

convince the understanding of a tempted man that he is no Reprobate; if he
mean he can convince him that he shall not be damned if he repent and believe,
we can do the same: But if he mean (as he must do, if he will free the tempted
person from his perplexity after his way) that he is able to convince him that
he is none of those in whom God eternally foresaw final impenitencie, that he
is none of those whom God upon this foresight eternally reprobated; I dare say,
he is able to do that which neither S. Paul nor S. Peter were able to do: And
therefore we are not ashamed to profess, that we cannot attein to this skill.
And I think that if any tempted man should put a Remonstrant to his oath or
protestation whether he indeed can assure him that he is no Reprobate,
according to his own doctrine of eternal Reprobation, he would not dare to
take such an oath. He might safely swear unto him, that he neither is nor shall
be thrown from the face of God into hell, if he repent: but he cannot safely
swear unto him, that he shall repent, or that God upon the foresight of his
stubbornness did not from all eternity absolutely appoint him unto damnation.

And were it possible for a Remonstrant demonstrative to convince him that he
is no Reprobate. For he might reply, You have taught me that a man may totally
and finally fall away from faith, that he may lose regeneration,
sanctification, adoption: I am one of those in whom God has eternally foreseen
this my final falling away: And therefore though I now felt repentance and
faith stirring in my heart (which I do not) yet I know in the end I should
relapse; and therefore you neither do nor can assure me that I am no Reprobate.

We willingly grant, that we cannot, to from the outward seeming acts of faith
and repentance prove a man to be a true believer, to be a person elected, to be
no Reprobate: But we can do as much upon the grounds of our doctrine as any
Remonstrant can upon his, and somewhat more: because in his doctrine men
justified, sanctified, adopted may become Reprobates, and so be damned in the
end.

What Piscator says is thus far forth no comfort from assurance of Election,
or from assurance of not-being under the decree of Reprobation, can possibly be
instilled into the soul of any man elected or not-elected, so long as he
continues faithless and impenitent.

And for this Author, if he can persuade but one of his hundred reprobates,
whilst he lies in impenitencie, that he is no reprobate, he has but brought
him into a fools paradise, and comforted him with a lie, or at least with that
whereof the truth is to him who avoucheth it altogether unknown and uncertain:
Which boldness becomes not the true Ministers of the Gospel of Christ.

To shut up all; It is a gross error in this Author, to suppose that the
Gospel teaches a Minister how to comfort a desperate impenitent sinner, by
assuring him that he is of the number of the Elect, or that he is not within
the number of the Reprobate, or that Gods eternal decrees of Election and
Reprobation are yet unmade or unsettled. And it is a strange fancy which this
Author has conceived, that the Remonstrants doctrine can give such a
distempered and impenitent sinner proofs more then probable that he is no
reprobate. Nay he further implies, that his doctrine can give such a person
more comfort then this FIERIPOTEST Peradventure I am elected. Belike it can
assure him, Without all Peradventure, thou art an elected person. those who can
do this, are able to set up ladder, climb into heaven, pry into the ^ook of
life, and bring men news that they ^re certainly appointed to be made parta^ers
both of grace and glory. A religious Christian will never be thus comforted by
^uch bold and blind assurers. If at any time ^e happen to be perplexed, he will
wait for ^omfort from the Spirit of comfort, and he ^ill not seek it in
uncertain conjectures or ^ivinations of his own or other men's, but in ^he real
effects of the same Spirit experimentally found and felt in his own soul.
Whilst we walk in the Spirit, we are sure ^o find comfort from the Spirit:
Whilst we walk in the flesh, it is not an earthly Mini^er that can comfort us.
Labor to eschew ^vil and do good, the fear of Reprobation will vanish, and the
sweet comfort of Election will replenish thine heart.

READER,

The author thought good to close up these his Animadversions with a
Conclusion touching the manifold abuse and use of the doctrine of
Predestination and Reprobation.

IT now remains that for a close of all we speak something concerning the
abuse of the doctrine of Election and Reprobation, and of the right use of the
same. Let us begin with the preachers and themselves, then proceed unto the
hearers.

First, those Ministers do very ill and indiscreetly Strong meat belongs to
them that are of full age, Heb. 5.14.
even those who by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern both
good and evil. We ought therefore to imitate the practice of Christ and of the
Apostles, and to preach the Gospel in the same order which our Master and those
most skillful builders did follow. But in what manner did our Savior Christ
instruct men to life eternal? We have a notable example John 3.16. where in
the first place he teaches, That God so loved the world that he gave his Son
for the redemption of mankind. Then he adds, That every one who believes in
this Redeemer shall obtein life everlasting; but those that believe not shall
therefore perish because they believed not in the Son of God. Hitherto we
have not one word concerning the mystery of Election and Reprobation. But
afterward, when Christ saw some by the preaching of the Gospel brought to
repentance, faith and holiness of life, lest they should attribute unto
themselves these effects of special grace and mercy, he opens unto them the
deep mystery of Election, and tells them how all those graces flowed from
the decree of Predestination. This is the scope of these places, Matthew. 13.11.
It is given to you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to
them it is not given. John 6.37.
All that the Father gives me shall come to me. S. Paul treads in his
Masters steps, and observes the same method of teaching. For being about to
preach unto the Jews the Gospel of Christ, he begins not at the point of
Election and Reprobation, but promises in general Acts 13.38.
forgiveness of sins to all believers, and teaches that all unbelievers do
by their own default ver. 46.
put from the^ everlasting life offered unto them. But afte^ that diverse of
them had embraced Christ by a true faith, then at length the Evangelis^ thought
fit to lay down the cause thereof i^ these words, ver. 48.
As many as were ordained t^ eternal life believed. If therefore we would not
go to work preposterously, whensoeve^ we have to do with such who for the
greatest part it is likely are ignorant and carnal^ men and not yet endued with
true faith and holiness, we are to move them to faith in Christ and newness
of life, and not to step into the doctrine of Election and Reprobation until
we deal with those in whom we manifestly perceive the effects of Election, that
is faith and the fruits thereof. S. Augustine to this purpose says very
wisely, De Perfev. lib. 2. c. 16. Utile est ut taceatur aliquod verum propter
incapaces.
It is good that some truth be concealed, for their sakes who are incapable
thereof. Whence that of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 3.1.
I could not spea^ unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal.

Schools then the pulpit; yea indeed unfit even (...) the Schools to be meddled
withal, if the ^mportunity of our adversaries and the ne^essity of mainteining
our own cause did not ^ometimes drive us even against our wills to ^hese nice
speculations. Such are the discus^ons which are made by Divines about the
^ignes of Priority and Posteriority in the eter^all decrees of God, with great
labor and ^ittle profit. Some affirm that the first decree ^n the Divine
understanding and will was of ^ending the Redeemer; and then another, of saying
the Elect by this Redeemer. Others hold the contrary way. Yea, so boldly
curious have some mortal men been, that when ^hey have laid down the order of
the Divine decrees as a thing whereof they had certain knowledge, affirming
this to have been the first decree of the Divine will, that the second, another
the third, and so on, at length they stick not to avouch, that if God had not
observed this very order which they approve of, he should have done either
unwisely or unjustly. A wise Minister should wholly abstein from handling these
thorny questions: however the business never ought to come to that point, that
if we fail in these our speculations, any reproach should be fastened upon God
himself. The Ministers of the word therefore, as often as occasion is offered of
treating of Predestination before the people, must be content to contein
themselves within those bounds which the holy Scripture has clearly chalked
out unto us. Let them teach, how God elected his own unto life eternal before
the foundations of the world were laid. Let them teach, how this Election
flowed not from the foresight of man's merits, but from the free will and
gracious pleasure of God electing. Let them teach, that whatsoever saving good
is found in us, is the effect of this free and gracious mercy. Let them teach,
that the assurance of our Election is not to be sought in Gods secret decrees
or our own idle imaginations, but in the effects and operations of the
faithful and sanctified soul. These and other such doctrines which are clear,
sound and profitable, may and ought be preached unto Christians. But those
which are either too knotty or else altogether fruitless (especially when they
are not clearly grounded and revealed in the word of God) ought quite to be
excluded out of vulgar congregations. And here I cannot but tax the folly and
rashness of some (especially young) Preachers, who as soon as they hear any
new controversy concerning Predestination started amongst Divines, be it never
so intricate, never so unfruitful, yet presently they acquaint the people with
it: This they press, this they daily stand upon, and think it an argument of
great learning to discuss those points amongst the unlearned, which their
auditors do not at all understand. Against these may we take up that of the
son of Sirach, Ecclus 19.12.
A fool travelleth with a word as a woman in labor of a child: as an arrow
that sticks in a man's thigh, so is a word in a fools belly. This abuse
therefore is chiefly to be avoided by the Ministers of the word; who as they
may deliver the simple, clear and fundamental doctrine of Predestination with
profit and edification to the people of God rightly trained up, so can they not
run out into intricate questions, and curiously discuss both sides of the
controversy after the manner of the Schools, but by this their superfluous
diligence they must needs train up their people rather unto curiosity and itch
of contention, then unto faith and zeal of a godly life. Yea, what Prudentius
said of wrangling sophisters may well be applied unto these men; Fidem minutis
dissecant ambagibus, They mince the faith into petty circumstances: Or rather
that of the Apostle, 1. Tim. 6.4
They dote (or, are sick) about questions or strifes of words, whereof come^h
envy, strife, etc.

Thirdly, as we do worthily blame those to be taxed who seem to offend by doing
too little, while they propound Predestination and Reprobation to the people in
the effect only or the event, that is, the infallible salvation of the Elect,
and the infallible damnation of the Reprobate; in the mean time little
regarding, or at least not with the same diligence acquainting the people with
the means whereby the Elect are brought unto salvation, and the means whereby
the Reprobates do rush headlong into destruction: whereas indeed it is a
dangerous matter to lay open before the eyes of the vulgar the naked and bare
doctrines of Predestination and Reprobation. A wise Minister therefore will
never teach the people that some particular persons are absolutely
predestined unto life, but withal he will let them know that these persons
are none other but such as by faith and holiness do walk in the way to
eternal life. He will never teach that some particular persons were passed-by
in this infallible ordination unto life everlasting, but withal he will also
show that these are none other but they who by their own voluntary impenitency,
infidelity and impiety did most deservedly pull upon themselves eternal
destruction. So Paul delivers this doctrine of Predestination, Romans 8. where
having made mention of Predestination, he presently annexeth thereunto
Vocation, Justification, Sanctification, without which we ought not so much as
to dream of our Predestination, at least we cannot come to any certain evidence
thereof. So likewise Ephesians. 1. unto the doctrine of Predestination he joyneth
Sanctification and other spiritual gifts, which are (...), manifest tokens, of
the predestinate. In like manner the point of Reprobation is so to be unfolded,
that all may understand, that although by his special mercy God do not free
the Reprobates from death, yet he forces not any unto sin, but they are
carried headlong unto their destruction, and that by their own voluntary
motion. So Paul in his epistle to the Philippians, when he speaks of the
Reprobate, Phil. 3.19
whose end is destruction, he adds, whose God is their belly, whose glory is
in their shame, who mind earthly things. So Jude in his epistle speaking of
some Jude v 4.
who were ordained to condemnation, he straight adds, that they were wicked
men who turn the grace of God into lasciviousness, and deny the only Lord God
and our Lord Jesus Christ. It is not therefore the duty of a Minister, so to
urge absolute Predestination as in the mean time to forget the means: Because
although Gods decree concerning the salvation of this man, suppose Peter or
Paul, be absolute, yet the salvation of Peter and of Paul in regard of the
event and fulfilling of the decree does depend upon the conditionate use of the
means. Neither on the other side is the Reprobation of any particular persons
so to be pressed, as though they were infallibly to be damned whatsoever they
do: Because the decree of Reprobating some does not infringe the truth and
steadfastness of the Evangelicall promises made unto all and every one. For
they hold true when they are in general divulged in this form, Whosoever
believes shall be saved: And they hold true also when they are applied in
special to any particular person, If thou believe and leadest an holy life,
thou shall be saved. To be short, the saying of that most wise and learned
Father is very necessary to be observed by all Ministers of the word, who
shows, August. De bono Persev. lib. 2. c. 21.
That we may speak that which is true concerning the absolute decree of the
Divine will to save and reprobate men, and yet not in that due manner in which
we ought to speak. For example; If a man should speak to his auditors to this
purpose, Whether ye run or sleep, whether ye receive the word into your hearts
or reject it, yet in the conclusion ye shall all be such as God who is
invincible decreed ye should be, as God who is infallible foresaw ye would be,
this is indeed a most true doctrine; But because in the manner of propounding
it seems to separate the end from the means, and to invite men to
slothfulness, in the judgment of S. Augustine Ibid. cap. 22. Nempe hoc
verissimum est: ita sane, sed improbissimum, importunissimum,
incongruentissimum, non falso eloquio sed non salubriter valetudini humanae
infirmitatis apposito.
it is so most true that withal it is most wicked, unseasonable, inconvenient;
not that the saying is false, but because it is not wholesomely applied to
humane infirmity. Dolosi vel imperiti medici est etiam utile medicamentum sic
alligare ut aut non prosit aut obsit, cap. 21.
Now it is the part of a deceitful or unskilful physician so to apply a good
plaster that either it shall do no good or do hurt. And hitherto we have
touched upon those abuses whereinto Ministers do sometimes run when they go
about to preach unto the people the doctrine of Predestination and Reprobation.
We comprised them all (as ye might observe) under three heads: For either they
are preposterous, and deliver it to such as are yet incapable thereof; or else
they stretch their discourse beyond that fundamental and simple doctrine
delivered by the Apostle, and run out into intricate and curious speculations
far unfit for the peoples understanding; or lastly they deliver it
defectively, barely and abruptly mentioning the infallible end and absolute
event predetermined by God on either side, but speaking not a word of the
several means, conditions or ways whereby those several ends are atteined.
But the decree of the diverse ends is secret, and concerns God more properly
then men; but the precept about the means is revealed, and belongs to men
rather then to God: This therefore ought chiefly to be pressed and inculcated
by the Ministers of the word. But from the Preachers let us proceed unto the
people.

Now men are wont to abuse this doctrine of Predestination two manner of ways;
either unto presumption, or unto despair. The presumptuous, when they hear
Predestination mentioned, as though they could guess what God before the
creation of the world determined concerning them, straight without any
premises at all they conclude themselves to be of the number of the
predestinate. And to this rash conclusion they annex this profane inference,
Live as I will, since I am predestinate I shall be saved. Thus from rashly
presuming what they please they proceed to live licentiously as they please. On
the contrary, the desperate, as soon as they understand how some were elected
some passed-by by God before the foundations of the world were laid, presently
conceiting ill of their own case they reckon themselves among the reprobate.
And to this blind conjecture they add this wicked conclusion, Since I am none
of the Elect, wherefore should I trouble my self by hearing Gods word,
receiving the Sacraments, mortifying my flesh, and bringing forth the fruits of
new life? for do I what I can I shall at length be damned. Thus these by
despair do fall into the same slothfulness and neglect of their salvation
whereinto the others fell by presumption. Both these abuses ought most sharply
to be reproved, and withal the remedies are to be shown whereby they may be
avoided. For the former, those rash presumers are to be admonished, that
although in thesi, in the general, it be most certain that God from all
eternity elected some rejected others, yet if we come down to particular
persons, it is a secret kept close in Gods own breast, which be those persons
that were destinated unto life, which be those who are not comprehended in his
gracious decree. It is therefore a very diabolical temptation which moves men
to dive into the depth of Gods eternal decrees, and from thence to take up a
rash persuasion of their Predestination. For the decree of Predestination as it
concerns others is altogether by us unsearchable. Whence that of Prosper, De
lib. arb. Ne impatienter feramus quod electionis vasa non novimus.
Let it not much trouble us that we are ignorant who are vessels of Election.
As it concerns our selves, it is unsearchable also a priori, in its causes,
and is to be perceived only by its effects after our conversion and
sanctification. Luther most excellently says, In Genesis 26. De Deo quatenus non
est revelatus, nulla est fides, nulla scientia, nulla cognitio. Omit
speculationem de Deo abscondito, si vis effugere blasphemiam Dei. Si credis in
Deum revelatum, and recipis verbum ejus, paulatim etiam absconditum Deum tibi
^evelabit. Altiora te ne quaesieris, and fortiora te ne scrutatus fueris: Audi
^ilium incarnatum, and sponte se offeret tibi praed^stinatio tua.
Of God so far as he is not revealed there is no faith, no science, no
knowledge. Leave off to muse of God where he concealeth himself, if thou
would avoid being guilty of blasphemy. If thou believe in God revealed and
receivest his word, he will also by little and little reveal unto thee God
concealed. Sore not after things above thy reach, and search not for what is
above thy capacity: Hearken to the Son incarnate, and thy Predestination will
quickly manifest it self unto thee. Thus Luther. They flatly dote therefore
who, as if they were of Gods privy counsel, presume that they can be assured
of their Predestination before they have any knowledge of their conversion and
justification. The only remedy for this madness is, that as they have been
taught out of the word of God that some were elected, some passed-by, from all
eternity, so they should learn out of the same word, that no man either can or
ought absolutely conclude himself to be in the number of the elect before he
find himself to be in the number of those who are converted and do truly
believe. Thus S. Paul, 2. Tim. 2.19.
The Lord knows them that are his. And, Let every one that names the name of
Christ depart from iniquity. As if he had said, God himself knows who are
elected by looking into the secret decree of his own will: but thou, O man,
whosoever thou art, do not know that thou art elected but by departing from
thy course of iniquity. So says Peter, 2. Pet. 1.10.
Give diligence to make your calling and election sure. For though it be most
sure and firm in the purpose of God electing, yet there can be no certainty of
the Election of any particular man, but only of him that does well. Lastly,
Ephesians. 1. (where the doctrine of Predestination is professedly handled) the
Apostle teaches both these points, viz. That God Ephesians. 1.4.
chose his before the foundation of the world; and, That we have not the
assurance of this Election sealed in our hearts till after that we have
received the Gospel into our hearts and believed in Christ. If thou obeyest
Gods call, v. 13.
thou may rightly conclude that thou wast from all eternity predestined:
If thou persevere in thy unbelief and impiety, dream thou may or surmise
that thou art predestined, know or believe thou can not. Away therefore
with all rash presumption of Predestination, which is never begotten by the
right unfolding of this doctrine, but by the foolish imagination of carnal men
or the pernicious suggestions of the devil.

Now let us weigh the inference which such presumptuous men do use to make:
Live as I will, say they, since I am predestined I shall be saved. I will not
further stand to examine the rashness of this presumption, having spoken
sufficiently thereof already. Let it be granted that such an one is indeed
predestined, yet nothing can be more wicked, nothing more foolish, nothing
more false then this conclusion.

I am predestined, what says he else but this, God out of his mere good
pleasure has ordained me to eternal life? but he who hence does gather,
Therefore I may live as I list, what says he but this, Therefore I may of set
purpose run headlong toward hell? But how can he who is not more wicked then
Wickedness it self reason thus, Because I believe that God was thus specially
gracious toward me, therefore I will show my self exceedingly unthankful
toward him: Because God has decreed to bring me to the kingdom of heaven,
therefore I will try if I can maugre his decree cast my self into the pit of
hell.? Profane and godless men, who turn the grace of God into wantonness,
may sometimes perhaps out of a conceited opinion of their Predestination fall
into this desperate madness: But for a truly regenerate and faithful man,
whose heart is assured by the holy Ghost that he is the son of God and
ordained from all eternity to the participation of the kingdom of heaven, it
is as impossible that he from the sense and persuasion of his Predestination
should draw this wicked conclusion, as for wood to be cold in the middle of the
fire, or the air to be dark when the sunbeams are diffused through it. 1.
John 3.3.
Every man that has this hope in him purifieth himself, says the Apostle.
Therefore they that defile themselves with all manner of lusts, come far
short of a true persuasion of their being elected.

Secondly, nothing is more foolish then Whatsoever I do or not do, God will
take care for the accomplishment of his own decree; it would be hard to say
whether such reasoning were more guilty of folly or of wickedness. In like
manner, if Ezekiah, after notice of Gods decree to prolong his life fifteen
years, should thereupon have determined with himself from thence forward
neither to eat nor drink nor do any thing else that is ordained for the
preservation of man's life, who could excuse him from extreme madness?
Accordingly, should we grant that such a particular man were elected by God
unto life eternal; should we further grant the same man to have certain
knowledge of his Election, not by faith only and the secret testimony of the
Spirit, but by the voice of God himself clearly sounding from heaven; yet after
such an extraordinary revelation of his Election to neglect the means leading
to salvation, and supinely to expect by power of the Divine decree to be drawn
to the use of them whether he will or no, would be a manifest argument not of
an elected but of a brainlesse person.

I am predestined; Therefore whether I believe or not believe, whether I live
well or ill, I shall be saved. For although the Predestination of a man being
granted, his salvation must necessarily follow, yet it follows not upon every
condition. For example; That Paul was elected to salvation from all eternity,
is most true: yet if any should argue thus, Therefore whether he had been
converted unto Christ or had persevered in his blasphemy against him, he had
been saved, he would infer a most false conclusion. For if these reasonings
were true, the preaching of the Gospel would be in vain, the administration of
the Sacraments superfluous, our conversion, justification, sanctification idle
and frivolous: for Predestination alone would carry a man to heaven whether he
would or no. But such dreams as these are to be avoided: For the decree of
Predestination about the end to be obtained does not exclude but include the
means and ordinary way whereby men tend to that end. This conditional
proposition therefore, Although Paul continue in unbelief, he shall be saved,
is so far from following upon the doctrine of Predestination, that the
contradictory thereof may thence be deduced, namely, If Paul believe not, it is
impossible he should be saved. The reason is manifest: Because the same God who
decreed to save Paul, decreed to save him by faith, not by impenitence and
unbelief. This may very well be illustrated by that purpose of God to save all
those from shipwreck who sailed together with S. Paul toward Rome: For though
God had infallibly decreed to deliver all these men, and by an Acts 27.24.
angel had revealed this his decree unto Paul, yet the Apostle cries out, v.
31.
Except the mariners abide in the ship, they cannot be saved. The same say we
concerning the Predestination of any particular persons unto life eternal:
Although it be infallibly decreed by God, although it be clearly evidenced to
the persons themselves, yet can they not be saved except they abide in faith
and godliness. The doctrine of Predestination therefore permits not any man
to persuade himself that his salvation is certain before he find that he is
truly converted, truly faithful, truly sanctified. Much less does it permit
men to presume, that following their lusts and living wickedly, they may
nevertheless attein the kingdom of heaven. And thus much concerning the
former abuse.

Now let us come to them who from the doctrine of Predestination take occasion
to despair, and conclude from thence, that although they believe in Christ, and
lead their lives never so holily, notwithstanding by reason of the
infallibility of the Divine decree they shall at length be damned. First let us
consider how ill these men's persuasion of their Reprobation is grounded:
Secondly, what an ill consequence this is, That though they believe and follow
good works yet their damnation is certain. For the first, I would fain know
what argument of despair any Christian can draw from this doctrine, That God
before the foundations of the world were laid did pass those decrees of
Predestination and Reprobation in the secret counsel of his own will. For first
even reason it self forbids us in matters whereof we are altogether ignorant
to determine any thing on either side: Now what God did before the creation of
the world is a point so deep and unsearchable, that to go about by conjecture
to dive into it is even as if man a poor earthworm should attempt to scale
heaven with a ladder. Here we may well take up that Exodus 19.12. Take heed to
your selves that ye go not up into the mount or touch the border of it:
whosoever touches the mount, shall be surely put to death. Hilary says very
well, De Trin. lib. 10. Ratio coelestis in tantum intelligenda est in quantum
se permittit intelligi.
We are to pry no further into the Divine reason then it has pleased to reveal
it self to our understanding. Now this it gives us to understand, that some
were elected, some reprobated: but who are elected who reprobated, it suffers
us not to know. But further, though any man were so rash and heady as that he
could not moderate himself but must needs peep beyond the written word into
these eternal and hidden actions of God, yet from these his most uncertain
conjectures to prescribe himself a rule what to do or not do, were madness
void of all reason. For let us put case, that a battle were to be waged between
two armies, and God by some Prophet had revealed that the far greater part of
the soldiers should perish in the fight, and the lesser part should escape,
without mentioning what particular persons he will by his special favor
preserve from death or suffer to be slain, I demand now, if any man by occasion
of the Divine will thus far revealed would needs before the combat reckon
himself in particular to be one of the number of those who must certainly
perish, and hereupon out of a desperate humor throw down his weapons, run upon
the enemies swords, and voluntarily offer himself to be slain; I demand, I say,
whether this wretch should rather be thought to be driven into this despair by
the Divine revelation or by his own madness. Without doubt he may blame
himself for taking occasion (where no just one was given) from the foresaid
revelation. The very same we may think of those who from the doctrine of
Predestination and Reprobation set forth in general do take occasion to thrust
themselves into the number of those that are reprobated and shall certainly
perish, and thereupon to neglect their spiritual armor, to offer their throat
to the devil, and wilfully to plunge themselves into the pit of hell. De
nullius hominis salute desperandum quem Dei patientia sinit vivere; de
suiipsius minime omnium. Tanquam caput igitur omnis noxiae tentationis
repellatur ab animo Christiani haec mortifera conclusio, Sum ex reprobatis.
A man ought not to despair, says S. Augustine in a certain place, of the
salvation of any one whom the patience of God does suffer to live; least of all
of his own. This deadly conclusion therefore, I AM ONE OF THE REPROBATES, ^ught
to be repelled by every Christian as the most dangerous temptation of all
other. Last^y, although (as we touched formerly) before true conversion and
sanctification no man can obtein either any certainty of his Election or any
true feeling and lively comfort, yet the doctrine of eternal Election does not
afford to a Christian any probable conjecture whence he may gather that himself
in particular is one of the non-elect: yea rather any one that lives within
the pale of the Church, although yet unconverted, may learn so much from thence
as may and ought move him rather to conceive himself to be one of those whom
God from all eternity elected to everlasting life. It is a commonly received
rule amongst Divines, De quolibet homine praesumendum est bonum donec constet
contrarium, We ought to hope well of every one until we know the contrary. If
we ought not out of conjecture to conclude any thing amiss of others, then
ought we not of our selves. But let us see now how many reasons there be which
may keep a Christian from thus despairing. If thou art a Christian, thou have
God by the Gospel calling thee; thou have the Son of God in the Gospel
offered unto thee, and together with him remission of sins and life eternal;
thou have the Spirit of God standing and knocking at the door of thy heart;
thou have many other things, which though they be not sufficient to demonstrate
infallibly to a man that he is elected while yet he believes not and remains
unsanctified, yet they ought abundantly to demonstrate thus much to any man,
that he neither can nor ought have any preconceit that he is reprobated. But
they object, God indeed does offer the outward means unto me; but since I am
none of his elect, he will never impart unto me the precious gift of faith. How
know thou that? Ask thou faith of God, and use diligently the means ordained
for the begetting of faith, and thou may be confident that thou art neither
shut out of Gods Predestination nor shall finally be kept destitute of the gift
of faith. But if any do so stiffly persuade himself that he is a reprobate as
withal to cast off all care of his salvation, he has enterteined this
persuasion into his breast without all reason, and he neglects the means
against all religion. But this doctrine of Predestination and Reprobation is no
more to be concealed or relinquished because such as these do thus waiwardly
abuse it, then the doctrine of the Trinity is because the Jews and Mahometanes
deride and reject it.

Having therefore confuted this rash and impious persuasion, let us examine a
little the conclusion which they infer from it, viz. That although they do
believe the Gospel, and live never so holily, yet for all that they shall be
damned, by reason of the infallible decree of the Divine will. I answer, There
was never in the Divine will any such decree as these men imagine, of damning
any man though he should believe and live righteously. Yea, God has
established and published unto all men a quite contrary decree, That John. 3.16.
whosoever believes in his Son shall not perish but have everlasting life.
And, That Romans 8.1.
there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after
the flesh but after the spirit. The doctrine therefore of Gods secret decree of
Predestination and Reprobation can afford no comfort to any man before he
knows that he is in Christ and is become a new creature: neither can it drive
any man to despair who believes the Gospel and is careful to lead a godly
life; because such a care is a consequent fruit of Election. Whence S.
Augustine, De bono persever. c. 23. De ipso cursu vestro bono rectoque
condiscite vos ad praedestina^ionem Divine gratiae pertinere.
From your godly and upright course of life ye may conclude that ye do belong
to Gods gracious Election. The sum of what we have said is this; That the
doctrine of eternal Predestination and Reprobation is true, and quoad the sin,
in the general, clearly delivered in the Scriptures: yet as it has respect
unto particular persons elected or reprobated, it is a most unsearchable
mystery; which to go about by curious search or mere conjectures to pry into,
is both extremely foolish and wicked. We must always therefore have recourse
to the word revealed, the which when we believe and obey, we do safely draw out
from thence this comfortable conclusion a posteriori, from the effects, That we
are Gods chosen children: But as long as we abide in infidelity and
unconverted, it is folly to presume we are elected, madness to conclude we are
reprobated, whereas the will of God has as yet by no external effect
evidently manifested it self unto us on either side. Hitherto of the abuses of
this doctrine: Now let us proceed to show the uses thereof.

Here in the first place I premise this, That they are in no wise to be
hearkened unto who conceive that this doctrine of Election and Reprobation ought
therefore to be quite buried in silence, because profane and wayward men do
abuse it either to presumption and licentiousness or to despair and
rechlesnesse. If the former cautions be observed, That we neither deliver it
unseasonably to those that are incapable, nor immoderately stretch it to
curious speculations, nor propound it to the people by halves and defectively,
then it is clear and evident that this doctrine ought to be preached. First,
because Christ and his Apostles taught it publicly, notwithstanding the
wickedness of carnal men: And it is far safer from their example to learn
what is profitable to be taught and what not, then from humane reasonings.
Secondly, because Election is a singular benefit of God, and the foundation of
all other gifts which tend to salvation: And it is the part of unthankful men
to desire to conceal such an especial favor because wicked and ungodly men
are troubled to hear of it. Lastly, because this very doctrine does
exceedingly encourage the faithful and godly to proceed in their course of
faith and godliness, of whom more regard ought to be had then of profane
wretches who are wont to pervert all things to their own destruction. For we
ought not so much to fear lest those who have no mind to embrace the truth
should be offended at our doctrine, as lest while we conceal the truth of this
mystery such as both are able and willing profitably to lay hold on it, should
in the mean time be surprised with error. But now let us address our selves
to unfold the uses of this doctrine.

In the first place it serves to illustrate acknowledge, and which they who
impugn this doctrine can never acknowledge as is meet. I will briefly run over
some of the chief of them. First, Gods infallible and eternal Prescience of
contingent events and of all the actions of free agents, is such a property as
by granting or denying whereof we grant or deny a Diety. Wherefore Isai. 44.7.
God does challenge the foreknowledge of future events to himself alone, and
denies it to all the gods of the heathen. Now this Prescience is so linked
together with the doctrine of Predestination, that he who grants or denies
either must needs by consequence grant or deny both. Further, an absolute
Dominion and Sovereignty over all the creatures and their actions, especially
over the wills and actions of men, is so proper unto God, that he is not to be
held for a God who cannot bend and incline the wills of men which way he
please, and that without any violence offered to their natural freedom. But
if we reject the doctrine of absolute Predestination, we must withal of
necessity abridge God of his absolute power over the wills of men. It is
therefore no small use that we make of this doctrine, when we learn from thence
that God has an omnipotent power of turning the hearts of men which way he
please. Moreover, the Immutability of the Divine will is held to be another of
Gods principal attributes. The Lord of hosts has purposed, and who shall
disannull it? Isai. 14.27. I am the Lord, I change not, Mal. 3.6. Now what is
Predestination but the eternal decree of this unchangeable will of God? For
(...), the immutability of his counsel, is seen in nothing so clearly as in it.
Lastly, we ought to acknowledge and admire in God a free and gracious Mercy
altogether undeserved on the creatures part: and this attribute also does shine
so clear in the doctrine of Predestination, that those who go-about to deny or
obscure it must withal be guilty of denying or obscuring this mere and free
mercy of God showed in the salvation of man. If therefore we mean not to coin a
new God, we must not introduce a new Predestination, but retein that which the
holy Scripture has delivered unto us. Let us look a little on Arminius and his
followers. These men reteining the bare name of Predestination, have indeed
brought in a Postdestination; yea under the empty title of Predestination they
understand nothing else but such a purpose in God to bring the faithful unto
the kingdom of heaven and to shut out the unbelievers, as was then only
conceived by him, as it has reference to particular persons, when he foresaw
that they would persevere unto the end either in faith or in unbelief. Now it
is worth our pains to consider how these men handle the foresaid Divine
attributes. Vorstius being Not. ad Disp. de Deo, page 328. etc.
loath to admit of such a Predestination as agrees with Gods nature, has
shaped out a nature for God suitable to that Predestination which he dreamed of.
Hereupon he questioneth all those forementioned Divine attributes. The
universal Prescience he hotly opposes under the person of others, not
answering any thing to the objections alleged; but for the arguments of the
orthodox side, these he confuteth with might and main, or at least endeavors
to confute them. We will give you a taste of the man. Page 329. Infallibilis and
prorsus universalis omnium futurorum praescientia nulli usui est in Deo.
An infallible and universal foreknowledge, says he, of all future events is
of no use at all in God. Page 330. Admissa hac praescientia universali and
prorsus infallibili, necesse est multa Scripturae loca mirabilibus glossis
torquere.
This universal and absolute prescience being admitted, many places of
Scripture must needs be wrested by strange glosses. And again, Page 331. Absit
ut Deo vel hypocrisin, vel temeritatem atque imprudentiam ejusmodi attribuamus
cujusmodi per infallibilem illam omnium futurorum praenotionem induci omnino
videtur.
God forbid that we should attribute unto God any such either hypocrisy, or
rashness, or folly, as by this infallible foreknowledge of all future things
seems necessarily to be fastened upon him. Now let us hear whether he
conceive any better of Gods Sovereigntie over the wills of men. Amica Duplic.
ad Jo. Pisc. page 55. Virtutes and bona opera libere prorsus and contingenter
in nobis esse aut a nobis fieri vult: eoque potentius aut efficacius eae ipsa
quam per modum voti ac desiderii velle non potest.
God would have virtuous habits to be in us, and good actions to be done by us
freely and contingently: Therefore this will of God can import no more power or
efficacy then agrees with the nature of a bare wish or desire. And elsewhere
he affirms that Not. ad disp. de Deo page 355.
God does procure our conversion, holiness, and perseverance, yet so as that
he is rather to be conceived to wish and desire it, then to necessitate or
absolutely and irresistibly to effect it. Hence flows that common doctrine of
the Arminians, Positis omnibus gratiae Divinae operationibus quibus Deus utitur
ad conversionem humanam, manet tamen ipsa conversio ita in hominis potestate,
ut converti possit vel non possit.
When the Divine grace has done all that it uses to do for the conversion of
a man, yet still his conversion is so far in his own power, that he may
choose whether he will be converted or no. Yea further, since they are of
opinion that the will of God cannot bear such sway over man's as to incline it
which way it please without prejudice to the liberty thereof, therefore they
avouch Corvin. ad Bogerman. page 203.
that God did never absolutely will or peremptorily intend the conversion of
any man. Neither can the Immutabilitie of the Divine will escape being violated
by these impugners of absolute Predestination. For hereupon does Vorstius take
upon him thus to censure our Divines, Not. page 195. Non satis circumspecte
loquuntur qui Deum ut essentia sic etiam voluntate prorsus immutabilem esse
affirmant. Voluntas Dei ad extra non minus in Deo quam in Angelis and hominibus
ad opposita vertibilis.
They speak but unadvisedly who affirm that God is absolutely immutable as well
in his will as in his essence. The will of God ad extra, as it respects the
creatures, is no less alterable then the will of angels and men. Page 371.
Nihil absurdi ex eo sequitur quod Deus in tempore quaedam praecise velle vel
nolle dicitur quae fortassis antea non ita praecise voluit vel noluit.
It is no absurd assertion to say that God did in time precisely and
determinately will or not will some things which perhaps before he did not so
precisely will or not will. But in another place he has a speech that
savoureth of most rank blasphemy; Page 486. Poenitentia recte Deo convenit,
quatenus ipsa opera sua propter supervenientem aliquam causam insperatam vere
improbat, deserit, aut mutat.
God may properly be said to repent, in as much as by reason of something
intervening contrary to his expectation he does truly find fault with, give
over, or alter his own actions. Moreover, those men do flatly overturn Gods
free Mercy who disallow absolute Predestination, and will have it to depend
upon the foreseen actions of men. For it is not an act of mere mercy to ordain
any man to salvation only upon foresight that he who is thus ordained will
rightly use the freedom of his will. Hence S. Augustine says, That
Predestination is to be preached to the end De bono persever. c. 21. ut possit
vera Dei gratia insuperabili munitione desendi.
that Gods true grace may have an invincible bulwork to defend it. It is
manifest therefore that this is one special use of the doctrine of
Predestination, To learn from thence to conceive aright of the Divine
attributes, which they who reject it cannot possibly do. Wherefore it is much
to be feared, lest those who disallowing S. Paul's Predestination embrace that
of Arminius, will at length also like well of Vorstius his God, hewed out and
squared for the most part by the rule of Arminius his Predestination. Thus much
of the first use of this doctrine.

Secondly, the doctrine of Predestination Justus quis est nisi qui amanti se
Deo vicem rependitamoris? quod non fit nisi revelante Spiritu per fidem homini
aeternum Dei propositum super sua salute futura, Epist. 107.
Who is righteous, but he who requiteth the love of God with love again? Which
is never done except the holy Ghost reveal unto a man by faith Gods eternal
purpose concerning his future salvation.

3. Thirdly, this doctrine is a great spur and encouragement to the study of
true godliness unto all those who are affected with a lively sense of their
Election. For as soon as the heart of a man begins to glow with the love of
God, presently he has an ardent desire of glorifying God by his good works and
of testifying his thankfulness. Howsoever therefore sometimes those that
prattle much of their Predestination are negligent and sluggish, yet such as
have obtained a true and lively sense thereof are fervent and zealous of good
works. Neither indeed can it be otherwise: For no man can by the evidence of
faith and testimony of the Spirit apprehend that he is elected, but withal he
must apprehend thus much, that he is elected to the end he may be holy and
unblameable before God through love; that he is created anew unto good works,
which God has prepared for him that he should walk in them; in a word, that he
is ordained as well unto the works of grace as to the reward of glory. But he
abhors and repelleth far from him that profane cogitation, I am
predestined; therefore I may live as I list.

The fourth use of this doctrine is this, Psalm. 85.7.
Show us thy mercy, O Lord, says thus, Happy is the man to whom God shows
his mercy: He can in no wise be lifted up with pride to whom God shows his
mercy. For by showing his mercy unto him, he persuades him that whatsoever
good he has, he has it from none but him who is our universal good. And when
he considers that he has all that he enjoys not from himself but from his
God, considering hereof he waxes not proud, not waxing proud he is not lifted
up, not being lifted up he falls not, not falling he stands, standing he
adhereth unto, adhering unto he abides in, abiding in he enjoys and
rejoices in the Lord his God. Thus Saint Augustine. And more briefly in
another place, De bono persev. lib. 2. c. 20. Praedicanda est praedestinatio
ista beneficiorum Dei, ut qui habet aures audiendi, non in seipso sed in Domino
g lorietur.
This decree of God of bestowing his benefits ought to be declared, that he
that has ears to hear may not glory in himself but in the Lord. This use of
Predestination the Apostle himself intimates in those words, Ephesians. 1.6. He
has predestined us to the praise of the glory of his grace.

Fifthly, this orthodox doctrine of Predestination and Reprobation does arm the
faithful against diffidence, and against all Fear not, little flock: for it is
your Fathers good pleasure to give you the kingdom. The same scope had the
Apostle. Romans 8. where having laid down the doctrine of Predestination, he
straight endeavors from thence to encourage the godly and faithful against
whatsoever any ways may molest and trouble them, and draw them into distrust
or any danger. For what else do those comfortable speeches breath out, If God
be for us who can be against us? verse. 31. Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods elect? verse. 33. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?
verse. 35. In all these things we are more then conquerers through him that
loved us. For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, -- nor
any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is
in Christ Jesus our Lord, verse. 37. etc.? This therefore is the most true and
wholesome use of our Predestination, not to feed our minds with the idle
speculation thereof, but to sustein, refresh and strengthen them with firm hope
and faith, when they labor and groan and are discouraged, under the pressures
of the world, the infirmities of the flesh, and the assaults of the devil. I am
not ignorant that the ancient Pelagians and some late adversaries of absolute
Predestination do reason far otherwise with themselves; namely on this
manner, If Predestination and Reprobation depend upon the acts of our
free will; if grace be tendered promiscuously unto all men, and it be left to
our choice whether we will believe or not believe, persevere or not persevere,
then let us take good courage: for since our will is mistress of her own
actions, no man can fall short of salvation unless he will. But then we must
needs despair, when our salvation is wholly grounded upon the secret pleasure
of God, not upon our own free will. Here we may well cry out with the Psalmist,
Psalm. 62 9.
Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie; to be
laid in the balance they are altogether lighter then vanity. If thy salvation
depended upon thine own will, then thou supposest thou should rightly use
the grace offered unto thee, and at length attein unto the kingdom of heaven.
What Adam in his integrity did not, what the Angels placed in heaven and endued
with heavenly perfections did not, when they were left unto their own liberty,
that thou frail man, though overwhelmed with sin and battered continually
with temptations, presumest thou should be able to do if the Divine
Predestination were quite removed, and the business wholly left in thy power.
On the other side thou complainest that by this doctrine thou art driven to
despair, because it places the whole oeconomie of man's salvation in Gods free
pleasure: As though then there were no remedy but men must despair when they
are commanded to put all their confidence in God alone. But whatsoever hope the
proud Pelagian can build upon the power of his own free will, which is none at
all, that and more can the righteous build upon the alone mercy of God, which
is infinite. I demand of them therefore with S. Augustine, De bono persev. lib.
2. cap. 22. An timendum est ne tunc de se homo desperet quando spes ejus
ponenda demonstratur in Deo, non autem desperaret si eam in seipso
superbissimus and infelicissimus poneret.
Whether there is any fear that a man should then despair of himself when he is
told that he must place his hope in God, and not rather that he should despair
when out of a wretched pride he places it in himself. What difference
therefore there is in respect of true and solid confidence, betwixt those who
will needs rely upon their own will excited by Gods grace and then left to its
liberty, and those who depend wholly on the grace of Predestination unavoidably
and invincibly working upon and ruling the wills of the Elect, we may learn of
the same Father in his book De corrept. and great. chap. 11, 12, 13.
Notwithstanding therefore all the calumnies of the Pelagians we avouch, that
this is one special use of the orthodox doctrine of our Churches concerning
Predestination, that by the shield of faith relying upon Gods eternal and
unchangeable good will toward us we arm and protect our selves against despair
and the fiery darts of the devil.

Sixthly, the consideration of Election were ordained for the elect. For they
know well, that prayer is the key of heaven, and that God does not use to
bestow his saving graces upon lazy sluggards, but upon such as duly seek after
them. Moreover, the same Spirit of Adoption which bears witness to our
spirit that we are Gods chosen children, is also the Spirit of Prayer and
Supplication, and enflameth our hearts to call daily upon our heavenly Father.
Those therefore who from the certainty of their Predestination do pretend that
the duty of prayer is superfluous, do plainly show that they are so far from
having any certainty of their Predestination that they have not the least
sense thereof. Aquinas speaks very learnedly and soundly, Part. 1. qu. 23.
art. 8. Praedestinatis conandum est ad been operandum and orandum, quia per
hujusmodi praedestinationis effectus certitudin liter impletur.
The Elect ought to labor in good works and in prayer: for hereby their
Election is ascertained and accomplished. Idem ibid.
For as natural effects, though foreseen by God, yet are brought into act by
natural causes, without which they cannot come to pass; so the salvation of
the Elect being decreed by God, whatsoever furthereth the same falls under
the same decree, as prayer, care to live godlily, and the like, without which
the salvation of the Elect will never be accomplished. By how much therefore
the firmlier any man is persuaded in his heart of his Predestination, so much
the greater ought his care to be of praying frequently unto God. For example;
There was never any who more strongly urged the doctrine of absolute
Predestination, never any who had more clear apprehension of his own Election,
then the Apostle S. Paul, and yet this doctrine and apprehension did not (as
the Pelagians falsely affirm) withhold him from prayer, but made him more
vehement and frequent in that duty. The same may we say of James, who is styled
the brother of the Lord: Without doubt he (if ever any other) had a most firm
persuasion of the love of God and of his own Election, yet (as Hist. Eccles.
lib. 2. c. 23.
Eusebius records) so did he wont himself to daily prayers, that his knees
became hard and brawnie like the feet of a camel. To be slack and sluggish
therefore in prayer is not the property of those who by the testimony of Gods
Spirit have got assurance of their Election, but rather of such as have either
none or very small apprehension thereof. For as soon as any one by believing
does conceive himself to be one of Gods elect children, he earnestly desires
to procure unto himself by prayer those good things which he believes that God
prepared for his children before the foundation of the world.

Lastly, it is manifest that when the doctrine of Predestination is rooted in
our and meekly to sustein all adversity. Neither is this use lightly to be
esteemed, seeing that Patience, as Tertullian De patient.
says, is a grace so necessary in all religious duties, that he that wants
it can neither keep any commandment, nor perform any work acceptable to the
Lord. Now the consideration of Predestination does work patience in the Elect
three manner of ways. First, because from thence they conceive certain hope
that their momentanie afflictions being ended they shall infallibly attein life
everlasting. Now what man into whose breast this persuasion is entered, that he
was elected to life eternal before the creation of the world, can be of so low
and cowardly a spirit as to be moved to impatience by the crosses and troubles
of this temporal life? The Apostle encouraged herewith cries out thus in the
midst of his adversity, Romans 8.18
That the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with
the glory which shall be revealed in us. Holy Prosper, a disciple of S. Paul,
susteineth himself with the same prop; In Sent. Appendo quod patior contra id
quod spero, and incomparabiliter majus est quod speratur quam quod insertur.
I weigh, says he, what I suffer with what I hope for, and my hopes do
incomparably exceed all my sufferings. Again, the Apostle Heb. 10.34. alleges
the knowledge that the saints had of being elected to eternal life as a
special cause of their patience in enduring afflictions: Ye had compassion of
me in my bonds, and took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing your
selves that ye have in heaven a better and enduring substance. As though he had
said, Those only do patiently endure the loss of these earthly goods who know
that there be heavenly goods appointed and prepared for them. Secondly, the
consideration of Predestination does wonderfully conduce to the begetting of
patience in the minds of the faithful, because whosoever understands this
doctrine aright, understands withal that he was elected not straight to be
carried into heaven on a bed of down, but to become conformable unto the Head
of the Elect Christ Jesus as well in the cross as in the crown, and first in
the cross, after in the crown. For so says the Apostle, Romans 8.17
If so be that we suffer with him, we shall be also glorified together. And S.
Peter, 1. Pet. 4.13.
Rejoice in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his
glory shall be revealed ye may be glad also with exceeding joy. Afflictions
therefore do not only not tire the patience of the Elect, but they beget
within them a secret and spiritual joy. Luther.
For being afflicted they rejoice, and embrace their sufferings like relics
consecrated by the touch of Christ. And from this their conformity with Christ
here in suffering the miseries of this life they do assuredly gather their
conformity with him hereafter in the fruition of everlasting joys; according
to the of Gregory, Moral. 1. 4. Quo malis praesentibus durius deprimor, eo de
futuris gaudiis certius praesumo.
The more grievous and heavy my pressures are for the present, the greater is
my certainty of future joys. Henc^ not patience alone but joy also in
afflictions does spring up unto the predestinate Thirdly, by the doctrine of
Predestination the faithful are trained up unto patience, because from thence
they learn that all crosses and troubles fall out unto them not by chance but
by Gods determinate appointment, not according to the fury of the wicked but
according to the will of their Father, lastly, not for their hurt but for their
advantage. No man has thoroughly learned the doctrine of Predestination but he
also acknowledges all this: and no man is firmly persuaded of this, but he
patiently endures whatsoever misfortunes can befall him. But if at any time
any impatience be found in the breast of the faithful, it is because they
either not sufficiently believe or not attentively consider this most
comfortable doctrine of Predestination. For if this persuasion be rooted in our
hearts, That no man can do any thing against us but what the counsel of God
determined before to be done, Acts 4.28.
we shall never impatiently grumble because God does not alter his eternal
decrees that so we might escape our momentany evils. Further, if this also be
added, That the wicked are only as rods in the hand of God, and cannot scourge
us as much and as long as they please, but as much and as long as seems good
unto God our heavenly Father, who will not meekly suffer himself to be
chastised by the powerful hand of so gracious a Father? Lastly, if we take-in
this also, That those very things which seem hard and sharp to be suffered do
undoubtedly work together for our good, who would take I will not say
impatiently but unwillingly a potion which, though bitter, yet is tempered and
prepared for him by so wise, so loving a Physician?

And thus you see how many excellent uses do flow from the orthodox doctrine of
Predestination. What remains shall be dispatched in a word or two. If we will
show that we have not a fleeting or uncertain conjecture only, but a true and
solid knowledge of our Election, we must have recourse to the forenamed uses,
and by them make trial whether our conceit of our Election be a deceitful
illusion or a true persuasion springing from faith. We are to account it false
and deceitful if it prove idle and unprofitable, much more if we find it to be
the pernicious mother of presumption: But if it has taught us to conceive
worthily of God, if it has enflamed our hearts with the love of him, if it
has kindled in us a zeal of true godliness, if it has beaten down our pride
and begot in us true humility, if it defend us against despair, if it stir us
up to frequent prayer, if it encourage us to patience under the cross, then we
may be assured of our Predestination and of our future possession of eternal
life through Jesus Christ our Lord.

FINIS.

