AN EPISTOLARY DISCOURSE Wherein (amongst other particulars) these following
Questions are briefly resolved.

I. Whether or no the State should tolerate the Independent Government? II. If
they should tolerate it, How far, and with what Limitations? III. If they
should not tolerate it, what course should be taken to bring them to a
conformity with the Presbyterials?
Written by Mr. JOHN DURY.

To Mr. THO. GOODWIN. Mr. PHILIP NIGH. Mr. SAMUEL HARTLIB.


Published by a Friend, for more common use.

Iul^ 27. 1644. Imprimatur, JA: CRANFORD.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Green, and are to be sold at his shop in lvie
Lane. 1644.

The copies of Letters to Mr. THO. GOODWIN, and Mr. PHILIP NIGH.
Worthy Sirs,
ALthough I am not yet settled here, nor can promise unto my self any leisure
and freedom of spirit from other necessary thoughts, which my present
condition does obliege me unto: and although I might imagine that there is
little use, as yet, to be made amongst you, of any thing that I can propose
tending to moderation in matters Ecclesiastical, by reason of the distracted
condition of the Civil State; Nevertheless, beause I did promise you that I
would put something to paper concerning the scope of my Negotiation, and the
Arguments which I have used to persuade men's spirits unto mutual forbearance;
and because I know, that if one will observe the wind very narrowly, he shall
hardly ever sow his seed, [ Eccles. 11.4.] or if he regard the clouds, reap his
corn; therefore I will not delay any longer the performance of that which I
undertook: Which that I may do in some order, I will branch out this
Discourse into these particulars.

First, I will relate unto you the true state of my negotiation with the
Lutherans, to bring them to moderation toward us.

Secondly, I will set down the heads of Reasons which induced me to this
endeavor, and which I used to persuade others to that duty, which I have
pressed upon them.

Thirdly, I will let you know my opinion concerning you case, for which you
desire to know these matters; that you may understand how far I take it to be
agreeing or disagreeing with that which hitherto I have agitated, and what I
would advise you to do in it, for the advancement of Christ's kingdom, and the
public edification of your Brethren.

The true state of my Negotiation is this, That I have endeavored to bring the
Lutherans to some orderly treaty with us, and joint resolution amongst
themselves, concerning the ways of Peace and Unity in the public and private
profession of Christianity, that the scandalous and unconscionable effects of
our divisions being taken out of the way, some joint course might be se^led to
set forward the Reformation of Protestant Churches, unto that period whereunto
it may by Gods assistance be brought. To this effect, having first dealt with
our own side, and gotten their consent unto this Aim, I have offered my self
also unto the rest as a Solicitor of the Councels of Peace, and a Servant of
the Communion of Saints in this matter. In this posture I have taken the
freedom to provoke all unto the duties of love and of good works, either by
proposing or asking council of them, or making motions tending to the
composure of differences. For, having made my spirit void of partiality, and
laid aside all private aims, I took up universal rules which I thought
app^^^^e unto all men's understandings in Theoreticis, and to their con^^^^^^es
in Practicis; that by this means we might be brought to f^llow the Apostles
council unto the Philippians, chap. 3.15.16. which is, that so far as we are
come, we should mind the same things, and walk by the same rule, as it
becomes those that i^deed are brethren in Jesus Christ. For I did not aim so
much at a ^are Toleration betwixt us and Lutherans, as at a pub i^ue prof^ssion
of Brotherhood, whereupon I conceived a Toleration would follow of it self in
matters of lesser difference, which c^uld be no just occasion of a breach: and
as for things of greater importance, wherein some did seem to find sufficient
cause of breaking of Brotherhood from us: I supposed these might be removed two
ways; first, by a fundamental confession of faith, and of duties requisite
unto salvation, which might be common to all, and openly professed as the sum
and substance of our Religion, and badge of our fraternall union. Secondly, by
a common and infallible rule of interpreting the Text of holy Scripture, by
which all Doubts incident in other matters, not fundamental, may be cleared
and decided: and as the fundamental Confession should serve for all in common,
so this Rule of interpretation should be a means to join the more learned
sort in one sense and meaning, lest their differences about matters of lesser
moment might rent the body in pieces, notwithstanding the former tie of Union
in fundamental truths. For seeing we see daily, that amongst men of good
repute otherwise for godliness in their life and conversation, and for zeal in
their profession of Religion, great disputes fall out for small matters, (as
for the different acception of a word in a place of Scripture, or for the
meaning of a sentence which may be diversely interpreted according to the
different relations which it has unto the matters precedent and consequent:)
and these disputes ofttimes come to such a height betwixt them, that they not
onley lose all charitable affections and amicablenesse of conversation one
toward another, but also involve others, their hearers, into the same breaches
of Christian love, from whence Schisms and Seperations at last arise and
increase in the Churches, although there be no just cause thereof in respect of
the substantial and material points of Faith and Practice: seeing (I say) we
daily see that this does fall out, and that this alone is able to breed many
divisions amongst the Learned, notwithstanding all other ties of brotherly
union and friendship betwixt them; therefore I thought it would be expedient,
if not necessary, to find some remedy for this inconvenient, which at last I
suppose is found, and if God would be pleased to enable me to propose it, I
hope it would prove effectual toward Men that are not self-conceited, but
tractable, either by the grounds of Reason, or of Conscience led in aspirituall
way, which is above, but not contrary unto Reason; for spiritual Truths are
rationally delivered in the Scripture, although men that are naturally
rational, are not able to c^mprehend the sense thereof. In a word, I conceive
the remedy to be this; That when we have agreed upon the substance of Faith
and Practice, we may have also some undoubted Rules whereby to reduce all
matters which are extra-substantiall, unto their own Principles, that the
doubts which arise concerning the same, may be decided according to the
Analogy of that Faith which is out of all doubt, and according to the clear
sense of the Word regularly analyzed: So that the Rules, first, of determining
Fundamentalls in Faith and Practice; Secondly, of reducing doubtful matters
concerning Faith and Practice unto their own Fundamentalls; and Thirdly, of
analyzing the Text of Holy Scripture demonstratively, are the means whereby
the disorderly proceedings of all our disputes may be remedied. And the whole
state of my Negotiation has properly been employed in this, to bring the
Lutherans as well as our own side, to intend jointly the right apprehension and
application of these Rules, as Antidotes to cure our diseases which are
infectious, and spread their distemper in the spirits of all men that walk not
by the same, to order their Theorie and their Practice, to the ends of Godliness
and of mutual edification through Love. You may perceive then, that I do not
negotiate for the decision of this or of that particular Opinion, about which
most men are so earnestly set, either pro or contra; for I leave all such
Disputes as matters of indifferency to me, in regard of the scope of my
Negotiation (although I make them not matters of indifferency in regard of
their weight, and in regard of my private judgment concerning them) and insist
only upon the Rules which all men that handle Controversies rationally or
conscionably should follow as well in Theorie as in Practice, to come at last
unto the decision thereof. In this state my Negotiation does stand at this time
with all parties, and my aim is to meddle with you no further than to this
purpose at this time. Yet I never refuse, chiefly if it be required at my hand,
or if otherwise I find it fit for edification, to let my judgment be known
concerning particulars of Doctrine or Practice, which may be doubtful; but I
stand not upon that as a matter of consequence in my Negotiation, but rather
do it in obedience to the command of Peter, c. 3.15. and leave my opinion to
be judged by others according to the rules of decision of doubts, whereupon we
do agree. Nor must you imagine that I do by this Negotiation seek to
prescribe Rules and Methods unto others, as one that would have masterie over
their understandings, and persuade them to follow my directions; but I
endeavor to draw them to a Consultation about such matters, that by an amiable
Conference, matters of this nature tending to regulate our thoughts and
affections in the work of Reconciliation, may be beaten out and cleared, that
when we have found the rules of proceeding without disorder and confusion, we
may make use of them for the public good, and our mutual edification: and if
you do not disallow of this undertaking, you may come in as a healer of the
breaches, and a repairer of the ruins of many Generations: For all that I
desire, is to engage every one who is able, to help to contribute assistance
unto this work of Reformation: and because you seem desirous to draw from me
some help unto your private Case, that others may be persuaded to use that
Moderation toward you, which you think is just you should enjoy, therefore I
am reciprocally desirous to draw from you some help toward the Public, that
all may be persuaded to use that Moderation one toward another, which you
would obtain from those of England toward your self: and if you work
effectually for this, and that according to Rules which no man can refuse, I
suppose in doing good to the Public, you will find the benefit immediately
redound unto your self; For if you study to do all things by a Rule, and can
make others sensible that the Rule which you follow in your profession, is the
best and most perfect way of Peace and Edification amongst all; you may be sure
that you shall enjoy the liberty which your Rule yields, when others shall
perceive the Righteousness thereof. Let us then beat out the matter of
Regulating our proceedings, and ordering our Theorie and Practice toward
Peace, Truth, and mutual Edification in Godliness, and we shall find in the end
that our labors will not be in vain in the Lord. For if we truly study to
keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace; and if we do the truth
which we know, in Love, no doubt others will do in like manner to us, not only
because our example will be a provocation and pattern unto them to walk as we
do, but also and chiefly because they shall see that we do not walk at random
or partially, but by a Rule which is universal, and will lead all men that
will take it up, unto the fruition of that happiness which we aim at, which is
no more but the unblameable Liberty of the Sons of God in the Kingdom of
their Father, to serve him, and declare the praises of his goodness toward
us, through Jesus Christ, in the great Congregation. This liberty of serving
God according to his will, and of speaking of his praises, and of his
goodness, if we can show how it should be used without partiality and
selfe-seeking, according unto clear and infallible Rules tending to the
Edification of all men; I say, if we can show to this Generation this Liberty,
what it is, and how it should be used, not to contradict and overthrow, so much
as to build up, and gain assent; we shall enjoy our share thereof without
opposition: And because I am very confident hereof through Jesus Christ, I make
bold to provoke you unto this Meditation with me; and will now leave you at
this time to think upon the matter, till the next occasion of writing, wherein
I purpose God willing to insist upon the second Head which I did propose unto
my self in the beginning of this Discourse: In the mean time let us pray one
for another, and for light toward all that are in error and darkness, from
the Father of lights; To whose favor I commend you, as

Your Friend and Servant in Christ, JOHN DVRY.
HAGVE, 24 June. 1642. 4 July. 1642.
Grace and Peace be multiplied unto you from God the Father and our Lord Jesus
Christ. Amen.
I Made a beginning on the 24. day of June last, to write unto you concerning
the things which you desired to know of me touching my Negotiation of Peace
amongst Protestants: then I did show you first, that my Aim was not to procure
a bare Toleration betwixt Us and Lutherans; but rather a Real Profession of
true Brotherhood. Secondly, that to procure this, I had laid the Foundation of
my Work upon the Apostles Rule, which is Phil. 3.15.16. Thirdly, that to make
use of this Apostolical precept, and apply it unto the present occasion of the
Churches, I had labored to find out Three things. First, Rules whereby the
Fundamentals of Faith and Practice might be determined. Secondly, Rules whereby
Doubtful Matters which are not Fundamental, may be reduced to their own
Principles of Faith and Practice, according to the Analogy whereof they should
be decided. Thirdly, Rules of True and Demonstrative Scripturall Analysis,
whereby the sense of the word, which is the last Judge of all Controversies,
may be known. Fourthly, that to find these Rules, I did abstract my thoughts
from all particular opinions in the way of my Negotiation, not endeavoring to
presc^ibe unto any my sense concerning these Rules, but rather to draw others
to a Consultation and search with me of the Way of finding out the same: that
when we should have agreed upon an Orderly way of proceeding in all doubtful
matters, to find the decision thereof, we may at last come to some issue of
the Controversies which hitherto by reason of the confused manner of agitation
have been undecidable. This was the whole purpose of that Discourse. The second
principal matter whereupon I was to insist toward you, was concerning the
Reasons and Arguments which first have induced me to this study of Moderation,
and which secondly I have used to persuade others toward the same.

First then, concerning my self, I do ingeniously confess, that the mere
love of Peace and Quietness, and the hope of doing good to the Church of God,
did move me to embrace this endeavor, when I was called thereunto in Prussia
by Dr. Godeman a Counselor of State to the late King of Sweden, in the year
1628. Since which time, as I have never intended to discontinue my purpose of
folliciting the Public Ways of Peace, so I have had several kinds of
inducements binding my Conscience to the duty, and some encouragements which
were able to support me against the manifold difficulties and impediments which
have been incident to my way. The first inducement which bound my Conscience to
think upon these Endeavors, was the Call which I had to think upon the same,
which I could not but answer, except I should have been wanting to my duty in
the Ministry of the Gospel. Therefore as I was provoked to think upon the
Object of Peace and Truth, so I thought others would be moved in like manner to
do the same, if I did call upon them to that effect. Hence it was that I took
upon me to become a public Solicitor of these Endeavors; For I conceived
that none that was Godly, wise and Learned, would refuse to concur in so
necessary a Work, so profitable for holy Communication, and so fit for
Correspondencie in the Communion of Saints. Upon this ground you know that I
drew a certain Form of a Declaration to be subscribed by all such as would
join to help by spiritual Council these endeavors: To this you both did
subscribe, and I did in some occasions require your advise and assistance; but
what has hindered the accomplishment of your promise, you your selves best
know; perhaps God would have the fruits of your Meditations in this kind
reserved till this time, wherein they would be most seasonable. The Second
inducement was the Necessity of the times, wherein nothing could be more
useful for the Public Good, then to heal the breaches of Protestant
Churches, which we are all bound to pray for: and I in my simplicity did then,
and still do conceive, that what I am bound by prayer to sue for unto Almighty
God, I ought also by my best endeavors so far as God does enable me, actually
to accomplish and promote. The Third inducement was the nature and property of
the Work if self, as it has Place in the Kingdom of God. This Consideration
did not come at first so fully into my mind, as afterward when I had been a
certain space in action; for then upon trial of my heart, and examination of
my aims, I found that in all the Scripture there was not any one duty so often
and so earnestly recommended, as this, which tends to the keeping of the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace, and to the Care of mutual
edification through love: Therefore I set my self with so much more zeal and
diligence to dive into the properties of these virtues, whereby to discern the
excellency thereof, and what their usefulnes is in the Kingdom of God: And
when I perceived that all other virtues and Graces are useless, and
unprofitable to the glory of God, and good of his Saints, except these be
effectually joined unto them: I rectified my purposes in many particulars, to
make them answerable unto the nature of these duties, and settled a resolution
unalterable, to pursue this aim continually, more then any other study
whatsoever. I had besides these many other motives to draw me on toward these
endeavors, which it is not needful to mention; yet because some of them are
of moment, and have much wrought upon me, I will name them briefly; as this,
That I found the pronenesse of man's spirit to strive and to lift it self up
against others for some particular matters of Difference very great: and then
perceiving the danger of such strife, and the most pernicious effects thereof
in the souls of men, and in the body of the whole Church, I was exceedingly
confirmed in the love of Peaceable endeavors, as the only means to preserve
my soul from being involved into the great inconveniences whereunto I
perceived most men were wrapped unawares, for want of a Rule to walk by in
seeking Peace. Also this, that the only way to encounter with men of cross
humors, and that are strongly led away into gross errors, is to bring them
unto the thoughts and affections of Peace and Unity, to be intended according
to just and equitable Rules with them from whom they dissent: for in convincing
their understandings that they ought to walk by the Rules of Love, which lead
us to maintain Peace, and aim at the ways of edification, they are made void
of prejudices, and tractable to receive instruction. Moreover this, that all
Disputes turn at last to bitterness and vain jangling amongst all men, and
become endless and without fruit, except the aim of Peace and Reconciliation
be intended, and a Rule of proceeding be used, which may l^ad us unto the same.

These are the principal heads of the Inducements which moved me to these
endeavors, to which diverse encouragements from time to time did co^cu^re,
whereby I have been strengthened against the straits and oppositions which are
fallen in my way to stop me in this course of Negotiation. First I had from
time to time the clear consent and full approbation of all the most Godly
Divines of both sides, so long as their judgments were free and void of
partiality: and when they did fall off from me, I perceived that it came from
groundless jealousies and false informations or suspicions, which did make
them leave their true Principles and Rules of edification, which at first they
had intended. Secondly, I had the concurrence of the chief Statesmen that
were Rational and Prudent in he ways of true Government, who engaged
themselves to give me real assistance by their Authority. Thirdly, I found not
only great hopes of proceeding, but real eff^cts of my w^^ke, by Gods blessing
disposing the spirit of leading men unto the ways of Moderation. Fourthly, I
saw that the very opposition of unreasonable men did turn to the greater
advantage of my work, and the manifestation of the truth, so that at last it
was almost indifferent unto me, whether I met with opposites or no, seeing I
could turn all to my advantage. And lastly, I came to this resolution, that I
made a Vow of perseverance in the Work, whether I perceived any temarkable
furtherance of the Work or no, in respect that I conceived it to be a
Necess^ry Duty, whereof the event did depend upon Gods special providence, to
whom I was bound to refer the issue, whatsoever be came of me or my
endeavors. So that now I look no more to the outward appearance of Men in
this Negotiation, but unto the tenor of my Vow, which I am sure is answerable
unto the express will of God, and by this means I hope I am confirmed
invincibly against all oppositions whatsoever.

These are briefly the Motives and Encouragements which have brought me to the
Negotiation of Peace, and confirmed me therein hitherto. Now I must tell you
the sum of the Arguments which I have used to persuade others unto the same
disposition toward Peace and Moderation, which God has wrought in my heart.

First, the Woe which is denounced against the world by reason of Offenses,
Mat. 18 7.8.9. is to be feared, and therefore we should take heed that we be
not accessarie to the multiplying of the same. Now it is evident that many
scandals are multiplied by reason of superfluous and disorderly disputes, which
scandalize the little ones; and by reason of Contentions and partial
proceedings, which divide the minds of the Professors, and draw them into
factions: and if we connive at these scandals, and labor not to take them out
of the way when occasion is off red to us, we are accessory thereunto, and so
are liable to the woe denounced against the world, and the authors of off^nces.
Secondly, the miserable effects of our endless strife and divisions is a large
field of discourse to show how the progress of the Gospel is stopped thereby,
how the Truth is darkened, how the practice of Godliness is neglected, how the
Churches are consumed one by another, and made a prey unto the Common
Adversaries, who lie in wait and watch for our destruction, and prevail by
noth^ng so much as by our inward confusions, disorders, and passionate debates
amongst our selves. This Argument is made plain from the present state of all
the Protestant Churches in all Countries which are exposed to all manner of
dangers, and laid waste in many places, by reason of the prevailing plots of
the Papists and Socinians, which take effect, only because we do not intend to
walk by one Rule, to be like minded in that whereunto we are come, and to
Edify one another (in that wherein we are at v^riance) by Common Principles,
and Orderly Ways of Proph^cying. Thirdly, the Benefits which would redound to
all the Churches from Peace and Unity amongst themselves; and what Advantage
the Gospel it self would receive thereby; and how by the joint and Brotherly
endeavors of Protestants, all Nations of he World, both Jews and Gentiles,
and Mahumetans, might be brought unto the sheepfold of Christ, and the Man of
Sin in a short time quite overthrown. This is a most ample and large subject
to be insisted upon toward those that believe the Raising up of the Kingdom
of Christ, and the Overthrow of Babylon in the latter times.

Fourthly, The express Commandments of God to seek peace with all men, and
the manifold exhortations tending to instruct us in the ways and means of
love and peace, and happy condition of those that study to observe the same in
the fear of God; are so many well-springs of reasons to move the consciences
of men unto this duty and endeavor.

Fifthly, The example and forwardness of others in former times, and in these
times also, with the preparatives used and made ready on all sides to
entertain the motions of agreement, and to concur in the Counsels of Peace,
are alleged as a call offered from God, which all godly men are bound to
entertain with readiness, except they will be found wanting to their duty
before God in the Gospel of Peace, and guilty of the Evils which follow upon
strife and debate amongst Brethren.

Sixthly, The Brotherly Relation which is really by reason of the
acknowledgement of the same saving Faith, betwixt us; does bind us to make
profession of Brotherhood and labor to edify one another therein, except we
will betray the Truth, and break the tie of one Faith and Hope, which obliges
us to provide and seek for one another Spiritual and Temporal good, as
Members of one and the same Head Jesus Christ: For it being evident that the
Lutherans and We are one in the substance of the same Faith and Hope; it
follows that we are bound in Couscience to make this unity manifest by our
Public Profession; because we doing otherwise, suppress the chief fruit of
that Truth whereby God is to be glorified, and Christ made known unto the
World, as he does intimate, Joh. 17.21, 22, 23.

Lastly, This Argument I have oft-times pressed, and found it Unanswerable; I
say then, that as I find my self bound to profess Brotherhood toward
another, so I suppose every one will find himself obliged unto the same duty
toward me, if he will consider me as I do him. Now I consider every one with
whom I seek Brotherhood in profession as he has a Relation unto God, who is
my Father in Christ: If then I find that he has the same interest in God
which I have, and does call him Father upon the same grounds which I do:
namely, by virtue of the same new Covenant whereby I am united unto God in
Christ; then I do conceive him to be my Brother, in respect that his soul is
begotten by the same heavenly Father through the same spiritual Seed, and in
the womb of the same heavenly Jerusalem, and to the same lively hope, by whom,
through which Seed, in which womb, and to which hope my soul is begotten. And
if I finding him sound in the tenor of the New Covenant, must needs
acknowledge him in my heart my Brother, and a son of the same Spiritual
Father and Mother, then I ought not before Men to conceal the same
acknowledgement, but am bound in Conscience (chiefly when it may tend much to
his good, and to the manifestation of Gods glory) to make open profession
thereof; although in some other respects there may be some differences of
opinions and of customs of behavior betwixt us: for all Brethren are not of
the same stature, and clothed alike, and speak with one and the same tone, and
alike readily: some are taller then others, and more comely: some more neat in
their clothes, and speak more distinctly, and with more reason then others do;
and yet this does make no difference in the interest which they have all alike
unto their Father, and to his inheritance, and in the Brotherly Relation which
they have one to another.

If these Arguments were enlarged according to the richness of their subjects,
they could fill up a great volume: But I suppose you desire nothing else of me
but the intimation of these heads, to which some others could be added if time
did permit; but I am straightened many ways and still distracted, by reason of
the new frame of life, and the unsettled condition of attendance, whereunto I am
come of late, wherein nevertheless as I shall never forget the Public Good,
so I shall always be ready to show my self.

Your faithful Brother and Servant in Christ, JOHN DVRY.
Hague, 7/17 July, 1642.
Grace and Peace be with you from God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ,
Amen.
YOu have received, I make no doubt, the two former letters, wherein you have
seen the state of my Negotiation, with the Reasons which have moved me to
undertake it, and which I proposed unto others to move them to join with me in
the same Endeavors: I conceive that therein I have satisfied your desire, and
my promise. I might therefore su^ce^^^ from this subject; but because I hope it
will be profitable unto you and the Public also, and I find it answerable
unto my aim of Solicitation, to draw you unto a nearer consideration of those
matters; For this cause I will proceed unto the Third point, which at first I
did mention; which was to let you know my opinion concerning your Case, for
which you did require these Declarations from me; for I supposed you would make
use of my Reasons for your private Advantage to gain the End for which you
treat with some of your Brethren now in England, that namely they might be
induced to bear with you, as you supposed I would have persuaded the Lutherans
to have borne with Us. I do not disallow of your purpose, nor am I unwilling
to contribute assistance to it, so far as I judge it answerable unto the Rules
of our holy profession, and the lawful liberty whereunto we are called in the
Kingdom of our Father: But I must truly confess, that I would be loath to
serve a particular Aim, as it is a particular, and not directly subordinate
unto the universal end of Public Edification in the Communion of Saints. For
if I live not unto my self in particular, nor dare I aim at my own advantages
in the profession of the Gospel; and if I may not seek mine own, far less
should I seek another man's particu ar^ as it is a particular: but as the
Public Good of many is made up of several particulars, so I am bound to do
service unto every one; therefore I keep my self free from all, that I might
be a servant unto all, in that which is truly good; which is always common and
appliable unto every one. You see then the Rule by which I walk, which does
keep me without prejudice, because I look more unto the Spirits of men as they
stand in relation toward others, to find a Way how to bring them to the same
Rules of intending Mutual Good and Edifying one another in that whereunto they
are come, than unto their outward particular Actions or Designs, which I never
reflect otherwise upon, but as they must be taken up and compared with the
infallible grounds of Charity and Holiness, wherein all the Means of Public
Edification are contracted. For all truths of knowledge and of Practice (for
which most men so earnestly contend, in maintaining several Opinions) must end
at last in these Two; or if they lead us not clearly unto these, they are
Matters of no consequence; but if they can be found directly Means to advance
these, it is certain that in all men's consciences they will easily be made
manifest, if the Manner of proposing Evangelicall Truths Inoffensively be known
and observed. Hence it is that before we propose Fruths unto others (though
never so important) we should always premeditate the Inoffensive Way of
dealing with them, that out testimony may be received and without prejudice
admitted by them. And I find that this was the maine care of the Apostle, and
such a matter wherein he does place the chief character, as of the Children of
God, who are fit to hold forth the word of life to a froward generation, Phil.
2.15. so of his own divine Ministry, 2 Cor. 6.1, 2, 3 4. for the fulfulling of
which without offense to others, he was willing to undergo all manner of
afflictions and distresses in all patience and long suffering, o show that no
inconvenience befalling to our selves, is such a hinderance unto the Gospel, as
the least ^ff^nce which may be given unto any to whom the Truth is to be
proposed. So then although I be never so fully assured of a Truth, yet I must
not propose it without a Rule which may teach me to do it without offense unto
Edification. And now I am fallen upon this discourse with you, to lay a ground
of Communication betwixt us, and to prevent jealousies which you might have of
me, in case I should seem to dissent from you in some things, or if perhaps I
interpreted your dealings otherwise then you would have them understood: and
indeed there is great danger in mistakes of this nature; therefore before I
proceed, I think it would be very expedient you should briefly State your Case
wherein you are in England, and let me know your true Aim, as I have made mine
known unto you; For if I should guess, and say that your Aim is to have the
Liberty of Independencie; and if I should describe that Independencie so as
others do, I suppose you would think your self wronged: Now I am loath to
wrong those whom I desire to edify, and by whom (I suppose, if we understand
one another aright) I may be edified. Let me then have the benefit of a true
Information before I proceed; and I will promise, that if your Aim and Way of
proceeding approve it self to my judgment, that my Conscience will bind me
to assist you in it; For I have dedicated my self and my labors without
partiality, unto all good undertakings which tend any way unto the Advancement
of the Kingdom of Christ. If then you will show me what your proper Endeavor
is toward the setting up of Christ's Kingdom, and by what Rules you frame your
proceedings, as well in Spiritual as Temporal undertakings, as well in
Ecclesiastical as Civil Relations: I shall be obliged to show my self
effectually according to my light and ability,

Your faithful Brother and Servant in Christ, JOHN DVRY.
HAGVE. 28/7 July. August. 1642.
A Copy of the Letter to Mr. SAMURL HARTLIB.
Loving Friend:
THe Apologeticall Narration of the Ministers who formerly were named
Independents, but now refuse that title, which you have sent me, is penned with
much art, circumspectly and advantagiously for their end; and to me it has
given some general satisfaction in that which I did require hitherto from
them, but never could obtain, which was to know the true point of difference
betwixt them and the other Reformed Churches. Seeing then you desire to know my
opinion of their Way, I am willing to propose it; not to censure but to edify
you, and warn them, if my Discourse may be taken up without prejudice, which I
hope both you and they will do, because you know fully that hitherto I have
not been, and I assure you that henceforth I will not be wanting to them in
any duty of love which may advance the Kingdom of Christ; although in matters
of Spiritual Communication with me about that subject, I never could find any
reciprocation on their part, even then when they have been entreated so to do.
But I will not make this a complaint, nor must you think that I am less
charitable unto them for it: For I see that their aim is rather Private then
Public, and that their whole Way is answerable to a particular Interest, to
commend themselves in a distance from others, by some distinct practices
wherein they suppose they come nearer to the right Way of Church government
then others do; whereof you shall know by this Discourse my Judgment.

Their End in this Apology is set down in the close thereof to be this, that
they would persuade the Houses of Parliament to suffer them to have a
subsistence in their own land, with the enjoyment of the Ordinances of Christ
peaceably, with the allowance of the latitude of some lesser differences. The
chief force of reason to persuade them to yield to this, is herein, 1. That
elsewhere they cannot be in saf^ty and health with livelihood. 2. That they
have been sufferers in the same Cause with the Kingdom in former times, even
to exile, and in these present times that they endure the opposition and
reproach of good men, even to the threatening of another banishment; and yet
that they are not changed from their resolution to walk as they do. 3. That
they differ little from the Reformed Churches in their Judgment about the
present Work of Reformation of Worship and Discipline. 4. That if they have
not been furtherers of the Reformation which the Houses intend, yet they have
not been hinderers thereof, nor disturbers of the Public Peace. And to make
all this appear to be so, the Apology is penned with a great deal of
insinuation and strengh toward popular capacities who look not deeply into
matters of this nature, and to whom the plea of Equality in Government, and the
Liberty from being subject to Authority is very plausible; nor can the most
Judicious greatly except against the thing pleaded for, if it be supposed that
the particularities of their W^y are truly answerable to that which the
general Narrative does fairly insinuate; And if they be granted free from
those inconveniences, which a stranger to them will hardly suspect. Bu^ some
here who have been more nearly acquainted with their particular course then I
am, seem to have something to say to that, yet I will not prejudge them in my
thoughts, but do believe charitably all they say for themselves, as I would be
believed in the like case; and supposing all to be as true as may be imagined:
I will discover my Judgment concerning the main Matter, which I take to be
this:

1. Whether or no they should be Tolerated by the State as they do desire? 2.
And if they should be Tolerated; How far, and How long that should be; and What
latitude of differences should be permitted unto them, and What limitations
laid upon them? 3. But if they should not be Tolerated, How they should be
dealt withal to bring them unto that Union and Communion of Spiritual things
with their Brethren, which by their own Principles they will be bound in
Conscience to maintain, and which their Brethren ought to rest satisfied
withal.
Of these heads I will speak as one that looks without partiality upon their
difference, yet taking notice that they are with their Brethren joined in
consultations to advance the Kingdom of Jesus Christ by the means of His true
Public Worship, Government and Discipline which should be settled in England by
the Authority of the supreme Magistrate.

To come then to the matters which I have proposed to my consideration: The
first Question is, whether or no they should be Tolerated as they do desire?
To which that I may know what to say, I must consider their plea for
themselves, and show how far my judgment does find strength therein, to
evince the conclusion which they would have the State to yield unto.

They plead then for a Toleration in their native Country, because they cannot
live out of it, because they will rather suffer all outward inconveniences then
go out of that Church Way wherein they are, because that Way is little
different from that of their Brethren, and because they hitherto have not been
hinderers of the Reformation, nor disturbers of the Peace of the State by it.

The first Arguments are properly motives necessitating them to demand the
favor of a Toleration; and the two last are Motives inducing the State to
yield thereunto.

Their necessity is both Bodily and Spiritual: in respect of their body, they
say, ^hey cannot live elsewhere out of their Country conveniently: and in
respect of their Spirit, they say, that except they have the freedom of their
own way, they cannot live in it contentedly, but will rather choose to be in
exile. As for the commendablenesse of the Way whereupon their spirits are so
strongly set to enduce the State to give it a Toleration: They say that it is
but a little diff^rent from the Way of the rest of their Brethren, and so may
be Tolerated without danger, and that the rather because they have hitherto
given a proof of their peaceable disposition therein.

These pleas are made credible by a Narrative of their life and convers^tion in
their charges, and by a declaration of their Judgments in matters of
difference from their Brethren. And if any will take notice more distinctly of
the Particular Heads of the Narrative, he shall see that they insinuate.

Their Sincerity, Page 1. and 2. Their Unpartiality, p. 3, 4, 5. Their Amiable
and Brotherly Correspondence with others at home and abroad, p. 6. and 7. Their
Way of Church Government, p. 8. and 9. taken up from three Principles, p 9, 10,
11, 12, 13, 14. differing from the Presbyteriall, p. 15, 16, 17. and in nothing
inferior to it as they suppose, p. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. Their Innocence from
things laid to their charge, p. 22. and 23. From factiousnesse although
provoked to strife, p. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Their Oxthodoxie, p. 28. and 29.
Their Moderation to bring matters of Discipline to a temper, p. 29. declining
the Scholasticall debatement thereof in Public, p. 30. The Conclusion
inferring from all these premises the lawfulness of their desire ensuing for a
Toleration, in page 31.

Now how far the Conclusion is evinced from these Premises, and should be
yielded unto by the State, I will briefly declare: First, let it be supposed
that all matters of Fact are true in this Narrative, and as full as they should
be. Secondly, let it be granted that all these good dispositions of spirit
whereby they commend themselves are fully in these Men, and will be in their
Successors, which no man can promise: yet I think under correction, that
except they can make it clearly appear to the State that their Church Way of
Non-Communion (for I know not what else to call it) is the only true Way of
God, and that the Presbyteriall Way is not agreeable to the Word of God, in
that wherein it differs from them; I say, except they be able to make these
two things clearly appear, I think it would be no wisdom in the State to
give them the Toleration which they do desire: and that for these Reasons.

First, because the Wisdom and Piety of the State does intend to erect the
true Ordinances of God: Except then they can show that the true Ordinance of
God is not in the Presbyteriall Way, but in their Way of Non-Communion, they
have no plea for their request; For if they can enjoy the Ordinances of God,
and all the Ordinances of God, and every Ordinance fully in the Presbyteriall
Way; they have no cause to desire the Toleration of another Way of Church
Government, nor would it be Wisdom in a State to yield it; except it be made
to appear, that in the Presbyteriall Way some of Gods Ordinances in their full
strength cannot be enjoyed.

Secondly, because it is no wisdom in a State to reject an approved Way of
Government, which all the best Reformed Churches have received all this while,
and acknowledged to be Gods Way, and by experience found to be safe and sound,
and a strong hold against all manner of corruptions; and in stead of it to take
up another, which is not yet known what it is, nor was ever tried but in two or
at the most three Churches, and that for the space of a few years, wherein a
most dangerous Paroxisme of a great rent did arise amongst them, as I am
credibly informed, and which may be gathered from their own Apology.

Thirdly, it is no Wisdom to authorize two different Ways of Church
Government in a State, except it be to lay a foundation of Strife and Division
therein, which may agree with sour Machivilian, but with no Christian Policy.
Therefore if the Toleration sued for, be not a thing done by divine right unto
those that sue for it, but be craved only as a humane favor (as this seems
to be craved) it will be no Wisdom in State to yield unto the suit, except it
be induced thereunto by the necessity of avoiding some greater inconveniences
then is the admitting of a seed of perpetual Division within it self, which
in my apprehension is the greatest of all others, and most opposite to the
Kingdom of Christ. Now the less the cause of a Separation is, the greater the
fault is in those that make it, and the less cause the State has to give Way
to the making of it.

Fourthly, the Wisdom of a State might retort the Arguments of these Suitors
thus: If these men that are but few in number, and if those whom they
acknowledge to be their Brethren, are very many and great Churches; and if the
matter of difference be very small, and such as ought not to disturb the
Public Peace, as they profess, and by their practice show: then it
follows, that these few ought not to stand by themselves at a distance from
the rest of their Brethren, but they should join to them, not making a rent,
and thereby expose themselves to the extremities of banishment and want of
livelihood in a strange Country. Now these men are but few, and their
difference, as they say themselves, is but small, and ought not to disturb the
Public Peace; Therefore they ought to join with their Brethren, and we ought
not to allow them the liberty of a separation, lest a Schism arise from
thence in the Church, and further trouble to the State.

And truly this Conclusion may be inferred from their premises, with more
strength then that which they draw from it. If then they will punish themselves
with exile, because they cannot have their wills, they can blame none but
themselves. For in this case I should judge them persecuted by their own
discontentednes.

Nor will the plea of Christian Liberty avail here; for the liberty whereunto
we are called in Christ, does not give occasion to Singularity, or permission
to break the bonds of Spiritual Unity; which by the allowance of a public
Toleration of different Church Government, may be occasioned. Therefore to keep
the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace entire, and to prevent occasions
which may be taken to abuse Liberty, a few should yield unto many, except they
can fairly persuade those many to yield unto them: and if both sides in
matters Tolerable should intend mutually to yield one to another, their Way
will be, not to separate from each other, but to keep the interest of love and
Communion entire, till God open all our eyes to approve of things that are most
excellent: For we that are Spiritual or think our selves to be so, are
commanded not to please our selves but our Brethren to edification: If then we
desire to approve our selves more then others Spiritual toward God and his
Church, let us strive to go before others in all forbearance and long
suffering, with meeknes bearing the weak and their burdens, to heal them, and
no^to open a sluice to let in strife and debates chiefly in public, and for
matters confessed to be of no great moment. Let us remember that the servants
of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all men; and if to all men,
chiefly then unto their nearest Br^t^ren; for such we are commanded especially
to consider, to exhort daily, and to provoke unto love and to good works: And
as at all times this duty is requisite, so now chiefly in this sad conjuncture
of Public Aff^irs, and at this occasion of Public Deliberation whereunto
the State has called them, for the advancement of a settled Reformation.
Supposing therefore that this will be, and is the aim of those to whom I
speak, as they are my beloved Brethren in Christ, so I desire from my heart
their perfection, that I may be partaker of the Gospel with them in the
greatest liberty thereof, which in my judgment can stand very well with the
strictest obligations of spiritual Unity. Only two Rocks must be avoided in
the outward carriage of matters toward Public Edification: the one is, that
under the pretense of Liberty, no Licentious and Selfe-seeking Singularity
take place: the other is, that the obligation to Unity become not a yoke to
Tyranny, to bring the Spirits of Gods Children in bondage under humane
Ordinances. If these that are called to give advice in Spiritual matters
unpartially, can as good Pilots steer their course in this troubled and grown
Sea of the State, betwixt these two hidden rocks which are beset with dangerous
quicksands on all sides; then they shall by Gods grace help to save the
weather-beaten ship of the Church from shipwreck, and bring her to a safe
harbor in the quieted state of the Kingdom. And in hope that the good hand of
God may be upon them to help the furtherance of so good a Work, I will
suppose that the Apostolical Rule of composing differences, Phil. 3.16. may be
practiced in this case amongst those that are professedly Brethren. The Apostle
sai h then, Whereunto we have attained already, let us walk by the same rule;
let us be like minded, or mind the same things. To such then as are
spiritually disposed, let me speak in the words of the Apostle, as a joint
member of the body of Christ: I would entreat them to set down that whereunto
they are attained, and wherein they fully agree in the profession of the
Gospel: Then when this is known, let Rules be thought upon to walk by; and let
these be received on all sides for the ordering of their course without offense
one toward another, and for the settling of the bounds of their mutual
freedom, and of the engagement to mutual subjection and yielding to one
another in the Communion of Saints. These Rules being taken from the clear
precepts of the Word; the tie of the Conscience binding every one ^o mind the
same thing, or to be like minded each toward another, should be superadded
thereunto. The thing then which should be minded unanimously by all, is the
duty of Mutual Edification, by serving each other through love. This duty is
to be tied upon the Conscience by some Special Promise which is to be taken by
all in the presence of God, as being profestedly subject to his will by the
tenor of the New Covenant, which he has made with us in Jesus Christ; that we
being all bound over to him in Christ, may by the same tie of love be knit each
to other, as members of Christ's mystical body, by our spiritual Relations.
These Rela^ions then are to be settled in the acknowledgement of the duties
which one member owes to another, as they stand jointly under the same head
Christ Jesus. And verily me thinks this were no difficult matter for Men of
Spiritual and impartial dispositions to do freely amongst themselves,
without troubling the Secular Magistrate with debates of the Forms of
Spiritual Government, as matters merely Ecclesiastical, whereof he is no
competent Judge. But if these Spiritual Relations cannot be settled by the
Wisdom and loving Affections of Spiritual Office-bearers within the Church,
amongst themselves, then it is just that they should forfeit their Spiritual
Right and Liberty, which Christ has conferred upon them, and fall under the
arbitrament of a Secular Power, which ought to look unto its own Safety, lest
those that make divisions, and multiply breaches in the Church about small
matters, disturb also by that means the Public Peace of the State; and then
the Magistrate in his Charge over the Visible and Outward behaviors and
actions of Men, as well Religious (so far as they are Public) as Civil, in
respect that they are Natural; ought to become a Zorobabel, and take the
plummet of just Authority in hand, to interpose and make Ordinances of
Innocence and harmless Carriage amongst those that in their strife about
Spiritual Matters forget their Moral dutifulness unto the laws of Nature
and Civility.

If then these Men that pretend a freedom of Non-Communion should gather every
one their own Churches, and get followers unto themselves, which would have
the same privilege to be under no Authority resulting from the Spiritual
Combination of Church officers; and if the State should find it necessary to
Tolerate such Non-Communionists for a time to avoid greater Public Evils,
then I think that the Second Question should be taken into consideration;
Namely, What latitude of difference from others should be permitted unto these
in their Public Worship? and What limitations of behavior should be laid upon
them to avoid disorder and trouble in that Church which is Principally allowed
in the State? For if a Christian State should have but one only Church which it
shou d own as the child whereof it is a nursing Mother; and if the owning of
many Churches alike will be an inevitable cause of division within it self;
then it follows that all the Churches which we Tolerated publicly besides
that which it owneth, should be so Tolerated, as may be no prejudice unto that
whereof it self is professedly the nursing Mother. And because the
Substantial Truth of Christianity is but one, the Wisdom of a State should
Tolerate nothing that may darken, oppose, or eat out the Substantial Truth.
But because all those that make true profession of Christianity, do it for
conscience sake toward that which they conceive to be substantial in that
Truth; and for this cause also desire to have the Liberty of their Profession,
as thinking it an injury to have their Conscience restrained from serving
Christ, or any thing forced upon it, which it cannot acknowledge to be Christ's*
therefore as it is with the Conscience of every honest hearted Christian in
this Case, so it ought to be with the Conscience of a State. For as no honest
hearted Christian would have his conscience at perpetual uncertainties in
matters of Divine Worship, nor would he have any thing which is not agreeable
to the Will of God forced upon it; nor would he be obliged to give assent
thereunto, before he should know it to be of God, or at least no way contrary
to his undoubted Ordinance: So in like manner the Conscience of a State should
not be suffered to be at perpetual uncertainties, nor should it suffer any
thing to be forced upon it self, which it is not sure is of God, and
subordinate unto his will; but in case to avoid a greater evil it be found
a^solutely necessary to admit a doubtful profession in Pu^like, then a good
con^cience of two unavoidable evils m^^ choose the least, as we see David did,
1 Samuel 21. and 2 Samuel 3 39. and at other times: yet it will endure that evil
no longer then it needs must, but it will take it up only as a burden to be
laid down again as soon as it may be with conveniencie. Thus then if the
Non-Communion Way be found unavoidable, and yet not known to be Gods
Ordinance, it may be admitted till it c^n be either laid down or rectified, or
approved to be of God; all which the Conscience of the State should declare in
the Act of Tolera^ion: Nor do I think that the Non-Communionists themselves,
if they will not go from their Principles, will desire a Toleration upon other
terms. And that it may be determined whether it be the Way of God or no; a
course of O derly Conference should ^e settled, which may not turn to any heat
or breach of Brotherly Affections, but be a means to state the Qu^stion truly
without mistakes; and to clear the truth thereof by the evident Word of God.
This manner of conference may be described in due time, if the State should
incline to yield unto a Toleration upon the terms forenamed.

And then in the interim whiles the matter is in debate, the whole difference
of their course in Public, and the Underhand Pract^ses which perhaps some of
them might intend, should be so limited, as that the Peace of the Church and
Government owned by the State should suffer nothing thereby. And to find out
these Limitations so as they themselves shall have no cause to except against
the same; the State may command them to give up a Draught of the Whole Way
which they intend to follow in Gathering, Framing, and Governing their Churches
according to Gods Ordinances; requiring them to show wit^all, what Limitations
they would admit of, voluntarily in respect of others, that the latitude of
difference wherein they desire to stand, may be no disturbance to the Peace of
their Brethren, or occasion of Scandal to the Public Profession of the
Gospel: and when this Draught is given up, then the State may give it to the
other side to be considered, desiring them to declare if any thing more should
justly be required of them to prevent scandalls, and maintain the Public
Peace of that Religious Profession, whereby the Gospel may be most honored and
advanced, till in due time the causes of their Separation may be taken out of
the way: and when these have given up their Considerations to that effect, the
State may show the same to the Non-Communionists to see what they will except
against them; and if they except not against the Limitations required by the
Presbyterians, then the Authority of the State may Ratify the same; but if
they do except against the foresaid Superadded Limitations, then the State is
to judge and determine the matter as it shall think fittest for the Public
Peace and the honor of God in the Means of Outward Edification: Now because
difficulties may be incident, and many doubtful Cases arise in the J^dgement
of a State, How to determ^ne of such Limitations, as may be disputable betwixt
Parties of several Interests; Therefore it ought not to be without some Rules
whereby it may discern what is Justice, and give satisfaction unto its own
Conscience in a matter of so great concernment: It will then not be amiss to
set down some Propositions tending this way, which if all sides agree unto, it
may be hoped that the Limitations will not be very difficult to be found.

First, then it belongs to the Conscience of a State, to look both to the Ou
ward Visible Worship of God in it self, and to the frame of Humane Societies
wherein God is publicly worshipped; that neither in the Manner of Worshipping
God, nor in the Society of the Worshippers, any thing be admitted which may
overthrow the truth of Christianity, or cross any maxim of Civil
Righteousness and Tranquillity. By this Rule the Civil Magistrate will be
bound to suffer no Idolatry and Superstition in the Form of Public Worship,
and to repress all Confused Tumul uous and Factious Meetings of the
Worshippers, and the Occ^sions thereof.

Secondly, as that which is merely Spiritual, belongs to the charge of
Spiritual Office-bearers, wherein they are to be ruled by the Word only,
within themselves: and that which is merely Civil, belongs to the Charge of
the Civil Magistrates, wherein they are to be guided within themselves, by the
grounds of Right Reason, teaching the Fundamentalls of Humane Society,
consisting in the Principles of good Order and mutual Innocence to be
prescribed unto their Subjects. So in things of a mixed nature, the care thereof
belongs to the Spiritual and Civil office-bearers jointly, wherein both are
to concur to determine the matter according to their several Interests
therein. By which Rule, as the Civil Magistrate is bound not to meddle with
the Spiritual, nor the Spiritual Office-bearer with the Civil Charge and
Authority; so both are obliged to make their Charges useful to the good of
each other in the advancement of Gods glory. Therefore whatsoever may tend to
make a Confused mixture of these Charges (such as is in Popery and Papal
Episcopacie) or to break the amiable Correspondencie which should be betwixt
them in their distinct charges, should be taken out of the way.

Thirdly, although the Spiritual Charges of the Kingdom of God belong not to
the Civil Magistrate, yet the Conscience of the State professing
Christianity, is bound, not only to look to the inconveniences which may
hinder the progress, or overthrow the truth of Christianite, that they may
authoritatively be taken away, but also to the Conveniences advancing that
Truth, that these may be furthered, so far as his sphere does reach, in the
Nursing care of Religion. By which Rule the Conscience of a State is bound, as
I suppose, to these following duties. First, to satisfy it self in the
knowledge of that which is the Infallible True Worship of God, and in that
which is absolutely requisite in the public Profession thereof; that it may be
fully settled in the bosom of the State, and none suffered therein that will
oppose the same. Secondly, to bear a hand over it, to nurse and protect it
from Outward and inward Enemies, whenever the Church shall make a true
discovery of the same to the State. And thirdly, to oversee within it self
the Outward discharge of all Duties belonging to Gods Ordinances, that for the
matter, Justice, and for the manner, good Order may be observed therein: For
although the Spiritual Ordinances are not to be administered by the Civil
Magistrate himself; yet the just and Orderly behavior of those that do
administrate the same, in the discharge of their duties, belongs unto his
Cognizance; and if he finds that Injustice and Disorder is practiced by any
who is entrusted with the discharge of Spiritual duties, he ought to take
Council with the Spiri^uall Office-bearers of the Churches owned, and (as the
case may be) also of the Churches Tolerated; how the scandal thereof may be
taken away, and prevented in time to come. Fourthly, because the Right and
Orderly Outward Calling and Authorizing of Ministers to a Spiritual Charge,
and the appropriating of them to the Churches wherein their Charges are to be
exercised, is the groundwork and Cornerstone of the Outward settlement of
Congregations, and consequently of the Public Profession of Religion:
therefore the Conscience of the State ought to look narrowly unto this, that
by the Congregations Tolerated, no root of Confusion in any kind be planted or
admitted to spring up, and trouble many in their Public Societies: but all
prudent and circumspect Limitations should be used to prevent, so far as the
Sphere of the Magistrates charge in this kind reaches, that neither the
Multitude having itching ears should be permitted to heap unto themselves
Teachers after their own lusts; nor the Teachers following their own humors,
should be suffered to draw away Disciples after themselves, or to come in
secretly upon the flocks as thieves, to steal their hearts from the Shepherds,
or to break in violently as grievous wolves, leaping over the pale, or
breaking through the fold.

By these general Rules, and the Inferences which will clearly follow
thereupon, I suppose all, or most of all the Cases requiring a Limitation, may
be determined, and that without any undue Authoritative Power, which the
Non-communionists so much fear: For although they say that they yield not
less, ^ut more then their Presbyteriall Brethren do to the Civil Magistrate
in Ecclesiastical Affairs; yet because they dwell in Generalities, wherein it
cannot be discerned what they yield unto the Magistrate; therefore it seemed
expedient to me to propose also in a general Way these grounds, that if they
have nothing to except against them, the Particulars may be thought on; the
Toleration which therein they require may be justly limited thereby; and the
troublesome uncertainty whereby all things are kept in suspense may be
determined: For by reason of the doubtful General way wherein they walk, and
by reason of their great silence (concerning the Rules of Government, and the
duties of Spiritual Communion) which is like a guard of darkness over their
proceedings; they trouble some, and give cause unto others that are no ways
partial, to suspect, that they lie at their advantages, and love not the
light; and this because their proceedings are not settled, and so cannot be
brought to any trial by the evidence of Common Principles. In the mean time
they finding the app^ause of many that love the taste of liberty, grow strong,
and thus keep the State of the Church in Unsettlement.

And truly this suspension and uncertainty of matters Ecclesiastical leaving
all the bonds of dissolved Government in looseness, may prove fatal both to
Church and State, if God in mercy do not prevent the danger which may ensue
thereupon: Therefore I am troubled, and would feign be able to speak
seriously, as unto those whom I este^me my truly beloved Brethren in Christ, as
unto those to whom I acknowledge my self a debtor in the Gospel (for some of
them have obliged me in the outward part of my Negotiation in the Lord) as unto
those whose gifts I reverence, as unto those whom I love sincerely, even to be
jealous of them with a godly jealousy; to them I say, I would feign speak in
the freedom, meekness and sincerity of my love, as in the presence of Jesus
Christ to warn and to exhort them for the love of the Gospel, that they should
neither give their Brethren cause to be offended at their distant walking, nor
the Enemies advantage who watch for both their haltings, nor to me who have
unfainedly sought to have communion with them, occasion to fear, that the
frame of their Spirit and Way in the Gospel, will be mainly, or is, to please
themselves, and that the issue of it will be a Non-Communion, not only with the
Presbyterians, but even with themselves, in the end the one falling from the
other. All which I beseech the Lord in mercy to prevent, that the transcendent
gifts which many of them have received, may not become either useles or
hurtful to the Communion of Saints; For hereunto as I have not been wanting to
invite some of them heretofore, so now I would again Exhort them all, in the
bowels of Jesus Christ, in whom also I would entreat them to receive this word
of Admonition and Exhortation kindly; namely with that spirit wherewith they
would desire me to bear with them in the like case; that is, if they should
apprehend me to be in that dangerous condition wherein I may apprehend them to
be, if I look to suspicious appearances. But I love not to suspect evil, nor
will I give way to sinister Reports; but hoping the best, I labor also to make
the best of every thing, knowing that for the most part the mending or marring
of matters, is in the right or wrong taking up ^f them. Let us then not judge
by appearances, but let us judge a righteous judgment, as we would be judged:
and if the impression which I have taken up of them is innocent and harmless,
void of prejudice, and without partiality; then I hope that they will have the
same mind concerning me, and think well of these sollicitous expressions of
my mind for their good. For I speak the truth, and lie not, that I am in
pain, and afraid of something which may spring up from the opinion and
consideration of ones self in the sight of more light and perf^ction then
others have; which may be a dec^it tending rather to make a show then to
edify, to seem somewhat at a distance, rather then to be what we ought to be
toward others in neerenesse. The Apostle says, 1 Cor. 8.9. that knowledge
does puff up, but it is Charity that edifieth: and there he tells us also,
that of any man thinks that he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as
he ought to know. It is then very dangerous to have an opinion that we know
something, or that we are something in comparison and beyond others, and that we
may stand by our selves: and from this danger, if I look to what is said and
practiced by the Brethren of the Non-Communion, I cannot judge them free: and
how far they authorize by this way of distance, in private Christians (which
have gotten some smattering of light in a heat of zeal) the murmuring,
complaining, comparatively censorious humor of the Age; I would desire them to
judge by themselves, in the unlimited liberty which is taken this way by their
Members, and which is natural to follow upon that frame of Church Government
which they seem to pitch upon. For having cast off the yoke of subjection, and
absolute obedience under Episcopacie, if now they will dissolve also the bonds
of brotherly Correspondencie in a Presbytery; let them look to it, they will
find little or no Authority in a Consistory; and the liberty which their
members will take, and which indeed is permitted to them, to take over their
Rulers, for want of an Aweband of just Authority, will prove contagious, and a
leaven of Corruption unto all that have to do with them. And for this cause I
have laid the grounds of necessary Limitations for them, in case it be found
absolutely necessary by the State to give them a Toleration, such as they
desire.

Thus I have uttered my fears and jealousies, to give them warning of that
which may and ought to be apprehended in their way, to prevent the worst,
because I hope the best, and make no doubt of their ready willingness, not only
to take this Brotherly discovery in good part, but that they will also concur
gladly with me and others in the means which may remedy the same: of which
now I must come to speak in the Third place.

Thus I have done with the Second; Now I come to the Third Question, wherein
the Remedy of the breach betwixt them and their Brethren is to be thought upon
in case the State should not yield unto that Toleration which they do require.
In this Case two things must be supposed; First, that the State will find no
such satisfaction in their Way, as to think indifferently of it: Secondly,
that they of the Non-Communion can find as little satisfaction in the
Presbyteriall Government; For if either of these were, they would either get a
Toleration, or need none. The way must be then, either to give satisfaction to
their Brethren, or to receive it from them. I would advise then that they
should labor to beget a good understanding betwixt them and their Brethren.
For if their difference does arise from a scruple of Conscience, the State is
no competent Judge thereof: but it should be brought unto the Tribunal of
Jesus Christ, and judged by his clear Word, amongst those that are Officers in
his kingdom: and if it be no scruple of Conscience, then I see not why they
should stand so much upon it: why the conscience of the State should be
troubled with it; why the Church kept in so dangerous uncertainties for it. I
suppose then that it is a Scrupulositie of Conscience rather then any worldly
Consideration, which keeps them at a distance from their Brethren: and if it be
so, the nearest way to receive satisfaction therein, is to deal with Men that
make no less Conscience of their ways then they do: whose Consciences are
ruled by the same Principles that theirs are; who are every way alike and
equal with them in the Kingdom of Christ, and who seem to be offended at
their carriage in the Gospel, as they seem to be offended at theirs: therefore
they are bound mutually to take notice of, and to give satisfaction unto each
other; not should the Civil Magistrate be troubled with a Judicature of mere
Spiritual Matters. Now the best Way to deal with one another for an
Agreement, in my opinion is this; that either should propose to the other a
faithful Promise of mutual love and willingness to yield one to another, in
that wherein they shall see the will of God directing them to further the means
of Mutual and of Public Edification. This Promise being made, they should
intend to declare each to other their Sense of that wherein they conceive the
Means of Mutual and of Public Edification to stand. Now then give me leave
to lay open my thoughts unto you, that if by the Grace of God I may be able to
let them see that they really agree in all those Means which are any way
Fundamental; and that the way of making use of the same may be intended
Uniformally by both sides each toward other; then their difference may be
composed, and their hearts joined in the Lord for the advancement of his
glory, through the Unity of the spirit, in the bond of Peace. I am persuaded
then, that they have both the same Sense of the New Covenant of Grace, whereby
the Souls of believers are joined to God in Christ. This their Sense of this
Fundamental mystery of Godliness may be declared from the clear Words of
Scripture which may be made a Fundamental Confession of Faith, as I have
elsewhere in an Epistle to the Lord Forbes advised. And to this ground of all
Fundamentalls in Christianity, all the points of necessary Doctrine, and of
duties of Practice (which are no less Fundamental in the profession of
Christianity then the knowledge of Truths) wherein they also fully agree, may
be referred: For it is clear, that all which we either need to know or do, is
only needful for this end, to enable us to walk faithfully, and uprightly
with God, according to the Tenor of his Covenant made with us in Christ.

This Declaration being agreed upon, they should acknowledge themselves
therein, and thereby Brethren in Christ, and Sons of the same heavenly
Father, Servants of the same Master, set in his House, and over his Household,
to bring all men by their Ministry, through the Tenor of that Covenant unto
him: Here then they should take into consideration the duties of their
Ministry, to agree upon that which they should do in it for Mutual and for
Public Edification. For seeing they take themselves to be Servants of the same
Master, sent forth by him in the same Commission, to preach jointly to the same
people the same Word: I conceive that it will be no hard matter, if they know
their Masters will, to agree upon the Manner of doing his work: But to proceed
orderly herein, the first Matter should be concerning the calling of Ministers,
for you know that no man may take this Honor unto himself, but only he that
is called by God unto it, as Aaron was, Heb. 5.4. Therefore they should
determine from the Word and the Practice of the Churches of all Ages, What it
is to be lawfully called unto the Ministry? and What it is to be lawfully
called unto a Particular Congregation to exercise the Ministry therein? If
they agree in this (which I hope they will do) by looking to the Word of God,
and following the Practice of the best Reformed Churches; then their next care
should be to consider what Rela^ion Fellow Servants in one and the same Work
of the Ministry should have one to another, and how they should do to
strengthen one another hands, and to prevent the occasion of scandalls. And if
they find that they ought as Members or the same Body to have the same care
one for another, and that to show this care to strengthen one another in their
Ministerial duties, and to prevent scandalls, nothing is so necessary as to
do all by mutual Council and joint consent; then they should agree upon the
Form of such Consultations, and upon the Authority, which their decrees ought
to carry in matters of doubt: Wherein as I would have them whom I call the
Non-Communionists not to maintain any thing which may seem to exempt the
Spirits of Prophets from being subject unto the Prophets, from whence confusion
and trouble will inevitably arise in the Churches: So I would not have the
Presbyteriall Brethren to press upon the other any obligation to make them
subject unto such decrees, further then shall be necessary to make up breaches
and prevent scandalis, which otherwise will be unavoidable: And this I make no
doubt they will yield unto; that the joint Consent of many in a Spiritual
Senate should sway the Spirit of one or of a few to submit it self in
Circumstantiall Matters which are not precisely determined by the Word, but
left unto the general Rules of Christian discretion, because the Apostle
says, that the wisdom which is from above is peaceable, gentle, and easy to
be entreated, Jam. 3.17. from whence it follows that such as are endued with
this wisdom, will easily be entreated, and not self conceited, but yielding
to the Common advice of their Brethren in matters only determinable by
Spiritual discretion: For even as one member in the natural body, will be
swayed by the joint inclination of the rest, so it ought to be in the
Ministerial society of Spiritual Office-bearers in the Senate of Christ's
Kingdom: Now that they ought to be joined in a Spiritual Senate, and
Ministerial Society amongst themselves, is clear from the necessary end of
Mutual Edification, from the evident and constant Practice of the Primitive
Church; from the precept of Christ who commands a Brother offended at an
incorrigible Brother, after private admonition, to tell the Church; and from
the Precept commanding all to endeavor to keep the unity of the Spirit in the
bond of peace, Ephesians. 4.3. which cannot be effected without some joint care to
walk uniformally in the Public Worship of God as it becomes the Members of
the same body, whereof Christ is the head, that the world may see that they all
belong unto him: For this is that which Christ prayed for unto his Father, Joh.
17.21.23. That all believers may be one; and if all believers, then far more
all Ministers of the Word, because they are sent forth to edify the body of
the Church, till we all come unto the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge
of the Son of God, Ephesians. 4.13. if then they are appointed to bring others unto
the Unity of faith and love, it is clear that to do this they are obliged to
maintain the bonds of Ministerial Communion amongst themselves, which cannot
be done more effectually then by such Consultations as are used in
Consistories, Presbyteries, and Synods, the true intention and nature of which,
is not Coactive, but Auxiliary. And if to make up one single Congregation they
require a Covenant betwixt each Believer and his Brother, and betwixt them All
and the Pastor that should watch over their Souls; I see not why they should
refuse the like Covenant to be established amongst the Pastors of several
Flocks, who are bound as Officers in the same household of Faith, to watch one
over another under the direction of the supreme head of the Family, and
Shepherd of souls, Jesus Christ. I will not say that the tie is alike strong,
or the Relation equally binding betwixt Pastors and Pastors, as it is betwixt
Member and Pastor, or betwixt Member and Member in one Congregation; I say I
will not positively affirm it, but that it ought to be made as strong as a
Covenant of Brotherly love and care for one another in Christ, can make it; and
as the aim of strengthening one another hands in the work of the Lord, and of
standing jointly in a fight against the world, can require it, I do strongly
assert, and think those, that do not mind this aim, and the true means of
entertaining the same, guilty of a great sin against the Communion of Saints,
because they seem to seek a Particular Interest of their own, rather then the
good of others, whom they are bound to serve for their edification, although it
may be with some inconvenience to themselves by stooping to their infirmities
and bearing of their burdens. But this duty is little minded on all sides, and
therefore the ways of Peace are so difficult.

If then it cannot be denied that Gods Servants in his House, and work, should
not live at a distance as strangers, but stand together as Members of the same
body, in a Sociable Relation, to entertain the Unity of the Spirit in the
Communion of Saints; and if this Sociable Relation in matters belonging to
their charge of Mutual and Public Edification, is a means to maintain that
Authority, toward their particular Congregations, which in matters of doubt is
necessary to come to a decision thereof, and if this be the most natural and
mild way of Government, when every Church is directed by its own Officers,
through the consent of the whole; I say if these things cannot be denied, I see
not what can be excepted against the Presbyteriall Way of Church Government and
Discipline: and if the Authority of one Pastor, to whom the Charge of Souls
is committed, is such, that his flock is bound by express Commandment of the
Word to obey and submit unto him, Hebr. 13.17. and if the Non-Communionists
will not exempt any of their flocks from this Subjection to their Pastors,
though they stand by themselves alone; I cannot imagine why they should exempt
those same flocks from the Authority of the same Pastors, when their Authority
is strengthened by the consent of all their Brethren. For (to use their own
words) If it be a most abhorred Maxim, that any single and particular Society
of men professing the name of Christ, should arrogate unto themselves an
exemption from giving account or being censureable by any other neighbor
Churches about them; then it follows, that the Means as well of giving an
account and inflicting of a Censure, if need be, as of preventing Scandals
which may deserve Censures, ought to be used amongst neighbor Churches: which
means is none other then the Conjunction of Brotherly Counsels in the
Ecclesiastical Senate of a Presbytery or Synod. Now the Authoritative sway
which such Councels and Censures should bear, is no extrinsecall matter, but a
thing intrinsically inherent, and the immediate result of the combined body of
the Senate, wherein all the Authority of the whole Ministry is cast together
in one: nor can it be imagined that the decrees of such a Senate can be without
that Authority which the Charge of every member thereof does yield unto him by
Gods appointment, toward those over whom he has a Charge. Except then it be
thought, that Christ never intended that any such Senate should be convocated
or established in his Church to prevent or rectify Scandals, I am not able to
conceive what can be excepted against the Authoritative sway of the Decrees
thereof, supposing matters to be fairly and openly scanned. But if otherwise
there should be any fault in the Manner of proceeding of those that belong unto
the Senate, then the cause and the effect thereof should be meekly discovered,
and a way proposed to rectify it; but the bond of Brotherly Unity amongst
themselves, and the ground of their Authority toward their Churches should not
be shaken. Now the ground of their Authority is their Unity in their Charges,
and the bond of their Unity is the sincerity of their Intention^ to care and
look one to another, according to the Commandments which are expressly
given, Heb. 3.12, 13. and 10.24. and 12.15.

But here it may be said, that these Commandments belong unto all the Members
of the Body, and are not peculiar unto the Pastors and Elders more then to
others: I answer, that it is true, all are bound unto the same care for one
another as Members of each other; But although the Principle of this duty which
is their Co-membership and Covenant in Christ be the same, yet the discharge of
the duty is to be differently performed according to the distinct property of
every member wherewith God has endued it, as the eye, the ear, the nose, the
tongue, the hand, the feet, are all members, and as in one body, and moving by
one spirit, are bound all to have the same care each for another, yet their
care is in a different way according to the place and property which they have
in the body: For some of these members have a more eminent place and property
then others, and according to the nature of it, their care is commanded. The
members then which have their property and place in the head, are commanded to
care in the nature of the head, which in comparison of the rest of the members
is Authoritative; thus the property of the eye is toward the foot and hand
Authoritative; namely, to direct it, by judging and discerning the way wherein
to walk, or the matter that is to be felt: Now the property of the hand is not
of this nature, yet it cares for the body, and it has the faculty of feeling
to none other end; but the property of the faculty is not Authoritative and
directing further then it is directed by the superior Members, or the
faculties of the head. By all which I intend to intimate thus much: First, that
the Commandment of mutual care does not give to Members of an inferior
faculty any power to act above that which is in the nature of their place in
the body, far less to oversee or overrule the Rulers, as the custom of some
is or has been. And secondly, that this same Commandment does give to the
Members of a superior faculty a Charge to act lovingly, according to the
nature of their place and office in the body. For the office of every Member
does make the actions done therein according to the Rule, and to the end of
Common good Authoritative: and as it is in the Natural, so it is in the
Spiritual and Mystical body. Therefore as in the head of the Natural body,
there is a Senate of superior Senses, which in the acts of their Charges
cannot be without Authority toward inferior Members: so in the Mystical body
of the Church, these Officers which partake of the Senses of the Head, cannot
be without Authority in the Acts of their Charges, and their care which is
recommended to them for the body in their charge is to be understood different
herein from that which belongs to the rest of the Members: and if the looking
to, and caring thus for one another, be an express Commandment of God, as
well to Ministers one toward another in their Charges and places, as to
Members each to others; then it must be granted, that the best Means to
perform this duty, is also commanded: and if this be found to be the
Presbyteriall Conjunction of Ministers, then I must conceive that a Combination
of the Ministers of many Churches, is the complete and entire seat of Church
power over each Congregation so combined, which is the thing whereof they made
a question. Now if this Relation of Ministerial Authority and Respective
Subjection for mutual Edification, be once settled; then all other matters
tending to Public Edification, will easily be determined in matters of Public
Worship for Uniformitie therein, according to the Rules of the Word, which to
prevent scandals and divisions is absolutely necessary: and that this
Uniformitie may be obtained, I conceive that these things should be taken
notice of.

1. That in and about the Acts of the Public Worship of God some things are
his own immediate Ordinances; some things are not of that nature.

2. His own immediate Ordinances, as they are unalterable, so they are of
necessity to be observed, and must be done in his name.

3. All things of another nature are not necessary, but alterable, and may not
be done in his name

4. The things of an Alterable nature relate the bodily and Outward part of the
Worship, as it is clothed with Outward Circumstances; For whatsoever is
Spiritual, and relating the inward truth and substance of the Worship, is
determined in the Word, and not subject to Outward Circumstances.

5. The power to determine what is Alterable, and How it is to be altered for
Public Edification, does belong to those that have a Public Charge in the
Church.

6. Yet in some Cases which may relate the Rights of the Civil Magistrate, his
power is not to be neglected, but respected jointly with the Church Officers.

7. The limits of the joint powers in cases of a mixed nature, are to be taken
from their different Objects, Ends and Properties of Fundamental Rights and
Laws of Government, by which they attain their End severally.

8. No particular Church loses her Right to order within her self matters of
Particular Edification; only the occasions of Scandal to others must be
avoided, and may be prevented by a Brotherly Communication of Reasons why
things must be so ordered in a private way.

9. Therefore the Uniformitie of Public Worship is not to be esteemed by mere
Circumstantials, which ought not to be too precisely determined, but by the
Fullness of Substantials agreeing, and by the consent of a Latitude under
certain Rules of Brotherly Correspondencie therein ^etwixt United Churches.

10. The Manner of introducing new Orders to be observed, or of altering any
thing which has been observed, should not be without a due preparation of the
understandings of that flock toward which the Alteration is to be applied.

If these Positions be not denied, I suppose that most of the Scrupulosities of
the Non-Communionists may be resolved thereby, in matters of Public Order,
Decency and Government, about which they seem to intend a Scholasticall
disputation: but I would entreat every one whose aim is Public Edification,
to beware of the disputes of that nature, which may easily breed heat and
needles contradictions about matters of no great consequence: Or if they
undertake them, to agree with those with whom matters are to be discussed, of
the manner of debating, which ought to be limited and regulated, and free from
all Personal reproaches, which lay open the nakedness of other Infirmities, or
censure faults prejudicially; For except these cautions be prudently used,
those that take in hand to dispute, will lose their way, and be taken off from
the maine work of the Ministry, which is to declare the Testimony of Jesus
without partiality, as it may be for the Edification of all. We know, and that
experimentally, that Knowledge does puff up the spirit, but it is Charity
that does edify: Now to maintain the affections of Charity in the bonds of
Spiritual Unity, there is nothing so effectual as the Way of Brotherly
Consultation, by which all can be said, which in a Scholasticall or disputative
way can be proposed; and with more force, by how much the aim is more friendly
and insinuating then that of a Contradictorie debate.

Thus I have briefly done with the last point of this Discourse, where many
other things might be insisted upon, which I purposely omit, as not being
willing to descend unto Particulars which may be observed in the several
passages of the Apologeticall Narration. Hereafter, if it be found expedient,
and you require it, I may add an Appendix to this Discourse, containing the
same. Till then and ever I commend you to the Grace and love of the God of
Peace; in whom I am

Your faithful friend and servant, JOHN DVRT.
Hague, 17/7 March. 1644.
FINIS.

