THE Protestants Practice, Or the Complete CHRISTIAN.

BEING The true and perfect way to the Celestial Canaan.

Necessary for the bringing up of young and the establishing of old Christians
in the faith of the Gospel: The use whereof in Families will preserve them from
the Errors of the Times.

By a Reverend Father of the Church of England.

Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7, 8, 9. And these words which I command thee this day shall be in
thy heart, etc. Pietas Sapientia summa est. LONDON: Printed by M. S. for
Lodowyke Lloyd at the Castle in Cornhill. 1656.

To all the truly Religious Protestant LADIES AND GENTLEWOMEN In the County of
Glamorgan, or elsewhere:
Most Noble Ladies.
AUGUSTUS being invited by a private Gentleman to his house, and but slenderly
entertained, far below the Majesty of so great an Emperor; instead of thanking
him, gave him a secret but a smart check for it, Nesciebam me tibi tam
familiarem esse, I knew not (says he) before that we were such familiars.
Though Augustus like your Ladyships might justly task and check me for my
over-boldnesse in commending this Babe of Providence unto your Protection, yet
I am more then confident when I reflect upon your Ladyships candor and
goodness (not to mention any other of that golden chain of Heroine virtues
wherewith you are in the highest measure beautified and adorned) that the
presumption of these my addresses unto your most noble Ladyships, will be no
less then favorably excused, if not graciously accepted: In regard whereof I
cannot but conceive my self highly honored at this juncture of time to be in
a capacity to serve ye in presenting this Christian Orphan to your Ladyships
most gracious tuition. And indeed I should be very much wanting in my duty, by
being accessory to the worst of vices (Ingratitude) if upon the uninterrupted
continuance of so many liberal expressions and indulgent effects of your
favors and bounty toward me, had I buried them all in silence by omitting the
present opportunity so strangely offered, as to the Dedication of this
Treatise, which together with all my best services I once more humbly recommend
to your Ladyships Acceptance, Perusal, and Patronage, not thereby presuming
to inform ye of any thing you know not, or confirm you in any thing you
scruple at, for I am too mean an Orator to give ye Characters correspondent to
your Ladyships merits; it is as far above my ability, as I am below your
Eminency: I must therefore do by your Ladyships, as the Ancient Heathen did by
the Images of their Gods, on whose heads when by reason of their height they
could not place the Crowns offered to their Deities, they humbly laid them at
their feet: ever vowing my constant prayers for your Ladyships Improvement of
all virtues and saving graces in order to the eternity of glory, it being the
height of my Ambition so to prostrate my endeavors and express my self as I am

Your Ladyships most humble Votarist. Athanasius Davies.

To the READER.
Reader;
IF thou do but enter into a serious consideration of the world, the
deceitfullnesse of Riches, the shame of Pleasures, the folly of Sports, the
inconstancy of Honors, the danger of Greatness, and the strict Account thou
must one day give for All, thou must needs with Solomon confess and acknowledge
all this worlds Magnalia, to be but Vanity of vanities, and all but vanity.
Divert thy course then, and (do as the Wisemen did) go another way; Trade
for spiritual Merchandise, travel toward Heaven, Labor far the meat that
perishes not, search diligently for the Pearl of the Gospel, Seek the
Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof: account nothing so precious as
Gods favor, nothing so fearful as his displeasure, nothing so hateful as
sin, nothing so desirable as grace.

Remember thou art a Kings Son (said Menedemus to his Pupil) Remember thou art
the King of Kings Son (say I to thee, Christian Reader) Think not, speak not,
act not any thing unworthy of thy self. The consideration of this Dignity,
made Theodosius to thank God more that he was a Christian then a King, Moses to
refuse the Crown of Egypt, David to desire the place of Gods Doorkeeper, and
Paul to make a base account of all things in this world. The consideration
thereof (I say) made Abel to sacrifice his sheep, Abraham his Son, Joseph to
fly Adultery, and the 3 Children Idolatry, Nehemiah Tyranny, yea all Gods
Children to abandon impiety. See then that thou behave thy self in all things
like thy self. Beware of temporary faith, partial obedience, mercenary love,
pretended zeal, legal sorrow, and feigned Humility, these have the form, not
the power of godliness. Except thy righteousness exceed that of the
Pharisees, thy spiritual sacrifice that of Cains, thy confessing of sins that
of Pharaoh's, thy fasting that of Ahabs, thy weeping that of Saul's, thy
reformation that of Jehn's, thy compunction and restitution that of Judas, thy
believing that of Simon Magus, thy fear and trembling that of Felix, thou
may have a name that thou live, and yet art dead; thou may be said to
travel toward Heaven, yet never arrive thither. Remember Lots wife: Beware
lest a promise being made, thou seem to come short of it: Work out thy
salvation with fear and reverence: Love Gods House, honor his Ministers and
Messengers, forsake not the public Assemblies, as the manner of some is.
Slight not Christ's Ordinances, desire to be with him, pray heartily unto him,
depend on his providence, be content with thine allowance, patient under
corrections, and above all things reverence his sacred word, meditate therein
day and night, let that be thy counselor, the directer of thy ways, thy
comfort in calamity, a Lanthorn to thy feet, and a light to thy paths, there
Old men may learn Instruction, and Young men Reformation, and all, edifying
knowledge to their eternal salvation. Next to these sacred Oracles of God, I
commend unto thy reading this Breviary of Divinity, entitled The Complete
Christian, comprising the chief grounds of Christian Religion; be not over
curious and inquisitive to know the Authors name, whose ability is much above
his ambition. The fear of envy and some other ill consequences at present,
press a concealment, and have denied a subscription to the Book, which if thou
do (good Reader) but diligently read and peruse, thou shall find it for
Order Methodicall, for Matter Judicial, for brevity compendious, for plainness
perspicuous, for use precious. Buy this truth therefore, but sell it not, read
well this little Book, and forget it not, for thou shall buy much for little
cost, and read much to thy great gain. Let it be thy guide and thy counsel,
and thou shall hardly do amiss. What further profit thou shall reap therein,
give God the more praise, and remember the Publisher in thy prayers, who
offers both life and labors to further thy salvation.

A. Davies.

EDitus e fausto puer est hic pectore parvus,
Et vium Coeli dulce repent bibit.
Infantem pulchrum nutrivit docta Minerva.
Atque Deus tenero mox benedixit ei.
Hunc peperit faetum Matter Sanctissima Nostrae
Ecclesiae Mammas saxit and ipse duas.
Haeres and pariter mandns e pneumate sacro
Nobilis est natu dignus habere gradum
Tu graduatu, eas subito quo Trina potestas
Permittit miseros te revocare viros.
Tu contra canctos reprobos sis lamine testis
Durus in ignavos qui tua ditla negant
Contra Schismaticos sis semper testis acerbus
Illos quo pudeat de servisse fidem.
Denique qui temnunt Sanct^ssima dogmata Matris
Contra illos firn e bella benig^ia ge^as
Indoctos doceas, peccant. Vulnera sana,
Et derisores corrige, frange minis.
Vtilis es pueris puer, es magnalia tractans
Et magna Annoses fertilitate doces.
Aetatis suae. 8^. Ed Davies.
GOds Spirit moved on that waters face
Wherein was found this pretty Babe of grace;
As soon as there they did him but baptize,
He straight began Christ's flock to catechize.
His Infant lisping is pure Eloquence,
His lips drop Honey, his breath Frankincense.
Three of our Senses these may well delight,
And it is perusal the Internal fight.
And to the Sense of our true inward feeling
Here is an Object for our sick soul healing.
Some Quere's quarrels breed, some jests some sadness,
But these produce our inward peace and gladness.
These are Divine penned Catecheticall
All Orthodox, not one Schismatic.
This is the marrow of Theology,
And the Elixir of all Piety.
Of Law and Gospel the pure quintessence
And the true March^fit extract from thence.
It is the powder that turns brass to gold,
Revives the New man, and dest oy the O^d.
Aged 86. Ed. Davies.
THus Anchored may I live and dye,
Fraught with secure Divinity.
Whilst Babel-builders do devise
Unto themselves a thousand lies,
Weather cock souls that float upon
The waters of Religion,
Whose Moon-like fancies are become
The zealous bane of Christendom.
Wilfully blind they tear and rent
The seamlesse Coat of Christ: intent
To Sects; they do make that their sport
Which ought to be their only Fo^t.
Dow-bak't prosessors, who to shun
Rome's Rocks, into flat Atheism run.
Unning'd and hovering they fall
To Hellish errors: these they call
Religion reformed; mean while
The Turk does laugh, the Jew does smile.
But here with safety sail, never here
Shipwreck of Religion fear.
This Pilot Primitive may refine
A two-three-four hour-glasse Divine.
Wherefore to thee (fixed Protestant) I give
This Counsel: read, practice this Book, and live.
Tho: Morgan.
On the solid Author, and the Publication of this Piece.
MIstake not Reader, here is a C^techisme
That Is Orthodox no Heresy, no Schism,
Nor new-light drops, from the Seraphick pen,
Here Is milk for children, yet strong meat for men.
Thus to all Readers all things; he does fly
Low to the unlearned, to the learned high.
Blush Sons of Impudence! of little wit,
And less true Gospel-knowledge! it ^s fit
You should turn Catechumens. (No disgrace
To sing your Palinode) your looks to grace
These lines we beg not. Your Owl Eagle sight
They Will dazzle; you will one day confess his light.
Let either Ford, or Bridge, or Minster come
And view't; here is neither whey, nor froth; nor scum.
Concocted to Elixar here is Cream
(Sound nutriment) in this pure Nectarstream.
Tho. Wilkins.
Upon the Author. (...)
CAll for the Conjectors, and let them try
Each Species of Physiognomy;
Judge Intercisions, Stars and Crosses, all
Speak this year to Books Climactericall;
What then? this (instar omnium) does comprise
The Quintessence of all, approved Excise.
Astrologers their Credit once may save
Pry its Nativity, and Judgment have,
The Ascendant with a Fortune, Planets be see
All dignified, none in their Cadency;
Who viewes this face of Heaven (they say) may see
This the Paragon of futurity.
Writers have their exit, from hence must all
(Like the next year) be turned Platonicall,
The revolutions inexpir'd. Now try,
What you can guess by your Ouroscopy
Physician, try symptoms, pulse, and all,
Inspect each region of the Urinall,
Their doom; in truth each tyn panized story
Would wear an Age, much more one Century
Of Books; this spares the labor and will lap
The Gangraen'd and the luxuriant tap.
The blazing Meteor which did impend
Did point the Babe, this with a different end.
As a wise Pilot steers the way to Joy
Where he transcended; nothing can annoy
(Though Preachers silenced) our heavenly passage
To the port of rest, each by his steerage
Has access to the Celestial Throne,
Though to the Prototype Highpriests alone.
He that with the Interrogant did conspire
To burn all Books in the Censorious fire
Plutarch excepted; would gladly reverse
This Sentence, and command to bring his hearse
That he for one might make the Company
(If living) would subscribe his destiny
This to preserve. As the diffused light
Filled one Horizon, and the other night;
At last it was contracted to the Sun,
The fourth day's work of the Creation.
So, what the Universe has, be it grace or wit;
This Author has Epitomized it.
Whitgift Gibbons
Upon the Author's Catechisticall Paraphrase of our English Church-Catechism.
THis namelesse (blameless) Author in each line
Presents a piece o'th'Gospel Preached. Divine
Instructions all throughout: It Is best perused,
When unto practice in our lives reduced.
That Sermon is well heard, that Book well read
Whose Subject, Use, and Doctrine's practiced.
These times pretend new lights, reformed times,
But did we act those virtues, shua those crimes
This Author points us out, then should we be
The Great Exemplars of Christianity.
What Councils, Fathers, Schoolmen, all Divines,
As well of Ancient as of Modern Times,
Have studi'd, writ, read, preached and Catechized,
This Author has couched and Epitomized.
This Author ( Moses like) Anonymus
To Pharaoh, and his Daughter, and to Us,
The Way unto All happiness and bliss
Mercurius-like describes; which if we miss,
Who is most Ignorant cannot pretend
Want of a Guide unto his Journey's End.
May God a Blessing add, and Sanctify
This Bible to our Souls Eternity.
A PRAYER for the Sabbath: OR LORDS DAY.
ALL possible praise, and thanks be given to thee, O most gracious God, and
merciful father, for all those most holy and helpful means of grace, which it
has pleased thee to appoint for the sanctification and salvation of corrupt
and sinful man: Amongst other means we bless thee (O Lord) for this as for a
principal and special means which contains many other in it, even thy blessed
Sabbath.

Magnified for ever be thy wisdom and goodness, who (foreseeing how this
wretched world would fill the hands, yea, and take up the hearts of us
earthly-minded Creatures) have been pleased, by a perpetual Law, written with
thine own finger, to set apart (for thine own self, and for our souls) one day
in seven, wherein we being called out of the world, and having our minds taken
off from all earthly businesses (on that day forbidden us,) may delight our
selves in thee our God, being joyful in thy House of prayer, and have our
conversation truly and wholly in Heaven, and all heavenly exercises.

Have mercy upon us (O Lord) in regard of that light estimation, that worldly
and vain mis-spending of this precious time, whereof we have been so often and
so deeply guilty heretofore; and put thy Spirit into us; we beseech thee to
incline our hearts for the time to come to keep this Statute, Ezekiel. 36.27.
and to cause us to observe this great Commandment.

And (first of all) enable us we pray thee, unto a meet preparation for this
days service; help us (for that purpose) so to examine our ways and carriage
the week past, as to repent truly of what has been amiss, and to renew our
Covenant for a better carriage the week following: Assist us (withal) for the
through purging of our hearts from those dregs and defilements which the world
has left behind it; as also for the stirring up of our souls by heavenly
meditations and prayer, that so we may come with devout minds, and hungring
hearts into thy Sanctuary, as those that (being poor, and blind, and miserable,
and naked) stand in great need of thy provision.

Grant moreover, O Lord, that coming in due time, and in a reverent manner into
thy Temple, our care may be attentively, and without distractions of mind,
watchfully and without heaviness of heart, devoutly and without dullness of
spirit, reverently and without uncomelinesse of carriage, to abide in thy
presence, and (for the whole time) to attend thee in thine Ordinances. Make us
mindful (afterward) of those private exercises, reading, repeating,
conferring, meditating, praying, whereby the public may be made more
profitable to us, and powerful in us. And let us not forget (according to the
time and ability we have) to meditate upon thy Creatures, but (this being the
day wherein it pleased thy Majesty to put thine hand first for the making of
them) let it be our day also wherein to thy praise and honor to remember them;
especially let us not forget upon this good day, those labors of love, and
charitable works for our brethrens good, which thou (O Lord) forgettest not.
Heb. 6.10.
And while we do good to their bodies, let us not be unmindfull of that which
is the greatest matter, the doing of all the good we can unto their souls.
That all this may be done the better grant we may abstain the day throughout
not only from vain pastimes, and sinful practices, but also from those every
days works and words and thoughts (more then truly necessary) whereby we shall
use, as our own, any part of that sacred time which thou, O Lord, have set
apart wholly and only for thy self. Help us (O Lord our God, without whom we
can do nothing) by thine own strength thus to observe thine own time:
Sanctify us that we may sanctify it unto thee, and be (our selves) sanctified
by it, it being made to us, as it is to all good observers, a blessed day by
all the exercises thereof, blessed to our use and spiritual advantage. And let
this work of sanctification (by the service of this day as a special means) be
continued still, and more and more perfected in us, till we come to that place,
where perpetually resting from all our labors, we shall enjoy an eternal and
all-satisfying Sabbath with thine own glorious Majesty, and thy blessed Son and
Lord of the Sabbath, Jesus Christ, and that for the same Jesus Christ's sake. To
whom with thee (O Father) and the blessed Spirit, for the Creation of the world
this day begun, for the Redemption of the world this day finished, for the
Sanctification of the world this day by the descending of the Holy Ghost fully
manifested and ordinarily most effected: we acknowledge to be due, and desire
to give all honor, power, might, Majesty and Dominion, both now and for
evermore.

Amen and Amen.
A Prayer to be used before the Hearing of the Word, especially on the Sabbath.
I Do humbly and heartily thank thee, O Father Lord of Heaven and Earth, for
that I live by thy goodness and good providence in thy Church, in a Land of
uprightness, wherein there is the means of grace, and that in these last days
wherein it has pleased thee to speak unto us by thy only Son, and so to make
known unto me (a poor Babe in Christ, only because it seemed good in thy
sight) things hid from the wise and prudent, yea from Kings and Prophets, who
(heretofore) have desired to see the things that we see, and have not seen
them; and to hear the things that we hear, and have not heard them: withal I
do with sorrow and grief of heart acknowledge how unworthily and with how
little fruit I have entertained that holy word of thine, and blessed means of
salvation which thou have in so much mercy and plenty afforded, not
understanding what I have heard, for want of marking it; not remembering what I
have understood, for want of making account of it; not delighting in what I
have remembered, for want of love unto it; not practicing what for a time I have
delighted in, for want of considering the end of Preaching, and the necessity
of practicing; not persevering in what for a time I have practiced, for want of
a through resolution to hold out in a holy conversation.

O Lord, I deserve not to escape, but to be seized upon by some grievous and
heavy judgment, for neglecting so great salvation. Notwithstanding (gracious
Father) since thou have been pleased to work in my heart a love unto thy word,
and a loathing of my self for my light esteeming of it (heretofore.) I beseech
thee pardon my former neglect, and for the time to come, let the eyes of my
understanding be enlightened, that I may know what formerly I have been ignorant
of; yea, let my heart be opened, that I may receive, remember, and delight in
that word of thine, which formerly I have shut out, let slip, and not regarded.
Give me thy Spirit to cause me to walk in those Statutes of thine, which
formerly I have not observed, and uphold me with thy constant Spirit, that I
may persevere unto the end in all holy courses. This day in particular (wherein
thou offerest the means, and call me unto the hearing of thy holy word)
vouchsafe to free me from all pride of heart, Jer. 13.15.
distractions of mind, tentations of Satan, from all drowsinesse, deadness,
and dullness of spirit; and withal, make mine heart, by that good disposition
which thou shall work in it, like well prepared ground, fit in the most kindly
manner to receive that seed of thy word which thou preparest for it: Assist thy
Servant and Minister, who is to deliver thy message, that he may speak as he
ought to speak, even that which shall be profitable to the souls of all thy
people, and powerful upon my soul in particular, and for that purpose; Paul
may plant and Apollo water, but thou O Lord give the increase; let it please
thee so to bless the word delivered, as that much increase and good fruit may
come thereby unto Jesus Christ the great Lord of the Harvest. For me thine
unworthy servant in particular, let me not receive thy word as the high way
ground without understanding and retaining it, nor as the stony ground, so as
by reproaches or persecution to wither and be withdrawn from it; nor as the
thorny ground, so as to suffer it by worldliness and voluptuousness, to be
choked and deaded in me: but as the good ground, so as to bring forth much
fruit, and that with patience; that so by patient continuance in well doing, I
may have glory, and honor, and immortality, and eternal life; and that, not
for any thing in my self, but in and through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom
with thee and the holy Spirit, be all honor and glory, now and evermore. Amen.

A Prayer for Advisement.
O Most wise, most gracious, and most glorious God, I confess my self to be a
poor and weak Creature, very unable and insufficient to take any such course as
whereby thou should have glory, others good, or my self any true comfort.
Unto which weakness, much carelessness also is added, and a neglect or a
negligent using of those means and helps whereby I might become more able, and
more profitable in my place and calling; nor is that all, but too unadvised I
am, too sudden, too rash, and so apt, both in speaking and dealing, to behave
my self without that good consideration that becomes a discreet and settled
Christian: And hence it is, that there is a want of that reverence that there
ought to be in thy presence, of that mindfullnesse that there ought to be in my
business, of that wisdom that there should be in my words, of that
staidness that there ought to be in my carriage. --

Lord grant that I may consider of these things so as to be humbled, repent of
these things so as to be pardoned, and beg help of thee so about these things,
as that they may be amended. Pardon O Lord these and all other my sins: Amend
(O Lord) these and all other my imperfections: Grant that (casting away all
carelessness) whatsoever my hand finds to do, I may do it with all my
might; withal grant, that (observing the overforwardnesse and freeness of my
nature in every thing) I may be so much the more careful and watchful that
nothing may be done rashly: Above all things, let me not be rash with my mouth
before thee, but (besides that) since of every idle word that I speak, I must
give account at the day of Judgment, Lord help that my mind may be so set a
work, before the moving of my lips, as that I may speak nothing to thy
dishonor, others offense, or my own grief and shame -- Yea grant that I may
ponder the paths of my feet, and so study all my carriage, as that my rashness
may not be seen therein, but my Rule (if being framed according to the good
direction of Religion and reason) and that I may not hasten with my feet, and
so sin, do thou (O Lord) see to it that my soul may not be without knowledge
but so endued with it, as that both the inner and the outer man may be ordered
by it. Let faith and Religion guide my reason, and sanctified reason my
affections, and wellruled affections set awork my senses and members; that I
may so speak, and so do, as one that must give a (strict) account; and so, as
that I may give a (good and comfortable) account of both; and all this for
Jesus Christ's sake, in whom thou give to all liberally, and upbraidest none;
to whom with thee (O Father) and the Eternal Spirit, be all honor and glory,
both now and evermore. Amen.

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS upon the Church-Catechism.
Question 1. WHat is it that Christian Children should consider of in the first
place?

Answer. That which their very name puts them in mind of, to wit, their Baptism.

Question 2. What is the special thing that they are to consider of in their
Baptism?

Answer. Of that Vow and Promise which they by their Sureties made unto God
when they were Baptized.

Question 3. But what were those particular things which they then promised?

Answer. First, to forsake the Devil and all his works.

Question 4. What be those works of the Devil?

Answer. Some are inward, and some are outward.

Question 5. What are those that are inward and more spiritual?

Answer. The first of them is Pride, which is when a man thinks himself worthy
of more honor then is due unto him, or when he loves too well that that is due.

Question 6. How do you know that this Pride is a work of the Devil?

Answer. Because it is said that Satan tempted David to number the people, to
wit, by stirring up his heart to that pride and vanity, out of which he numbered
them, 1 Chronicles. 21.1.

Question 7. What helps and means are there for the forsaking of this work of
the Devil?

Answer. 1 We must consider we have nothing but what we have received, and
therefore we must not boast as if we had not received it, 1 Cor. 4.7.

2 To pull down our Pride, we must look upon our faults and follies, as the
Peacock upon his black feet, that he may not be proud of his feathers.

3 We must know that God sets himself against all such people, and beholds
every one that is proud, to abase him, Job 40.11.

4 He that is lifted up with Pride, is in danger of falling into the
condemnation of the Devil, 1 Timothy 3.6.

Question 8. Who be those that be most apt to fall into the sin of Pride?

Answer. Those that be young, and Novices in the world, and amongst young
Scholars that be of better parts and wits; who ought therefore to be so much
the more careful to avoid this sin, by how much the Devil is more busy, and
has from their age more advantage to bring them to it?

Question 9. What is the second inward work of Satan?

Answer. Anger, Envy, and Malice.

Question 10. How does it appear that these are the works of Satan?

Answer. Because the Apostle says, They give place to the Devil, that give
place to their passion, Ephesians. 4.27.

Question 11. What help and means is there for the forsaking of this work of
the Devil, and for the suppressing of anger and wrath?

Answer. To consider these particulars.

1 That a man in his wrath is altogether unfit to do what God would have him
do, for the wrath of man works not the Righteousness of God, James 1.20. as
appears in King Asa, who being in a rage, was so far from entertaining the
righteous word of God, as that he did most unrighteously put the Prophet in
Prison, that did deliver it, 2 Chronicles. 16 10.

2 That a wrathful man is unfit for society with others, and become like
Nabal, who was so froward, that a man could not tell how to speak to him. 1 Samuel 25.17.

3 That wrath and envy cause foolishness of carriage, and shortness of days,
Prove. 14.29, 30.

4 That anger, wrath, and malice, are the marks of unregenerate persons. Now we
should be as unwilling to undergo the marks as the misery of such graceless
persons Col. 3.8.

Question 12. What is the third inward work of Satan?

Answer. Filthy and unclean thoughts in the heart, although they never break
out in words or carriage.

Question 13. How do you know that this uncleanness of heart is the work of
Satan?

Answer. Because his Title is to be an unclean Spirit and accordingly his
business is to work uncleanness in our spirits.

Question 14. What help is there to forsake and avoid this work of the Devil?

Answer. Some things are to be avoided, and some things are to be done.

Question 15. What are the things to be avoided?

Answer. 1 Such things as stir up uncleanness, as wanton Pictures, Plays,
Songs, wanton Books or looks, Job 31.1. by means of which the unclean spirit
enters in, and defiles the heart.

2 Such things as strengthen uncleanness, as excess in meat and drink, Genesis
19.32. Jer. 5.8.

3 Such things as perfect it, and whereby Satan fills the heart with it, as
dalliance and wanton carriages.

Question 16. What are the things to be done?

Answer. 1 We must fill our hearts with good meditations: The heart will be
working, and the way to free it from worse thoughts, is to fill it with better.

2 We must fill our hands and hearts with business: An idle head and heart is
the shop of the Devil, and David fell into unclean walking not warring, 2 Samuel
11.2.

3 We must fill our mouths with earnest prayers to God to keep out and to cast
out this unclean spirit: Yea, and in regard of all such inward works of Satan,
we must pray, Lord rebuke Satan, and incline not my heart to any evil way,
Zech. 3.2. Psalm. 141.4.

Question 17. You have showed the inward, what be the outward works of Satan?

Answer. First, swearing falsely or vainly, unto which cursing may be added.

Question 18. How do you know that swearing is a work of the Devil?

Answer. Because Christ says, whatsoever is more then yea or nay, comes of
evil, or of Satan that evil one, Mat. 5.27.

Question 19. How do you know that cursing is a work of the Devil?

Answer. It appears that cursing of God comes from the Devil, because the Devil
by Jobs wife tempted him to curse God, Job 2.8, 9. Cursing of God by Job was
the Devils aim, and for that purpose Jobs wife was the Devils Agent.

And it appears that cursing of men comes from the Devil also, because the
tongue is set on fire of Hell, when we do therewithal curse men, J^mes 3.6, 9.

Question 20. What helps and means be there to forsake this work of the Devil?

Answer. To consider that

1 There is a flying Book sent forth to overthrow his house and state that
swears falsely, Zech. 5.4. and God will not hold him guiltles that takes his
name into his mouth and swears vainly, Exodus 20.7.

2 Swearing does not only make particular persons miserable, but the whole Land
also to mourn under the heavy judgments of God, Jer. 23.10. Because of
swearing, or cursing, as it is in the margent, the Land mourns.

Question 21. What help is there against cursing?

Answer. First, to consider, that he that loves cursing, cursing shall come
unto him, it shall cleave unto him, it shall come into his bowels like water,
and like Oil into his bones, Psalm 109.17, 8.

Secondly, to consider how unseemly and unreasonable a thing it is with the
same tongue to bless God, and then afterward to curse men, that are made after
the similitude of God, James 3.9.

Question 22. What help is there against both cursing and swearing?

Answer. To consider that in both the name of God is taken in vain, even that
glorious and fearful Name, Exodus 20.7. The Lord our God, which whosoever fear
not, the Lord will make their plagues wonderful, and the plagues of their
seed, even sore sicknesses, and of long continuance, sore diseases, and of long
durance, Deuteronomy. 28.58, 59.

Question 23. But there be diverse that do not swear by this dreadful name of
God, but by this bread or drink, by this hand, or by this light, what shall we
say to them?

Answer. This was an old trick to shift off the force of the third
Commandment, and to such the Apostle James says, that while they swear by
Heaven or Earth, or any other of the Creatures, although they never name God,
yet God will not hold them guiltless, but they shall fall into condemnation,
James 5.12.

Question 24. But I cannot choose but swear (say some) for men will not believe
me otherwise.

Answer. Yes (says the Apostle) Let your yea be yea, Jam. 5.12. 2 Cor. 1.17,
18, 19.
and your nay, nay. That is, be not off and on, but be true and stable in your
speeches, and you shall never need an Oath. A constant and ordinary true
speaker, is easily believed, an ordinary swearer is never believed.

Question 25. What, is it absolutely unlawful then for a man to swear at all?

Answer. Not so, a man may swear before a lawful Magistrate, Nehem. 10.29. to
confirm a solemn Covenant, Genesis 31.53. and upon special and important
occasions, Genesis 47.31. Heb 6.16. For God forbids us not the taking of his name
into our mouths, but the taking of it in vain.

Question 26. What Is the second outward work of Satan?

Answer. Lying and deceiving.

Question 27. How do you know that lying is a work of the Devil?

Answer. Because when the Devil speaks a lie, he speaks of his own, that
is, nothing is more usual with him, nor more proper to him, then a lie is, and
it is that also that proceeds from him, for he is a liar, and the father of
them, John 8.44.

Question 28. What helps be there for the forsaking of this work of the Devil?

Answer. 1 To consider, that as all truth comes from God, so all lying comes
from the Devil: Now who would be willing to conceive and bring forth a Child,
whereof the Devil should be the father?

2 Every thing should be to us as it is to God. Now lying lips are an
abomination to the Lord; but they that deal truly are his delight, therefore
lying and deceit should be abominable to us likewise, Pr^. 12.22.

3 We should consider that he shall be shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven, that
loves or makes a lie, Rev. 22.15. withal that all liars shall have their
part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, Rev. 21.8. I ought
(therefore) to love truth as I love Heaven, and to fear lying, as I fear Hell.

Question 29. What particular cases be there wherein men are more tempted to,
and therefore ought to be more watchful against this sin of lying?

Answer. In four cases especially.

First, in case of profit. Hence it is that people do so ordinarily lie in the
Market, and in trading, to wit, for the getting of a penny, and some worldly
pelf. This lying was Gehazi's sin, and a leprosy was his punishment, 2 Kings
5.22 25, 27.

Secondly, in case of credit. Hence comes so much lying in houses, because
people having done amiss, are loath to be known of it, lest they should be put
to shame by it, therefore they deny it stoutly, when God is able to say to them
as to Sarah (who failed in the like case) Nay but thou did do such a thing,
Genesis 18.15.

Thirdly, in case of safety, and when some danger of smart is like to ensue by
telling the truth. Hence Children lie so often to avoid the rod; yea Gods
Children also, do to their shame and grief, fail in this particular, as
Abraham and Peter, Genesis 20.2.11.9, 10. Mat. 26.70, 75. But if holy parents whip
a lying Child twice, one for his fault, and again for his lie: How much more
will a holy God of truth punish such a fault, yea in his own Children, yea in
them most.

Fourthly, in case of complement and entertainment, wherein men profess more
love then ever they mean, and excuse entertainment beyond the truth.

Question 30. What further preservative is there against all these evils?

Answer. This one thing may suffice, that he that means to come to Heaven, must
have this mark upon him, to speak the truth in his heart, Psalm. 15.2.

Question 31. Are there not besides these two outward and more common, some
more special works of Satan also that are to be avoided?

Answer. Yes, there are two of them, the opposing of Gods truth, and the
persecuting of Gods Saints.

Question 32. How do you know that opposing the truth of God is a work of the
Devil?

Answer. Because the Devil is a liar, that is one in whom there is no truth,
and who is still setting a foot some lie or other against the truth; and
because he that opposes and perverts the right ways of the Lord, is a Child of
the Devil, John 8.44. Acts 13.10. So 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. opposers of truth are in
the snare of the Devil.

Question 33. What means is there to forsake this work of the Devil?

Answer. 1 To hearken patiently to our Instructors, with prayer to God to give
repentance, that so we may come to the acknowledgement of the truth, and
recover our selves out of the snare of the Devil, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26.

2 To consider that all liars in this high degree, that is, that lie against
the truth, James 3.14. and set up falsehoods whereby to fight against the word
of God, shall assuredly and especially have their part in the lake that burns
with fire and brimstone, Revel. 21.8.

Question 34. How do you know that opposing and persecuting the Children of
God, is also a work of the Devil?

Answer. Because the Devil has ever been an Accuser, Revel. 12.10. an
Imprisoner, Rev. 2.10. and a murderer, John 8.44. and Rev. 2.13. of the
Brethren, and who so sets against, and offers violence to his righteous
brother, he (as Cain) is of that wicked one, 1 John 3.12.

Question 35. But what if men do no more but mock Gods Children, and those
that take good courses?

Answer. Even that also is a Diabolical persecution, as Ishmaels mocking was,
Gal. 4.29. with Genesis 21.9. and a thing that ungodly men must in special manner
be accountable for at the day of Judgment, Jude 15.

Question 36. What help is there against this work of the Devil?

Answer. To consider that every persecuter of good Christians, is a persecuter
of Jesus Christ himself, and does but kick therein against the pricks, and that
(without timely repentance) unto his eternal perdition, Acts 9.4, 5.

Question 37. How do you know that?

Answer. Because he that hates his Brother is a murderer, and we know that no
murderer has eternal life abiding in him, 1 John 3.15. yea how can such
Vipers escape the damnation of Hell? Mat. 23.33.

Question 38. What general Motive is there to stir us up to forsake the
Devil, and all those works of his that have been formerly mentioned?

Answer. To consider that they that forsake not Satan, shall (by Gods just
judgment) be given to him here to be his Vassalls in sin, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11, 12.
and Mat. 12.43, 44, 45. and shall be partners with him hereafter in Hellish
misery, Mat. 25.41. Mat. 23.33.

Question 39. What general help and means is there to free us from Satan and
his works?

Answer. 1 To be diligent and obedient hearers of Gods Ministers, who are sent
of God for this very purpose, to bring men from the power of Satan unto God,
Acts 26.18.

2 Even after we are brought to God, we must still labor to beat down those
lusts which use to betray us (for want of the mortifying them) into the hands
of Satan, who would not be able to prevail over us, but that he finds
something (that is a corrupt nature) in us, John 14.30.

3 When we have done this also, we must still watch, and still pray unto him
that came of purpose to destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. that we may
not enter into tentation, Mat. 26.41.

Question 40. What other thing was promised in Baptism, besides forsaking the
Devil and all his works?

Answer. To forsake the pomps and vanities of this wicked world.

Question 41. What is meant by the pomps and vanities of this world?

Answer. In general all the goodly and glorious things of this world ( Mat.
4.8.) whereof there be three particular heads, Pleasure, Mark 6.22. Heb. 11.25.
(pleasures of sin) Profit, Josh. 7.21. Micha 2.2. Preferment, 2 Samuel 15.4. 1
John 2.16.

Question 42. But why are they called pomps and vanities?

Answer. Because in the worlds conceit they are pomps and glorious things, Dan.
4.30. Acts 25.23. But in true judgment they are very vanities, Eccles. 1.2.

Question 43. Why is it added, that they are the pomps and vanities of the
(wicked) world?

Answer. Not only because there is a great deal of wickedness in the world
(the whole world either lying in wickedness) 1 John 5.19. Or else wickedness
lying and abiding in them, Romans 7.20. But also because there is a great deal
more then otherwise there would be through the tentation of these worldly
things, Josh. 7.21. When I saw, etc.

Question 44. How far forth are the world and the things of the world to be
forsaken?

Answer. When we cannot enjoy them and Christ both, when we cannot keep them
and keep our Covenant with God both, then they must be forsaken, that Christ
may be followed, and that our Covenant made with God in Baptism may be
performed, Heb. 11.25, 26. Heb. 10.34.

Question 45. What helps be there for the forsaking of the world?

Answer. 1 We must labor to be in love with better things then the world has;
Psalm. 119.36. Heb. 10.34. And to embrace Christ as Simeon did, that so we may
not embrace the world as Demas did Luke 2.28. 2 Timothy 4.10.

2 We should avoid worldly company, especially in the nearest society. Ahab was
much more drawn after that worldly thing (to wit, Naboths Vineyard) which he
should have forsaken, because Jezabel his wise provoked him, 1 Kings 21.7.25.

3 We must meditate often of the vanity of worldly pomps, which is such, as
that they become men to be laughed at for their folly, that will forsake God
rather than them, Ps. 52.5, 6, 7.

4 We ought to be earnest in prayer to God that the profits and vanities and
pomps of this world may never so prevail over us, as to draw us from Gods
word, or way, or make us to sin against him, and walk in an evil way, Psalm.
119.36, 37. and 141.4.

Question 46. How shall I know when I have forsaken the world?

Answer. I have then forsaken it, when I have forsaken the pomps and vanities
of it, and make no reckoning of them in respect of the keeping of a good
conscience toward God, Gal. 6.14.

Question 47. What was there else promised in Baptism, besides the forsaking of
the Devil and the world?

Answer. To forsake the sinful lusts of the flesh.

Question 48. What are these lusts of the flesh?

Answer. Such inward stirrings, and (sinful) motions as arise from corrupt
Nature (which is called flesh, John 3.6.) and tend to the sanctifying of it in
the fleshly desires thereof, Romans 13.14.

Question 49. But are there not some particular heads by which we may better
understand, and under which we may place these fleshly lusts?

Answer. Yes, the Apostle has brought them to three heads, Romans 13.13.
Surfeiting and drankenes, Chambering and wantones, Strife and envying; whereby
it appears that all belly Gods, wanton and unclean persons, all proud malicious
and quarrelsome persons, do in a special manner walk after the flesh.

Question 50. Is it absolutely unlawful (then) to desire meats, drinks,
marriage?

Answer. Not so, for the desires of the created Creature are not unlawful, but
of corrupted nature only; and it is not altogether unlawful to make provision
for the flesh, so it be not to fulfill the lusts, that is, the sinful lusts
thereof, Romans 13.14.

Question 51. But is it enough that the outward works of the flesh be forsaken?

Answer. No, we must forsake those inward and secret lusts that be sinful; nor
is it enough to forsake some of them, but we must forsake them all.

Question 52. What Reasons and helps can you give to persuade and enable us to
forsake these works of the flesh?

Answer. 1 Because God in his word beseeches us to abstain from them, 1 Pet.
2.11. and who would not do any thing at Gods entreaty?

2 Because these lusts be fleshly lusts, and Christians be spiritual men, 2
Cor. 6.17.

3 Because they be (sinful) lusts, to wit, which the word of God speaks
against, 1 Thessalonians. 4.5. And the Spirit of God lusts and strives against, 1 Pet.
1.11. Gal. 5.17. And how can we then keep with us, how can we nourish within us
such great wickednesses, and sin against God? Genesis 39.9.

4 Because we be Pilgrims and strangers, and therefore should moderate our
selves in those delights of nature that we meet withal in our way; and should
much more forsake and abandon those things that tend only to the satisfying of
corruptnesse, and wherein worldly men that are at home, and must never look for
any other comfort then that they have here, do sport and glut themselves.

5 Because these lusts fight against our souls; and shall we keep in our
bosoms, and cherish in our hearts, enemies that fight not only against our
bodies, and states, and names, but even against our souls also.

6 Because they fight against the souls of others with whom we live. Christians
that satisfy the flesh, keep Heathens from the faith; and men unconverted
loath the very profession of Religion, by reason of the dishonest conversation
of those that do profess it; whereas their honest conversation might prevail
very much for the winning of others to Religion, 1 Pet. 2.11.

7 Because if we walk after the flesh we shall dye, but if we mortify the
deeds of the body by the Spirit, we shall live, Romans 8.13.

Question 53. How ought we to forsake all the forenamed things that we have
vowed against, to wit, the Devil, the world, and the flesh?

Answer. We must forsake them all.

1 In our Judgments, disliking them, John 1.24.

2 In our hearts and ^ffections, distasting and loathing them, Psalm. 97.10.

3 In purpose resolving firmly against them, Hos. 14.8.

4 In practice having nothing to do with them, but putting them quite away,
Ephesians. 4.24.

5 With prayer to God that we may have strength to do all these effectually,
Psalm. 141.4.

Question 54. Hitherto of the first thing that Christian Children promise in
Baptism, to wit, to forsake the Devil, the world, and the flesh: But is that
all?

Answer. No, it is not enough to forsake that which is evil, but there must be
also a cleaving unto that which is good: and therefore the second thing
promised is, to believe all the Articles of the Christian faith.

Question 55. What is the Christian faith?

Answer. It is the Doctrine of Faith contained in the whole Scripture, but most
clearly revealed in the Gospel, which is called The word of Faith, Rom 10.8.

Question 56. But why is this Doctrine called the Christian faith?

Answer. It may be so called

1 Because it speaks (of) Christ, 1 Cor. 1.25. 2 Timothy 2.8.

2 Because it was spoken and preached by Christ, Heb. 1.1. Mark 1.14, 15.

3 Because it is a Doctrine for Christ, that is, advancing and setting up Jesus
Christ, 1 John 17.3. both against Heathens that never knew God in Christ, and
against the Jews that rested on their own righteousness with the refusing and
slighting of Jesus Christ, and that righteousness of his, the flying whereunto
is the maine matter of our Christian Faith, Romans 10.3, 4.

4 Because it is a Doctrine received by those that were first called
Christians, Acts 11.26. and acknowledged (ever since) by those that by, Baptism
come within the number of Christians.

5 Because it is a Doctrine that makes people Christians: The Apostles went
forth and taught all Nations, and by that means they became Christians, and
were Baptized, Mat. 28.19.

Question 57. But what do you mean by the Articles of the Christian faith?

Answer. The twelve Articles of the Creed, wherein is comprised the whole
Doctrine of the Christian faith.

Question 58. Why are they named Articles?

Answer They may be so called for these Reasons.

1 Because they be brief heads of Christian Religion, as Articles are a brief
draught of businesses between man and man.

2 Because they are the condition of our Covenant, unto which all are tied,
that will have a part in Christ, as men by Articles are tied each to other.

3 Because as Articles are things agreed upon between man and man, so these
Articles are things agreed upon between Jesus Christ and the Church Catholic;
yea, they are (therefore) said to be framed, that the Christian Church every
where dispersed, might be united in the faith, by the help of these Articles,
which all of them were to receive, and from which none of them might swerve.

Question 59. What is it to believe the Articles of the Christian faith?

Answer. To believe rightly and fully, contains in it these 4 things.

1 Knowledge, for how shall we believe in him of whom we have not heard? It Is
impossible for a man to believe a thing which he never knew, Romans 10.14.

2 Consent, without wrangling against the Christian faith. So Agrippa is said
to believe, that is, he gave consent to the things written in Scripture, as to
the truth of God, 1 Timothy 6.3. Acts 26, 27.

3 Cleaving or sticking to the Christian faith; for faith is a hand that holds
every thing fast, and though many men may seem to believe, yet he is not a
Disciple (nor a believer) indeed, that does not continue in the word of Christ,
John 30.31.

4 Though they may be truly said to be believers, and Christians, in whom the
three former things are, yet that our faith may be a saving faith, we must
apply the Doctrine of the Gospel, and Jesus Christ (who is the sum of it) unto
our own souls, 1 Timothy 1.15.

Question 60 What help is there for this applying of Christ to our own souls?

Answer. 1 It is needful that we see and feel our miserable condition out of
Christ, both in respect of the corruption that bears sway within us, and of the
condemnation that is due unto us, and (if a Remedy be not provided) remains for
us, John 16.8, 9. Romans 3.19, 20. Ephesians. 2.3.

2 We must hearken unto God preaching Jesus Christ unto us, as our only and
effectual remedy, with a gracious offer and assurance of ease by him, if we
(feeling our need of him) come unto him, Mat. 11.28.

3 Having so great a need, and hearing so gracious an offer, we are by the
grace of God brought to fly unto, and cast our selves upon Jesus Christ, that
so we may have the benefit of his merits to free us from the condemnation of
sin, and of his Spirit to free us from the corruption of sin; and this flying
and cleaving to Christ with full purpose of heart, and a resolution to receive
him upon his own terms, is that saving applying of him, whereof the question
here is made.

Question 61. And what is to be done by us after this application?

Answer. As we do apply Christ unto our selves that we may be saved by him, so
must we apply our selves unto Christ, that he may be served by us, being no
less willing that he should rule us, then desirous that he should save us,
Col. 2.6. Acts 9.6.

Question 62. What general use is there to be made of this second part of our
promise, to wit, the believing of the Christian faith?

Answer. A Fourfold use.

1 To learn to know God in Christ, in which knowledge alone eternal life is
to be looked for, John 11.3. This puts a difference between Christians and
Heathens, who acknowledge a God, but not in Trinity.

2 To go out of our selves, and fly to the righteousness of Christ, wherein
especially true Christianity confists: this puts a difference between us and
Jews, us and Papists, us and civil honest men, who while they will be saved by
the Law of Moses, and rest upon their own righteousness, are of all other men
the most unchristianly.

3 To live righteously, for that also the Christian faith teaches, Tit. 3.8.
and 2.10, 11. And this puts a difference between us and profane men, who
living in unclean and filthy sins, be Heathens though they be baptized, for
good Christians do not so learn Christ, Ephesians. 4.19, 20. 1 Thessalonians. 3.4.

4 To cleave to the Christian faith constantly, John 6.68. And this puts a
difference between us and Hypocrites, who declare themselves to be Christians
in show only, not in deed, because they continue not in Gods word, John 8.31.

Question 63. Why, shall not a man be saved, if he live honestly in any
Religion?

Answer. No, He that believes not shall be damned, Mark 16.16. Our forefathers
the Martyrs might have lived honestly, and kept from the fire; but they knew
they were bound to believe and to stick to every Article of their Christian
faith, and therein they kept faith fully, the Vow of their Baptism, even with
the loss of their lives.

Question 64. What further thing is there promised in Baptism, besides the
forsaking of the Devil, the world, and the flesh, and the believing of the
Articles of the Christian faith?

Answer. To lead a godly and a Christian life.

Question 65. Wherein does that consist?

Answer. 1 In keeping Gods holy will and Commandment.

2 In walking in the same (and that all the days of our life.)

Question 66. What is meant by Gods holy will and Commandments?

Answer. That will of God which is revealed to us in his word, for the
commanding and ordering of our conversation.

Question 67. Why is it said to be Gods holy will?

Answer. Because it is holy in it self, Romans 7.12. Prove. 30.5. and makes those
holy that be due observers of it, Psalm. 19.9.119.9.

Question 68. What is it to keep Gods holy will and Commandments?

Answer. It may signify in general the placing and settling of Gods word in
our hearts and souls, Deuteronomy. 6.6. In particular it may imply these three things.

1 The receiving of it into our minds by faithful knowledge, Col. 3.16. For
learning and keeping go together, Deuteronomy. 5.1. A man cannot keep what he has
not, that is, that he understands not, Mat. 13.19.

2 The laying of it up in our memories, Mal. 4.4. For what a man forgets, is
lost, not kept, Prove. 3.1.

3 The observing, regarding, and reverencing of it in our hearts, it being hid
there, so as to keep us from sinning against God, Psalm. 119 11.

Question 69. For what purpose ought we thus to keep Gods Commandments?

Answer. That we may walk in the same all the days of our life. Hence it is
said, Deuteronomy. 5.1. Keep them to do them, which must not be for a time only, but
all the days of our life, Deuteronomy. 6.2. and 5.29. Deuteronomy. 6.14, 18. You shall keep,
17. and thou shall do, 18.

Question 70. It being a general truth, and of large extent, that we should
make the word of God the guide of our walk (for all our time here) and the
orderer of our ways, declare unto me some special heads whereunto the word of
God is to be applied, and wherein the use of it may appear in the whole course
of our life?

Answer. The Rule of Gods word (that we may be Governed in all things by
direction of it) is to be applied 1 To our general calling. 2 To our
particular calling. 3 To all our carriage. 4 To our condition.


Question 71. In regard of our general calling, and as we be Christians, how
is the Rule of the word of God to be set before us?

Answer. So as to show unto us

1 What duties are to be done, and in what manner.

2 At what time they are to be done.

Question 72. What Is the first and principal duty belonging to a Christian?

Answer. The hearing of Gods word, James 1.19. Rev. 2.29.

Question 73. In what manner must it be heard?

1 Attentively, Nehem. 8.3. Psalm. 78.1, That is, without distraction and
wandering of heart; and with all readiness of mind, and due regard, Acts 17.11.
James 1.19. Acts 28.14.

2 Sincerely ( Acts 10.33.) without a dissembling heart, Jer. 42.20.

3 Understandingly, so as to conceive it, Mat. 13.51. Mark 1.14.

4 Affectionately, so as to have our hearts quickened and warmed with it, Luke
24.32.

5 Faithfully, so as to be fully persuaded of the truth of the Doctriue, the
worth of the Promises, the weight of the threatenings, and generally of the
undoubted certainty of all those things whereof we are instructed in the word
of God, Heb. 4.2. Luke 1.4.

6 Meekly, so as to submit to it, James 1.21. Even when we are reproved and
threatened by it, Isa. 38. ult.

7 Fruitfully, so as to profit by it, and be doers of it, never getting rest to
our selves, till we be like that word we hear, in all holiness both of heart
and life, James 1.22. 2 Cor. 3.18.

8 Providently, laying up in stock for the time to come, what we have not
present use of, Isa. 42.23 -- Psalm. 119.9.

Question 74. What Is the second maind uty belonging to our Christian calling?

Answer. Receiving the Sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 11.25.

Question 75. In what manner ought we to receive it?

Answer. 1 With some good understanding of the grounds of Religion in general,
to wit, man's good Creation, sinful fall, and gracious redemption, that so we
may know what need and use there is of a Sacrament and Sacrifice; as at the
Passover there was instruction, to acquaint them with the grounds and use of
it, Exodus 12.26. 2 Chronicles. 30.22. As also, with the understanding of the Mystery
of the Sacrament in particular, so as to be able to discern the Lords body, 1
Cor. 11.24.

2 With an earnest desire, and eager appetite, which without the understanding
(before spoken) cannot be ( John 4.10.) and that shows the necessity of it --
Isa. 55.1. John 7.38.

3 With faith, for we cannot partake in Jesus Christ for our spiritual
nourishment, unless we come to him, and to come to him, is to believe on him,
John 6.35.

4 With a good conscience, which contains in it both repentance and charity:
for it is as much as to see

1 (As much as may be) that God have nothing against us ( Rev. 2.4.) our sin
being put away by repentance, Psalm. 32.5.

2 That men have nothing against us, all offenses being removed by
Reconciliation, Mat. 5.23.

Question 76. What Is the third special duty of a Christian?

Answer. Prayer, Mat. 7.7. Psalm. 50.15. 1 Cor. 1.2.

Question 77. In what manner are we to pray unto God?

Answer. 1 Watchfully ( Col. 4.2.) the time and place being as much (as may be
fitted) Mark 1.35. But always the heart being fixed and settled on the
service, Psalm. 108.1.

2 Wisely, praying for things lawful and needful, good and fit, 1 John 5.14.
1 Kings 3.9, 10.

3 Reverently, that is, with humble acknowledgment how unworthy we are to
desire any thing from so gracious a God, Genesis 18.27. and with humble submission
of our suites unto the will of so wise a God, Mat. 26.39.

4 Faithfully, James 2.6. Earnestly, Luke 11.8. and Constantly, Luke 18.1.

Question 78. What Is the fourth special Christian duty?

Answer. Fasting Mat. 9.15.

Question 79. What Rules are there to be observed for fasting?

Answer. 1 We are to fast (when) it is fit, that is, not when such a day comes
(superstitiously) Gal. 4.10. But when God calls thereunto by any special and
extraordinary occasion (religiously) Isa. 22.12. Joel 2.12.

2 We are to fast (as) it is fit, to wit,

1 With inward contrition and renting of our hearts, Psa. 51.17. Joel 2.13.

2 With outward Humiliation, that all the world may see our submission unto
God, 1 Kings 21. last.

3 With faithful and fervent prayer, Jona 3.8.

4 With a through reformation professed by the renewing of our Covenant in the
day of our fast, Nehem. 9. last and 10. and practiced in the renewing of our
conversation, after the fast, and that so as that God may see, and he himself
may say that we are turned from the evil of our works, Jona 3. last.

3 We are to humble our selves before God as long as it is fit, to wit, till
God he entreated, Judges 20.23, 26. even as Jacob continued his wrestling, with
weeping and supplication, till God was conquered, Genesis 32.26.

Question 80. What Is the fifth special Christian duty?

Answer. Vowing, Psalm. 76.11. and 50.14.

Question 81. In what manner is a Vow to be made?

Answer. It must be

1 Of things lawful, not to kill Paul, Acts 23.12. Romans 14. ult. It Is against
Scripture to Vow Chastity (1 Cor. 7.9.) Poverty ( Prove. 30.8.) Regular
obedience (1 Cor 7.23.) So as the Papists prescribe.

2 Secondly, of things in our power (to wit, in ordinary course, and by
diligent use of the means, through that blessing of God which he uses to
afford) for Vowing requires paying, Eccles. 5.4. and paying power.

3 Of things in our purpose and resolution, Psalm. 119.106. not Vowing in a
passion, or with dissimulation.

4 For such reason as it is fit, to wit,

1 To express our thankfulness, Genesis 28.20.

2 To take some revenge upon our selves for sins committed, 2 Cor. 11.7.

3 To prevent some sin whereof of we are in danger, Job 31.1. A Vow is sepes
sanctimoniae, to hedge us in a holy course, and keep off the breakings in of
sin.

4 To help our selves in service, 1 Cor. 9.25. as to make a light dinner on the
Sabbath, for attending the afternoones Sermon the better.

5 For such a time as is fit in some cases, and for some considerations for
ever, 1 Cor. 7.5. That wine which a young man may have reason to Vow abstinence
from, will when he is older or weaker, be needful for him, and not hurtful
(as before) to him, 1 Timothy 5.23.

Question 82. What special Caution is there to be observed in Vowing?

Answer. Vow not upon a push of zeal; our zeal must be put to the performing,
but our wisdom and care to the making of a Vow; that thou may not be slack
to pay, be slack (rather) to Vow, for to forbear to pay, will be a sin to thee,
but it is no sin to forbear to Vow, Deuteronomy. 23.21, 22.

Question 83. But what if I Vow rashly, am I then bound to pay?

Answer. A rash and unlawful Vow binds, but to what? not to performance but to
repentance.

Question 84. But when a Vow is needful to be made, and hard to be kept, what
course is to be taken for the keeping of it?

Answer. Vow a hard thing for a short time, first whereby thou may take a
trial what thou art able to do, and so either injure thy self to keep it for
a longer time, or if thou find thy self too weak to perform, unloose thy self
from it, till thou have greater strength.

Question 85. What is the sixth Christian duty?

Answer. Sympathizing, or a rejoicing with the people of God that do rejoice,
and a weeping with them that weep, Psa. 106.5. Romans 12.15.

Question 86. In what manner should we take to heart the case of distressed
Christians?

Answer. As those that be members of the same body, yea, as if we our selves
were with them in the same bonds and misery, Heb. 13.3.

Question 87. Wherein is our compassion to be showed to persons afflicted?

Answer. 1 In making enquiry into their condition, Nehem. 1.2.

2 In praying for their comfort, Psalm. 25. last. 122.6.

3 In providing for their relief, John 3.17.

Question 88. What Is the seventh Christian duty?

Answer. Edifying one another, 1 Thessalonians. 5.11. unto which we may refer Christian
visits and conferences, Acts 15.36. Mal. 3.16.

Question 89. What Rule is to be observed for the better building up of our
Brethren?

Answer. It is to be done ^ither with compassion and favor, or with fear and
terror, as there is occasion, Jude 20, 21, 22.

Question 90. What help is there for this duty?

Answer. We must consider and take a view one of another (as those do that are
about to repair) and when we see what is lacking or amiss, we must accordingly
put to our helping hands; not commending our company in that which is good, and
winking at them wherein they are defective, but letting that alone which is
well, and setting to work and building where there is need, Heb. 10.24. 1 Thessalonians. 3.10.

Question 91. What is the duty of those that are dealt withal in this kind?

Answer. They ought not to be stern and stout, and to fling away in a chafe,
but quietly to suffer the word of Exhortation, and Edification, accounting it a
matter of the greatest favor and faithfulness, to keep their ruinous souls
in repair, Heb. 13.22. Prove. 27.6.

Question 92. What Is the eighth Christian duty?

Answer. Almsgiving, or charitable Contributions, Heb. 13.16.

Question 93. What Rules are there to be observed for this duty?

Answer. It is to be performed

1 In regard of persons, wisely and with due distinction, ever preferring the
household of faith, as sometimes Joseph did his beloved Benjamin, Gal. 6.10.
Genesis 43.34.

2 In regard of our states proportionally, that is, we must help others as God
enables and prospers us, 1 Cor. 16.2.

3 In regard of our affection cheerfully without harshnesse of spirit, and
inward grudgings; and compassionately, without hardness of heart, and inward
deadness, 2 Cor. 9.7. 1 John 3.17. A man should not only open his purse to
give Alms, but his bowels also.

4 In regard of God, humbly, not dreaming of merit, but accounting it a great
mercy that we have any thing to give or any mind to give it withal, 1 Chronicles.
29.14, 16. And seeking Gods glory in it, and not our own, 1 Cor. 10.3. Mat.
6.2, 3.

Question 94. What help is there for this duty?

Answer. First, that we may be able to give, we must strengthen our hearts with
faith, and look upon our Alms, not as upon water that is spilt, but as upon
seed that is sown, and that in well watered ground, still remembering that
liberality makes no man lean, Eccl. 11.1. Prove. 11.25.

Question 95. What Is the ninth Christian duty?

Answer. Mourning for the sins and abominations of the Times, Ezekiel. 9.4. Ezra
10.6. 1 Cor. 13.21.

Question 96. What help is there for this duty?

Answer. We may help our selves therein with these four considerations.

1 The great dishonor that is done to God by such sins; for if there be any
love to God in us it cannot but vex us that such dead Dogs as the sinners of
the times are, should so dishonor so glorious a God; yea it will grieve our
souls that any shame should be done to him who is our only friend, although it
be by our own father, 2 Samuel 16.9. 2 Samuel 20.3, 4.

2 The great danger upon which the sinners in Zion run themselves by those
their sins that be committed in the height of evil Times: For can we behold the
destruction of thousands of people (and many of them (perhaps) our near
friends and kindred also) without lamenting seriously so sad a spectacle, Jer.
13.17. Luke 19.41.

3 The grievous calamity and desolations that the sins of wicked men bring upon
the whole Church of God, Micah 2. last. For how can we endure to see the
destruction of Gods people? In this regard if any enquire (with wonder) of our
more abundant weeping for the sins of the time, the answer is at hand, because
I know the evil that thou (O sin) wilt do to the Church of God, 2 Kings 8.12.

4 Even respect to our selves, and our own security, may make us mourn for the
sins of the time, because that (only) assures us that we shall be marked and
preserved when a general destruction is decreed, Ezekiel. 9 4.

Question 97. Hitherto of those principal duties of our general calling that
are to be performed; show me in ^^e second place, at what time they are to be
performed?

Answer. The principal time is the Sabbath, the observation whereof is a duty
enjoined in the fourth Commandment.

Question 98. The fourth Commandment was given to the Jews, and enjoynes the
Jewish day, which was Saturday, now that day being gone, how does the
Commandment bind us?

Answer. The fourth Commandment requires three things.

1 A Sabbath day.

2 A Sabbath day every week, for we must not work longer then six days
together.

3 The Jews Sabbath day; now it is true that the last of these (viz.) the
Jews Sabbath is gone, and another day fitter for Christians is put in the
place thereof; but for the first and second, that is, a Sabbath, and a weekly
Sabbath, the fourth Commandment gives us a perpetual Law.

Question 99 To clear this the better, show me what reason there is, why there
should be a Sabbath day for ever?

Answer. Because of the ends for which a Sabbath was appointed, which are these
three.

1 That the work of Creation might be remembered, and whereby the true God (who
is known so to be by the making of Heaven and Earth in six days, Isa. 45.12.
Jer. 10.11, 12.) might be acknowledged and advanced.

2 That the public worship of God might be setledly, solemnly, uniformly,
conveniently performed by the whole Church of God, and so Religion it self
upheld and strengthened, for duties are preserved by days and times: Now that
the service of God may be performed setledly and constantly, there must be a
set day that it may be performed solemnly and uniformly, there must be one and
the same set day that it may be peformed conveniently, that set and standing
day must still return in a due distance, from all which will arise firm reason
for a weekly Sabbath.

3 The Sabbath was made form an, that is, that the souls of men might be
sustained and built up unto salvation, by a sweet and free fellowship with God,
that whole day in his holy Ordinances and the exercises of Religion, not
without a gracious respect also to his bodily refreshing and necessity.

Now all these ends of the Sabbath being no ceremonial things, but matters of
substance abiding in their strength throughout all ages; therefore the Sabbath
if so (founded upon them) is a thing moral and perpetual.

Question 100 By this it appears that a Sabbath, that is, a day of holy rest
in every week, is a thing not changed, yea is unchangeable, show me now how the
particular day comes to be altered, so as that Saturday was the Jews Sabbath,
and the Lords day ours?

Answer. One day every week is to be observed, that the work of Creation
(accomplished within the compass of a week) may be remembered; but the day is
now altered from the last to the first day of the week, that the remembrance of
that far greater work of redemption, may be preferred, which redemption being
perfected in Christ's resurrection, the day of the resurrection, is now become
the Lords day, that is, the Lords Sabbath day.

Question 101. What Rules are to be observed for the sanctifying of the Sabbath?

Answer. 1 Remember the Sabbath so as to be careful of preparation for it;
that is, set thy business in order the day before, and thy heart in order (at
least) the morning of the Sabbath, and have not twenty things in thy house to
be set in order on the morning of the Sabbath, when thou should be setting
thy heart in order, Eccles. 5.1. 1 Pet. 2.1.

2 Attend carefully the public service, lest while thou art busy here and
there about vain and impertinent things and thoughts, many precious passages of
the Sermon, or of prayer, pass away without any notice, 1 Kings 20.40. Acts
10.33. 1 Cor. 14.16.

3 Consecrate the day privately and wholly unto God, for it is the Sabbath of
the Lord thy God; thy heart thy tongue, thy carriage that day must not be for
thy self, but for thy God, Isa. 58.13, 14.

Question 102. What helps are there for the sanctifying of the Sabbath in this
holy manner?

Answer. 1 Look to thy heart, lest that rove and be divided from God with every
days thoughts, and be thou in the Spirit, that is, rapt up and ravished with
spiritual meditations upon the Lords day, Rev. 1.10.

2 Look to thy company and conference; for as worldly work is forbidden because
it hinders a spiritual work, so by the same reason are worldly words
forbidden, because they hind^r spiritual words, that is, such as are for God
and thy souls good, Exodus 20.10. Isa. 58.13. Our words that day must not be
our (own) that is, such as we have mind unto, but such as are meet for the
Lords day.

3 Look to thy works and carriage; this is not a day for the shambles, the
shop, the warehouse, the workhouse, but for thee and other good Christians to
be upon the Mount Tabor, that is, being lifted up above the world, to be wholly
busied in Religious exercises, and Ordinances wherein Jesus Christ the King of
the Church is to be seen in his beauty, Isa. 35.17.

4 Look to thy Entertainment, using friends (if on the Sabbath day they be with
thee) friendly, and rejoicing with them in the Lord, in the sober use of the
Creatures, Prove. 18.14. Acts 2.46. But appoint not solemn Feasts upon that day,
(that is to make the Lords day thy friends day) and take heed lest by
unnecessary care for many things, thou keep Mary from Christ's feet, that is,
thy well-affected Servant from a Sermon, Luke 1.10.41.

5 Watch thy self in thy contentments, let not sleep, or meat, or pleasant
talk, or sport, take away the time, or thy heart from the Lord of that day, and
the end for which he appointed it. They that live in pleasure on a Sabbath day,
are dead while they live, to wit, in regard of their deadnes and indisposition
to heavenly things, Luke 8.14.21.34. Hos. 4.11. and 13.6.

Question 103. By this is appears that the Sabbath is the principal time, but
are there not other times also, and that in the week days, wherein Christian
duties are to be exercised?

Answer. Yes, a due respect is to be had unto Christian duties, piety and
charity all the week long; for we ought to be devout Christians, and therefore
to fear God, and give Alms, and pray to God (not this or that day, but)
always, Acts 10.2. In particular, a due regard is to be had to hearing,
reading, conferring, praying at all times.

Question 104. What reason is there of hearing the word continually?

Answer. Because Ministers are to preach in season, and out of season, Sabbath
day, and week days, therefore people are to hear: So likewise, think not
others too careless, that leave some other businesses to be at Christ's feet
(sincerely) but thy self (rather) to be careful who art from thence
(unnecessarily.) Luke 10.39, 40.

Question 105. What Rule may be given them who have many businesses, for their
better guiding and settling, as concerning the six days Sermons?

Answer. The direction useful for such may be comprehended under these three
heads.

The Judgment must be well informed.

The Conscience well examined.

And the Providence of God well observed.

Question 106. How is the Judgment to be informed?

Answer. Both generally and particularly

1 Of the generality, that a man must by no means make l^ght of spiritual
opportunities, but redeem them rather, and purchase them with abatement of
outward things, Mat. 22.5. Ephesians. 5.16.

2 For particular opportunities, a light may be given for our direction by a
twofold consideration, Viz.

1 Of the state of Times: Time for good exercises is still to be redeemed, but
specially when the times are evil, that is, the more corrupt and troublesome,
the more doubtful and dangerous the times are, the more earnest we should be
to wait out and to make use of all spiritual opportunities, 2 Timothy 4.2, 3.
Acts 20.28, 30. John 12.35, 36.

2 Of the nature of the opportunity, when Christ goes by when there is a more
special occasion, a Minister that preaches with Authority, and not as the
Scribes, then (without the contempt of the lowest means and Minister, but with
a greater desire of this greatest means) get up into a Tree as Zacheus did, and
lay all other ordinary things aside, as Mary did, to enjoy God in a more
special manner, the reason is, because ordinary duties must yield to
extraordinary, as ordinary works of piety are to yield to extraordinary works
of mercy, Mat. 12.1, 2, etc. the necessary exigence of our calling, to
extraordinary works of piety Acts 20.7, 11.

3 Of our own state and occasions, which must make Christians to strain above
ordinary, in three cases.

1 At their first conversion, the new converted Christians were every day in
the Temple, and new born Babes had need be often at the breast, Acts 2.42.46. 1
Pet. 2.12.

2 In the time of affliction and tentation, as people spare time for their
business, to go to the Physician, and are blameless, Psalm. 73.16, 17. Job
33.23. Isa. 40.4. Mat. 11.28.

3 When in the course of the Ministry, some special matter is in hand, that
more concerns their state, and is more fit for their present use, Acts 10.6.24.
Shall not Cornelius leave all to wait upon Peter, for that information which he
so much needed?

4 Of the state and condition of others, about whom there are two Rules.

1 Be amiable, and make thy zeal as little offensive to others as may be.

2 Judge not severely of others that be not come so far, that are not so
forward after spiritual opportunities, as thou art, Phil. 3.15. Mat. 9.15.

Question 107. How is the conscience to be examined for the direction in this
point?

Answer. Conscience is to be looked unto two ways

1 If thou omit an opportunity, watch thy conscience so well, as that whilst
thou pretendest an Ox, a Farm, a Wise necessarily hinders thee, God (that
knows thy heart) may not come and say, that the true cause of thy absence is,
because thou make light of a Sermon, or else such things would not have
hindered; or that is because of thy unbelief, as if God would look to nothing
committed against him, while thou take an opportunity for him: be able to say
(if there be an absence) that the Sermon was (indeed) esteemed, only thy
calling (not thy coveteousnesse or unbelief) hindered.

2 If thou take an opportunity at a hard hand, (when those that be good will
perhaps question it, Luke 10.40.) be able to say it is not because thou love
not thy business, and so art willing to cloak idleness with profession; or
because thou have a lust to be abroad, or in company, to show thy self, or for
the loaves, John 6.26. or to maintain a credit among professors, or out of an
itching humor to diverse Preachers, 2 Timothy 4.3. Ezekiel. 33.32. and to see which
Minister makes the best Music, but because thy conscience (upon the best
consideration) is convicted of the necessity of that duty at that time.

Question 108. What direction is to be taken from the providence of God in this
particular?

Answer. If God cross thee when spiritual opportunities are omitted in those
outward things that caused the omission, or if God prosper thee in outward
things, when thou strainest thy self to be about better things, learn by the
dealing of a gracious God, to leave the world (at fit times) for thy souls
good, for such acts of providence are Gods notices, to give a light to tender
consciences in doubtful cases.

Question 109. What Reason is there of reading the Scripture continually, as
well as on the Sabbath day?

Answer. Because it is a blessed thing to read Scripture, and because the time
is at hand, Rev. 1.3. that is, no man knows how near the time is, when by
special occasions and afflictions he shall be put to make special use of
Scripture; now it is good to read that at every opportunity, that is necessary
to make our condition blessed, when we shall be brought to extremity.

Question 110. But time and leisure is wanting to look into Scripture.

Answer. The Eunuch when he was in his Chariot, did not only ride but read,
not only in a Closet, but in a Coach ( Acts 8.30.) in a shop, in a walk, Love
will find leisu^e, Psalm. 119.97.
in a business that must be waited upon, some part of Scripture may be read;
it is very hard if there be no leisure to look after eternal life, and in the
Scripture we think to have it, John 5.39.

Question 111. What special Motive is there to a daily reading and searching
of Scripture?

Answer. Because it is the honor and nobleness of a Christian so to do, Acts
17.11. yea and the note also, 1 Cor. 2.10. where the Spirit is, it is thus
employed, it casts a shame and a suspicion upon diverse professors, that
howsoever they delight in hearing Sermons, wherein there is a mixture of humane
sufficienc^, yet they let their Bible alone when they come home, as if there
were nothing in the bare and pure word of God worthy the inquiry, but let that
be accounted the heavenly Christian, that accounts the Bible the sweetest Book,
and loves to be ever looking upon Scripture Promises no otherwise then upon the
goodliest Pearls.

Question 112. What ground is there of the continual practice of Christian
conference?

Answer. Because they that fear God speak (not once a week, but) often one to
another; and the worse the times are by the worlds opposition, more need they
have to meet often together for their mutual confirmation, Mal. 3.16. Acts
1.14, 15. 2.42. and 15.36.

Question 113. What ground is there for daily prayer?

Answer. 1 Gods Precepts, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.

2 The example of Gods Children, Psalm. 55.17. Dan. 6.10. Acts 10.30.2.

3 The Lords Prayer, wherein we are directed to pray every day for our daily
bread: Now if we must pray daily for outward things, then much more for
spiritual; if for things concerning our good, then much more for things
concerning Gods glory; we must therefore pray always with all manner of prayer
and supplication, Ephesians. 6.18.

Question 114. What Reason is there of daily prayer in the family?

Answer. 1 Because not only a man himself, but his house also with him, is to
fear and serve God, and that continually, Acts 10.3. Josh. 24.15. Dan. 6.20.10.
Of which service of God, prayer is so necessary a part, that it is often taken
for the whole service, Joel 2.32. Zech. 8.21.

2 Because those Families must needs be under the curse, that are under the sin
of Heathens, that is, who do not acknowledge God in their Families, by calling
upon his name; which calling upon God should be daily, because God ought to be
daily acknowledged; and openly also with the whole Family, because God ought to
be openly acknowledged, Jer. 10.25.

3 Christian Families are called by the name of Churches, Romans 16.5. Now it is a
strange Church wherein there are not prayers, and those public; and it is a
strange Family-Church that can live a day without having to do with God, and
without making often acknowledgements of him.

Question 115. What time may there be for Family prayer, where there be many
businesses, and where perhaps the Master of the Family must rise and be gone
before the household be up?

Answer. 1 Reserve a time. Viz. That which (in reason and experience, thy
occasions being considered) will best suit with Gods business, and thy
business; the first time of the day (if it may be) before the world have taken
possession, or the first time that may be.

For this remember two Rules.

1 Make not more have then good speed, in the morning they that work together
may pray together (if the rest at that time cannot) and so be blessed together in
their business.

2 Pretend not in the evening that thou and thy Family are over-weary; for
would thou have thy weary Servant provide thy supper, and thou thy self not
serve God with him by Prayer, Luke 17.7, 8.

3 Redeem a time. Gain it from thy work and worldly business, or from thy
sleep, rise the earlier that thou and thy family may pray together in the
morning Mark 1.35. work the harder that (business being dispatched) thou and
thy Family may have a time to read and to pray together in the evening.

Question 116. What Help or Motive is there for the establishing of a course of
prayer in private Families, notwithstanding all worldly businesses?

Answer. There are these two helps.

1 Have serious thoughts of God. (Take) a time to hear and pray, for God can
tell very well what time thou have, yea (make) a time, dispatch business out
of the way, for God can tell very well what time thou (may) have, and
whether it be thy worldly business that hinders thee, or an abominable lothnesse
to be about any spiritual business.

2 Have reverend thoughts of prayer. Men have base and Atheistical thoughts of
Religious exercises, to wit, that so much time is lost in them, without any
good at all to be expected from them. Hence it is that they are so willing
rather to loose a prayer then a penny; but look upon prayer as a familiar
communing with the most glorious God, Genesis 18. last. as the supplyer of all our
wants, Luke 11.9, 10. as a shelter from all danger, Ezra 8.21, 22. as the
setler, sanctifier, prosperer of all business, Genesis 24.12.15.27. I say
conceive thus of it, and neglect it if thou can. Worthy thoughts of better
things, will devise ways to enjoy them, but infidelity abandons duty, Mal. 3.4.

Question 117. Is not a special time also to be taken (as there shall be
occasion) for special and extraordinary exercises?

Answer. By all means, come to fasting and humiliation from any work, from any
content, Joel 2.16. 1 Cor. 7.5. Be more willing to loose a day, than a duty,
then such a duty, although a day is no more lost in such a service, than that
day is lost that a man spares to get a thousand pound debt struck out, or to
get a pardon for his life. Such godliness is great gain.

Question 118. Hitherto of the applying of Gods word unto the duties of our
general calling, show me now what directions we may have from it as concerning
our particular calling?

Answer. Concerning that, the word of God directs us three ways.

1 It shows that every man must have a Calling.

2 It guides a man for the choosing of his Calling.

3 It teaches him how to behave himself in it.

Question 119. How does it appear that every man is to have some calling or
other?

Answer. The first Adam, and the second, the two only innocent men that ever
lived upon the earth, had both of them a calling Adam dressed the Garden, and
Christ was a Minister of the Circumcision, Genesis 2.15. Romans 15.8.

And that all men generally ought to have a Calling, appears by these three
things.

1 We be Christians, and therefore must not live disorderly, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10, 12.
but abide in a Calling, 1 Cor. 7.20.

2 We be Servants, and therefore must not live idly and licentiously, that
Christ our Master should find us sleeping or drinking, (1 Thessalonians. 5.3, 6, 7.
Mat. 24. end --) but waiting and working, doing and (so) doing, as belongs to
us in our places, Luke 12.36.43.

3 We be Stewards, and therefore must not live carelessly, or improvidently, for
we must give an account of our stewardship. Talents we have to Trade withal,
and from them (yea, if we have but one of them) advantage is expected. Neither
will our Master be content to receive his own again, but he must receive his
own with usury, Mat. 25.27.

And in ill case are idle persons (whether Beggars or Gentlemen,) yea, in a
damnable condition, because God will take (not only the abominable, but) the
unprofitable Servant, and cast him into outer darkness, and that most justly,
nothing being more unreasonable, than that a man should be a Servant (and that
of God himself) and do no work.

Question 120. How may a man judge according to Scripture, what Calling to make
choice of?

Answer. A man may judge of that two ways.

1 By his own gifts and disposition. For we shall still find in Scripture that
God either chose or made men fit for those employments to which he called them.
David that was to be a victorious King, had courage and might, 1 Samuel 17.26.32.
2 Samuel 17.10. Solemon that was to be a glorious King, had wisdom and a large
heart. Jehu was (apparently) a man fit to be what God called him to be, a
through Executioner, 2 Kings 9.20. and Timothy was (in sight) a man fit to make
a Minister of, 1 Timothy 1.18.

2 By Gods calling and disposing, to wit, by ordinary lawful means, and the
motions and desires of men in the society wherein we live, who taking notice of
our gifts, accordingly take order to dispose of us, as Genesis 47.6. 1 Kings 11.28.

Question 121. May not a man in some cases change his Calling?

Answer. A man may change his Calling in three cases.

1 If there be a mistake, and a man by his own error, or others overruling,
be fallen upon a Calling unsuitable to his gifts, and cross to his natural
inclination.

The reason of this, is because all outward calls must be regulated by the
inward. Man's call must be corrected by Gods call, and a man's employments should
be (sooner or later) suitable to his Talent and endowments.

2 Though a man be apt for the Calling wherein he is, yet if he be able also
for a greater, he may (for the public good) change a meaner for a more
excellent Calling.

3 When a man's Calling cannot maintain himself and his family, he is enforced
to change it (for some other profit able Calling which he is able to manage)
out of respect to his own necessity.

But for a man to change his Calling for another below his gifts, because he
loves his ease and profit:

Or for another that is above his gifts, because he desires a greater gain,
and affects an estimation above his worth, this is unlawful and unjustifiable.

Question 122. How must a man be conversant about his Calling?

Answer. 1 Providently, Prove. 27.23. etc. 2 Kings 20.23. Boaz had one to
oversee his servants yet he comes to the field to oversee them and the
overseers too, Ruth 2.4, 5.

2 Diligently, Pro. 27.23. Laziness is next to idleness, and doing sluggishly
to doing nothing; what a man undertakes, he should do it with all his power,
Eccles. 9.10. with Genesis 31.6.40.

3 Faithfully, not trusting to our own toiling, as if it were in our own power
to get wealth, Deuteronomy. 8.18. but building upon Gods blessing, Pro. 10.22.

4 Moderately, that is,

1 Not hindering our selves in the exercises of Religion, Luke 10.39, 40. To be
so busy as that the six days will not serve, as to have no leisure for
private and family prayer, to have so much to do with the world as to shut out
God, that he can say nothing to us, nor we to him, this is to be penny wise, and
to labor after the food that perishes, John 6.27.

2 Not wearing away our bodies with excessive toil, Exodus 18.18.

3 Avoiding excessive care, which disturbs and annoyes the heart, and so
hinders that setlednesse of mind that there ought to be in duties of piety,
Psalm. 108.1. 1 Timothy 2.8. and that peaceablenesse of carriage that there ought
to be with those that are of our company, 1 Samuel 25.17.

5 Holily, not with a (will) to be rich, 1 Timothy 6.9. but to be employed for
Gods glory, John 17.4. and for providing for those that God has given us, 2
Cor. 12.14. as also that we may have to give to him that needs, Ephesians. 4.28.

Question 123. Are men so to be busied in their Callings, as that no Recreation
is allowed?

Answer. Recreation, that is, resting after a man is toiled out with labor,
and fetching a man's breath (as it were) Exodus 23.17. (...), Sept. So 2 Samuel
16.14. is no way unlawful, but rather by the example of God himself, and of
Jesus Christ commended unto us, Exodus 31.17. John 4.6.8. Nor is refreshing and
setting an edge upon a man's spirit, by some pleasant and harmless exercise, to
be condemned, because it furthers a man in his Calling, and makes him more
profitable then otherwise he could be.

Question 124. Since by how much Recreation is more delightful, by so much
Rules are more needful; show me what Rules are to be observed, that Recreation
may be better ordered?

Answer. Our Recreation should be

1 In and by things lawful, not vain and vile Books, not filthy or slanderous
Songs, girding at those that fear God, 1 Cor. 15.33. Psalm. 69.12. not foolish
talking, and (un-Saintlike) jesting, Ephesians. 5.3, 4. not mixed dancing, for Mat.
6.13. we are not to lead our selves into tentation. Excessive drinking, Ephesians.
5.18. nor make bold with those Recreations that are not of good report, Phil.
4.8. to wit, amongst the Brethren, Acts 16.2. that is, holy and judicious
Christians: such are Dicing, Carding, Gaming, Stage-playing, etc.

2 It is needful, when the body is wearied, the spirits weakened and wasted.
Recreation is not as meat and drink of ordinary use, but as Wine, that is, a
little is to be taken of it, when there are evident reasons for it, 1 Timothy 5.23.

3 Such as is needful. Corporal exercise is a fit Recreation for Students,
but to sit down and employ the mind in reading the Bible, or some good Book or
other, is the best refreshing for Laborers.

4 At a fit time. Pleasurable Recreations are not to be used

1 On the Sabbath, that is a day wherein we should not do our pleasure; it is
Gods holy day, not our play day, Isa. 58.13. Recreations on that day be
sacrilegious, for they steal away sacred time, and the hearts of the people
from God, and the duties of that day; as sometime Absalom stole the hearts of
the men of Israel from his father David, 2 Samuel 15.6.

2 In time of mourning, Isa. 22.12, 13. for it becomes no body to be jolly,
when God is angry, or absent, Mat. 9.55.

5 For a fit time, as our need requires, and as our occasions will bear; for we
must redeem the time, and not set spurs to a running Horse, and pass it away
needlessly in pastimes, as if it were a benefit to be rid of it; that is neither
for our profit here, Prove. 21.17. nor our safety hereafter, Mat. 25.30.

6 In a fit manner, that is,

1 Not covetously, playing for money, that is, for any considerable quantity
(for otherwise Recreation being needful, some small matter may be laid out by
those that be able to make it more a Recreation to them) but playing for any
such quantity as stirs up covetousness, and longing desire to win for the
moneys sake, and as will make the looser bad, because he cannot well bear the
loss, this is unlawful, as being against the tenth Commandment, in regard of
coveting -- and against the eighth Commandment, in regard of the casting away
of more then a man can well spare.

Besides it turns the Recreation on the winners part to a Vocation (he stays
longer then he should do at it, and returns sooner then he should to it) and
on the loosers part to a vexation. Nor is it any thriving course, for the
ordinary or extraordinary winner, Prove. 13.11.

2 Not over earnestly, and with unrestrained enlargement 1 Cor. 7.31. it is
dangerous for a man to give up himself to pleasurable things, and if at any
time he give himself more liberty that way, yet even then he should acquaint
his heart with wisdom, that is, he should be master of himself, and wisdom
should be the moderator of his mirth and content, Eccles. 2.3.

7 In good company, not with men of evil minds and manners; for in Recreation,
a man is most free, and so apt to grow into further acquaintance, and to open
himself more then is fit for such companions, 1 Kings 22.2.4. and 2 Chronicles.
19.2.

Besides that men of an evil carriage, show it in their mirth most, and so a
man that accompanies them, is in danger to be partaker of their sin. It Is true,
that he may reprove them but reproof and Recreation do so ill stand together,
that the one is like to be omitted for the other.

Question 125. Hitherto of the applying of Gods word to our general and
particular calling, show me in the third place how is it to be applied to our
carriage?

Answer. There is a great use of the Direction of it for our carriage,

1 Alone.

2 In company.

3 In regard of our relation to others.

4 In regard of our selves.

Question 126. What must we do when we are solitary and alone?

Answer. Something we must watch against, and something we must look to.

Question 127. What must a man watch against?

Answer. Against Satan (and) his own heart, or against Satan (in) his own
heart, for his tentation when we are alone, is suitable to our disposition. He
enters upon the heart of covetous Judas, to set him upon the betraying of his
Master for his own advantages. Hence it is, that a worldly and voluptuous man
is ever thinking on his Barns, Psalm. 49.11. and his belly, Luke 12.17, 18, 19.
good fellows, and youngsters of their pleasures, drinkings and merry meetings,
Isa. 56.12. for which such thoughts their hearts cheer them up, Eccles. 11.9.
Malicious men think of revenge, Genesis 27.41. Ambitious men of preferment, Luke
9.46, 47. Ezekiel. 28.6. and lustful persons fill and foul their hearts with all
unclean thoughts, Prove. 7.18. yea, they garnish their hearts for the Devil, by
setting up in their imagination all lascivious pictures, and defiling
representations, and by acting fornications and adulteries in their hearts a
thousand times over, Mat. 5.28.

Question 128. What help is there against such vile thoughts as these, when a
man and his own heart is together?

Answer. 1 A man must find his heart work. There Is no other means for a man
alone (especially if he be given to meditation) to be free from bad and base
thoughts, but by better. A working heart is like a going and grinding Mill, if
a better grain be not in it, there must be a worse; Walk in the Spirit, (says
the Apostle, Gal. 5.15.) that is, let grace ever find you work; and then you
shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. A thoughtfull man shall do well
(and without that he shall very hardly do well) when ever he goes abroad, or
must be for some time alone, to set his heart some particular and profitable
task, and to hold it strictly thereunto.

2 He must maintain a War with it. That is, he must be ever mortifying his
natural and most special Iusts; for as the severity of Authority so takes
away Thieves that men may ride alone without fear, so if men be ever calling in
question their inordinate affections and executions upon them, they may walk
alone without hurt, and be solitary without sin.

3 Give God thy heart by prayer, and entreat him to look to it for thee, and to
knit it unto himself, Psalm. 141.4. and 119.36. and 86.11.

Question 129. What must we look to, when we are alone?

Answer. Men's thoughts alone should be either pious with respect to their
general Calling, Psalm. 63.5, 6. and 132.1, 4. Genesis 24.63. or profitable with
respect to their particular Calling and occasions, 1 Kings 20.22. Take heed
that thou and the Devil be not together, as it was with Judas, Luke 22.3. thou
and the world as it was with Ahab, 1 Kings 21.4. thou and the flesh, as it was
with Amnon, 2 Samuel 13.2. Be thou and the Lord together in heavenly meditations,
and communications Genesis 18. last. Thou and a Bible together, Acts 8.28. at
least, thou and a good business, Luke 14.28.31.

Question 130. How ought we to take care of our carriage in company?

Answer. So as to avoid the evils to which we are prone, and to the duties
belonging to us therein.

Question 131. Unto what evils are men most prone when they are in company?

Answer. 1 If a man be of a free and a kind nature, he is apt to yield unto
evil company, so as to be a partner with them in their evils (1 Kings 22.4.)
as in going to Stage Plays, revels, riotous, or at least frivolous and
fruitless meetings, and doing when he is there, as they do: when it were far
better to disclaim the company of such, as David did, Psalm. 119.115. and 26.4,
5. and to resist their courses with the resolution of the Rachabites, that
said, We will drink no wine, Jer. 35.6.

2 If a man be of a mild and melancholic constitution, then he is apt in evil
company, to be a countenancer of them; and having neither a spirit apt to
contend, nor a tongue apt for discourse, to let pass all requisite reproofs of
their rotten communication and carriage, and let things go even as they would
have them; when a Christian ought to be clear in such cases, and of a constant
spirit, as Micaiah and Jeremy were; his words should not be as the words of one
of them, they should turn to him, but he should not turn to them, 1 Kings
21.13, 14. Jer. 15.19.

3 If a man be of a hot and fiery temper, then he is apt in evil and provoking
company, to break out into passion, and unbounded indignation; when the tongue
should be kept as with bitt and bridle when the wicked is in our sight, and
much more our hands, Psalm. 39.1. Mat. 26.51, 52.

Question 132. What are the Duties or Rules which we ought to respect in regard
of company?

Answer. Look to these three things.

1 Come into Company with a good Calling, that if thou be sternly examined,
thou may be able to say, is there not a cause a call that draws me hither,
1 Samuel 17.29. and those whom God calls, he keeps from danger, and the power of
temptation, Psalm. 91.11.

2 Be in company with a good care, viz. of dispatching thy business for which
thou came thither as soon as thou can, Genesis 24.32. and the worse the
company is, so much the more careful be thou to do what thou came about,
speedily, and then fly away, 2 Kings 9.10.

Question 133. How must our carriage be ordered in regard of our relation to
others, whether superiors, inferiors, equals, friends, enemies, strangers?

Answer. In regard of our Superiors, two things are especially required.

1 Prayer for them, 2 Timothy 2.12. Nothing being more needful then prayer, for
those that have so great a task, 1 Kings 3.9. and that are under so great
temptation, 2 Samuel 11.2. nor any thing being more reasonable, then that they
that are common persons, should be supported with a common stock of prayer for
the common good.

2 Honor and due respect toward them, which honor is of so large extent, as
that it comprehends the whole duty of the fifth Commandment. For as the
despising of others in our hearts, and (in particular) of superiors, is the
ground of all evil carriage toward them, as we may see in Michol, 2 Samuel
6.16.20. so the honoring of them in our hearts, is the cause of good carriage
toward them, though occasion be given to the contrary, as appears in
Mephihosheth, 2 Samuel 19.24.28.30.

Question 134. In what particulars is this honor to be declared?

Answer. Have a care of these three things.

1 Be not ready to receive evil reports of them, 1 Timothy 5.19. A great fault it
is even of those that profess Religion, to take up reports of superiors
lightly, and thereupon to speak their pleasure; when we ought not to speak
evil of dignities, Jude 1.8. when such evil speaking is much observed by
Opposites, and laid to the charge of professors, Acts 23.4. and they know not
well how to answer it, because they must needs yield, that they ought not to
speak evil of the Ruler of the people, Acts 23.5.

2 When they do well and worthily, fear them, and declare a high estimation of
them, 1 Kings 3. ult.

3 If they do otherwise, consider howgreat their temptations are in regard of
thine, and withal, how great thy help is (by plain and faithful instruction)
in regard of theirs; it is a hard thing for a rich man to enter into heaven: if
thou were in their place, what would thou do? put thy soul into their
souls stead, Job 16.4. and so pity them, and instead of declaiming against
them in company, weep in secret for what is amiss in them, Jer. 13.17.

Generally, be able to say, Unto thee (my Superior) I have done no hurt, Dan.
6.22. Of thee I have spoken no hurt, 2 Samuel 19.27.

Question 135. What must our carriage be in regard of inferiors?

Answer. There should be

1 Due protection, Psalm. 72.12. Job 29.16, 17.

2 Good counsel and instruction, Prove. 31.2. Tit. 2.3, 4.

3 Good example, Tit. 2.3, 4, 7.

4 Good usage, Viz.

1 In matters of Clemency, doing them favor, Esth. 20 3.

2 In matters of Equity, doing them right, Job 31.21. Col. 4.1.

3 In matters of Charity, doing them good, Job 31.19.

4 In matters of Courtesy, doing them no shame, nor offering unworthily to
abase them, 1 Samuel 20.34. James 2.1, 2, 3.

Generally, they should take care that they under them (especially belonging to
them) may lead a quiet and a peaceble life, in all godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2.

Question 136. What should our carriage be toward equals?

Answer. 1 Men and women that be equals should take sweet counsel together
(especially if they be friends and acquaintance) and walk (not to play, or to
revell, but) to the house of God in company, but ever with truth and sincerity,
Psalm. 55.13, 14. Romans 12.9.

2 They should be kindly affectioned one to another, with brotherly love and
kindness: They must not look each upon their own vices but upon the virtues
one of another, and so in honor prefer not each themselves, but one the other,
Romans 12.10.

3 When they walk together (especially on the resurrection and Lords day) they
shall do well to talk together of Jesus, and to edify the souls one of
another, Luke 24.14. 1 Thessalonians. 5.11.

4 All shall do well to profit in Religion (that is, in a right Religion)
above their equals, Gal. 1.14.

Question 137. How may we carry our selves fitly toward friends?

Answer. 1 Show thy self a friend to their souls in spiritual things, Acts
10.24. John 1.41, 42, 45. Do what thou can to keep thy brethren and kindred
from the place of torment, by bringing them to hear Moses and the Prophets,
Luke 16.28, 29. As also by pulling them out of the fire by private admonitions,
Jude 23.

2 Be friendly also unto them (as there shall be occasion) in outward things,
Pro. 18.24. 2 Samuel: 9.1.3. but especially express love in the time of their
affliction, Prove. 27.10 1 John 6.14.

Question 138. But how should I behave my self toward enemies?

Answer. 1 Make known thy innocence to them, 1 Samuel 24.10. that thou may not
seem to suffer as a Malefactor, 1 Pet. 4.15. but either as an innocent person
without cause, Dan. 6.22. or as a Christian for a good cause, 1 Pet. 3.14.

2 Beware of them, Mat. 10.17. 1 Kings 20.22.

3 Pray for them, and do good to them, that so (if it be possible) we may win
them, or at least we may show whose sons we our selves are, Mat. 5.44.45. If a
Christian must kill his Enemy any way, it must be with kindness, Romans 12.20.

4 If they say (It repents me) forgive them, Luke 17 4. It Is true, that though
they do not say so, a Christian forgives them out of Christian charity, laying
aside all revengefull affection; but if they do say so, he forgives them out
of Christian Justice as those that have made them amends by their
acknowledgement, and with entertaining a good opinion of them, as those that
have changed their minds.

5 Do not thou rejoice if God lay his hand upon them, Job 3^.29.

A holy rejoicing there may be in regard of the execution of Gods Justice as
they be wicked, Job 22.19. but not a carnal content in regard of their
downfall and destruction, as they be our Enemies, 2 Samuel 1.15.17. Ezekiel. 18.32.

Question 139. How are we to carry our selves toward strangers, and those that
are unconverted?

Answer. There should be in regard of them

1 Holy and unblameable walking before them, Phil. 2.15.

In particular such a conversation as whereby

1 God may be glorified, Mat. 5.16.

2 The mouths of the ignorant and evil minded may be stopped, 1 Pet. 2.15. and
3.16.

3 Whereby their names may be (really) reproved, that so being how bad they be,
they may loath and leave them, Ephesians. 5.11, 12, 13.

4 Whereby they (beholding the innocence and honesty of it) may through the
mercy of God (as by a special help) be converted and saved, 1 Pet. 2.12.

2 There should be a meek and meet instructing of them, and we should be
willing to do a blessed cure upon their souls, especially if they do any way
belong to our care and charge, 2 Timothy 2 25. Jer. 51.9.

Question 140. Hitherto of our carriage in relation to others, show me now what
Rules are to be observed for the well ordering of our carriage in regard of our
selves?

Answer. 1 First and principally look to thy soul, Mat. 16.26.

2 Look to thy body, both for the health and safety thereof, Tit. 1.23. 1 Samuel
18.12.

3 Look to thy business, calling, and occasions, 1 Kings 20.22. Psalm. 112.5.

4 Look to thy state, and do not undo thy self with suretiship or dangerous
undertakings, either for strangers or friends, Prove. 6.1, 2, 3.

It is not only against reason, but against conscience and Scripture, and a sin
as well as a misery, and folly for a man (improvidently) to endamage himself.

Question 141. Hitherto of the use of the word of God in regard of our
earriage, now show me the use of it in regard of our condition, and of the
things belonging thereunto.

Answer. The Rules appertaining to our condition, have a respect either to our
persons, as food and apparel, or to our estate, to wit, either prosperity or
adversity.

Question 142. What Rules are there to be observed concerning meats and drinks?

Answer. 1 We should take them for our need and refreshing, and the support of
our natures, 1 Samuel 30.12. 1 Timothy 5.23. Genesis 18.5.

2 For our chearing up also, and delight, at fit times, and in fit measure,
Psalm. 104.15. Nehem. 8.10.

But neither wantonly, when we do not need them, Prove. 31.4, 5. nor
excessively, so as that so much as our hearts should be charged with them, Luke
21.34.

3 The Creatures, when ever we receive them, must be sanctified, and that two
ways.

1 By the word. Now the Creatures are sanctified by the word, when my
conscience is truly informed out of Scripture, and withal is persuaded and
assured (by a yielding to that information) that I may lawfully and
warrantably, without offending God, make use of such and such a Creature, as
being admitted and enabled to a free and holy use thereof by Jesus Christ in
the time of the Gospel.

2 By prayer. Now the Creatures are sanctified by prayer, both when I beg of
God that the curse, which for sin cleaves unto them may be removed, by his
commands and blessing, they may minister that effectual nourishment for which
they are appointed: As also when I am thankful to God in Christ for them,
beholding in him a comfortable admittance to them.

4 Though at meal time, common and pleasant discourse may lawfully be used,
Judges 14.12. yet should there be reverent and seasonable remembrances of that
God that prepares a Table before us, and a great fear of cursing, or casting
any dishonor upon him in our hearts, when we are at our merriest feasts, Psalm.
23.5. Job. 1.5.

Question 143. Tell me (now eating and drinking is spoken of) whether it be
lawful to drink healths or no?

Answer 1 Not unless it be for Gods glory to drink them; for the Rule is,
Whether you eat or drink, or whatever you do else, do all to the glory of
God, 1 Cor. 10.31.

2 Not if by that drinking, so much as our hearts be over charged and put out
of frame for the duties of our Callings, and the expectation of the day of
Judgment, Luke 21.34.

3 Not if any of the company that is tied to drink the health, be distempered
by it; for is not the health a work of darkness, Ephesians. 5.11. if it cause
distemper? and have not I fellowship with it, if I be a worker in it, yea and
moreover a binder to it? for every man that is in it, does not only drink the
health, but bind the health, if not in words, yet in deed, because by his
joining a greater distaste and shame rests upon any man that shall offer to
shrink.

Now whether this Healthing be for the glory of God, and so carried as that he
that drinks it, is not over charged himself, nor any of his company, let every
man's conscience judge as in the sight of God, and thereby decide to himself the
lawfullnesse or unlawfullnesse of this course.

To which add,

4 Not if it be open and observed, and so countenance the course of God, and
bid God speed to the fashion of drinking healths, wherein (ordinarily and for
the generality) there is so much abuse, John 2 Epist. v. 11. and this meets
with the most moderate and eminsed Healthings; for though to eat and drink, to
feast is a thing needful and requisite, yet there is no need of Healthing. Now
though a man drink but a little or no hurt, yet how can it be lawful for them
to do a needless act, when it is an occasion of stumbling to others, and a
hardening of them in a most sinful practice: see Deuteronomy. 32.26, 27.

Question 144. Hitherto of meats and drinks, show me now what Rules are to be
observed for Apparel?

Answer. 1 Let not thy Apparel be above thy place: For Gods mind is, that men
should so appear outwardly in their port and attendance, and so in their
Apparel, as to maintain that difference of degrees that he has established
among them, Eccles. 10.6, 7.

2 Let it not be above thy means, for that is against the Commandment, Thou
shall not steal, while as Absalom stole away the heart of the people from
David their rightful King, 2 Samuel 15.6. so vanity of Apparel steals away a
man or woman's estate from those necessary occasions wherein (of right) it
should be bestowed.

3 Conform not to the world in it, against the good and acceptable and perfect
will of God ( Romans 12.2.) that is, against those general Rules of godliness,
comeliness, sobriety, modesty, and moderation, which the word of God sets
before us, which have a binding power in those particulars which are too low
for the Scripture to name, and which, Christians that reverence their general
Rules, need not to have named. See 1 Timothy 1.10. Phil. 4.8. 1 Timothy 1.9.

4 Imitate in thy Apparel holy and faithful men and women, 1 Pet. 3, 5.
Modest and sober Sarah is a fit pattern for those of her sex (who are more apt
to exceed in this kind) and not Jezabel, 2 Kings 9.30. Now the example of holy
persons lays down the Rule of restraint in this particular. So to cloth our
selves as that all the world may see we count our graces our Ornaments, rather
then our Garments, a meek spirit rather then a curious habit, 1 Pet. 3.3, 4.
with Psalm. 73.6.

5 For this reason let those that be professors of Religion, and those that
would be reckoned holy Christians, watchfully and above others, restrain
themselves this way, keeping still (and yet without uncomelinesse) the safer
and sober si^e, and leaning to the word rather then the world; for how shall
they be examples to others, that exceed themselves? and what a pity and misery
is it that there should be so few holy men and women out of the fashion, to be
a pattern to the residue of the world that so affect fashions?

Question 145. Since you speak of fashions, tell me what is to be thought
concerning new fashions in Attire?

Answer. 1 To speak generally, all affectation and offense in the form and
fashion of our Apparel is to be avoided; that is, we must not apparel our
selves so as to show we have a mind to be in the fashion; nor so, as to
encourage those that be vainer, and grieve the better party, Phil. 4.8.

2 To speak more particularly, observe these Rules.

1 Such fashions of Apparel as clearly and at first sight cross the Rules of
Christian modesty (as the attire of women, whereby nakedness is in part
covered, but in a great part discovered) are to be rejected as abominable. It Is
strange that honest women will not give Harlots leave to have such an Attire as
may be properly called the Attire of an Harlot ( Prove. 7.10.) to wit, as
unbeseeming the modesty of a sober woman.

2 Other fashions there be tolerable rather then laudable; and that they may be
tolerable it belongs to the wisdom and sobriety of Christians to observe these
two Rules.

1 Not to enter into them suddenly, so as to keep even pace with the most
forward fashionist.

2 Not to use them exactly, and in the utmost extremity.

The former of these argues levity, the later curiosity and want of worth, both
pride and vanity.

3 Any fashion used out of pride and vanity of mind is absolutely sinful.

Only for some better Reason, some more liberty may be given and taken, viz.
in these regards.

1 To avoid the imputation and offense of fingularity, and that it may appear
that Christians do not affect to be unlightly, nor put the stresse of Religion
upon these lessen things.

2 In case of duty both of Children to parents, and of wives to husbands, whom
the clearness of the duty to give content, makes these things more disputable,
and gives occasion for dispensing with them, at least in some degrees.

But there is a wide difference between these two, to wit, when such or such are
in the fashion out of a mind and affectation, and when their appearing in the
fashion (enforced by the imperiousness of vain and unkind and ungodly
Superiors) in their trouble and affliction.

Question 146. But is not Apparel an indifferent thing, why then should there
be so much scruple about it?

Answer. I Answer.

1 It Is true that the Apparelling of our selves this or that way, is a thing
indifferent in the generality; but pride, luxury, vanity of mind are not things
indifferent, but absolutely sinful, and so are those particular fashions that
spring from and manifestly savor of these corrupt roots.

2 Though such things be in a sort indifferent, and left to our liberty, it
being a shame that Christians that have so many Rules pressing to modesty and
sobriety in the general, should need to be taught particularly how to dress
themselves every day, yet let us not (for shame) so carry our selves, as that
God should repent he has left them indifferent; liberty is the trial of
ingenuity, and tenderness of conscience.

3 I Answer, with a Holy Father in a like case, That Is the very work of the
Devil to make indifferent things to be contemned. The Devil is nothing so much
a gainer by that which is apparently sinful, as by things of an indifferent
nature; for therein men sin under a protection, they take their pleasure to the
full in the (use) of such things, that is their sin, and the indifferency of
them in their (nature) that is their protection.

Question 147. Hitherto of Rules appertaining to our condition as it has
respect to our persons, show me now what direction the Scripture gives
concerning our condition with reference to our estate, and first tell me what
direction's for the carrying of our selves well in the state of prosperity?

Answer. 1 Be thankful, Deuteronomy. 8.10. and 26.5. and ever magnify that God that
is so infinitely gracious, as that not only to take Order for, but to take
pleasure in the prosperity of his servants, Psalm. 35.27.

2 Be humble. For as we are greater then the greatest of all Gods Judgments in
regard of the merit of our sins ( Ezra 9.13.) so we are less then the least of
all Gods mercies, in regard of the unworthiness of our persons, Genesis 32.10.

3 Be watchful; for prosperity is an estate of temptation, Prove. 30.8, 9. and
without special care it will be abused, either to pride, Psalm. 73.6. or unto
sensuality, Luke 12.19. or unto security, Mat. 24.38, 39.

4 Be fruitful. For prosperity is as it were the Lords dunging, whereby to
make his Trees the more fruitful, Isa. 61.3. Luke 13.8. Let thy heart
(therefore) be lift up, when God is more plentifully good unto thee (as the
heart of prospering Jehosophat was) in the ways of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 17.5, 6.
Psalm. 116.12.

5 Be charitable. For we are but Stewards of that we have, Luke 16.1, etc. and
therefore must be ready to distribute and lay out, 1 Timothy 6.18, 19. and our
layings out are our best layings up. Now in what measure to lay out, our
prosperity will direct us, for every man must lay out as God has prospered
him, 1 Cor. 16.2.

6 Be fearful and so prudent as to think always a change will, or (at least)
may come, ( Job 3.25, 26.) that thou may not be impatient when it is come,
Job 1.22.

7 Be faithful, and when God so prospers thee at one time, as that thy Cup
runs over, gather from thence, that if he deal not so with thee at another
time, but strip thee of all thou have, it is not for want of good will, for
sure (thou having goodness in thee) mercy and goodness shall follow thee all
days of thy life, Psalm. 23.5, 6. and it shall be in one thing or another (as
in outward things it has been expressed to thee.)

8 Be very inquisitive whether thou have Jesus Christ and these outward things
(with) him, or whether thou have them and (not) him, and resolve never to take
pleasure in an outward portion, unless thou can enjoy Gods gracious presence
in Jesus Christ, Exodus 33.3.15.

Question 148. What Directions are there for a good carriage in adversity?

Answer. Therein

1 Be patient and silent, Lev. 10.3. Psalm. 39.10. and do not by walking
frowardly, charge God foolishly, Job 1. ult.

2 Be tender and considerate; do not despise and make light of Gods
corrections, but let them put thee into a study, Eccles. 7.14. Consider from
whom affliction comes, to wit, from God, that thou be patient, Psalm. 39.10.
From whence it comes, to wit, from sin, that thou may be penitent, Psalm.
32.5. For what purpose it comes (in regard of man) to wit, for reformation,
that thou may be converted, Isa. 27.9. Ezekiel. 18.30. And with what purpose it
comes (in regard of God) to wit, to do us good by it at the latter end, that
so thou may be comforted, Deuteronomy. 8.16.

3 Be hopeful and hearty ( Psalm. 42. ult.) not dismayed and weary, Prove. 3.11.
rather promise to thy self the best, Jer. 30.7. then prophecy the worst, 1 Samuel 27.1. Judges 13.22, 23.

4 Out of this hope be diligent in using all means of good, Ezra 10.2, 3, etc.
Joel 2.12, 13, 14.

5 In the use of the means be faithful, Psalm. 9.10. and for this purpose be so
wise, as to observe former experiments of Gods gracious deliverance of Pilgrims
and Prisoners, of sick men, and Sea men, and all men, others and thy self, that
so thou may understand the loving kindness of the Lord, so far as to see a
comfort in it, in regard of thy present sad condition, Psalm. 107.43.

Question 149. This may help for trouble in general, but what more special
directions are there for a good carriage in spiritual afflictions and
tentations?

Answer. 1 By no means slight just troubles of conscience, nor think to drink
down spiritual distresses. Conscience is a thing that may be ducked, but
cannot be drowned; give it leave therefore to speak out, and provide rather to
pacify it, then to stupifie it, Psalm. 4.4. 1 John 3.10.21. Hag. 1.5. Psa. 14.4.

2 Be troubled for nothing but out of a ground in Scripture, 1 John 3.4. Let
not thine own superstitious heart, let not Satan make thee sad, who loves to
make sad the souls of the righteous, but let God have the honor of all thy
joys and sorrows, by being glad or sad; and that thou may not err in this
point, never accuse thy self when faithful Ministers will not join with thee in
the accusation.

3 Reason not with the Tempte^. It is not safe for us to have to do with the
Devil by way of Treaty, but only by way of conflict ( James 4.7.) therefore
instead of reasoning with him, be careful of a threefold recourse.

1 To thy self, with repentance for any sin that may occasion thy trouble and
grief of soul, Genesis 42.21. Psalm. 51.3, 4, 5.

2 After thy repentance and washing, have recourse unto thy God, who is so
gracious as to say unto thee, when the Devil would feign reason with thee, Come
and let us (thou and me) reason together; in which reasoning if thou objectest
thy sins are as red as Scarlet and Crimson, his Answer is, I will make them as
white as snow, or as wool, Isa 1.18.

3 Have recourse to Jesus Christ, and to his intercession, that is ready to say
upon thy suing to him for rescue, The Lord rebuke thee O Satan, Zec. 3.2. And
if he say and pray so once, there is no doubt he shall be heard, John 11.42.

4 Omit not Religious duties upon the Opinion of unworthiness; for God
justifies the ungodly, Romans 4.5. and invites the unworthy, Revel. 3.17, 18.
Isa. 55.1. And it is the masterpiece of the Devils policy, to keep thee from
Gods company, that he may with the more ease corrupt and torment thee with his
own company and tentations.

5 Leave not by any means, the labors of thy Calling. A special help against
the Devil and bad company, is to take order to have no leisure to converse
either with the one or the other.

6 Rest thy hold of salvation upon Arguments, not upon sense and feeling; for
as no man's state is good because he thinks it to be so by presumption; so no
man's state is bad because he judges of it in tentation: Leave the matter
therefore to just proof, and judge accordingly, 2 Corinthians. 13.5.

Question 150. What Is the best means of comfort, and the most Catholic
Cordial in all Afflictions?

Answer. Labor to have peace with God by faith, and to have the assurance of
it by holiness, and that will be sure (as by strong Garrison) to preserve thy
heart and mind in all troublesome places and cases whatsoever; for how ^an he
possibly faint, who has God Allsufficient to be his friend, and who knows he
has him, by his walking uprightly before him? Phillip. 4.7.

(...).

Common BREACHES of the Commandments.
Question. FOr the better preventing of sin, and for a help to private
examination, show me briefly the most common breaches of every Commandment;
and first, tell me what those sins be whereby the first Commandment is
ordinarily broken.

Answer. In general this Commandment is broken, because we seldom consider
how our hearts stand affected toward God, nor think whether God have our
hearts or no; and so we never strive to give unto God the whole inner man, and
to cleave unto him with all our heart, as this Commandment requires, Deuteronomy.
6.4, 5.

Question. How is it broken more particularly?

Answer. By these four things especially.

1 By the want and by the contempt of that knowledge of God, Deuteronomy. 4.39. Jer.
4.22. that should make us cleave unto him, Isa. 43.10. appearing in the great
and general ignorance of common people, Isa. 28.9, 10. 1 Cor. 15.34.

2 By a want of the love of God, yea by a loving of pleasure and worldly profit
more then God, of which it appears we are guilty, because things of this world
carry us away from the Commandments and service of God, 2 Timothy 3.4. Phil.
3.19. Deuteronomy. 6.5, 6. Mat. 10.37. John 14.15.

3 By a want of trusting in God, showing it self in rebelling against God in
our lives, 2 Kings 18.20. in want of seeking to God in the time of our need, 2
Kings 1.2.6. and in using unlawful means to help our selves withal in the
time of our trouble, Isa. 30.37.

4 By a want of the fear of God appearing in our boldness in sinning, Numb.
15.30, 31. and in the presumptuous neglect of holy services, Mat. 22.5. Acts
24.25.

Question. What be the common breaches of the second Commandment?

Answer. In general all omissions and all neglect of that worship of God which
is required in his word, Psalm. 45.11.

Question. In what partioular things does this common neglect of Gods worship
amongst people show it self?

Answer. It shows it self especially in these four things.

1 In a careless neglect of the times and parts of Gods service, while people
do so ordinarily come unto it after it is begun, and go away from it before
it be ended, Acts 24.25.

2 In the ordinary neglect of Sermons by poor men upon the Sabbath day out of
infidelity, 1 Kings 12.27. thinking by the dispatch of some worldly business
to help themselves in their necessities; and by rich men upon other days, out
of covetousness and unwillingnesse to leave their worldly delights, Luke 14.19.

3 In neglecting extraordinary services, and being unnecessarily absent from
the Congregation, in the days of public Humiliation and Thanksgiving, Ezra
10.9. Esther 9.20 28, 31.

4 In that common neglect of public prayer in Families, which is the daily
morning and evening Sacrifice which is to be offered to God now in these times
of the Gospel, and which Gods Children have ever been careful of in former
times, Joshua 24.15. Acts 10.2. Acts 12.12. Esther 4.16. Mat. 18.20.

Question. But is there nothing that can be blamed in us, if these outward
services be performed by us?

Answer. Yes, we are much to be humbled for this, that though we perform the
outward service, yet we do not perform it with all our heart serving God (as
he requires) in spirit and in truth, and loving him, as well as keeping his
Commandments, Isa. 29.13. John 4.24. Romans 12.11, 12.

Question. Wherein does this heartlesnesse in Gods service ordinarily show it
self?

Answer. In deadness and heaviness of heart, whereby we are more inclined
unto sleep then service. Luke 22.45, 46.
And in distractions and wanderings of heart, while our thoughts do so run upon
worldly Ezekiel. 33.31. Romans 12.11, 12. Col. 4.2.
and vain matters, as that we very little mind the exercise that we are about,

Question. How is the third Commandment co^mmonly broken?

Answer. In general, by using unreverently the Titles, Word, and work of God,
whereby (as by a name) he has made himself known unto us.

Question. How does this more particularly show it self in the ordinary
practice of people?

Answer. That men do not fear an Oath, Eccles. 9.2. Jer. 2. Deuteronomy. 28.50.

Question. How does that appear?

Answer. 1 By men's common swearing in their ordinary talk; many being of this
mind, that they may swear safely (though it be never so ordinarily) so that
they swear truly, Mat. 5.34.

2 By swearing upon unwarrantable occasions, as when men anger us, or because
they be loath otherwise to believe us 1 Samuel 14.39. 2 Samuel 19.7.

3 By not fearing and forbearing those which people account lesser Oaths, and
which be grown unto common custom.

4 By the using of Popish Oaths, wherein men swear by Saints, or profane Oaths
wherein they swear by the Creatures, Jer. 57. Zeph. 1.5. Mat. 5.35, 36.

Question. How else is this Commandment broken?

Answer. It is broken ordinarily in these ensuing particulars.

1 In cursing and banning, 1 Samuel 17.4.44.

2 By using the name of God vainly, appearing in naming God in our prayers,
when our hearts do not think upon him; and in saying rashly and upon sudden
idle occasions, O Lord, O God, O Jesus, when we neither think upon our God, or
Lord, Savior.

3 By men's profane pleading upon Scripture points over their Plots, or taking
in phrases of Scripture to make up their jests, Psalm. 50.16. or to defend
themselves in their sins, as that, 1 Timothy 5 8. for coveteousnesse, Mark 1.24,
25, 34.

4 By resorting to Plays, and thereby countenancing those gross abuses that
be in them, both of Gods word, holy men, and holy things, all which abuses fall
in the end upon the great and glorious name of God himself Prove. 14.9. Jer.
11.15.

5 By Prayers for dead friends, wherein the name of God is idly and vainly
taken into our mouths, all confessing that those Prayers can do the dead no
good, nor in any sort alter the state wherein they are, Mat. 12.36.

6 By a loose life, either in Christians that live worse then Heathens, or in
professors that live worse then other Christians, since by both these we bring
disgrace upon that fearful name of God which we profess, Genesis 13.7. 2 Samuel
12.14.

Question. How is the fourth Commandment commonly broken?

Answer. In general, because people remember not a day, but think it enough if
they come to Church morning and evening, and so give the Lord some few hours
of a day, instead of a whole day.

Question. But in what else is there a general breach of this Commandment?

Answer. In this, that men do not make the Sabbath their delight Isa. 58.13.
Mal. 1.3. Amos 8.5.
but account the duties thereof a heavy burden, and long much to have the day
spent, that so they may return again to their worldly businesses,

Question. In what particulars is this Commandment ordinarily broken?

Answer. 1 In sleeping out the morning, and neglecting that due preparation
that should make us fit to perform the holy services of that day, Psalm. 92.2.
Eccles. 5.1.

2 In not resting that day, but toiling and troubling our selves (without any
true necessity) about worldly businesses, Deuteronomy. 5.13. Isa. 58.13.
or traveling either nearer or Exodus 16.29, 30.
farther off for our worldly advantage,

3 By taking no heed to the hearing of the word publicly (for which the Lords
day is appointed, Acts 7.20.) or catechizing privately (which on the Lords day
also is to be performed) the former of which appears in the ignorance of
householders, and the latter in the ignorance of those of their household.

4 By providing nothing for the poor, for whom Collections are to be made that
day, 1 Cor. 16.2.

5 In going out of the Church, and departing from the Assembly, before the
blessing be pronounced, 1 Cor. 14.16.

6 In not observing a holy rest unto the Lord the day throughout, but spending
a greater part of it either in sleeping, or in vain pastimes and recreations
that steal away the mind from heavenly things, Isa. 58.13.

7 In that people take very little care whether their Children or Servants keep
the Sabbath or no, which appears in that commonly they do either set them to
work, or suffer them to play, Josh. 24.15. Ex. 20.10. Acts 10.33. and 11.14.

Question. How is the fifth Commandment commonly broken?

Answer. In general, for want of giving freely to our betters, to our
brethren, and to those that be under us, that which of right belongs to them in
regard of their several places, Romans 13.7. 1 Pet. 2.17.

Question. What be the particular breaches of this Commandment, whereof men be
ordinarily guilty?

Answer. Men do ordinarily offend against this Commandment, in these
following particulars.

1 In that they do not observe themselves, 1 Pet. 2.13. and (as far as belongs
to them) cause to be observed, Tit. 3.1. the wholesome Laws of Magistrates,
especially such as are ordained for the beating down of sin, and the better
observing of the Laws of God, 1 Pet. 2.13. Tit. 3.1.

2 In that men (that be of any means) do commonly contemn meaner offices 1
Pet. 2.14. Romans 13.1. and cause them to be contemned (for want of aiding them
(when occasion requires) in the execution of their Office, Jude 2, 23, and 8,
5, 15, 16.

3 In the inferior Offices, do so execute their Office as to please their
neighbors, rather then glorify God, benefit their Country, or discharge
their Oath, Deuteronomy. 16, 18, 19, 20. Acts 12.3. and 24.

4 In that men regard not the Authority of Ministers in matters concerning
their souls, Heb. 13.17. nor do very highly esteem of them in love for the
works sake, 1 Thessalonians. 5.13.

5 In that husbands and wives set forward one another in their gainful sins, 1
Kings 21.7.25. Acts 5.2. hinder one another in godly exercises, 2 Samuel 6.16.20.
have many unkind quarrels one with another within their houses, Exodus 4.26. and
so become an evil example to their Children and charge.

6 In that Children when they be somewhat grown up, begin to be their fathers
fellows, Ephesians. 6.1. Luke 2.51. and their mothers masters, going any whether
they please without leave, Ruth 2.2. Pro. 1.8. and 3.2. Exodus 21.13. and
presume either to marry, or make themselves sure, without parents consent,
Judges 14.2. Ruth 3.5.

7 In that many servants be false and idle when they be trusted, sullen
especially when they be commanded to come to a Religious exercise, such as
answer again when they be rebuked, Tit. 2.10. Ephesians. 6.6. Tit. 2.9. They do
not please them well because they be sullen when they command some things, and
take stomach, and are ready to resist when they be corrected, 1 Pet. 2.18, 19,
20.

8 In that parents and householders take no care to catechize their Children and
Servants, Genesis 10.19. Pro. 22.6. Ephesians. 6.4. that they may get wisdom into
their souls, nor (with discretion, and with a calm spirit, to correct them,
that they may drive foolishnes out of their hearts, Pro. 22.15. and 23.13, 14.
and 19.18. Pro. 20.30.

9 In that householders provoke their Children and servants by their
unreasonable anger and hard usage, Ephesians. 6.4. Col. 4.1. 1 Samuel 20.30. and (in
particular) either cast off or care not for their sick servants, 1 Samuel 30.13.
Mat. 8.6.

Question. How is the sixth Commandment commonly broken?

Answer. In general by the common neglect of our own and our neighbors
preservation, and that anger, Mat. 5.22. envy, Pro. 14.30. malice, hatred, 1
John 3.15. and desire of revenge, Genesis 4.5. and 27.41. 1 Kings 19.2. James
3.14, 16. and 4.1, 2. These be killing lusts, that tend unto our own and
neighbors bodily hurt.

Question. What special sins be there by which this Commandment is commonly
broken?

Answer. 1 By that excessive worldly sorrow, Prove. 2.17.22. 1 Kings 21.4. 2 Samuel 25.37. 2 Cor. 7.10. and that distracting and dividing worldly care, Mat.
6.25. Luke 12.29. Eccles. 2.23. and 5.17. whereby many people hasten their ends.

2 By that ill carriage, Genesis 27.46. 2 Pet. 2.8. Psalm. 42.10. unjust, unkind,
or unmercifull dealing, whereby many do so grieve the souls of others that
they make them weary of their lives, and become guilty of their deaths.

3 By that malicious and scornful frowning, Genesis 4.6. nodding of the head,
writhing of the mouth, Psalm. 22.7.17. Pro. 6.13. laughing, girding, that
betoken a spightfull and murtherous mind, thirsting after the destruction or at
least the hurt of our brethren, Psalm. 22.7. and 35.16.

4 By those spightfull and wrathful words, Mat. 5.22. 1 Samuel 20.30. Lev.
19.14. those scornful and bitter jests and quips, 2 Samuel, 6.20. Mat. 27.46, 47.
2 Kings 2.23. which (like so many swords) pierce and wound those against whom
they are spoken, Psalm. 42.10. Prove. 12.18. Neh. 4.3, 4, 5.

5 By that crying and clamorous noise that malicemakes among chiding
neighbors, Ephesians. 4.31. and by those Challenges that pass between desperate
persons, 2 Samuel 2.14. 2 Kings 14.8.

6 By that quarrelling, striking, wounding, Exodus 21.8.22.26. Tit. 3.2. so
ordinarily amongst men, when they be either overtaken with drink, Prove. 23.29.
or overcome with anger, Genesis 4.23.

7 By desperate adventures for money, or credit, or out of a humor, without
any lawful Calling, Mat. 4.6. 2 Chronicles. 35.22.

8 In excessive labor, out of a covetous mind, Eccles. 4.8. or in surfeting,
drunkenness, Prove. 23.29. Adultery, Pro. 5.11. out of a carnal mind, whereby
men consume their bodies, and shorten their days.

9 By a careless neglect, in not mending Highways, covering and filling up
pits, keeping up Dogs and Cattle that endanger the lives of Passengers, Deuteronomy.
22.8. Exodus 21.29, 30.

Lastly, in not punishing quarrelsome persons, that endanger the lives of other
men, Lev. 24.19, 20. and in suffering the poor to perish for want of fit
provision, James 2.15. John 3.17. 1 Samuel 30.12, 13.

Question. How is the seventh Commandment commonly broken?

Answer. In general, by lust stirring in the heart, wherein (as Christ faith,
Mat. 5.28. the one is the fountain, the other the fuel of adultery) adultery
is committed, and that wanton carriage whereby the same sin is ordinarily
furthered, Prove. 7.11, 12, 13.

Question. But by what particular sins is this Commandment especially broken?

Answer. 1 By thinking of those persons or of those things that provoke to
lust, 2 Samuel 13.1. by that inward boiling of the heart that arises from such
provocations, 1 Cor. 7.9. 2 Samuel 11.3. and those filthy wishes which thereupon
follow, that we had that thing whereby our present lusts might be satisfied.

2 By that painting of the face, 2 Kings 9.30. and that apparelling and
pranking up of the body, Pro. 7.10. Some Attire is Harlots Attire, which (many
times) are the signs of a filthy mind in those that use them, and means of the
same mind in those that behold them.

3 By eyes and ears full of Adultery, 2 Pet. 2.14. looking upon those things,
2 Samuel 11.2. Genesis 34.2. Psalm. 119.37. Job 31.1. and harkening unto those words,
Genesis 39.10. that stir up, and draw on lust and uncleanness.

4 By that minsing, Isa. 3.16. dancing, Mark 6.22. dalliance, Pro. 7.13. those
lascivious casts of the countenance, and carriages of the body, Isa. 3.16. that
breed and feed adulteries and uncleanness.

5 By filthy and tempting speeches, which are nothing else but the breathings
of an unclean heart, whereby likewise the same uncleanness is begotten and
brought forth in others, Pro. 7.21. and 9.15. 1 Cor. 15.33. Ephesians. 5.3, 4,
Celat Scripturaras pudendas. Judges 3.24. 1 Samuel 1.19.

6 By that excess in meat and drink, Ezekiel. 16.49. Jer. 5.8. Pro 23.33. or that
dainty diet whereby many people pamper and provoke themselves to lust and
wantonness.

7 By looking after lascivious pictures, and provocations of lusts, as also by
running to Stage Plays, wherein adulteries be so fully and fowly acted, that
many that be present go away defiled and infected, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.

8 By that idleness, Ezekiel. 16.49. 2 Samuel 11.10. that pampers the body, and
gives the heart leisure to be all a fire with lust, as also by being in those
companies, Prove. 5.8. Genesis 39.10. 2 Samuel 13.10, 11. that ordinarily tempt
people to lust and wantonness.

9 By those foul sins, and heinous acts of fornication, adultery, yea, and
incest likewise, which now adays we do so ordinarily hear of, Deuteronomy. 22.22, 23,
28. Levit. 18.6.

10 By the unseasonable or immoderate use of the marriage bed, Heb. 13.4.
whereby diverse be adulterers, even with their own wives.

Question. How is the eighth Commandment commonly broken?

Answer. In general it is broken in this, that every man is ready to seek his
own and not another wealth, Phil. 2.4. yea, men are so far from that, that its
an ordinary thing with them to raise their own gain by their neighbors loss,
1 Thessalonians. 4.6. Amos 8.6.

Question. But in what more particular and special sins is it ordinarily
broken?

Answer. 1 In all covetous purposes of getting any thing into our possession
that we have no right unto, nor can well and truly come by, Mat. 15.19. 1 Timothy
6.9, 10. Joshua 7.21. 2 Kings 5.20. 1 Kings 21.1, 2.

2 By all false dealing, and blindfolding of the truth in bargaining, Ephesians.
4.25. Psalm. 15.2. by which the buyer concealeth the goodness, or the seller
the faults of any commodity, to his neighbors advantage, Mat. 7.12. Luke
19.18. Prove. 20.14.

3 In buying underfoot of such as sell for need Mat. 7.12. Lev. 25.14 in
deceiving simple people with a bad commodity, Amos 8.6. and others that have
more skill with false weights, Amos 8.5. Lev. 19.35. Prove. 11.1. Micah 6.11.

4 By not lending what we can spare upon just occasion, and in case of mercy,
Psalm. 10. Prove. 21.26. by not giving what we are able in case of charity, Isa.
58.7. James 2.16. and exacting unmercifully what is due unto us from them that
be no way able to pay us, Mat. 18.28. Luke 6.30.

5 When men deceive others, by borrowing upon fair promises and shows, what
they know they shall not be able to pay, Lev. 19.13. 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. Psalm. 15.4.
or deny a due debt because the Creditor cannot prove it, Lev. 19.13. Or when
they that confess the debt make no shift to pay it, Psalm. 37.21.

6 By withholding things that be due, Romans 13.7. By not restoring things that
be found, if we can hear of the right owner, Ex. 23.4. Deuteronomy. 22.1, 2, 3. or
denying what is given us to keep, Exodus 22.7. or what is laid to pl^dge, in
case it be the means of our neighbors living, Exodus 22.26, 27.

7. By unjust 1 Cor. 6.7. either commencing or prolonging of Suites, while a
man contends rather for malice then matter, and so by a privy theft robs his
brother, Lev. 19.35. 1 Kings 21.9, 10.

8 By getting any thing unjustly, Prove. 28.8. as by selling charms, and such
things as be vain and hurtful; by Gaming, when men are to get their living by
working, not by playing, Pro. 13.11. and more commonly by that ordinary usury
whereby one man eats out another, or it may he many others, Exodus 22.25. Ezekiel.
18.8.

9 By purloining and pilfering lesser matters, Exodus 22.1. or drawing on
company to any thievish courses, Prove. 1.11.

10 By stealing away men's daughters for marriage, which be the chiefest goods
they have, Deuteronomy. 24.7. and a part of their inheritance, Psalm. 127.3.

Question. But may not a man be a Thief to himself, and so be guilty of the
breach of this Commanmandement?

Answer. Yes diverse ways.

1 By idleness, and living without a Calling, whereby men bring themselves
unto, and keep themselves in penury and misery, 1 Cor. 7.20, 21. Genesis 4.2.
Prove. 23.21. and 20.4, 13. and 21.25. and 24.33, 34. 2 Thessalonians. 3.10, 11. Ephesians.
4.28.

2 By excess in eating, drinking, Prove. 23.21. Isa. 3.16. apparel, building,
furniture, all which be privy Thieves; and more especially, by the excessive
desire of purchasing Lands, or buying estates, whereby men grow so far in debt,
that either they undo themselves, or their posterity.

3 By unnecessary gifts, Isa. 30.6. either to get great men's favor, or to get
the good word of poor people that wander about, and have no honest Calling or
course of life, as also by costly sports and recreations, Prove. 21.17, 20.

4 By unnecessary Suretiship for such men as be not known and approved, whereby
so many men smart, Prove. 11.15. and 17.18.

5 When men pinch themsellves, and are thieves to their own backs and bellies,
by withholding from both things necessary, Eccles. 2.26. and 6.2.

Question. Wherein is the ninth Commandment commonly broken?

Answer. In general it is broken in regard of our neighbor, because men do
not in honor prefer one another, Romans 12.10. by a holy striving for the
setting up and maintaining of the good name and credit of our brethren; and in
regard of our selves, for want of procuring a good report by doing those things
that be true, lovely, and praise worthy, Phil. 4.8.

Question. In what particular things do men ordinarily offend against this
Commandment?

Answer. 1 In evil suspicions of others in our heart without good reason, 1 Timothy 6.4. 1 Samuel 2.13. 1 Cor. 13.5. and condemning others in our judgment
without just ground, Mat. 7.5. Acts 28.4. and 2.18. 1 Samuel 17.18.

2 In rejoicing at our neighbors infirmity, whereby he shames himself, 1 Cor.
13.6. Job 31.29. and in grieving at our neighbors prosperity, whereby he
raises himself and his good name, 1 Cor. 13.4. Neh. 2.10. both which are very
usual faults among them that be at odds one with another.

3 In raising or receiving false reports, and flying tales, whereby our
neighbor may be discredited, Lev. 19.16. Prove. 26.20, 22. and 25.23. and in
repeating of old faults whereby our neighbor has been formerly disgraced,
Pro. 17.9. 1 Pet. 4.8.

4 In not speaking in the cause, and for the credit of our neighbor, when his
name is called in question, and we may fitly stand out in his defense, Phil.
10, 11, 16. Prove. 31.8, 9.

5 In nodding with the head, pointing with the finger, or any other scornful
carriage made out of malice for the disgrace of our brethren Psa. 22.7. and
more especially in making jests or Songs upon them, Psalm. 35.16. Genesis 37.19.
Psalm. 69.12.

6 By bewraying secrets committed to us, to our brethrens disgrace, Prove.
12.13. and 25.9, 10. or making known private faults without just occasision,
and before brotherly admonition, Mat. 18.15, 16.

7 By false presentiments in Court, or bringing in false evidence (either for
malice or money) to our neighbors discredit, Lev. 19.15, 35. Deuteronomy. 19.16.
Prove. 19.5. Mat. 28.12, 15.

Question. But how may a man hear false witness in regard of himself, and so
become guilty of the breach of this Commandment?

Answer. 1 By thinking too highly of our selves, above that which is in us,
Luke 18.11. Gal. 6.3. Phil 2.3 or too meanly of our own gifts, and so
withdrawing our selves from that service which God requires of us, Exodus 4.10,
13. Jer. 1.7.

2 In cleansing our selves when we have done amiss, by dissembling and unjust
excuses, 2 Kings 2.25. 1 Samuel 15.15, 20, 30. Mat. 28.11, 12. and laboring to
free ourselves by lies from the shame of our evil courses.

3 By dissembling those things that be commendable in us, and dispraising our
selves of purpose to draw other men to commend us.

4 By showing our weakness, and discovering our simplenes before malicious and
carping adversaries.

5 By not laboring to procure our selves a good name by holy and wise courses,
but rather on the contrary discrediting our selves by evil and indiscreet
carriages, Pro. 22.1. Eccles. 10.2. 2 Samuel 12.14. Romans 2.23, 24.

Question. Wherein is the last Commandment ordinarily broken?

Answer. In general, by that pronenesse of nature which there is in every one
of us to sin against our neighbor, Psalm. 143.2. Gal. 5.17. And more especially
by those covetous thoughts which howsoever they be curbed in our selves, yet
are uncharitably carried upon that which is our neighbors, Romans 7.7.

Question. How is it broken yet more particularly?

Answer. 1 By being not fully contented with that estate which God by his
providence has given us, and which may by good means be gotten by us: For, the
root of coveting other men's portions, is the want of being content with our
own, 1 Timothy 6.8, 9. 1 Cor. 7.29, 30.

2 By those wild and worldly wishes whereby our hearts wander after that which
is our neighbors, or which it will be hurtful to our neighbors for us to
have, 2 Samuel 23.15, 17. though they never come to full and perfect desires,
James 1.14. Psalm. 4.6.

3 For want of mortifying and abating the power of our corrupt nature, and
worldly mind, which is the fountain of all those uncharitable motions and
stirrings that be in us, tending to our neighbors hurt, Col. 3.5. 1 Cor. 9.
ult.

Question. By this opening of the Law we see plainly how many sins there be
that require Humiliation; but because Master-corruptions are they for which we
ought especially to be humbled, show me in the next place how they may be
discerned?

Answer. A master sin may be discerned by these marks.

1 It is that which most haunts a man, and commands his heart most when he is
alone. Hence it is that when anger or lust is the master, there be many
chidings in a man's heart, and many filthy passages in a man's spirit, when no
body else is with him.

2 It is that which has most sins attending upon it; as if a man be given to
carking, to couzening, to cruel dealing, and worldly grief, it is a sign
covetousness is the master-sin, for all these wait upon it, 1 Timothy 6.9, 10.

3 It Is that which most troubles a man in good duies, as in prayer, hearing of
the word, keeping the Sabbath; as it is a sign he is a man's master, whom he
leaves his own work to follow, though it be to his disadvantage.

4 A master sin is that, which if a man be bad, he cannot endure that a
Minister should touch it; if he be good, he is most glad that any man or
Minister helps him with Armor against it.

5 A master sin is like that great Goliath, that seems to set at defiance the
whole Armor of Gods graces in us, and is of all other sins most hardly
overcome by us.

Question. What then must we do in days of Humiliation, with such master
corruptions?

Answer. We must resolve to War against them, we must choose out of the word of
God such weapons as are fittest for our purpose, and then we must fight in
faith; by this means we shall cut off the heads of those Goliah's, so that
though they be still rebelling in us, yet they shall never have dominion over
us, 2 Samuel 17.40, 45, 46. Romans 6.12, 14.

Certain Infallible Signs OR CHARACTERS OF A Sincere Heart.
1 Has been soundly humbled under the mighty hand of God, with 1 A particular
knowledge of sin Natural Actual.
2 An experimental apprehension of Divine vengeance.


2 Has had some special Promise pointed out, applied and printed in him from
the word preached, by the finger of the Spirit; that Promise among all shines
still as a Pearl in his eye, and is most precious to his soul. 1 By that he
was kept from sinking. 2 In that he stands. 3 In that Promise Christ came unto
him, and now dwells in him, whom he 1 Priseth infinitely. 2 Loves entirely. 3
Looks continually into his wounds for pardon and purging.



3 Has parted for ever from his beloved and bosom sin; it cost him much 1
Perplexity. 2 Peril. 3 Patience. 4 Pains. 5 Pain in the farewell and parting
with it.


He has cut off his right hand, and plucked out his right eye with this one
hand, and cast it from him too.

4 He carefully and continually searches himself, and goes down with light
into his heart.

5 He is jealous of his own heart, for it is deceitful; and fears it, for it is
desperate, and therefore goes not with it without a sword, the word; he will
not trust it in holiest practices, and most heavenly persuasions.

6 He doubts of none but of himself, suspects most his own graces, and the
witness of his own spirit, lest Satan shine like an Angel of light, and say
it is the testimony of Gods Spirit with ours.

7 He walks daily with God, humbly and heavenly, wishing that none saw his good
but God, and men his evil; he cares not if Christ loves him, how he appears.

8 He eats and drinks as if Christ sat at the Table; his bodily food is
sweetened and seasoned with some heavenly meditations, or holy discourses; his
speech is powdered with salt, he feeds not heartily, but rises hungry till
then.

9 He is verily afraid of indifferent things, and avoids all appearance of
evil.

10 He is careful of his Calling only in love to Gods Command, with fear of
the world.

11 He buys and sells not to gain, but to godliness, they are but poor
professors that live no better then they bargain, they trade as all, at the
best as most do; and is not this the broad way where many go? You shall know
a Christian as by his Church, so by his shop.

12 His days of Humiliation are his Holi-dayes; his delights are Christians,
Sabbaths, and society of Saints, not only public, but in private; he fears
many times he is not one, but desires ever, and is earnest to be one of the
excellent ones the secret ones and sincere ones.

13 He is open hearted and open handed to all; he can no more keep sin close,
then his Coin; he can give well, and lend as well as borrow, and can take as
well a reproof as a kind nesse; he is simple in evil, he cannot cover or
excuse it; in the Lords work he is careful and cleanly, and a good workman,
but in the Devils work he is a very bungler, he cannot bandsomely sin or excuse
it.

14 He is content to have his spiritual estate tried by any, not only by a
searching Minister in public, but by a private friend; he opens his heart
freely for others to ask, and gives Answer of his hope with meekness and fear.

15 His thoughts are bound in with a holy compass, and his words are not idle;
he speaks not to spend the time in impertinent, powerless, or discoverlesse
things, but to minister grace to men, glory to God, and to do good or receive
good; his life is a light, and leads and provokes to goods works.

16 He does not a good duty in grace, but he goes to the utmost of it; he aims
not at the Butt, but at the midst of the white; he is zealous in good works,
fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, pressing hard to the price of the high
Calling, perfecting holiness in fear.

17 He has heard no more then he practiceth, and prays not only in fear of
Gods Command, and his own conscience, but in love to have a communion with God
in Christ by the Spirit.

18 His ears are open to the whole word, he believes the threats and trembles,
he fears also the Promises lest he come short.

19 He has a respect to every Command, such a respect I say, as a man has to
his betters, his heart stands in awe to every Commandment.

20 He prays in the holy Ghost, his Petitions and intercessions are made by
the Spirit, and sent up with sighs by the intercession of Christ unto God the
father, the Spirit cries before he cries, he speaks not first, and then he
looks for the Spirit to quicken his words, but his words follow the Spirit with
much affection, fervency, faith and fear.

21 He has found out the Hell of his heart, and feels the flames of it in
secret self-love, hidden hypocrisy, horrible blasphemy, etc. and sometimes
pride, possessed with the whole damned Crew mentioned, 2 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, 5. and
elsewhere. In a word, he has found an emptiness, and an enmity to all good.

22 He sets his face against the body of sin, and every member of it; he seeks
and receives some power daily from Christ's Cross to crucify every lust, and
he watches the Sepulcher lest it rise again.

23 He daily desires the virtue of Christ's Resurrection, and he is risen and
walks in new obedience in holiness and heavenly mindedness.

24 He is ever poor in spirit, and is known 1 By his continual complaints. 2 B
importunate Prayers. 3 By uncessant pains for righteousness.


25 He is never found in his own, but if he can be in Christ's Righteousness,
all the rest is dung.

26 He ever forgets others sins, and his own graces, observes others graces and
his own sins.

27 He not only loves the Saints, but honors the excellent ones, and rejoices
at Gods glory, and at any good done by others, as done by himself.

28 He mourns in secret for his 1 Own sins. 2 Others. 3 For the dishonor of
God. 4 For the danger of the Gospel. 5 For the disgrace of Gods people.


29 He walks humbly with God, lying ever at his feet, looking up ar the Throne
of grace to the Lord in Jesus Christ.

30 He lives by faith, eats and drinks and sells and buys in Christ. In a
word, he will not receive any earthly Creature, a spiritual Cross, nor a
heavenly grace and blessing, but by the hand of Christ.

31 He looks for and longs and loves the appearing of Christ, he hastens his
coming. Amen, even so Lord Jesus come quickly, 2 Timothy 4.5. 2 Pet. 3.12. Rev.
22.28.

A Christian CATECHISM, Opening the first Principles and most fundamental
points of RELIGION, As they are expressed in the BELIEF.
Question. WHat is the Belief?

Answer. It is a profession of our Christian faith.

Question. Is it a Prayer?

Answer. No.

Question. How does a profession of faith differ from a Prayer?

Answer. Prayer is a speech directed to God, wherein we desire that something
may be given or forgiven us; but a profession of faith is a speech directed
usually to men, wherein we express to them what we do believe.

Question. Why does every one in particular say I believe? I believe.


Answer. Because every man must in particular know what he himself does
believe, and so be ready to declare what is his faith, upon which he groundeth
his hope of eternal life.

Question. What do you mean when when you say I believe in God? In God.


Answer. I mean that I know and am assured that God is such a one as he has in
his word declared himself to be, and that I do trust in him, Jer. 31.34. Isa.
26.4.

Question. What is that word of God wherein you say God has declared himself
unto us?

Answer. It is the holy Scriptures, Romans 1.2.

Question. How can the Scriptures be called the word of God, seeing they are
written by men?

Answer. Although holy men wrote the Scriptures, yet did not they write by
their own power, or in their own name, but by the power of the Spirit of God,
and in the name of God himself, and therefore what they wrote is to be
accounted the word of God himself, Hos. 8.12. 1 Pet. 1.20, 21. 2 Samuel 23.2.

Question What has God in the Scripture declared himself to be?

Answer. An eternal, most gracious, most wise, most just, unchangeable,
infinite and all glorious Majesty, from whom all things have their being, and
by whom all things are Governed and preserved, Isa. 43.10, 13. Jude 25. Exodus
34.6. Deuteronomy. 32.4. Number. 23.19.

Question. Who is God the father in whom you believe? The Father.


Answer. He is the first person of these three the Father Son and Holy Ghost,
who are the one and only God Eternal, 2 Chronicles. 6.18. Psalm. 119.91. Acts
17.28. 1 John 5.7.

Question. Why is the first person in the blessed Trinity called Father?

Answer. He is called so especially in respect of his only begotten Son Jesus
Christ our Lord, and secondarily in respect of all his Saints, who are adopted
to be his Children by grace in Jesus Christ, Jer. 20.17. Ephesians. 1.5.

Question. Why do you call God the father Almighty? Almighty.


Answer. Because he is abundantly sufficient to accomplish his will, so that he
can do whatsoever he will do, Psalm. 115.3.

Question. Whereby does the Almighty power of God appear?

Answer. It appears by this, Maker of Heaven and Earth.
that he is the Maker of Heaven and Earth.

Question. Why do you call God the Maker of heaven and earth?

Answer. Because God did at first make, and does still preserve the heaven and
earth, and all things that are in them, Jer. 42.5.

Question. Of what did God at first make the Heaven and Earth?

Answer. God created, that is, made the Heaven and Earth of nothing in the
beginning, and then brought them into that order wherein they now stand in six
days, Genesis 1.

Question. What did God do in the first day of the world?

Answer. He made the light, and divided it from the darkness, calling the
light day, and the darkness night, Genesis 1.3.

Question. What did God in the second day?

Answer. He made the firmament, and therewith he divided the waters, calling it
Heaven, Genesis 1.7, 9.

Question. What did God in the third day?

Answer. He made the dry Land, calling it Earth, and Seas, and all kinds of
Grass, and Herbs, and Trees, Genesis 1.9, 10, 11, 12.

Question. What did God in the fourth day?

Answer. He made the Son the Moon and the Stars, and placed them in the
Firmament of Heaven, that they might divide the day from the night, and be for
signs and seasons and days and years, Genesis 1.3, 5.

Question. What did God in the fifth day?

Answer. He made all such Creatures as live in the water, and all kind of
Fowls which fly about the earth, Genesis 1.20, 21, 22.

Question. What did God in the sixth day?

Answer. He made creeping things of the earth, and all Cattle and Beasts of the
Earth; and last of all, he made man, to whom he gave dominion over the Fish of
the Sea, Fowls of the air, and every living thing that moves upon the earth,
Genesis 1.24, 28.

Question. Whereof did the Lord God make man?

Answer. The Lord God made man of the dust of the earth, Genesis 2.7.

Question. Is there no part of man which was not made of the dust?

Answer. Yes, there is an immortal spirit in man which the Lord God breathed
into him after he had formed his body of the dust, Genesis 2.7. Eccles. 12.8.

Question. How many more did the Lord at first make?

Answer. He made only one, and that was Adam, the father of all mankind, Genesis
2.7.

Question. How was woman made?

Answer. The Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and whilst he
slept, the Lord God took out one rib of his, and made a woman of it, Genesis 2.21,
22.

Question. How many women did the Lord at first make?

Answer. He made only one and that was Evah, whom he gave to Adam for wife,
and so they two became the first Parents of all mankind, Genesis 2.22, 23.

Question. Were Adam and Evah our first parents created sinful and miserable,
as we are now?

Answer. No, the Lord God created them holy glorious and upright in his Image,
according to his likeness, Genesis 1.26, 27. Eccles. 7.3.

Question. How did they become then sinful and miserable?

Answer. By breaking the Commandment of their God.

Question. What Commandment was it that they brake?

Answer. That Commandment whereby the Lord forbad them to eat of the fruit of
the Tree of the knowledge of good and ill, which was in the midst of the Garden
of Eden wherein God put the man, Genesis 2.17.3.6.2.8.

Question. Seeing the Lord God created our first Parents holy and perfectly
able to fulfill his will, how became they so rebellious as to transgress his
Commandment?

Answer. The Devil by his subtilty deceived them, and so caused them to
transgress the Commandment of their God in eating the forbidden fruit, Genesis
3.1, 2, 3, 4.

Question. Was this sin of our first parents a small offense?

Question. No, it was a great and most grievous sin, and that in a threefold
respect.

1 Because it proceeded from the belief of the Devils lie, before and against
the known truth of God.

2 Because it proceeded from a causeless and wicked distrust of Gods goodness to
them as if he envying their happiness, had by his Commandments restrained them
from a principal means thereof.

3 Because it was a wilful act of disobedience, even against their Creators
revealed will.

Question. What effect wrought this disobedience in our first parents?

Answer. It made them subject unto death, and so to him who has the power of
death, which is the Devil, Romans 5.12. Genesis 2.17. Heb. 2.14.

Question. What death were our first parents subjected unto by sin?

Answer. They were subjected to a threefold death.

The first of sin.

The second corporal.

The third everlasting.

Question. How did our first parents disobedience make them subject to the
death of sin?

Answer. By depriving them of that righteousness wherein they were created,
making their hearts inclinable to all wickedness, and working darkness in
their understandings, perverseness in their wills, disorder in their
affections, readiness in all the members of their bodies to serve uncleanesse,
and so wholly subjecting them to the Dominion of sin and death. Genesis 6.5. and
21. Ephesians. 2.3.4.8. Pro. 1.24, 25. 1 Pet. 2.11. Rom 6.19. Ephesians. 2.5. Romans 6.17.

Question. What is that corporal death which sin brought upon our first
parents?

Answer. It is that death which is caused by the separation of the body from
the soul, when the body returns to the ground whence it was taken.

Q. What is that everlasting death which sin brought upon our first parents?

A. It is that death which is caused by the everlasting separation of the whole
man from the presence and glory of the Lord, which wicked and ungodly men shall
suffer in Hell fire, Rev. 20.6. Zech. 1.9.

Q. Did our first parents bring themselves only into this miserable estate by
their sin?

A. No, by this grievous offense of our first parents, they and all their
children to the world; end were made children of wrath subject to death, and
him who has the power of death, Romans 5. Ephesians. 2.32.

Q. How could the sin of our first parents make their posterity subject to so
much misery?

Answer. Very well, because they sinned not only as particular persons, but as
the root or fountain of mankind, and so their corruption flows from them with
their corrupt nature, unto all who by ordinary generation receive their nature
from them.

Question. Must all men then dye and perish everlastingly?

Answer. No, although Almighty God might in Justice condemn all men, yet he is
pleased in mercy to save some, Psa. 130.3.

Question. What means has God in mercy for the salvation of men?

Answer. He has given his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, that whosoever believes
in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life, John 3.16.

Question. Do you then believe in the Son of God?

Answer. Yes I believe in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord. And.


Question. What is it to believe in Jesus Christ?

Answer. It is from an inward evidence of heart concerning that unseen
salvation which is in him, to cleave unto him as the one and only author of
eternal salvation, Heb. 11.1. John 6.68, 69. Heb. 5.9.

Question. Why was the Son of God called Jesus? In Jesus.


Answer. Because he was to save his people from their sins, as the word Jesus
imports, which sign fieth a Savior, Mat. 1.21.

Question. Why was our Lord Jesus called Christ? Christ.


Answer. Because he was the great Messiah, or anointed one of the Lord, spoken
of of the Prophets, for so much the name Christ signifies (an anointed one)
imports, John 4.25. Dan. 9.25.

Question. Why was our Savior called the anointed one of the Lord?

Answer. Because those three great Offices, the Kingly, Priestly, and
Prophetical, to which men were by Gods appointment anointed, in their
perfection in him who was appointed by God to be the heavenly King or Governor
of his Church, the heavenly Prophet or instructor of his Church, and the
eternal Priest, who by one Offering of himself, perfected for ever them that
are sanctified, and ever appears in the true holy place (Heaven it self) to
make intercession for them, 1 Kings 1.39. Exodus 29.7. 1. Kings 29.16. Psalm.
2.6. Acts 7.27. Heb. 7.25. Heb. 10.14. Heb. 4.24.

Question. How was our Savior anointed to these Offices?

Answer. He was anointed with the Holy Ghost, and with power, Acts 10.38.

Question. What benefit has the Saints by these Offices of our Savior?

Answer. Much every way; for they need fear no spiritual enemy, who have such
a King to defend them; they may with boldness come to God, who have such a
Priest appearing in the presence of God for them, they may be sure of the
knowledge of God, who have such a Prophet to instruct them, 1 John 4.14. Luke
1.74, 75. Heb. 10.22. John 15.15.

Question. Seeing the Saints receive so great benefit by our Saviors Offices,
are there no duties which they owe to him in respect of them?

Answer. Yes, as he is their King, so they must obey him; as he is their
Priest, so they must rest upon his all sufficient Sacrifice, and intercession;
and as he is their Prophet, so they must attend unto him, that they may be
instructed by him, 2 Cor. 10.5. Heb. 10.19. Mat. 17.5.

Question. How does our Savior, being now in Heaven, execute his Kingly and
Prophetical Office in his Church on Earth?

Answer. By his holy Spirit and holy word, whereby he inwardly and outwardly
Governes his Church as a King, and instructs it as a Prophet, Romans 8.9. Psalm.
110.2. Ephesians. 3.5. Col. 3.16.

Question. Whose Son is our Savior Jesus Christ? His.


Answer. He is the Son of God the father Almighty, Mat. 3.17.

Question Has the Almighty any more Sons?

Answer. Only Son
No, Christ Jesus is his only Son, John 1.14.

Question. How then does the Scripture call all the Saints the Sons of God?

Answer. The Saints of God are his by his gracious adoption, but our Lord is
his only begotten Son by miraculous and unutterable Generation, Romans 8.15. John
1.14.

Question. Why is our Savior Jesus Christ called Lord? Our Lord.


Answer. He is called Lord both in regard of his Godhead, wherein he is one
Lord with the father, and the holy Ghost, and also in regard of the great
Lordship and power which is settled upon him by God the father, Mat. 28.10, 18.
Acts. 20.36.

Question. Who are they that may in a special manner call Christ Jesus our
Lord?

Answer. All the Saints of God who are translated out of the power of
darkness, into the spiritual Kingdom of Jesus Christ the dear Son of God,
and are therefore his subjects and servants, and so have him for their Lord,
Col. 1.15. Rev. 1.9.

Question. Was Jesus Christ our Lord ever in the world?

Answer. Yes, in the fulness of time appointed by his father, he came into
the world, Gal. 4.4.

Question. How came our Lord Jesus Christ into this world? Who was conceived


Answer. He was conceived of the Holy Ghost, and born into the world of the
virgin Mary, Luke 1.35.12.6, 7.

Question. Was our Savior conceived by the power or means of any man? Of the
holy Ghost.


Answer. No, the Holy Ghost without man conceived our Lord Jesus in the bowels
of his blessed mother, being still a pure virgin, Mat. 1.18. Isa. 7.14.

Question. Why then is Joseph the husband of Mary, in the Scripture called our
Lord Christ's father?

Answer. Because he was his mothers espoused husband, and so supposed to be his
father, though indeed he was not his true and natural father, Luke 3.23.

Question. What do you learn by knowing that our Lord Jesus was conceived by
the Holy Ghost?

Answer. I learn thereby two things.

1 That he was God.

2 That he was altogether without sin.

Question. How do you learn that Christ Jesus our Lord was God, by knowing
that he was conceived by the Holy Ghost?

Answer. Because I know that the Holy Ghost is God, and therefore that he who
was conceived of him was God, as he who is conceived of man is man, Luke 1.35.

Question. Was our Lord Jesus Christ God then?

Answer. Yes, he was eternally, and now is, and for ever shall be one with the
father and the holy Ghost, God blessed for evermore, Isa. 9.6. John 1.1. Romans
9.5.

Question. How do you learn that our Lord Jesus Christ was altogether without
sin, by knowing that he was conceived by the holy Ghost?

Answer. Because our Saviors conception of the Holy Ghost assures me that he
was perfectly sanctified in his conception by the Holy Ghost, and so made a
perfect holy one void of sin, Luke 1.35.

Question. Was our Savior then clean void of sin?

Answer. Yes, he was pure and spotless, separated from sinners, void of all
iniquity, and therefore fit to be a Priest to offer a sacrifice to be offered up
for our sins, Heb. 9.14.7.26. Heb. 9.26.

Question. What do you learn by knowing that our Lord Christ was born of the
virgin Mary? And born of the virgin Mary.


Answer. I learn thereby that he was man.

Question. How do you know that our Lord Christ was a man by knowing that he
was born of the virgin Mary?

Answer. Because I know that every one that is born of a woman does partake of
the nature of his mother, and so is man, Job 14.1.

Question. Was our Lord Christ a man then?

Answer. Yes he was a perfect man in all things like unto us, sin only
excepted, 1 Timothy 2.5. Heb. 2.14, 17.

Question. What do you learn by considering our Saviors conception of the
holy Ghost, and birth of the virgin Mary together?

Answer. I learn thereby that our Savior was and is perfect God, 1 Timothy 3.16.
God in the flesh.
and perfect man in one person.

Question. To what end came our Savior Jesus Christ into this world?

Answer. The main end of his coming into this world, was to suffer, and by his
suffering to satisfy for the sins of the world, Psa. 40.6, 7, 8.

Question. Did he undergo these sufferings which he came into the world to
endure?

Answer. Yes, Suffered under Pontius Pilate.
he suffered under Pontins Pilate.

Question. Who was Pontius Pilate.

Answer. He was a Roman Governor in Judea, in the days of our Savior Jesus
Christ.

Question. Why is our Savior said to have suffered under Pontius Pilate?

Answer. Both because he suffered in the time of his Government, and was by him
adjudged unto death, John 19.16.

Question. What manner of sufferings did our Savior endure?

Answer. He endured two kinds of sufferings, namely inward of soul, and
outward of body.

Question. What were the inward sufferings which he endured?

Answer. They were that exceeding sorrow, and amazing Agony of soul, which he
sustained before his death when his heart within him was even like melting wax,
Psalm. 14.22. Mat. 26.38. Luke 22.44. Mark 14.33.

Question. How was that exceeding sorrow and amazing agony of soul bred in him?

Answer. By the Lords wounding of him for our transgressions, bruising of him
for our iniquity, and laying upon him the chastisement of our peace that by his
stripes we may be healed, Isa. 53.5.

Question. Did the Lord then wound and bruise our Saviors soul, with such
sorrows and grifes, as we by our sins deserved?

Answer. Yes, he bare those our griefs and carried those our sorrows which we
deserved by our sins, though not in quality or continuance, yet in equality of
sorrows, and sufferings, Isa. 53.4, 10.

Question. Did our Savior then undergo sorrows and sufferings equal to
those which our sins deserved?

Answer. Yes, our Savior bare such sorrows, and sufferings of soul, as were
equivalent to those which our sins deserved, even such as no creature in Heaven
or earth could possibly have sustained.

Question. How can it be proved that the sorrows and sufferings of our Savior
were so great as you affirm?

Answer. This is proved,

1 Because our Savior (although his manhood was sustained in his sufferings by
the infinite and almighty power of his Godhead) complained notwithstanding
that his soul was oppressed with that ^orrow which lay upon it even unto
death, Mat. 26.38.

2 Because our Savior though he were of infinite power, yet needed the
ministry of an Angel to strengthen him in his agony, Luke 22.43.

3 Because our Savior in that agony, wherein he was before he was betrayed
into his enemies hands, was so strongly wrought upon by his sorrows and inward
sufferings, that it bred amazement in him, and drew strong cries from him, and
tears from his eyes, and drops of sweat like unto clots of blood from his whole
body, Mat. 14.33. Heb. 5.7. Luke 22.44.

4 Because the greatness of our Saviors sufferings on the Cross deprived him
of the present fence of his Fathers gracious presence with him, and supportance
of him in his sufferings: All which plainly testify the unexpressable sorrows
and inward sufferings of our blessed Savior, Mat. 27.46.

Question. What outward sufferings did our Savior endure?

Answer. He endured scornings, and scourgings, and death.

Question. How was our Savior put to death?

Answer. He was crucified, Was crucified.
and so he dyed, John 19.18.

Question. What do you mean when you say that he was crucified?

Answer. I mean that he was nailed unto the Cross, Acts 10.39.

Question. Was crucifying an ordinary kind of death among the Jews?

Answer. No, It was a shameful and most accursed kind of death, due only to
notorious wicked persons, Mat. 27.38.

Question. Why would our Savior die so shameful and an accursed kind of
death?

Answer. That he might bear our shame, and be made a curse for us, that so we
may be freed from the curse of sin and wrath of God through him, Gal. 3.13.

Question. Was our Saviors death altogether enforced by the torment which he
endured on the Cross?

Answer. No, it partly proceeded from his own will, for when he endured such
deadly torments as were inflicted on him, he then willingly gave up his Spirit
into the hands of his Father, and so he dyed, Dead.
John 10.17, 18. Luke 23.46.

Question. How could our Savior be crucified and dye, seeing he was truly God?

Answer. Because he was truly man also, and so suffered and dyed according to
the infirmity of his flesh, 1 Pet. 3.18.

Question. To what end did our Savior endure all these inward and outward
sufferings of which you have spoken?

Answer. That he might be an allsufficient propitiation for the sins of the
world, that so whosoever believes in him should receive remission of sins, and
be delivered from the wrath to come, 1 John 2.2. Acts 13.33, 39. 1 These. 1.10.

Question. How could our Savior being but one be an allsufficient propitiation
for the sins of the world?

Answer. Because he was the only begotten Son of God, God and man in one
person, and there was a person of more worth and value then the whole world, 1
John 1.14. 1 Pet. 1.19.

Question. What became of our Saviors body after his death?

Answer. It was taken down from the Cross and buried, And buried.
Acts 13.29.

Question. Who buried the body of our Savior?

Answer. Joseph of Arimethea a wise Counselor, and Nicodemus, after they had
imbalmed it with spices, buried it in a new Tomb, which Joseph had hewn out of
a rock for himself, John 19.38, 39.

Question. Was our Savior willing by these steps of his Crucifying death and
burial to be brought unto his grave?

Answer. He descended into hell.
Yes doubtless, for he was not merely by force brought, but he willingly
descended or went down into hell and overcame the power thereof, John 10.15.

Question. What was done to the body of our Savior after it was laid in the
grave?

Answer. It was sealed up fast into the Sepulcher and watched by Soldiers that
it might not be stolen away, Mat. 27.66.

Question. When our Savior was buried, was he for ever holden in the grave?

Answer. No, He roseagain from the dead.
he arose again from the dead.

Question. What do ye mean when you say, that He arose again from the dead?

Answer. I understand thereby that the body of our Savior was raised out of
the grave, and that by the joining again of his soul unto it, he became of a
dead a living man, Rev. 18.

Question. How long was it after our Saviors burial before he arose again?

Answer. He arose again from the dead the third day, Luke 24. The third day.


Question. By what power did our Savior rise from the dead?

Answer. By the power of his eternal Godhead, wherein he is one with the
Eather and the Holy Ghost, 1 Pet. 3.18.

Question. What testimonies have we to assure us of our Saviors resurrection?

Answer. We have the testimony of the Prophets, of Angels, of those many
witnesses who saw him, and spoke with him, and handled him after his
resurrection, and of those works of a truly living man which he did after he
was risen from the dead; Psalm. 16.10, 11. Luke 24.5, 6. Acts 13.22.

Question. How long continued our Savior upon the earth after his resurrection?

Answer. By the space of forty days, Acts 3.

Question. What became of our Savior after those days?

Answer. He ascended in to heaven.
He ascended into Heaven.

Question. What do you understand by these words, He ascended into Heaven?

Answer. I understand thereby that our Savior went up from the earth into
Heaven, where the glory and majesty of God does appear in the presence of his
holy Argells, Luke 24.51. Ephesians. 4.10. Mat. 18.10.

Question. Why did our Savior ascend into heaven?

Answer. That he might prepare a place of rest and glory for the children of
God, and appear in the presence of God to intercede for them to the end of the
world, John 14.2. Heb. 7.25. Heb. 9.24.

Question. Is our Savior then at this day in heaven?

Answer. And sits at the right hand of God the Father almighty.
Yes, there he sits at the right hand of God the Father almighty, Acts 1.34.

Question. What do you mean when you say that our Savior sits at the right
hand of God?

Answer. I understand thereby that Christ Jesus our Lord is in the Heaven
exalted to the highest degree of Heavenly glory and dignity, being made much
more powerful and excellent then men and Angels, Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22. 1 Pet.
3.22.

Question. Shall our Savior return from the heaven whether he is ascended?

Answer. Yes, From thence he shall come to judge.
from thence shall he come to judge both the quick and the dead, 2 Timothy 4.1.

Question. Whom do you undestand by quick and dead?

Answer. By the quick I understand all those who shall be living at the time of
the appearing or second coming of our Savior to Judgment, the quick and the
dead.
and by the dead all those who shall die before that day, 1 These. 4.15.

Question. Shall all then both dead and living be judged by our Savior at his
second appearing?

Answer. Yes, they shall appear before the judgment seat of Christ, and
receive from his mouth a most just and unresistable sentence of blessedness or
misery everlasting, Romans 14.10. 2 Cor. 5.16. Mat. 25.34, 35, 36.

Question. Do you believe only in the Father and his Son Jesus Christ?

Answer. No, I believe in the holy Ghost.
I believe also in the holy Ghost, Mat. 28.

Question. What do you mean when you say, I believe in the holy Ghost?

Answer. I mean that I do believe that there is a holy Ghost, who is one God
with the Father and the Son, in whom the children of God ought to trust,
because he abides in them to be their instructor, comforter, and sanctifier,
uniting them into the mystical body of Jesus Christ and making them parts of
the holy Catholic Church, 1 John 5.7. John 16.13. 1 John 2.27. John 14.16.
Romans 8.5. 1 Cor. 12.13.

Question. Has God an holy Catholic Curch?

Answer. Yes, The holy Catholic Church.
I believe the holy Catholic Church, Ephesians. 1.22.

Question. What do you mean when you say, I believe the holy Catholic Church?

Answer. I mean that I do believe that there is an holy congregation of men
women and children in all ages, and out of all quarters of the world, by Gods
special grace according to his eternal purpose from the midst, and miserable
estate of wicked men, to be Gods peculiar people on earth, and the inheritance
of his kingdom in Heaven, Heb. 12.23. 1 Pet. 3.7. 1 Cor. 7.14. Heb. 11. Isa.
60.4. Gal. 1.15. Romans 8.28. 1 Pet. 2.9. 1 These. 2.12.

Question. What is the meaning of the word, Church?

Answer. A Church is as much as a Congregation called out from among others,
Acts 15.14.

Question. What is the meaning of the word, Catholic?

Answer. Catholic signifies as much as universal or general.

Question. Do you believe that Gods Church is universal or general?

Answer. Yes, I believe that the Congregation or assembly of Gods Saints, which
is called his Church, is generally called in all times and out of all places in
the earth.

Question. How does God call men into his Church?

Answer. God calls men into his Church after a twofold way or manner.

1 Ordinarily, when he does at once speak unto their ears by his Spirit,
moving them by faith to receive the word, Acts 16.14.

2 Extraordinarily, when he does without the means or ministry of the word,
work powerfully by his Spirit upon the hearts of men, inlightning and
sanctifying them, Acts 9.6.

Question. May a man who neglects the call of God in his work, warrantably
expect to be called of God by his Spirit?

Answer. No, in no wise, because it is most just with God to deny those his
extraordinary calling who most wickedly contemn the blessed call of his holy
word, Prove. 1.24, 25, 26, 27.

Question. Why is the Catholic Church called holy?

Answer. Because the Catholic Church consists only of such as are holy, to
whom alone belongs the kingdom of God, Acts 20.32.

Question. What good do men receive by being members of this holy Church?

Answer. They are thereby made partakers of the communion of Saints, the
forgiveness of sins, and the resurrection of the body unto life everlasting,
Acts 2 47.

Question. What do you understand by the communion of Saints?

Answer. I understand thereby that especial, joyful, and heavenly fellowship
which the Saints have with God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ, The
communion of Saints.
and one with another, 1 John 1.3.

Question. Have the Saints an especial communion above others with God the
Father?

Answer. Yes, they have so blessed a communion with him that he is not ashamed
to be called their God, and to acknowledge them to be his people: To be called
their Father, and to acknowledge them to be his children, Heb. 11.16. 2 Cor.
6.16, 18.

Question. Have the Saints a special communion with our Lord Jesus Christ?

Answer. Yes, for he is their head, husband, redeemer, Lord, and advocate, and
they are his members, his spouse, his redeemed, his subjects, and those for
whom he prays unto his Father, Ephesians. 1.22. John 19.25. Phil. 4.23. 1 John 2.1.
1 Cor. 12.27. Psalm. 45.13, 14. Rev. 5.9. Heb. 7.25. Col. 1.5.

Question. Have the Saints an especial fellowship among themselves?

Answer. Yes, for they are fellow citizens, fellow servants, fellow brethren,
and fellow members, which joyful communion works in them brotherly love, a
compassionate consideration of another estate, mutual prayers, and a
merciful relief of another necessities whether worldly or spiritual, Ephesians.
2.19. 1 Pet. 2.17. Romans 12.5. Heb. 13.1. Romans 12.15. 1 Cor. 12.26. James 5.16.
2 Cor. 9. Heb. 10.24.

Question. How is this joyful communion of Saints wrought, which they have
with God the Father, with our Lord Jesus Christ, and among themselves?

Answer. It is wrought by the communion of the holy Ghost, who being one with
the Father and his Son Jesus Christ, is one also in all the Saints, and so
joyneth them together in this heavenly and spiritual fellowship, 2 Cor. 13.13.
2 John 5.7. 1 Cor. 12.13.

Question. Are no wicked men of this fellowship?

Answer. No, this is only the communion of Saints.

Question. How can you believe that the Saints shall ever be admitted into the
fellowship with God and Christ, seeing the best of them are guilty of many sins?

Answer. Because I believe the forgiveness of sins. The forgiveness of sins.


Question. What mean you when you say I believe the forgiveness of sins?

Answer. I mean that I do believe, that the Lord God neither does nor will
deal with all men in the strictness of his Justice, remembering and taking
vengeance on their sins; but that he does and will in his abundant mercy in
Jesus Christ, forgive the sins of those his people which believe on the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, Psalm. 30.3, 4. Dan. 9.9. Psalm 103.10. Luke 24.47.

Question. What is sin?

Answer. It Is the transgression of the Law, Gods revealed will, either in
thought word or deed, by doing what he forbids, or not doing what he
commands, 1 John 3.4. Acts 8.22. James 3.2. Ephesians. 4.9. James 2.11.3.17.

Question. What is the forgiveness of sins?

Answer. It is the Lords acquitting of a man from the guilt and punishment of
his sins in Jesus Christ, Romans 8.33, 34. Isa. 53.5. Ephesians. 1.7.

Question. Is forgiveness of sins only to be had in Jesus Christ?

Answer. Yes, he alone has born our sins, and the punishment due to them, and
therefore in him alone we are and can be justified from all our sins, and freed
from the punishment of them, and so brought to receive the forgiveness of
sins, Isa. 53.10. Acts 13.38.39.

Question. Who are they that receive forgiveness of sins in Jesus Christ?

Answer. All those who confessing and forsaking their sins, rest by faith on
our Saviors allsufficient Sacrifice, the blessed means appointed by God for
the purging of us from all our sins, Prove. 28.18. 1 John 1.9. Romans 3.25. Heb.
9.12.26.

Question. When do those who believe in Jesus Christ receive the forgiveness
of their sins?

Answer. They receive forgiveness of their sins so soon as they truly believe
in Jesus Christ; the which forgiveness of sins is continually applied unto
them by the continuance of their faith; but they receive the full effect and
benefit of the forgiveness of their sins at the appearing of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, Acts 13.39. Heb. 10.38, 39. Acts 3.19.

Question. Do those who believe in Christ Jesus barely receive forgiveness of
sins in him?

Answer. No, when as any one by faith partaketh of the forgiveness of his sins
in Jesus Christ, then is he also accepted of God for righteous in him, who is
made unto him of God righteousness, Phil. 3.9. 1 Cor. 1.30.

Question. Do the faithful Children of God after their death reap any benefit
of the forgiveness of their sins, and of their acceptance with God?

Answer. Yes, for their spirits are immediately after their death, received
into bliss by our Savior Jesus, and their bodies shall be perfectly glorified
with him at his appearing, Luke 23.43. Heb. 12.23. Col. 3.4.

Question. How can you be assured that the bodies of believing Saints shall be
perfected in glory at our Saviors appearing, seeing their bodies after their
death are consumed in the earth?

Answer. Because I believe the resurrection of the body. The Resurrection of
the body.


Question. What mean you when you say I believe the resurrection of the body?

Answer. I mean that I am assured that the bodies of all such men and women and
Children as have dyed or shall dye before the last day, shall rise again out of
the dust of the earth, and by the union of their souls unto them, shall be made
to live again, 1 Cor. 15.

Question. What is it that works this assurance in you?

Answer. This assurance of the resurrection is wrought me

1 By the word of God, wherein it is plainly testified, Isa. 26.19. Dan. 12.2.

2 By the consideration of Gods power whereby it shall be effected, Rev. 20.12.
Mat. 12.19.

3 By the belief of our Saviors resurrection, whereby it is sealed and
confirmed, 1 Cor. 15.12.16.

Question. Do you believe that the same bodies which dye shall rise again and
live?

Answer. Yes, I assure my self that God will not give new bodies, but at the
resurrection will restore the very same bodies to the Children of men which
they formerly lived in. Job 19.26, 27. 1 Cor. 6.15.

Question. Shall the bodies of the Children of men at the resurrection be of
the same condition that now they are of?

Answer. No, for the bodies of men which are now subject to death shall after
the resurrection be no more subject thereto; and the bodies of Saints which are
now weak and vile, shall in the resurrection be made conformable to the
glorious body of our Lord Jesus Christ, being freed from all those infirmities
which do now accompany flesh and blood, Luke 20.36. 2 Cor. 15 42, 43, 44.
Phil. 3.20.

Question. When shall this resurrection of the body be?

A. At the last day, when our Lord Jesus Christ shall come to judge the quick
and the dead.

Q. What shall become of the Saints after the resurrection? The life
everlasting.


A. They shall be put into the possession of life everlasting.

Q. What do you understand by life, by the life everlasting?

A. I do understand thereby a glorious estate of heavenly and perfect
blessedness, wherein the Saints shall live for ever, Jo^ 7.22. and 3.2. 1 Th.
4.17.

Q Shall none of the wicked partake of everlasting life?

A. No, all unrepentant wicked men shall after their resurrection be for ever,
but because their being shall be in misery, it is therefore called a death, not
a life, Mat. 25.46. Rev. 20.5.

Q. Are not the spirits of Gods Children before the day of judgment made
partakers of everlasting life?

A. The spirits of Gods children immediately after they be severed from the
body, are admitted into heavenly blessedness in the presence of the Lord, but in
proper speech they cannot be said to partake of everlasting life which in the
Scripture signifies that perfect happiness which the Saints shall in their
persons receive after they be raised from the dead, Phil. 1.23. Rev. 6.11. Mat.
25.46.

Q. Where shall the Saints of God live that life everlasting which they shall
partake of after the resurrection?

A. The Saints of God shall be made partakers of everlasting life in those
heavenly places where our Savior now sits at the right hand of God, 1 John
1.3. Ephesians. 2.6.

Q. May no man then look to enjoy ever lasting life upon the earth?

A. No, the dearest Saint of God upon this earth lives to d^e, and shall never
live for ever until they be after the resurrection put into the possession of
their abiding City where they shall be freed from all the sorrows, sicknesses,
afflictions, and griefs of this present life, and shall inherit perfect joys
and happiness in the presence of the Lord for ever, Heb. 9.27. Heb. 13.14.
Rev. 21.4. Ps. 16.1.

Rules for a Christian way.
1 That Is the narrow way that is and has been (of old) set down in Scripture.
The way must be made no narrower nor broader then the word of God makes it, he
only is to appoint the way that brings us to the journeyes end, John 5.39.

2 In that way we must walk, without turning either to the left hand by
profaneness, or to the right hand by superstition, Deuteronomy. 5.32, 33.

3 That we may so do, we must continually take heed to our ways, according to
the word of God ( Psalm. 119.9.) and (withal) pray earnestly that we may not
wander, Psalm. 119.10. but may hear a voice behind us, saying, This is the way,
walk in it, Isa. 30.21.

4 We must turn into this way as soon as we can, and be (timely) good, that we
may be (greatly) good, 1 Kings 18.3.12. and when we be once come in, we must
never go out, Ezekiel. 18.24. Prove. 1.32.

5 The special time and season of coming in, is when God sends Ministers to
make known his word unto us. The sending forth of a faithful Ministry, is a
not suffering of us to walk in our own ways ( Acts 14.16. and 17.30.) if
therefore thou walk in them (afterward) thou do it whether God will or
no, Mat. 23.37. and shall accordingly suffer for it, Psalm. 18.26.

6 In this narrow way there must be a continual proceeding and going forward,
the path of the just being not as the morning cloud that vanishes at the first
heat ( Hos. 6.4.) but as the morning light that shines more and more unto the
perfect day, Proverbs 4.18.

7 The paths of wisdom are (indeed) paths of pleasantness ( Prove. 3.17.) and
the longer we walk in this way the easier we shall find it ( Acts 26.29.) it
being made easy to us, both by grace, enabling us to walk acceptably ( Ezekiel.
36.27.) and by faith flying to Christ, because we cannot walk perfectly (1 John
5.4.) and by use, whereby the yoke (more cumbersome at first) comes to be born
more quietly and contentedly at last ( Mat. 11.29, 30.) it will be our ease
(therefore) if we make it our exercise, to keep a good conscience toward God
and man, Acts 24.16. Psalm. 25.12, 13.

8 This is the difference between good and bad men, that the one comfort
themselves with their state and condition ( Luke 12.19.) the other with their
way and carriage, 2 Cor. 1.12. 2 Kings 20.3.

9 However Gods way be every where spoken against, yet the singular comfort of
it is felt by faith all the while we walk in it, Mark 10.30 (and then most when
we have least of all outward comforts, 1 Samuel 30.6. Heb. 10.34. Genesis 39.21.
Acts 23.1. Job 13.15, 16. and 27.5, 6.) but then shall this comfort be
perfectly felt, and perpetually enjoyed when we come to our journeys end, and
even to that glory, honor, immortality, and eternal life, which they shall be
possessed of who patiently continue in well-doing, Romans 2.7.

10 Then shall they that say (ye) fools, now meaning such as walk
circumspectly, Ephesians. 5.15. say feelingly and full sorrowfully (we) fools,
meaning themselves, while they see clearly (and when it is too late to help it)
their own everlastingly cursed condition, and the happy estate of those that
have been careful of a holy conversation, Wisd. 5.4. Mal. 3.18.

RULES FOR THE Christian-Day, OR The Sabbath Day OF THE New Testament.
1 SEt in order thy affairs the day before the Sabbath, and thy affections in
order upon the morning of the Sabbath; the former prevents (upon the Lords day)
worldly works, and the later distracting thoughts.

2 The heart being purged and prepared, there arises from thence a great
difference between Sabbath and weekly services. He that hears a Sermon on the
week day, leaves the world, but upon the Sabbath a man takes leave of the
world, that is, he sequesters himself even wholly from it, and by meditation
and prayer fills his heart with contrary, that is, with heavenly things; hence
while he hears the word he is much more affected with it, because the heart is
clear from the world, and carried heaven, and finds (after) a greater effect of
it, as fruit is much more and better in well prepared ground.

3 The principal duty of the Lords day, is repairing to the Lords house, to
the Assembly and Ordinances of God morning and evening ( Acts 20.7.11.) there
being therein

1 A public profession, that we are the people of the Lord Jesus, while we
leave all things, one day in seven, that we may attend him; and

2 A filling of our Cystern from God the Fountain (that is) a replenishing of
our heads and hearts with those heavenly things whereby we shall be furnished
and supplied for future time, and in special, all the week after, for a holy
walking in the narrow way, the general rule of hearing being to hear for
afterward, Isa. 42.23.

4 But as the day is not, so neither are the duties thereof ended, when the
public meeting is dissolved, but in private also, it is meet that we should be
mindful of

1 Heavenly Meditations. Upon the Lords day we should be in the Spirit, Rev.
1.10. in a spiritual temper, possessed and taken up with spiritual thoughts,
that the speeches and actions proceeding from us that day may be in a special
degree the breathings and Creatures of the Spirit of God.

2 Christian and ghostly communications, tending to the spiritual advantage of
our selves and those with whom we converse, Acts 20.11. Christians are to
edify one another. Ordinary builders are to build other days, they build and
are built up most on the Lords day.

3 Works of charity, as visiting the sick, administering to, laying up for the
necessities of those that be in distress, 1 Cor. 16.2.

5 Much ado there is about a Sabbath day, and Sabbath duties, and they that
account fellowship with God a heavy burden, are glad they have this to say,
that learned men differ; that so they may better take leave to do what they
list, and be far from God, without the condemnation of men; but they that love
that life that we shall lead in heaven, will be glad to live with God one day
in a week here (at least in some degree) as they look to live with him every
day hereafter.

RULES FOR A Christian Carriage EVERY DAY.
1 A Wake with God, giving him thanks in thy first thoughts, for the rest of
the night, and craving his presence for the occasions of the day. Parents look
their Children should do their duty to them in the morning when they see them
first; so when we are first awakened, and look up, God (that is ever before us,
and whom whenever our eyes be open, we should think we see) ought to be
reverently and dutifully acknowledged.

2 If there be much business, let not prayer be omitted, that the business may
be dispatched (that is, as if a man having a long journey to go, should hasten
out a foot, and not stay to make ready his Horse, for it is God that must carry
us along in all our businesses) but rise the sooner, that the duty of prayer
may first be performed rather out of sleep, then put off prayer, Mark 1.35. for
all prosperity comes from this, I am with thee, Genesis 39.5. And how shall God be
obtained, if he be not sought? Luke 11.9.

3 Betake thy self to thy private prayers before thou enter upon the world, for
thy heart will hardly be with God wholly and fully, if thy worldly occasions
have taken possession of it formerly.

4 Let Family exercises be performed, either the first time thou can take, or
the fittest time thou can choose.

5 As for worldly employment.

1 See thou have a Calling, it being not enough that thou be about some work,
or some good work, but this also being required, that thou be about (that) good
work which God commits to thee to do, ( John 17.4.) for God gives to every
servant of his (his) work, Mark 13.34.

2 Thy works and occasions being such as thou art called to. Be about them 1
diligently; a good Christian should not be a bad husband ( Prove. 27.23. Ephesians.
4.28. 2 Justly and conscionably; A good husband should not be a bad Christian,
nor any way defraud or overreach his brother, 1 These. 4.6. 3 Discreetly, for
he that handles a matter wisely shall find good, Prove. 16.20. Eccles. 9.10. 4
Faithfully, and with a dependence upon God, notwithstanding all thy wit and
care; for he that trusts in the Lord happy is he, Prove. 16.20.

6. When thou art alone, hate vain thoughts, Psalm. 119.113. when thou art in
company let thy communication be such as if Jesus Christ were at thy heels
ready to overtake thee and to ask what communications are these that ye have
one with another while ye wake together? Luke 24.17. and whether thou be alone
or in company, let thy carriage be ordered with such respect unto that God in
whose presence thou art, that thy tongue and thy doings may not be against him
to provoke the eyes of his glory ( Isa. 3.8.) Generally, be such in company as
that thou may with comfort remember thy carriage when thou art alone; and
such alone as that thou may with credit declare thy carriage when thou art
in company.

7 Take a view at night of the passages of the day (which would best be done by
putting them down in writing) particularly in that view consider thy dealing
and Gods dealing.

1 Thy dealing and in what.

1 Thy sins, and any evil thou have done; as careful men write down every
debt that they may mind it and pay it, so do tender Christians take notice, and
(rather then fail) a note of their sins, that they may not be out of their
remembrance, and that they may take the next opportunity for repentance,
wherein be thou so far from deferring, as to resolve for every evil of the day
that upon the review smites thy heart and clogs thy conscience, to judge thy
self before thou sleep, that if thou should never awake till the day of
Judgment, yet at that day thou may not be condemned of the Lord, thou
having (before hand) judged and condemned thy self, 1 Cor. 11.31.

2 Thy good deeds; for as thou art to recount thy sin because thou art a debtor
(in) it, so any good deed, because thou art a debtor (for) it, and God without
whom thou can do nothing ( John 15.5.) should not want the due praise of thy
well doing: Howbeit it is fit also that thou should observe that good that is
in thee, that thou may not want the comfort of it, but may support thy
self with it, when thy heart is sad with sin and vert with Satan.

2 Gods dealing: what God by his providence reproves in thee one day rush not
upon it the next, and in that which thou find God according to his word to
countenance, be thou constant; let the aff^ictions of the day make thee more
careful and fearful of sin, and the mercies more cheerful and forward in
service.

COUNSEL FOR A Christian Carriage.
TAsk thy self in business. Stint thy self in pleasure. Take heed that these
two never meet together, A loose life and a light heart; but when the carriage
is loose, let the heart be laden.

When thou differest from others in thy education, see that thou differ from
them in thy conversation; that being so much holier then they, as thy education
has been better.

The mind is the guide of the tongue, therefore consider before thou speak: The
tongue is the messenger of the heart, therefore as often as thou speakst without
meditation going before, so often the messenger runs without errand.

Let not pleasure steal away the mind from business, but let business win and
wean the mind from pleasure.

After good education take heed of the first errors, lest the virginity and
tenderness of conscience being taken away, it grow bold and impudent in evil.

FINIS.
A Table of the chief Heads handled in the foregoing Tract.
WOrks of the Devil, p. 21 Pride, 23 Anger, Envy, Malice, 24 Anger, 25 Filthy
and unclean thoughts, 26 Swearing and cursing, 28 Helps against swearing and
cursing, 30 Lying a work of the Devil, 34 In what cases lying is to be watched
against especially, 36 Helps against the works of the Devil, 38 Opposing the
truth of God a work of the Devil, 40 Opposing the children of God a work of
the Devil, 42 General helps to free men from the works of the Devil, 44
Pomps and vanities of the world, 46 Helps against them, 48 The sinful lusts of
the flesh, 50 Reasons of forsaking the works of the flesh, 52 In what manner we
must forsake the Devil, the world, and the flesh, 54 Of the Christian faith,
56 What it is to believe the Articles of Christian faith, 58 Helps for the
applying Christ to our own souls, 62 The use of our believing the Articles of
the Christian faith, 64 What Gods will is, and what to keep it, 66 What to keep
Gods will and commandment, 68 The use of Gods word, etc. and how it must be
heard, 70 The manner of the right receiving of the Lords Supper, 72 The manner
how to pray and to fast aright, 74 Vowing, 78 Rules for vowing, 79 The duty of
simpathising, 82 Rules for Edifying, 84 Alms giving, 85 Alms giving, and
mourning for the sins of the times, 86 Helps to mourn for the Sins of the
times, 88 Of the Sabbath and morality thereof, 90 Of the Sabbath, and the
duties thereof, 94 Helps for sanctifying the Sabbath, 96 Christian duties to be
done in the week days, 100 Rules of Resolution concerning 6 days Sermons, 102
Opportunities of hearing discovered by conscience, 104 Opportunities of hearing
discovered by providence, 106 Of reading and Christan conference, 108 Of
christian conference and daily payer, 110 Of prayer in the family, 112 Helps to
establish a course of family prayer, 114 Every one must have a calling, 118
What calling to choose, 121 Whether a man may change his calling, 122 How to be
conversant about a man's calling, 124 Recreation allowed, and how far, 126 Rules
for Recreation, 128 Of playing for money, 130 Of our carriage alone, 134 Helps
against vile thoughts, when we be alone, 136 How to take care of our carriage
in company, 138 Rules for company, 140 Duties to Superiors, 142 Duties to
superiors and inferiors, 144 Of our carriage toward equals, 146 Of our
carriage toward friends, 148 Of our carriage toward enemies and strangers, 150
Rules for our carriage in regard of our selves, 152 Rules concerning meats and
drinks, 154 Whether lawful to drink healths, 156 Rules for apparel, 160 Of
fashions of attire, 162 Against pride and vanity in apparel, 164 Rules for a
good carriage in prosperity, 168 Rules for a good carrage in adversity, 172
Directions for a good carriage in spiritual afflictions, 174 Helps for our
carriage in temptations, 176 A comfort in all afflictions, 178 Common breaches
of the 1 Commandment, 180 Common breaches of the 2 Com. 182 Common breaches of
the 3 Com. 186 Common breaches of the 4 Com. 188 Common breaches of the 5 Com.
192 Common breaches of the 6 Com. 198 Common breaches of the 7 Com. 202 Common
breaches of the 8 Com. 206 Common breaches of the 9 Com. 212 Common breaches of
the last Com. 217 Infallible signs of a sincere heart, 223 The first
principles and most fundamental points of Religion opened, 234 Rules for a
Christian way, 299 Rules for the Sabbath Day, 305 Rules for a christian
carriage every day, 310 Counsel for a christian carriage, 317.
FINIS.

