DAVID'S THREE MIGHTIES: OR SOVEREIGNTIES THREE CHAMPIONS: Being the three prime
Reformers of the Protestant Religion, Luther, Calvin, Tindal.

Faithfully cited, and affectionately presented to all the misled People of
England, for their instruction and direction, how to deport themselves in the
unhappy division betwixt the King and them.

That yet at the last by the light of these three Glorious Professors of the
Gospel, they may the better discern both their own errors, and the impostures
of their false Teachers.

Other Renowned Worthies since the Reformation have done honorably in the
defense of Sovereignty, Howbeit they attained not unto the first three, 2 Samuel
23. v. 18.23. OXFORD. Printed by Leonard Lychfield, Printer to the University,
1643.

To the Seduced People of England.
When the Princes and people of Judah, hurried with their sins, and driven
on by their false Prophets, were in the ready way to utter ruin, the Lord
called unto them by his Prophet to make a stand, and look about them, advising
them for their safety and quiet in the midst of their distempers, to ask for
the old paths, where the good way was, and to walk therein, and so they should
find rest to their souls, Ierem. 6. To tell you, that the Princes and People
of this Nation, too many of them at least, are in the like dangerous condition,
upon the like cause, and by the like instruments, were to tell you, not what
you dream, but what this whole Nation feels and groans under; and therefore to
call upon you to use the like means for your deliverance and presevation,
cannot but be a likely way of doing you much good, if you have but so much
grace as to hearken thereunto. But as it was Judah's grand error, if not the
complement of her iniquity, to refuse to walk in the ancient paths, and in the
way whereunto the Prophets invited them, and to choose rather to walk in [new]
paths, in a way not cast up [wherein their lying prophets had misled them]
Ierem. 6.16. and cap. 18. v. 15. so I pray God it be not Englands. We have
multitudes of us come near, very near that desperate obstinacy a good while
since, witness the imprisoning so many grave orthodox Divines, that have ever
walked in those ancient paths themselves, without turning to the right hand or
to the left, and have done their best to lead their people with them; and
witness also the suppressing so many excellent Sermons, books and tractates,
some in the Press, others at their first coming forth, composed and framed
wholly for the misled peoples information, that they might see the error of
their new ways, and return to their old paths of duty and loyalty to God, and
their Sovereigne. But, thanks be to the Lord, we are not all delivered up to
that stupendous blindness and hardness of heart. Nay my hope and charity
do as yet persuade my faith to believe, that hundreds of this Kingdom, if not
thousands, even of those seduced wretches, that have gone out in this present
horrid Rebellion against our most Gracious King, have gone out, like those two
hundred in Absalons Rebellion against King David, 2 Samuel 15. In the simplicity
of their hearts, and had they been suffered to have known, what some Divines
were willing and ready to have imparted unto them, they themselves would have
suffered as much as any, rather then have acted in that villainy. And for their
sakes it is, that I adventure the publishing these three Worthies opinions
concerning the duty of Subjects to their Sovereigne though wicked and
tyrannical; that by the truth and soundnes of these first Reformers of the
true Protestant Religion, the falsenesse and rottenness of our new Reformers
(as they would be reputed) may the more easily be discovered, and that by
their acknowledging such an indispensible through obedience to be due to the
worst of Princes, these deceived ones may at the last be shamed out of their
Rebellion against the best.

I could have produced in this cause above threescore witnesses of the most
famously renowned for learning and piety that ever the Reformed Churches
brought forth; but some considerable reasons persuaded me to content my self,
and to hope I may satisfy others, with urging only these three: First, because
God himself prescribes that number of witnesses as sufficient for the
establishing of truth, Deuteronomy. 19.15. Matthew. 18.16. and with whom Gods word is of
power, that number of witnesses prescribed in his word cannot but be so of
prevalency, especially when their testimonies are grounded upon Gods word, as
these three are. Secondly, the multiplying of witnesses would have proved over
chargeable to those for whose sake the vindicating of this cause by this fair
way of trial is principally undertaken, I mean, the common sort of people,
who though they can be content poor souls many of them to buy the truth,
Proverb. 23.23. yet being they may not sell it again, diverse will not, and
some cannot, though they would be at the cost to give any great rate for it, of
how great concernment soever it be; and he were unworthy to partake of that
price that Christ paid for men's souls, that would not consult the best he
could for the souls of the poor, as well as of the rich, all being alike
precious in our Redeemers sight. Thirdly, the poor Printers are a little to be
considered in these pressed oppressing times; for those few of them that are so
honest and valiant, as to dare to print ought that savours of loyalty and duty
to their Sovereigne are so hunted and persecuted from place to place, both by
day and night, that to employ them in ought that would long detain them, were
to betray them, and perhaps those that set them on work. Lastly, I would not
willingly prevent my good friend Mr. Catford, whom as I find by his Epistle
before the Exhortation to Peace to have taken this very way of conviction, and
to have made so fair a progress therein, that had not the inspired Colonel
had better information thereof, then he had lately a revelation of conquering
after so often running away, that work intended had been long since finished;
so it is yet hoped, and earnestly desired, that he may have liberty to perfect
the same. These reasons prevailed with me to urge only the testimonies of
Three, and why I made choice of these three, let the testimonies themselves be
perused, and they will speak enough to silence that demand. Read then, and
when ye are converted strengthen your brethren: which that ye may be and do,
is, and shall be the constant prayer of

Your constant Brother.

DOctor Martin Luther, that glorious day star of the blessed Reformation,
that third Elias, that burning and shining light of the Gospel.

Tom. 1. in decla. pop. de praecept. 4. Although they (speaking of Sovereigne
Princes) exact upon, and oppress the Country people, or their Citizens, or
their Priests, yet they are to be borne with, no otherwise then as the hand of
the Lord pressing hard upon our sins, and just deserts.

Idem. Tom. 2. in Act. Worm. habit. I know that Magistrates and Powers are to
be obeyed, even those that live naughtily and wickedly; and so have I taught in
all my writings.

Ib. fol. 311. If any man raise seditions and tumults, he abuses the word of
God to serve his own lusts and affections; for the word of Christ, or of God,
causes no outward tumults, though it do threaten and denounce to wicked men,
especially Tyrants, both outward tumults and utter devastations; but it does by
little and little free the souls of men from the bonds of Tyrants, so that
those bonds are contemned by them, which is of all, the most powerful and the
most prevalent redress for the repressing their tyranny.

Idem in Genes. cap. 13. It is no small comfort, that God does constitute
Dominions or royal Powers, and that he does preserve and defend them; neither
do they (as we for the most part think) increase or fall at all adventure.
The Heathen do not look upon government thus from God, but they dreamingly
conceive Dominions to be constituted and governed by their own industry.

Idem in 1 Pet. 2. on those words, Fear God, Honor the King; He does not say
this, to magnify Kings and Rulers of the Earth, but that we should honor
them, though they be Heathen, which is the very thing that Christ himself did,
and also the Prophets before him, who prostrated themselves at the feet of the
King of Babylon.

Ib. We must be subject to the powers, and do what they command us, so long as
they do not enthrall our consciences, although they play the mere Tyrants.

Ib. De bonis operibus 4. praecep. Although the temporal or secular power do
those things that are unjust, as the King of Babylon did to the King of Israel,
yet not withstanding God will have obedience yielded to them without all fraud
or deceit.

It would be an endless labor to trace this Loyalist through all his
voluminous works, he being one (as Melancthon testifies of him in his Preface
before Tom. 2. Luther oper.) that did detest the seditious Teachers of his
time; and did not only exhort all men to give to God the things that are Gods,
and to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, but did most constantly practice the
same, avoiding all seditious counsels, and condemning most sharply all Tumults
and Anabaptisticall outrages. That ingenious and much approved Historiographer
John Sleidan has left enough collected to our hands in his Commentaries, both
to assure all posterity of that Worthy's judgment and practice in point of
Loyalty and Obedience, and to convince the seditious and rebellious of the
error and wickedness of theirs.

Lib. 5. Comment. Having recorded the demands of the rustic Rebels in
Germany, who had appealed to Luther, anno Dom. 1525. he brings in Luther
returning this answer:

It Is true, I confess, that those Princes, who do not admit the preaching of
the Gospel, who diverse ways oppress, and lay heavy loads on the people, are
worthy to be tumbled down from their Thrones by God; neither have they nay
excuse for themselves. And although this be so, yet you (speaking to those
Rebels) ought to have a care to carry a conscience pure and blameless, lest
otherwise ye make shipwreck both of soul and body. Neither ought ye to think
upon your own strength, or how much your adversaries are to be reprehended,
but how lawful and just the cause is ye defend. Wherefore be diligently
cautions, and believe not every man's preaching, for Satan has at this time,
under the cloak of the Gospel, raised up many seditious and altogether bloody
Teachers, -- Ye take up indeed the name of God, and call your selves the
Christian assembly, and boast that ye follow in all things that Law which God
has prescribed. -- But it may easily be demonstrated, that you falsely cover
over your actions with the name of God; and therefore a may may clearly foresee
what the issue will be. For he fails not who has said, They that take the
sword, shall perish, by the sword; to wit, They that out of their own
boldness arrogate to themselves the power of punishing others, when
notwithstanding Paul commands all men to obey the Magistrate in all things with
reverence and fear. What will ye answer to these things, who pretend that ye
will follow the prescript of divine Law; and yet in the mean time ye snatch
the sword by force, and resist the Magistrate, whom God has placed over you?
Is not this to take the name of God in vain? But you will say, the Magistrate
so carries himself, that he is altogether insufferable; By Magistrate we are
to understand in this as in the other testimonies, the supreme Magistrate.
for he both takes from us the Doctrine of the Gospel, and does so oppress us
in all other things, as that nothing can be beyond it. Well grant it be so, yet
notwithstanding commotions and seditions ought not therefore to be raised; for
it does not belong to every one to correct things that are evil; but this
belongs only to him, to whom tribute and the power of the sword do belong, as
the Scripture does evidently teach. -- The Magistrate does wickedly, but ye do
much more wickedly, who, despising the command of God, invade another
jurisdiction, and leave nothing at all to the Magistrate, for what has he left
him, when ye take away the power from him? I appeal to your selves. He that
takes away from any a great part of his goods, yet leaves him something, and he
that, after he has taken away his goods, takes away his life also, whether of
these two seems to you the more cruel? The Magistrate takes from you
possessions, it is unjust so to do: but ye take from him jurisdiction, wherein
consists al his estate both of body and goods, and therefore ye do the
greater wrong. But you will say again, we do not desire to take away the
Magistrates life or estate. Believe that, who will, I will not. He that takes
away the principal part from any, will not fear to take away also the rest
which depends upon it. But let it be so indeed as ye say, let the Magistrates
still possess their goods, let their life also be safe; yet that which ye have
committed exceeds all moderation; when as having taken away all their power
from them, ye your selves would be Lords of those things which are theirs. I
beseech you, weigh this business well: If this your intent and purpose be
praiseworthy, and prevail, from henceforth let there be no more judicature,
let there be no Magistrate, and let it be lawful for every man to contrive
privately against any man after his own lust and pleasure, and let no other
thing be expected thence, but mutual slaughters and robberies; for as every
man shall think himself injured, so presently will he take vengeance after
his own desire. Now if this thing be both unjust, and not to be tolerated in
any person, much less may it be granted to any congregated multitude of men,
or if it be granted to such, it shall be also lawful for every man. What, if
in this very Assembly of yours, things should grow to that licentiousness,
that every one would privately avenge his own cause; pray tell me, what would
you do? without doubt, such a one would be enforced to stand to the public
judgment instituted by you. What excuse therefore have ye that overthrow
judgment, and resist the Magistrate, which God himself has set over you?
This very Law whereof we now speak is imprinted in the minds of all men, and
embraced even by those people that are most barbarous; for otherwise there
would ensue the greatest confusion of all things that could be: and though ye
should diligently observe it, yet notwithstanding in this very regard you would
be no whit better then either the Turks or other Nations of that kind,
ignorant of our Religion; for to allow of public judgment, and to su^mit to
the authority of the Magistrate, does not make a man a Christian; for even
necessity it self compels men to do so against their wills. Wherefore ye, in
that ye pull up this very Law which is implanted in the mind, and common to
all men, are much worse then the profane Gentiles, so far are ye from being
worthy of the name of Christian; which title because ye usurp to your selves,
and wrong the divine Name (unworthy I wi^ of ^^e appellation of Turks in that
ye violate the Law of Nature) how will you stand at last in the sight of
Christ, when he shall come to judge us all? Consider therefore seriously what
manner of teachers you are; for I fear lest some bloody minded men have crept
in amongst you, who by their Sermons incite you to this course, that so at
length by means of your aid they may invade the Rule and Dominion, altogether
regardlesse of your fortunes and safety. God commands all vengeance to be left
to himself: the Scripture commands to obey the Magistrate though a wicked one:
obey therefore ye must, otherwise ye shall indeed raise a commotion, but it
shall at length fall upon your own pate; neither will God suffer this your
licentiousness to pass unpunished; and whiles you seek for liberty, you
shall purchase to your selves loss of life, of goods, and of soul. The wrath
of God is hot against you, and the Devil the enemy of our salvation has sent
false teachers amongst you. Wherefore following my advice, beware and repent.
--

Now we will speak of the Christian or Evangelicall Law, for because you
arrogate this appellation to your selves it is very fit that we examine what
your Law is, And first of all Christ commands not to resist evil, but to him
that strikes on the one cheek, to turn the other also; to him that takes away
thy coat, he commands thee to give thy cloak also; he commands as well to wish
well as to do well to our enemies: to the same purpose there are many places
in holy Writ. Now consider how this design of yours is answerable to Christ's
commands; consider whither your Teachers have misled you. Certainly it is the
duty of Christians to endure and undergo the cross, not to resist, not to
revenge, not to smite with the sword: But is there any such like thing seen in
you? The profession of Christianity is a matter of great difficulty, and there
are very few which really perform what they ought; which that it may be more
fully understood, I will bring you an example of that Law whereof we speak.
Peter, that he might defend his Master, smote the servant of the high Priest:
was it not for a just cause? when as they did not only seek the life of Christ,
but did also take away from his Disciples the Doctrine of the Gospel, in which
all their salvation was placed, to wit, in taking away their Master Christ. But
such and soheynous an injury is not as yet offered unto you. And what says
Christ in the mean time? He commands Peter to forbear such defense,
pronouncing a heavy sentence against those that strike with the sword: that is,
such as contemning the Magistrate take upon them to exercise private revenge.
What does he, when he is fastened to the cross, when he is not suffered to
execute the office of teaching enjoined by God the Father? He bears it
patiently, commits all the business to God the Father, and prays unto him for
his smiters. These are the footsteps to be traced by you, or this so specious
title is to be laid aside. If ye will follow the example of Christ, the power
of God would manifest it self: and as after the most unworthy death of his
Son he propagated the Gospel far and wide in despite of all adversaries;
so without question would he also look upon you, and bestow the Doctrine of
Salvation in abundance: But now seeing the business is managed by Arms, you
shall not obtain what you would, and your Arms shall be wrung out of your
hands.

Let me now speak something of my self: The whole world opposed me with all
might and maine; and yet the more vehement was their resistance, the more
spreading was my doctrine. And why so? I did nothing violently, I raised no
commotions. I was not desirous of revenge, but reverently honored the civil
Powers, maintained them by my writings as much as in me lay; and which is the
chief thing of all, committing the matter to God, I rested wholly on his
power: and thus have I been preserved to this very day, maugre the Pope and all
adversaries, and my doctrine has also spread it self to many people. But ye
now rush on importunely, and whiles ye think to further the business, ye
consider not how much ye hinder (...), etc. Thus far and thus loyally Luther,
if we can find but as much in Mr. Calvin the other great light of that
illustrious Reformation, we shall scarce need to consult a third, every
Religious and sober Protestant ascribing so much honor and credit to those
two, especially in those points wherein they both concur and agree.

MAster John Calvin in his fourth book of Institutions, Chap. 20. Sect. 22. The
first duty of Subjects toward their Magistrates, is to think most honorably
of their office, namely which they acknowledge to be a jurisdiction committed
of God, and therefore to esteem them and reverence them as the Ministers and
Deputies of God. For a man may find some which yield themselves very obedient
to their Magistrates, and would not that there were not some whom they should
obey, because they so know it to be expedient for the common benefit: but of
the Magistrates themselves they think no otherwise of them then of certain
necessary evils. But Peter requires somewhat 1 Pet. 2.17. when he commands
that the King be honored: and Solomon, Prove. 24.21. when he commands God
and the King to be feared: for Peter under the word of honoring contains a
sincere and well deeming estimation, and Solomon joining the King with God,
shows that he is full of a certain holy reverence and dignity; this is also
a notable commendation in Paul, that we obey not only for wrath, but for
conscience, whereby he means that Subjects ought to be led not only with
fear of Princes and Rulers to be holden in their subjection (as they are to
yield to their armed enemy, which see that vengeance shall readily be taken on
them if they resist) but because the obediences that are showed to them are
showed to God himself, forasmuch as their power is of God. I speak not of the
men as if the vision of dignity did cover foolishness, or sluggishnesse, or
cruelties, or wicked manners, and full of mischievous doing; but I say that the
degree it self is worthy of honor and reverence, that whosoever be Rulers may
be esteemed with us, and have reverence in respect of their being Rulers.

Sect. 23. Of this then also follows another thing: That with minds bent to
the honoring of them, they declare their obedience in proof to them; whether
it be to obey their Proclamations, or to pay tribute, or to take in hand
public offices and charges that serve for common defense, or to do any other
of their commandments. Let every soul (says Paul) be subject to the higher
powers, for he that resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, Romans
13.1. The same Paul writes to Tit^s, Tit. 3.1. Warn them that they be subject
to rulers and powers, that they obey the Magistrates, that they be ready to
every good work; and Peter says, 2 Pet. 3.13. Be ye subject to every humane
creature (or rat er as I translate it) Ordinance for the Lords sake, either to
the King as most excellent, or to the rulers that are sent by him, to the
punishment of evil doers, but to the praise of well doers. Moreover that they
should testify that they do not feign subjection, but are sincerely and
heartily subject. Paul adds, 1 Timothy 2. That they should commend to God the
safety and prosperity of them under whom they live. I exhort (says he) that
there be made prayers, beseechings, intercessions, thanksgivings, for all men,
for Kings, and for all that be set in superiority, that we may live a peaceable
and quiet life with all godliness and honesty. Neither let any man here
deceive himself, for since the Magistrate cannot be resisted, but that God must
also be resisted; although it may be thought that an unarmed Magistrate may
freely be despised, yet God is armed which will strongly take vengeance on the
despising of himself. Moreover, under this obedience I contain moderation,
which private men ought to bind themselves to keep in cases touching the
public state, that they do not of their own heads intermeddle in public
businesses, or rashly break into the office of the Magistrate, and enterprise
nothing publicly. If any thing shall in a public Ordinance be behoofull to be
amended, let not themselves raise uproares, nor put their hands to the doing of
it, which they all ought to have fast bound in this behalf, but let them commit
it to the judgment of the Magistrate, whose hand alone is herein at liberty. I
mean that they presume to do nothing uncommanded: for when the commandment of
the Ruler is adjoined, then are they also furnished with public authority,
for as they are wont to call the Counselors of a King his Ears and Eyes, so
not unfitly a man may call them the hands of the Prince, whom by his
commandment he sets in authority for the doing of things.

Sect. 24. Now forasmuch as we have hitherto described a Magistrate such as is
indeed the same that he is called, namely, the Father of the Country, and as
the Poet calls him the Pastor of the people, the keeper of peace, the
protector of righteousness, the revenger of innocence: he is worthyly to be
judged a mad man that allows of such a government: but when as this is in a
manner the experience of all ages, that of Princes some being careless of all
things, to the foreseeing whereof they ought to have been heedfully bent, do
without all care slothfully wallow in delights: other some addicted to their
gain, do set out to sale all Laws, Privileges, Judgments, and grants:
other some spoil the poor Communalty of money, which they may after waste upon
mad prodigal expendings: other some exercise mere robberies, in pillidging of
houses, defiling of virgins and matrons, murdering of innocents: many cannot be
persuaded that such should be acknowledged for Princes, whose authority they
ought to obey so far as they may, for in so great heinous unworthiness among
doings so much contrary to the duty not only for a Magistrate, but also of a
man, they behold no form of the image of God which ought to shine in a
Magistrate: when they see no token of that Minister of God which was given for
praise to the good, and for vengeance to the evil: so neither do they also
acknowledge such a Governor, whose dignity and authority the Scripture
commends unto us: and truly, this feeling of affection has always been
naturally planted in the minds of men no less to hate and abhor Tyrants, then
to love and honor lawful Kings.

Sect. 25. But if we look to the word of God, it will lead us farther, that we
be subject not only to the government of those Princes which execute their
office toward us well, and with such faithfulness as they ought, but also of
all them which by what mean soever it be, have the dominion in possession
although they perform nothing less then that which pertains to the duty of
Princes; for though the Lord testifies that the Magistrate is a special great
gift of his liberality for preserving the safety of men, and appoints to
Magistrates themselves their bounds; yet he does therewithal declare, that of
what sort soever they be, they have not their authority but from him, that
those indeed which rule for benefit of the commonweal are true examplars and
paterns of his bountifulness; that they that rule unjustly and wilfully are
raised up by him to punish the wickedness of the people, that all legally have
that majesty wherewith he has furnished a lawful power. I will proceed no
further, till I have added some certain testimonies of that point, yet we need
not much to labor to prove that a wicked King is the wrath of God upon the
earth, forasmuch as I think that no man will say the contrary, and otherwise
there should be no more said of a King, then of a common robber that violently
takes away thy goods, and of an adulterer that defiles thy bed, of a murderer
that seeks to kill thee, when as the Scripture reckons all such calamities
among the curses of God: but let us rather tarry upon proving that, which does
not so easily settle in the minds of men; That in a most naughty man, and most
unworthy of all honor, if so that he have the public power in posession,
remains that noble and divine power which the Lord has by his word given to
the Ministers of his righteousness and judgment; and therefore that he ought
of his Subjects to be had in as great reverence and estimation, so much as
pertains to public obedience, as they would have the best King if he were
given them.

Sect. 26. First I would have the readers to perceive and diligently mark that
providence and singular doings of God, which is in the Scripture not without
cause so often rehearsed unto us in distributing of Kingdoms, and making Kings
whom it pleases him: in Daniel 2.21. it is said, The Lord changes times and
courses of times, he casts away and makes Kings. Again, that ^he living may
know that the Highest is mighty in the Kingdom ^f men, and he shall give it to
whom he will, with which manner of sentences whereas the whole Scripture
abounds, yet the same Prophecy of Daniel specially swarmeth full: now what
manner of King was Nebuchadnezzar, he that conquered J^^usalem, it is
sufficiently known, namely, a strange invader and destroyer of other. Yet in
Ezekel 29 19. the Lord affirms that he gave him the land of Egypt for the
service that he had d me to him in wasting it. And Daniel said to him, Dan.
2.37. Thou King of Kings, to whom the King of Heavens has given a mighty, and
strong, and glorious Kingdom; to thee, I say he has given it, and all the
lands where dwell the children of men, the beasts of the wood, and fowls of
the air; he has delivered them into thy hand, and has made thee bear rule
over them. Again, he said to his son Belsasar, Dan. 5.18. The Highest God has
given to Nebuchadnezer thy fathers Kingdom and Royalty, honor and glory: and
by reason of the royalty that he gave him, all peoples, tribes, and languages
were trembling and fearful at his sight: when we hear that a King is ordained
of God, let us therefore call to remembrance those heavenly warnings concerning
the honor and fearing of a King, then we shall not doubt to account a most
wicked Tyrant in the same place wherein the Lord has vouchsafed to set him.
Samuel when he gave warning to the people of Israel, 1 Samuel 8.12. what manner
of things they should suffer at the hands of their Kings, said, This shall be
the right of the King that shall reign over you; he shall take your sons and
put them to his chariot, to make them his horsemen, and to plow his land, and
reap his crop, and to make instruments of war. He shall take your daughters
that they may be his dressers of ointments, his Cooks and Bakers: your lands,
your vineyards, and your best olive plants he shall take away, and give to his
bondservants: he shall take tithes of your seeds and vineyards, and shall give
them to his Eunuchs, and bondservants: he shall take away your bondmen, your
bondwomen and your asses, and set them to his work* yea and he shall take
tithes of you flocks: and ye shall be his bondservants. Verily Kings should not
have done this or right, whom the Law did very well instruct to all
continuance; but it was called a right over the people which it behooved them
of necessity to obey, and they might not resist it: as if Samuel had said, the
wilfulness of Kings shall run to such licentiousness, which it shall not be
your part to resist; to whom this only thing shall be left, to obey their
commandments and hearken to their words.

Sect. 27. But chiefly, there is in Jeremy a notable place, and worthy to be
remembered, which although it be somewhat long, yet I will be content to
rehearse, because it most plainly determines this whole question, Jerm. 27.3.
I have made the earth and men, says the Lord, and the living creatures that
are on the face of the earth in my great strength and stretched out arm, and I
will deliver it to him whom it pleases in mine eyes: and now therefore I have
given al these lands into the hands of Nebuchadnezar my Servant, and all
Nations and great Kings shall serve him till the time shall come of that land;
and it shall be that a Nation and a Kingdom that has not served the King of
Babel, I will visit that Nation in sword, famine, and pestilence: wherefore
serve ye the King of Babel, and live. We see with how great obedience the Lord
willed that cruel and proud Tyrant to be honored, for no other reason but
because he possessed the Kingdom: and the same was by the heavenly decree that
he was set in the Throne of the Kingdom, and taken up into Kingly Majesty,
which it was unlawful to violate. If we have this continually before our
minds and eyes, that even the worst Kings are ordained by the same decree by
which the authority of Kings is stablished, the seditious thoughts shall never
come into our mind, that a King is to be handled according to his deservings,
and that it is not meet that we should show our selves Subjects to him that
does not on his behalf show himself a King to us.

Sect. 28. In vain shall any man object that this was a peculiar commandment
to the Israelites, for it is to be noted with what reason the Lord confirms
it: I have given says he, the Kingdom to Nebuchadnezzar, wherefore serve ye
him and live. To whomsoever therefore it shall be certain that the Kingdom is
gi^en, let us not doubt that he is to be obeyed; and so soon as the Lord
advances any man to the royal Estate, he therein declares his will to us
that he will have him reign; for thereof are general testimonies of the
Scripture. Solomon in the 28. Chap. Many Princes are because of the wickedness
of the people. Again Job in the 12. Chapter, He takes away subjection from
Kings, and girdeth them again with the girdle. But this being confessed, there
remains nothing but that we must serve and live. There is also in Jeremy the
Prophet another commandment of the Lord, wherein he commanded his people to
seek the peace of Babylon whither they had been led away captive, and to pray
to him for it, because in the peace of it should be their peace. Behold the
Israelites being spoiled of their goods, plucked out of their houses, led away
into exile, and cast into miserable bondage, are commanded to pray for the
safety of the Conqueror; not as in o her places we are commanded to pray for
our persecuters; but that the Kingdom may be preserved to himself, and quiet,
that they themselves may live prosperously under him. So David being already
appointed King by the ordinance of God, and anointed with his holy oil, when
he was without any his deserving unworthyly persecuted of Saul, yet the head of
him that laid wait for his life, he esteemed holy, which the Lord has hallowed
with the honor of Kingdom: far be it from me, said he, that I should before
the Lord do this thing to my Lord the anointed of the Lord, that I should lay
my hand upon him, because he is the anointed of the Lord. Again, who shall lay
his hand upon the anointed of the Lord, and shall be innocent? So sure as the
Lord lives, unless the Lord strike him, or his day be come that he dye, or he
go down into battle; far be it from me that I should lay my hand upon the
anointed of the Lord.

Sect. 29. Finally, we owe this affection of reverence, yea and devotion to all
our Rulers, of what sort soever they be, which I do therefore the oftener
repeat, that we may learn not to search what the men themselves be, but take
this for sufficient, that by the will of the Lord they bear that personage in
which the Lord himself has imprinted and ingraved an inviolable Majesty. But
thou will say, Rulers owe mutual duties to their Subjects, that I have already
confessed; but if thou thereupon conclude, that obediences are to be rendered to
none but to just Governors, thou art a foolish reasoner: for husbands also are
bound to their wives, and parents to their children with mutual duties; let
parents and husbands depart from their duty; let parents show themselves so
hard and unpleasable to their children, whom they are forbidden to provoke to
anger, that with their peevishness they do unmeasurably weary them: let the
husbands most despitefully use their wives, whom they are commanded to love,
and to spare them as weak vessels: shall yet therefore either children be
disobedient to their parents, or ^ives to their husbands? But they are subject
both to evil parents, and husbands, and such as do not their duty; yea when
as all ought rather to endeavor themselves not to look behind them to the bag
hangi^g on their back, that is, not to enquire one of another duties, but
every man set before him that which is his own duty; this ought chiefly to
have place among those that are under the power of other: wherefore if we be
unmercifully tormented of a cruel Prince, if we be ravenously spoy^ed of a
covetous or riotous Prince, if we be neglected of a slothful Prince: finally,
if we be vexed for godliness sake of a wicked and ungodly Prince; let us first
call to mind the remembrance of our sins, which undoubtedly are chastised
with such scourges of the Lord; thereby humility shall bridle our impatience:
let us then also call to mind this thought, that it pertains not to us to
remedy such evils; but this only is left for us, that we crave the help of
the Lord, in whose hand are the hearts of Kings, and the bowings of Kingdoms:
he is the God that shall stand in the assembly of Gods, and shall in the midst
judge the gods, from whose face all Kings shall fall, and be broken, and all
the Judges of the earth that shall not have kissed his anointed, that have
written unjust laws to oppress the poor in judgment, and do violence to
the cause of the humble, to make widows a prey, and rob the fatherless.

Sect. 30. And here both his marveilous goodness, and power and providence
shows it self; for sometime of his servants he raises up open revengers,
and furnishes them with his commandment to take vengeance of their unjust
government, and to deliver his people many ways oppressed out of miserable
distress; sometime he directs to the same end the rage of men that extend
and go about another thing: So he delivered the people of Israel out of the
tyranny of Pharaoh by Moses; and out of the violence Chusam King of Syria by
Othoniel; and out of other thraldomes by other Kings or Judges. So he tamed the
pride of Tyrus by the Egyptians, the insolence of the Egyptians by the
Assyrians, the fierceness of the Assyrians by the Chaldees, the boldness of
Babylon by the Medians, and by the Persians when Cyrus had subdued the Medians:
and the fullness of the Kings of Judah and Israel, and their wicked obstinacy
toward his so many benefits, he did beat down and bring to distress sometime
by the Assyrians, sometime by the Babylonians, albeit not all after one manner;
for the first sort of men when they were by the lawful calling of God sent to
do such acts, in taking armor against Kings, they did not violate that Majesty
which is planted in Kings by the ordinance of God; but being armed from heaven
they subdued the lesser power with the greater; like as it is lawful for Kings
to punish their Lords under them: but these latter sort, although they were
directed by the hand of God whither it pleased him, and they unwittingly did
his work, yet purposed in their minds nothing but mischief.

Sect. 31. But howsoever the very doings of men be judged, yet the Lord did as
well execute his work by them, when he did break the bloody Scepters of proud
Kings, and overthrew their intolerable governments. Let Princes hear and be
afraid: but we in the mean time must take great heed, that we do not despise
or offend that authority of Magistrates full of reverend Majesty, which God
has stablished with most weighty decrees, although it remain with most
unworthy men, and which do with their wickedness, so much as in them is,
defile it: for though the correcting of unbridled government be the revengement
of the Lord, let us not by and by think that it is committed to us, to whom
there is given no other commandment but to obey and suffer. I speak always of
private men, for if there be at this time any Magistrates for the people
constituted for the moderating of the lust of Kings, such as in old time were
the Ephori, that were set against the Kings of Lacedemonia, or the Tribunes of
the people against the Roman Consuls, or the Demarchy against the Senate of
Athens; and the same power also which peradventure, as things are now, the
three Estates have in every Realm, when they hold their principal assemblies,
I do so not forbid them according to their office to withstand the outraging
licentiousness of Kings, that I affirm that if they wink at Kings wilfully
raging over and treading down the poor Communalty, their dissembling is not
without wicked breach of falth, because they deceitfully betray the liberty of
the people, whereof they know themselves to be appointed pro^ectours or defen^
ours by the ordinance of God.

This ^estimony I co^^eive to be as complete an^ opposite as can ^e desired;
only for men's perve^ting the l^^ter part of the last ci^ed paragraphes from
those words; I speak always of private men, etc. to the end of that Sect ha^h
(...) both the honor of that teste^ amongst loyal subjects, and the validity
of that testimony in so honorable a cause, as it is now produced in: but with
Gods assistance, I trust I shall vindicate both by this candid explication of
those words, and clear manifestation of their true sco^ e and intent.

I speak always of private men, says Calvin, but in what case, and of what
private men does he speak? Why in the case of Su^jects obeying and suffering
without resisting or rebelling, when ungodly and tyrannous Kings or sovereigne
Princes bear rule over them. This is evident from his precedent words. All
private men in such a case, when ungodly and tyrannous Rulers ^ave the
government of them, have no other precept or commandment given to them, but to
obey and suffer: for though the correcting of unbridled government be the
revengement of the Lord, and he will be sure to repay; yet he has not
committed it to private men; nay therefore because vengeance is Gods royal
Prerogative, men ought not to meddle therewith. Well, but who are to be
accounted private men in this case? Why, it appears from the testimonies of
Scripture before cited, and from several instances before urged by this
renowned Author, that in the case betwixt Kings and Subjects (or if that te^me
be not large enough) all besides the King himself, that live within his
Dominions, of what rank or degree soever they be, they are in respect of their
Sovereigne no other then private ^en, and may not resist or rebel against him,
may not take vengeance or exercise correction or coertion upon him, though h^
be never so wicked and cruel a Prince. This is more expressly cleared by
precepts and examples which are produced Sect. 26, 27, 28. for there you shall
find not only some particular men, but whole Tribes and Nations, yea and the
Nobles and Princes of their Tribes, all and every of them, made and commanded
to be subject to Kings and Sovereigne Princes. Nay there you shall find
demonstrated from Dan. 2. Jerem. 27. and Jerem. 29. That even Kings of Nations
themselves after they were conquered by another King, were commanded not to
rebel against him that had conquered them either they or their people, but to
serve him, and to pray for him and his people: and if you please with those
places now cited to admit to audience two other places of the like enforcement,
Ezekiel. 17. 2 Kings 24. you shall there hear the King of Israel sharply
reproved, terribly threatened, and sorely punished for revolting from the King
of Babylon, after they had been subdued by him, and entered into covenant to be
his servants. So that either Calvin's saying, I speak always of private men,
must be understood either of all men that are or ought to be in subjection to
any Sovereigne Princes, as all that live within their territories ought to be
of what rank or degree soever they are; or else his so speaking contradicts
not only what himself had spoken before, but also what God himself had
commanded, and he from his mouth delivered.

Well, but whom then, does Calvin allow to be revengers or correctors of wicked
and tyrannous Kings and Princes? Why if you please to observe well the 30.
Section, You shall there find that he speaks of two sorts of men that God uses
for that purpose. As first, God sometimes rayseth up some of his servants to be
open revengers of such Princes, and them he furnishes with his commandment to
take vengeance of their unjust government, and to deliver his people many ways
oppressed out of miserable distress. Again, sometimes God directs to the
same end the rage of men that intend and go about another thing. For the first
sort of these men (says Calvin) when they were by the lawful calling of God
(which before he expressed by being furnished with his commandment) sent to
do such acts: in taking Arms against Kings, they did not violate that Majesty
which is planted in Kings by the ordinance of God; but being armed from heaven
[that is with the power of his command] they subdued the lesser power with the
greater; like (...) ^awfull for Kings to punish their great rulers or gover^^^
(...) them. But the latter sort, although they were di^^^ (...) ^and of God
whither it ^leased him, and unwittingl^ and his work, yet they purposed in
their minds nothing but mischief.

And now I hope you see whom Calvin allows to be correctors, ^r revengers of
wicked and tyrannous Princes, viz. only those s^rvants of God whom he raises
up as open and public revengers, and furnishes them with his commandment for
that purpose. And such indeed are no longer private men, but are now called to
a public office by God himself, and are in the place of God, being invested
by him with the power of the sword, at least for that time, to execute Gods
vengeance on those that have abused his power, wherewith they were entrusted:
but for all other men be they what they will be, if they have been brought into
subjection, and have entered into a covenant with their King, to be his
Subjects, they are but private men in respect of their King, and if their King
be wicked or cruel, etc. they have no authority to correct him or take
vengeance on him. And therefore Calvin speaking of the unlawfulness of
resisting or rebelling against Kings, though never so wicked, and concluding
that though the correcting of unbridled government be the revengement of the
Lord, yet we should not by and by think that it is committed to us, to whom
ther^ is given no other commandment but to obey and suffer, might well add de
privatis semper loquor, I speak always of private men.

Oh but Calvin goes further, and superaddes: For if there be at this time any
Magistrates on the behalf of the people constituted for the moderating of the
lust of Kings (such as in old time were the Ephori that were set against the
Kings of Lacedemonia, or the Tribunes of the people against the Roman Consulls,
or the Demarchie against the Senate of Athens; and the same power also which
peradventure, as things are now, the three estates have in every Realm when
they hold the principal Assemblies) I do so not forbid them according to
their office to withstand the outraging licentiousness of Kings, that I affirm
that if they wink at Kings wilfully raging over, and treading down the poor
Communalty, their dissembling is not without wic^ed breach of faith, because
they deceitfully betray the liberty of the people, whereof they know themselves
to be appointed protectors by the ordinance of God.

From hence presently it is concluded that Calvin not only grants it to be
lawful for Magistrates on the behalf of the people, and by name Parliaments,
to correct and take vengeance of wicked and tyrannous Kings, and Sovereigne
Princes, but also judges them betrayers of the peoples liberty, if they shall
neglect so to do.

Rebels I know, would be glad of such a patron: but I beseech you, weigh
Calvin's words thoroughly; and although you will find that to excuse the outrage
of the Citizens of Geneva against their Prince, he being admitted public
reader of Divinity in that City, and publishing his Theological Institutions,
then soon after they had changed their government; yet if there can be any
such inference justly and charitably made as is now pretended, from ought which
that honored Divine has there spoken; let me also (which is one of the
greatest curses my sorest enemy can wish me) be reputed a Rebel, for ascribing
so much honor to him, who derogates so much from the just honor and power of
Sovereigne Princes.

For first you see that he speaks as doubting whether there are now any such
populare^ Magistratus, any such Magistrates on the behalf of the people,
constituted for the moderating the lust of Kings (such as in old time were the
^phori, that were s^t against the Lacedemonian Kings, etc.) or not. And well be
might make doubt of it; when as, if we examine but the power of the Ephori over
the Lacedemonian Kings (and the T^ibunes of the people amongst the Romans were
in a manner the same, says Lalius, Laet Antiquit. lib. 18. cap. 26.) we shall
find it to have been such as it is not to be parallelled (so far as ever I
could read or hear) by any popular Magistrates in any Kingdom whatsoever
throughout the world at this present, to be sure not in ours of all others, as
in these respects amongst many.

The Ephori, though they were often chosen out of the lowest and poorest s^rt
of people, yet they did grow to that height that that power which had been
estated upon the people, they usu^ped to themselves, Arist. Polit. 2. cap. 9.

They had the power of waging or ending wars, and their Kings were bu^ as their
Generals, and at their command either to ^dva^ce, or re^i^e with their Armies.

They not only cal^ed their Kings to an account, but also killed and imprisoned
them.

They allowed their Kings the bare name and title of Kings, but all Regal
Rights they took to themselves.

They might put any man to death without showing any cause. There and diverse
other particulars, of the power of the Ephori, inconsistent, and incompossible
with the power of Kings, if any desire further to be assured, he may find
collected to his hand out of Ze^ophon, Plato, Aristotle, Plutarch, and others,
by Henni^gus Arnisaeus de Republica. lib. 2. cap 6.

It seems to me a very strange thing, and such as Parliaments themselves should
not well relish, that any should compare the power of the three Estates, with
that usurped, impious, tyrannical power of the Ephori. And for the Tribunes of
the people which were set against the Roman Consuls, and the Demarchy which
were set against the Senate of Athens, Me thinks the resembling of the power of
the three estates in Parliament to their power, should be as little pleasing,
it is more, then probable. I forbear to instance in the Roman Tribunes, they
being in a manner (as I but now told you from Calvin) the same with the
Lacedemonian Ephori: but for the A^henian Demarchy, I care not much if I afford
you a fuller description of them, and their power, together with their managing
of it, it being done to my hand by that learned Historian, and judicious
observe of men, Sir Walter Rawleigh in his third book of the History of the
World, cap. 9. sect. 2.3. The thirty Governors commonly called the thi^ty
Tyrants of Athens, were chosen at the first by the people to compile a body of
their Law, and make a collection of such ancient Statutes, as were meet to put
in practice; the condition of the City standing as it did in that so sudden
alteration. To this charge was annexed the supreme Authority, either as a
recompense of their labors, or because the necessity of the times did so
require it, wherein the Law being uncertain, it was fit that such men should
give judgment in particular causes, to whose judgment the Laws themselves by
which the City was to be ordered, were become su^j^ct. But these thirty having
so great power in their hands, were more careful to hold it, then to deserve
it by faithful execution of that which was committed to their trust. Therefore
apprehending such troublesome fellows, as were odious to the City, though not
punishable, therefore by law they condemned them to death, which proceeding was
by all men approved, who considered their lewd conditions, but did not withal
bethink themselves how easy a thing it would be unto these thirty men to take
away the lives of innocents, by calling them perturbers of the peace, or what
else they listed, when condemnation without due trial and proof had been once
well allowed. Having thus plausibly entered into a wicked course of government,
they thought it best to fortify themselves with a sure guard, ere they brake
out into those disorders, which they must needs commit for the establishing of
their authority: wherefore dispatching two of their own company to Sparta,
they informed the Lacedaemonians, that it was the full intent of the thirty to
keep the City free from all rebellious motions, to which purpose it behoved
them to cut off such as were seditious; and therefore desired the Lacedaemonians
to send them a garrison, which they promised at their own cost to maintain:
this motion was well approved, and a guard sent, the Captain of which was so
well entertained by the thirty, that none of their misdeeds could want his high
commendations at Sparta. Hereupon the Tyrants began to take heart, and looking
no more after base and detested persons, invaded the principal men of the
City, sending armed men from house to house, who drew out such as were of great
reputation, and likely or able to make any head against this wicked form of
government, whereby there was such effusion of blood, as to Theremanes (one of
the thirty) seemed very horrible, and unable to escape vengeance. His dislike
of their proceedings being openly discovered, caused his fellows to bethink
themselves, and provide for their own security, and his destruction, lest he
should make himself a Captain of the discontented (which were almost the
whole City) and redeem his own peace with their ruin: wherefore they
s^l^cted three th^usand of the Citizens, whom they thought meet^st, and gave
unto them some part of public authority, the rest they di^armed. And havi^g
thus increased their own strength, and weakened their opposites, they began
afresh to sh^d the blood, not only of their private enemies, but of such whos^
money or goods might enrich them, and enable them for the payment of their
guard; and to this purpose they concluded that every one of them should name
one man, upon whose goods he should cease putting the owner to death. But when
Theremanes uttered the detestation of so wicked intent; then d^d Critias, who
of all the thirty was most tyrannical, accuse him to the Council as a
treacherous man, and (whereas one mai^e pr^viledge, the three thousand was,
that none of them should suffer death at the appoi^tment of the Thirty, but
have the accustomed trial) he took upon him to strike off that number the
name of Theremanes, and so reduced him under the ^ryall and sentence of that
order. It was well alleged by Theremanes, that his name was not more easy to
be blotted out of the Catalogue, then any other man's; upon which consideration
he adv^s^d them all to conceive no otherwise of his case then they did of their
own, who were more liable to the same form of proceeding; ^ut every man
c^using rather to pr^s^rve his own life by silence, then presen^ly to draw
upon h^mselfe the danger (which as yet concerned him little, and perhaps would
never come near him) the Tyrants interpreting silence as consent condemned him
forthwith and compelled him to drink poison. After the death of Theremanes,
the Thirty began to use such outrage, as excelled their former villainies: for
having three thousand (as they thought) firm unto them, they robbed all others
without scare or shame, dispoyling them of lands and goods, and caused them to
fly into banishment for safeguard of their lives.

He that would read more of those thirty Tyrants, as how they ran into the very
depth of all mischiefs, when they had done such as they saw there was little
hope left them of going backward, as also how far the remainder of the three
thousand which had communicated with the tyrannical faction of the Thirty in
their wickednesses, did proceed in their barbarous practices, and what just
doom ceased upon that whole faction, may at his leisure, read on where I
break off; but this which I have transcribed may suffice to have showed how
little thanks they are worthy of from Parliaments that urge the practice of the
Athenian Demarchy for their pattern: And indeed (which is the second thing
observable in those words of Calvin) that Calvin himself considered that such
a comparison or resemblance of the power of the three estates in Parliament to
the power of such popular Magistrates, constituted for the moderating of the
lust of Kings (as the Ephori, Tribunes or Demarchy were, etc.) was either not
justifiable, or not acceptable or both; and therefore he ascribes to the three
Estates, they being such popular Magistrates, and having such power, only with
a peradventure, and as things are now, and does not say positively that they
have such power, or that the Laws of those Realms wherein they are do give
them that power. No had he affirmed it, he had foully mistaken, for it is known
to every Soilus that all the three Estates in this Realm (other Realms I
meddle not with) were never accounted populares Magistratus popular
Magistrates, or Magistrates on the behalf of the people: neither were they
reputed as entrusted with the peoples liberty, only one estate of the three,
viz. the House of Commons has been, and still is so reputed by the most, how
justly is disputable.

Besides, we of this Realm have lived to see one of the three Estates that
Calvin speaks of, viz. the Lords Spiritual, quite excluded from having any
power at all in our principal Assemblies; which I am persuaded, Calvin
himself, as great an enemy as he is rendered to that estate, would never have
approved, further then by submitting to their power and authority that did it
(which all good Subjects are bound unto) had it been only for the perilousnesse
of the example, whereby others hereafter may perhaps be encouraged to attempt
the excluding of one Estate more from that honorable Court, or for the danger
of our Religion it self, that being more easy to be corrupted by P^pists,
Anabaptists, Brownists, or other Heretics, through their false and subtle
suggestions to that honorable Assembly, when they, that either are, or should
be the most able propugners thereof are excluded from that place, where a word
seasonably spoken by them, might be of more force and validity then a thousand
spoken afterward in another place.

But take in Calvin's If, and his Peradventure and all; and let it be supposed,
that there are now such popular Magistrates for the moderating of the lust of
Kings, as the very Ephori, or the Dema^chy were themselves in old time; and
that the three Esta^es in those Kingdoms wherein they are established have the
some power when they hold their principal Assembles; (for that restriction
must not be omitted:) yet what does Calvin from thence infer? Only this: I do
so not forbid them (says he) according to their office to withstand, or hinder
or come b^tween (his word is intrudere) the outraging licentiousness of Kings;
that I affirm that if they wink or connive at Kings impotenter grassantibus,
or wildly, wilfully, or outragiously treading down and insulting over the
poor Communalty, their dissembling is not without wicked breach of faith,
because they dec^itfully betray the liberty of the people, whereof they know
themselves to be appointed Tuters, Defenders, or Protectors by the ordinance of
God. So that all which Calvin alowes any po^ular Magistrates constituted for
the moderating of the lust of Kings; if there be any such now in these times,
and all that by name be attributes to the three Estates when they are assembled
were they such popular Magistrates, as they are not, is this and this alone:
That when Kings are outragiously licentious, so that they do to the poor
Communalty even what they pleas^, treading them down, and insulting over them,
then they ou^ht to do their utmost, so far as their duty obliges them, and
the Law permits to hinder them from so doing, and not to wink at them or
dissem^le with them; as for ex^mple: If any King of our own Kingdom, should
outragiously and cruelly oppress the Communalty by illegal taxes, and other
unjust impositions according to his own lust and pleasure; if when the Houses
of Parliament be convene, they should not according to their duty inform the
King of the oppression which the people groan under, and the illegallity
thereof, and with all humbleness advise him to the contrary, yea and do their
u^most by propounding to him good and wholesome Laws, and by using all other
just and lawful means to hinder him from going on in such courses; but rather
either yield to the making of some Acts for the further satisfying of the Kings
licentiousness, or connive at him, and dissemble with him to the approving of
what he had formerly done, they might then indeed be thought to deal
perfidiously, and to betray the liberty of the people, which God even by
calling of them to that Assembly as Members thereof, summoned by his
Vicegerents Writ, has appointed them to maintain and defend so, as is before
mentioned. But here is not one word let fall, or one syllable whispered, that
does in any wise approve correcting, or taking vengeance on such Kings, no nor
calling them to an account, much less of taking up Arms against them; unless
Calvin's last clause [Whereof they know themselves to be appointed Protecters or
Defenders by the Ordinance of God] be hideously perverted, contrary to Gods
Ordinance, as enforcing, That because some are appointed by God to be
Protecters or Defenders of the liberty of the Common People, therefore they
that are such may protect and defend them, by open violence, and force of Arms
against their Sovereigne: as though there were no defense of the common peoples
liberty to be made, and no other protection to be subministred but by force of
Arms, or other violence. They that are but smatterers in our Laws, are able
to cite many cases wherein Tuters and Guardians are allowed, if not commanded,
to maintain and defend the rights and liberties of those who are under their
tuition and protection, and yet may not do either by force and violence, but
only in that way and course which the Law prescribes. Nay our last so much
violated and abused Protestation, wherein we promise, vow, and protest, every
man in particular, to maintain and defend, with our life, power, and estate,
the true reformed Protestant Religion, etc. with this restriction, as far as
lawfully we may, do yield us this as granted; that the greatest bond or
obligation wherein any man stands bound to maintain and defend another, be it
thing or person, obliges him to no other maintenance and defense then is
lawful, and makes not any maintenanc^ and defense to be lawful, that he that
is so obliged, either is able, or thinks fit to attempt: And therefore Calvin's
affirming some to be protecters or defenders of the peoples liberty, does not
give liberty to any to make such defense and protection thereof as they shall
think good, as suppose by Arms or other violence; but does only allow that
protection and defense of their liberty to be good, which the Laws of God and
man approve to be lawful.

I have been the larger in clearing this latter part of this testimony, because
I am verily persuaded, that the mistaking thereof has induced diverse pious and
loyal Protestants, with whom this Worthies authority has been always
prevalent to yield more in this case of defending the liberty of the people
against the outrageous licentiousness of Kings and sovereigne Princes then
otherwise they would have granted.

Many other excellent places full of loyalty are to be found in Calvin; but I
must remember what I promised in my Epistle, or without doubt the poor man
will challenge me for the forfeiture. I pass therefore to the third and last
testimony.

MAster William Tindal, a faithful Minister, and constant Martyr of Christ,
first strangled at the stake, and then burnt at Filford in Fland^rs, anno 1536.
A man that for his extraordinary pains in translating the Scripture,
especially the new Testament into English (which till then had been concealed,
and hid from the people of ^his Nation in an unknown tongue) well d^s^rved the
name of the English Evangelist, or (as Mr. Fox Act. mon. anno 1536 p. 1053. for
that and some other reasons styles him) an Apostle of England, the most
honorable title that can be given to a Minister of the Gospel. In his book
entitled, The obedience of a Christian man, printed at London 1573. p. 111.
having spoken briefly of David's carriage toward Saul, when God had twice
delivered him into his hands, 1 Samuel c. 24 etc. 26 he thus proceeds:

Why did not David slay Saul, seeing he was so wicked, not in persecuting David
only, but in disobeying Gods Commandments, and in tha^ he had sl^ine 85. of
Gods Priests w^ongfully? Verily, for it was not lawful; for if he had done it,
he must have sinned against God; for God has made the King in every Realm
Judge over all, and over him there is no Judge: He that judges the King,
judges God, and he that lays hands on the King, lays hands on God, and he
that resists the King, resists God, and damneth Gods Law and Ordinance. If
the Subjects sin, they must be brought to the Kings judgment, if the King sin,
he must be brought unto the judgment, wrath and vengeance of God. And as it is
to resist the King, so it is to resist his Officer which is set or sent to
execute the Kings commandment: and in the first Chapter of the second book of
Kings, David commanded the young man to be sl^ine, which b^ought unto him the
Crown and Bracelet of Saul, and said, to please David withal, That he
himself had slain Saul: and in the 4. Chapter of the same book, David
commanded those two to be slain which brought unto him the head of Ishbosheth,
Saul's son, by whose means yet the whole Kingdom return unto David
according unto the promise of the Lord. And Luke 13. when they showed Christ of
the Galileans, whose blood P^late mingled with their own sacrifice, He
answered, Suppose ye, That these Galileans were sinners above all other
Galileans, because they suffered such punishment? I tell you nay, but except ye
repent ye shall likewise perish. This was told Christ no doubt of such an
intent as they asked him, Matthew. 22. Whether it were lawful to give tribute
unto Caesar? For they thought it was no sin to resist an heathen Prince, as few
of us would think (if we were under the Turk) that it were sin to rise against
him, and to rid our selves from under his Dominion, so sore have our Bishops
robbed us of the true Doctrine of Christ; but Christ condemned their deeds, and
also the secret thoughts of all other that consented thereunto, saying, Except
ye repent, ye shall likewise perish; as who should say, I know that ye are
within your hearts such as they were, outward in their deeds, and are under the
same damnation, except therefore ye repent betimes, ye shall break out at the
last into the like deeds, and likewise perish, as it came afterward to pass.
Hereby see thou that the King is in this world without Law, and may as his
lust do right, or wrong, and shall give accounts but to God only.

And page 112. upon these words of the Apostle, He is the Minister of God to
thee for thy good, Romans 13. he rendereth it for thy wealth. Though the King be
the greatest* Tyrant in the world, yet he is unto thee a great benefit of God,
and a thing; wherefore thou ought to thank God highly, for it is better to
have somew^at, then to be clean stripped out of altogether, it is better to pay
the tenth then to lose all; it is better to suffer one Tyrant then ma^y, and to
suffer wrong of one, then of every man.

Page 118. Heads and Governors are ordained of God, and are even the gift of
God, whether they be good or bad; and whatsoever is done unto as by them, that
does God, be it good or bad. If they be evil, why are they evil? Verily, for
our wickedness sake are they evil, because, that when they were good, we
would not receive that goodness of the hand of God, and be thankful,
submitting our selves unto his Laws and Ordinances, but abused the goodness
of God unto our sensual and beastly lusts: therefore does God make his scourge
of them, and turn them into wild beasts, contrary to the nature of their
n^mes and offices, even into Lions, Bears, Foxes, and unclean swine, to avenge
himself of our unnatural and blind unkindnesse, and of ^u^re^t lious
disobedience.

This ^^sition he proves from sundry places of Scripture, and then page 119 be
makes this exhortative conclusion: Let us receive all things of God, whether it
be good or bad. Let us humble our selves under his mighty hand, and ^ubmit our
selves unto his nurture and chastising, and not withdraw our selves from his
correction. Read Heb. 12. for thy comfort, and let us not take the staff by
the end, or seek to avenge our selves on his rod, which is the evil Rulers.
The child as long as he seeks to avenge himself upon the rod, has an evil
heart, for he thi^keth not that the correction is right, or that he has
deserved it, neither repente^h, but rejoices in his wickedness, and so long
shall be never be without a rod, yea so long shall the rod be made sharper; if
he knowledge his fault, and take the correction meekly, and even kiss the rod,
and amend himself with the learning and nurture of his father and mother, then
is the rod taken away and burnt: So if we resist evil Rulers, seeking to set
our selves at liberty, we shall no doubt bring our selves into more evil
bondage, and wrap our selves in much more misery and wretchedness; for if the
Heads overcome, then lay they more weight on their backs, and make their yoke
sorer, and tie them shorter: if they overcome their evil Rulers, then make
they way for a more cruel Nation, or for some Tyrant of their own Nation,
which has no right unto the Crown: if we submit our selves unto the chastising
of God, and meekly knowledge our sins, for which we are scourged, and kiss the
rod, and amend our living, then will God take the rod away, that is, he will
give the Rulers a better heart, or if they continue their malice, and persecute
you for well-doing, and because you put your trust in God, then will God deliver
you out of their tyranny for his truths sake. It is the same God now, that was
in old time, and delivered the Fathers and the Prophets, the Apostles and other
holy Saints, and whatsoever he swear to them, he has sworn to us, and as he
delivered them out of all temptations, cumbrance and adversity, because they
consented and submitted themselves unto his will, and trusted in his goodness
and truth, even so will he do us, if we do likewise. Whenever the children
of Israel fell from the way which God commanded them to walk in, he gave them
up under one Tyrant or other: as soon as they come to knowledge of themselves
and repented, crying for mercy, and leaning unto the truth of his promises, he
sent one to deliver them, as the Histories of the Bible make mention. A
Christian man in respect of God, is but a passive thing, a thing that suffers
only, and does naught, as the sick in respect of the Chyrurgeon, or Physician,
does but suffer only: The Chyrurgeon lanceth, and cutteth out the d^ad flesh,
searches the wounds, thrusts intents seareth, ^urneth, sows and stitcheth,
and lays too corrasives to draw out the corruption, and lays too healing
plasters, and makes it whole: The Physician likewise gives purgations, and
drinks to drive our the disease, and then with restaurations brings health.
Now if the sick resist the Rasor, the searching iron, and so forth; does he
not resist his own health, and is cause of his own death? So likewise it i^
of us, if we res st evil Rulers, which are the rod and scourge wherewith God
chastises us, the instruments wherewith God searches our wounds, and bitter
drinks to drive out the sin, and to make it appear, and cor^asives to draw
ou^ by the roots the core of the pox of the soul that fretteth inward: A
Christian man therefore receives all things at the hand of God, both good and
bad, both sweet and sour, both wealth and want.

If you please at your leisure further to peruse that excellent work of that
incomparable Worthy, or but that part only of the Obedience of Subjects to
Kings, to Princes and Rulers, grounded upon Rom 13. you will meet with many
other excellent passages to the same purpose wort^ your observing.

But pass we from that Book to another of the same learned and religious
Author, viz. his Exposition upon Matthew 5, 6, 7. Chap. and there we shall find
the du^y of Subjects to their sovereigne Princes so stated, and the prime
objections pretended against it, so framed and resolved, as if that holy Man
had been not only an ^vangelist, or an Apostle, as you heard before, but also a
Prophet, and had foreseen this present Rebellion, and known the very pre^ences
all^adged for the justification thereof. The words which I refer unto, are
those upon Chap 5. ver. 38 39 and more particularly upon the 40. verse, where
the Law is unj^stly mi^istred, and the gov^rnours and J^dges corrupt, and take
^^^^es, and be partial, there be patient and readier to s^ff^r ev^r as much
more, whatsoever unright be done thee, rather then of ^^patiency thou should
avenge thy self on thy neighbor, or rash, or make insu rection against the
Superiors which God has set over thee, for to rise against them, is to rebel
against God, and against thy Father, when he scourges thee for thine ^ffence,
and a thousand times more sin, then to avenge thee on thy neighbor: and to
^ayle on them, is to raise on God, as though thou would blaspheme him if he
made thee sick, poor or of low degree, or otherwise then thou would be
made thy self. Thou will happily say, The Subjects ever choose the Ruler, and
make him swear to keep their Law, and to maintain their privileges and
liberties, and upon that su^mit themselves unto him, ergo, if he rule amiss,
they are not bound to obey, but may re^i^t him, and put him down again. I
answer, your argument is naught, for the husband swears to his wife, yet
though he forswear himself, she has no power to compel him: also though a
Master keep not covenant with his servant, or one neighbor with another, yet
has neither servant, no nor yet neighbor (though he be under none obedience)
power to avange; but the vengeance ever pertains to an higher Officer, to
whom thou must complain. Yea, but ye will say, It is not like, for the whole
body of the Subjects choose the Ruler; now cujus est ligare, ejus est solvere,
ergo, if he rule amiss, they that set him up, may pull him down again: I
answer, God and not the common people chooses the Prince, though he choose him
by them, for Deuteronomy. 16. God commands to choose and set up Officers, and
therefore is God the chief chuser and setter up of them, and so must he be the
chief puller down of them again: now has God given them no commandment to
put them down again, but contrariwise when we have anointed a King over us at
his commandment, he says, Touch not mine Anointed. And what jeopardy it is to
rise against thy Prince, that is anointed over thee, how evil so ever he be;
see the story of King David, and throughout all the Books of the Kings. The
authority of the King, is the authority of God, and all the Subjects compared
unto the King, are but Subjects still (though the King be never so evil) as a
thousand sons gathered together, are but sons still, and the commandment,
Obey your fathers, goes over all, as well as over one: even so goes the
commandment over all the Subjects, Obey your Prince, and the higher power, and
he that resists him, resists God, and gets him damnation. And unto your
argument, cujus est ligare, ejus est solver^; I answer, He that binds with
absolute power, and without any higher authority, his is the might to lose
again: but he that binds at another man's commandment, may not loose again
without the commandment of the same. As they of London choose them a Major, bu^
may not put down again, how evil soever he be, without the ^^thori^y of him,
with whose license they chose him.

As long as the powers o^ officers be one under another, if the inferior do
the wrong, complain to the higher; but if the highest of all d^e the wrong,
thou must complain to God only; wherefore the only remedy against evil Rulers
is, that thou turn thine eye to thy self, and thine own sin, and then l^^ke
up to God and say: O Father, for our sin, and the sin of ^^r f^^hers, is this
misery come upon us, we know not thee as ^u^ ^^ther, to obey thee, and walk in
thy ways, and theref^^^ th^n know not us as thy sons to set loving School
Masters over us; we hate thy Law, and therefore have thou, through the
wickedness of unrighteous Judges, made that Law which was for our defense to
be a Tyrant most cruel, and to oppress us, and done us injury above all other
kinds of violence and robbing, and amend thy living, and be meek and patient,
and let them rob as much as they will, yet shall ^od give thee food and
raiment, and an honest possession in the earth to maintain th^e and thine
withal.

I will but add one passage more of the same Author, to show him to be always
the same upon any occasion of mentioning the Subjects duty, and then I think
scarce any sober J^dge can require more from one witness. In his Epistle to
the Christian Reader before his book entitled, The practice of Papisticall
Prelates, he gives this Exhortation: Unto all Subjects be it said, if they
profess the Law of God, and Faith of the Lord Jesus, and will be Christ's
Disciples, then let them remember, that there was never man so great a Subject
as Christ was, there was never creature that suffered so great unright so
patiently, and so meekly as he: therefore whatsoever they have been in times
past, let them now think, that it is their parts to be subject in the lowest
kind of subjection, and to suffer all things patiently. If the higher powers
be cruel unto you with natural cruelty, then with sof^nesse and patience, ye
shall either win them, or mitigate their fierceness. If they join them unto
the Pope and persecute you for your faith and hope which ye have in the Lord
Jesus, then call to mind, that ye he chosen to suffer here with Christ, that
ye may joy with him in the life to come with joy everlasting, that shall
infinitely pass this your short pain here. If they command what God
forbids, or forbid what God commands, then answer as the Apostles did,
Acts 5. That God must be obe obeyed more then man. If they counsel you to
suffer unright, then Christ shall help you to bear, and his Spirit shall
comfort you: but only see that they neither pu^ you from Gods word, nor ye
resist them with bodily violence, but abide patiently a while till the
hypocrisy of hypocrites be slain with the sword of Gods word, and until the
word be openly published, and witnessed unto the powers of the world, that
their blindness might be without excuse. Thus Master Tindal.

And by this, and the other two testimonies, I hope you perceive of how far
different a spirit your new pretended Reformers are from those ancient pious
Reformers of the true Protestant Religion. They watered what they planted with
their own tears: These desire to plant in the blood, and water with the tears
of their fellow brethren: Their Arms were their prayers, all the prayers of
these are for Arms. They abhorred tumults and commotions, as Antichristian and
Diabolical: These so delight in them, as that they detest and persecute as
Antichristian and malignant all those that will not run the same tumultuous and
rebellious courses with them. They following the Doctrine and example of our
blessed Savior, and his Apostles, both acknowledged, and yielded all
submission and obedience to Sovereigne Princes, though never so wicked and
tyrannical. These following the suggestions and practices of the Devil, and
his angels, stir up, and foment insurrection and rebellion against their Lord
and Sovereigne, though most Pious and Gracious. I beseech you therefore in the
words of Saint John, 1 Epistle, Chap. 4. Verse 1. Believe not every Spirit, but
try the Spirits whether they are of God, because many false prophets are gone
out into the world.

Here is a fair way of trial presented unto you. Compare the doctrine and
practices of these furious Spirits in these times with the Doctrine and
Practices of those zealous Spirits in former tines, and see and judge which
comes nearest to the Spirit of God and of Christ; and beseech God that that
Spirit may possess you; which is the prayer as well as the counsel of one
that greatly longs after you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ.

FINIS.

