A SOBER CAUTION TO THE COMMON COUNCIL of the City of LONDON, For procuring
his Majesty to come to a Personal Treaty.

By a well-wisher to the City and Kingdom.

Printed in the Year 1648.

A timeous Caution to the Common Council of London.
WOrds in due season are like apples of gold in pictures of silver: It is now
seasonable, if ever, for every conscientious and knowing man, that has the
fear of God, the honor of his King, or the good of this Kingdom before his
eyes, timeously to endeavor the Re-enthroning of our most gracious Sovereigne,
the settling of Religion, and the establishment of the known Laws of the Land.

To you therefore of the Common Council, I humbly and earnestly address my
self; That you would speedily set upon the release of his Majesty, that is
worth ten thousand of us, whose soul longs after peace, and whose heart and
tongue dictate and declare the same. Believe him, trust him, rely upon him,
(peruse his most gracious Messages for peace) and you shall find the fruit of
your obedience, an Act of Indemnity for what is past, and a well grounded peace
for the time to come. After you have surveyed his constancy, observe the two
Houses who scarce go to bed and rise in the same mind, who once in a month
are mad of a new fangle either in Church or State. How many several faces have
they shown this City of late years, nay of late months? For the King, against
the King; for the Scots, against the Scots; for the City, against the City; for
the Army, against the Army, and now for the Army again. Believe their gilded
promises, and they will load you with immunities, but take heed lest those
linkes of pretended privileges, prove not chains to fetter you in the
conclusion.

Trust to their rewards and expect the like of the eleven Members, who for
their good service to them were forced to fly the Kingdom to save their
lives. Rely upon them and you shall have that which is designed that gallant
Citizen Colonel Brown and all his adherents, destruction for their fidelity.
If the demolishing of your works which were cast up with so much indefatigable
pains and cost, will make you strong, and the pulling down of your chains
will assure your safety, their resolve is to make you i^vincible: if to clap up
the Lord Mayor just upon the neck of an Election (to serve their own ends)
be a City privilege, doubt not there is not a man amongst you upon the least
distaste, but shall have his fill of it.

If it be music to your ears to hear a Thanksgiving Sermon for the
murdering of your sons and servants before your doors, you shall never want of
such harmony. Look upon the Army now under the command of the L. Fairfax, and
observe how they have plotted all along their pactises to hide their horrid
proceedings under the vizor of godliness? Entertayne discourse with them, and
you shall hear nothing from them, but of the new man of mortification, self
denial and the like. I do not know what they mean by their self denial,
unless it be to self deny themselves into all the power and purses of the
Kingdom: that is their scope and absolute end, else why have they imprisoned
their King? why have they seized all the strongest holds of this Land, and
invested what Militia they possibly can in their own hands? why else do they
at this time subtily plot, and cunningly contrive, the utter undoing of all
those Citizens that at this time speak the least tittle against that bloody
Traitor Skippon, in ejecting him out of his tyrannical power? How many have
they imprisoned within these few days, and for no other end, but because their
interest is peace?

O that you would seriously consider of this, and that you would choose rather
to die like men, then to live in perpetual slavery. Can any man amongst you
that has the least spark of common sense or reason, imagine, That it is
possible for you to be safe when your neighbor Counties are harassed, their
estates seized, their wives big with child threatened to be pistold, their
horses plundered, their cattle driven away, their corn destroyed, so that a
speedy famine is inevitably threatened. Think your Poor people will in short
time rise and cut your throats for want of bread, if not prevented by your
timely discretion.

Be wise therefore in time, lest you be the Epilogue of this sad Tragedy:
snort not in supine security: when your neighbors house is of a flame, think
not that yours is fire proof. They have not wanted a will, but they have
wanted power to cut your throats; in short time it is to be feared they will
have both. You nourish a Snake in your bosoms, (I mean Skippon) you have
given him warmth, and he will sting you to death. You suffer Warner to trample
upon your necks; you could offer violence to a just King, let not such a
Rebel hold the Sword in his hand. He has sold himself to do wickedness, and
struck hands with those that have drawn the sword of rebellion, and thrown
away the scabberd; he is familiar with none but such whose rebellion have made
them despair of the Kings mercy, such as have dipped their feet in innocent
blood, and are resolved to wade up to the chinne.

Resolve to call a common Hall, fear not the menaces of a few implacable
spirits, who are so deeply interested in this hellish rebellion, that like the
Devil they compass Sea and Land to make themselves proselytes; hearken no
longer to their witchcraft, for their end is to hedge you in to guard their
own lives and estates which lay at stake, to engage you in the same bottom,
to make you as irrecoverable Traitors as themselves, and then their votes are
fully completed, and your ruin is brought home to your doors.

It makes me to stand at a gaze, and wonderment, to see so many wise men to be
rocked in a cradle of good words, into such a Lethargy of destruction; what is
there nothing to awaken you? have you all drank of the Lethean well? has the
spirit of slumber so infatuated you that you will dye in your neasts? me think
the menaces from heaven against Rebellion should unlock your benumbed senses:
me thinks the justness of the Kings cause, the holiness of his life, his
clemency, his justice, his sufferings, his patience in adversity, should thaw
your hearts, and melt you into obedience: me thinks the good affections of all
the Counties round about you, should be an example to you; and will you only
stand out? will you only be notorious in this that you began, increased, and
fomented this Rebellion? and will you end in it too? repent in time, and set
upon the work now ye have an opportunity, else if the King come upon you as
Traitors, and so you receive the recompense of Rebellion; the long sword of
Heaven* either the noisome Pestilence, or the meager faced Famine, sweep you
away and your places be no more seen: if neither of these premises have power
to make you malleable, me thinks the epidemical decay of trade, and the fear
of those numerous growing evils upon you, by reason of the shipping now ready
to turn those streams which were wont to fill you with abundance and plenty,
should stir you up: if all these prove ineffectuall, think that if fire and
brimstone from heaven destroy you not, the justly discontented party of this
Kingdom, resiant in the City (maugre all orders, ordinances of exile) for
their revenge, for the intolerable injuries offered them by you, will see this
City (once the glory of this Nation) consumed into a model of ashes.

In the name of God what is it that should so bewitch you into your present
condition? is it fear that you should offend the Parliament, and so run a
hazard the loss of your estates? if this be it. I wonder when you will be free
of this slavish passion! nay, if the scale be heavy on Fairfax his side, there
is not an estate in this City worth a halfe-penny, longer then they please:
sure I am the eleven Members thought they had dealt wisely enough to save their
estates, but an Independent juggle unhinged them in a moment, and sent them
packing into a strange Country: or do you begin to idolize your Dagon
Parliament, because they grow kind to the City in uncaging your Aldermen?
thank them for nothing, it is as meeere a cheat, as arrant an imposture as
ever was; had they had a plenary power to put their hellish designs in
execution, those grave, loyal, and honest Aldermen should not have drawn
breath at this hour, nor must they look for freedom longer then the Army
keeps out of the walls of this City.

Take but this pregnant example of their actions: the Essex Gentlemen were
thanked for their Petition at first (a mere formality) many Surrey men had
their throats cut for begging the same; that which was a virtue in them and
countenanced at the beginning of this Parliament, is now become a sin
impardonable: Petitions are the undoubted Privileges of the Subject, yet this
liberty in three weeks has cost the County of Kent three hundred thousand
pounds; what is this but the height of robbery? it may be justly maintained
that the Parliament and Army are the greatest thieves in the world; for first
they take our purses, and then they gagge our mouths that we must not speak.

I. D.

FINIS.

