The Humble PETITION OR REMONSTRANCE Of RICH: DAY OF Eton near Windsor, To the
PARLIAMENT of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND.

I. For the repairing of the Decay of Wood and Timber.

II. For the Planting of an able Preaching Ministry throughout the Land.

III. For the Working of the Works of Mercy and Charity: and for an Act
against the pride of Apparel.

LONDON:Printed by M. Simmons in the Year, 1652.

Honorable Sir*
ABove a year ago I petitioned your Honor, and under your name the
Parliament of England, for the raising of a future Plantation of Wood and
Timber throughout the Land: Considering it as one of the greatest comforts of
life, a work of mercy and charity to the poor, of piety toward God, and his
Church, and of absolute necessity for the maintenance of Navigation, the
building of Houses, the maintenance of husbandry, and diverse useful and
necessary Trades in the Commonwealth. All which notwithstanding, it was not my
opinion that the matter could be thoroughly proceeded in so soon as my self
and others could wish or desire: Neither do I hold it the work of one year,
but rather such as will take up an employment for diverse years one after
another successively. True it is, if it like your Honor, I have heard it
estimated by some of good understanding and knowledge, that the loss of any
one year in the due prosecuting of this affair for the Commonwealth, is of
no less value, if not far greater, then the loss of one hundred thousand
pounds. Yet this I consider with my self, that the State may be so employed
otherwise, that they cannot so instantly pursue it as some think they may.
Such a dishonorable, disloyal conceit cannot enter into me, that those which
sit at the Stern, watching and waiting all opportunities to do public good,
can wilfully, enviously, or carelessly betray the honor, strength, comfort, and
conservation of the Commonwealth in such a maine, and most important business
as this. In as much as Wood and Timber will always be worth money, it is in
the power of the State, very easily, and within a reasonable time, to raise
diverse millions of money, by planting and increasing of woods: besides other
comforts and commodities arising thereof. On the contrary, woe to this Land, at
leastwise as I conceive, for the decay of Woods, not only if Shipping shall
fail, whereof it is said to be in apparent danger for time to come, but if
Sea-coale shall fail, as I am sure it may by more accidents then one: the
misery whereof began to be seen and felt not very many years ago, when the
Scots were possessed of New Castle. Certainly, it is the will of God, that men's
lives should by all means be made comfortable, and that we use our wits,
strength, and knowledge, whatsoever it is, to the profiting of one another, and
setting forth the praise of God in the world. Imitating the nature of good
Angels, who though they excel in dignity and beauty all other creatures, yet
they disdain not to be serviceable to men, doing it with singular love, and
good will; and infinitely rejoicing therein. In consideration whereof a certain
Theological Writer has this excellent saying: That after the example of
Angels we ought to employ our selves, in soul, and body, calling, credit, and
all we have for the good of men.

Thus I have presumed (under assurance of honorable favor and leave) to
revive the memory of my late Petition, Proposition, or Remonstrance, for
repairing the decay of Wood and Timber. Toward the latter end whereof I did
intimate to your Honor, how that I had also travailed with the late King for
the planting and propagating of the word of God in a just and due manner
throughout the Land. I did it by way of Petition, as the case necessarily
required, and briefly, and summarily the effect was this: In the first place I
did justly and truly affirm it, that the state and condition of
Impropriations is apparently derogatory to the glory of God, and salvation of
souls. Next, I showed unto the King, how it rested in his own sole power, to
grant Licenses in Mortmaine, whereby to make the Churches capable of a
restoration in that case by due course of Law, and not otherwise. Thirdly, I
proposed a Collection of benevolences to be had and made throughout the Realm
of England, whereby Appropriatories might be satisfied, either in Land, or
money, to the full value of their estates. Lastly, I suggested a competency of
yearly rent to be reserved upon all those Livings, as they should grow to be
purchased, to the King, his heirs and Successors, in lieu, of first Fruits,
Tenths, and Subsidies: to the end that the revenew of the Crown or State,
might not suffer diminution by any device or proposition of mine. This was the
maine ground, and the sum and substance of my Petition. Whereby it may
appear, as I suppose, that I intended no wrong or violence to any, but
proceeded in a lawful, peaceable, and satisfactory way, and not otherwise. As
for a general, free restitution of Impropriations (which has been often and
earnestly urged heretofore) I have ever held it a most unreasonable, and
uncharitable demand, besides the impossibility of obteining it. And in case
that it were possible to have it prevailed in at this day, it would not only
be the undoing of private Families, but also the dissolving of Collegiate
Societies, which are the Seminaries and Nurceries of good learning, and of Gods
true Religion in the Land. It was merely a Satanicall device, tending to the
destruction of souls, when Impropriations were put upon Colleges in exchange
for Lands of another tenure. For then, and from thence-forth, the Church could
not build up it self without destroying it self: In as much as Colleges are
rightly called, Semen Ecclesiae, the seed of the Church.

I omit for brevity sake, to show how the matter was discussed at my attendance
at the Council board, how the King was ready to have proceeded, and by whom,
and under what pretense the proceeding was secretly stopped and stayed. Whatsoever
shall be conceived of my proceeding with the said late King, which is here
above recited, it is a comfort to my Conscience, that I have faithfully
travailed in a lawful and peaceable way for the propagating of the word of
God, which is the glory and strength of a Nation, and the light, and life, and
everlasting happiness of every true Christian Believer. I never proposed any
thing to the said late King, but what I meant to justify at, and to a
Parliament whenever. For though the times then were such, that no Parliament
could be had (the reason whereof I well perceived, and understood) yet I did
not believe that the state of those times would continue long, whatsoever the
alteration should be. And the ground and reason of my conjecture did not fail
me.

Now to crave humble leave to speak somewhat of the matter in general,
although but briefly in comparison of that which might be said, I do thus
conceive of it. There is nothing dearer to God then his sacred Word, and the
saving of souls, for which the Son of God was incarnate, and suffered shame
and reproach, and a cruel death. Now when once the true Religion is
established in a Nation, the planting and propagating of it is of all religious
causes the next in order by the necessity of just consequence. For otherwise,
we make our selves unworthy of so great a benefit, and at length we hazard the
loss of it. As for this our Nation, it has abounded in wealth and peace
heretofore, and that of a very long time together, through the great and rich
blessing of God upon it. Wherefore it is much to be lamented, that in all that
peaceable time, a pious learned Ministry has not been planted, and settled
throughout the Land, as it might and ought to have been. For this cause
especially, as I in my conscience am persuaded, is the wrath of God incensed,
and stirred up against the Land. Other sins there are very great, and many,
even a multitude and heap of them. But the neglect and contempt of the Word of
God in this kind, overthrows all in the foundation. Under correction, it may
seem to overthrow the ground of public proceeding in the late lamentable
war. Which I could declare more particularly, if I thought it convenient.
Sure I am, if we refuse to plant our own, and the only true Religion, when God
gives time and means to do it, our consciences, if we ask them, will tell
us, that we do altogether deserve to be plagued with the contrary. It is Gods
exceeding great mercy, and forbearance, that the true Protestant Religion
(which we praise, and profess) is not utterly taken from us a good while ago,
and the Antichristian placed, and set up in the room thereof. We have wanted
neither time nor means to do the will of God in this kind, but we have wanted
love and good will to stir us up thereunto. If we have found and known the
sweetness of the Word of God in our selves, and for our own particulars, how is
it that we have not earnestly sought to communicate it to others? When thou art
converted, says he, convert thy Brother. It is extreme cruelty, thus to
neglect the souls of our Brethren, and Neighbors, which ought to be as dear
unto us as our own. He lives not the life of a Christian, but a dead, dull,
uncomfortable being he has in this world, whatsoever he is, that enjoys not
the benefit of the word of God duly preached and taught in the days of
solemn Assemblies, I mean, the Sabbath days in the public Churches,
according to the Ordinance and appointment of God. There is nothing under
heaven that may be compared to the benefit thereof. It is the ease and release
of all weekly labor, all worldly sorrow, misery and trouble. And in some
degree it is a lively representation of the Kingdom of heaven, where the
Psalme-singers, the holy Saints and Angels are filled with unspeakable joy and
gladness by their continual beholding of the glorious presence of God, and
giving him thanks and praises: As it is written in the book of the Psalms;
In thy presence is the fullness of joy, and at thy right hand there is pleasure
for evermore. I will shortly conclude this point, with a brief recicall of
that which was uttered at the Council, or rather the Conspiracy of Trent. It
is well known that that Council was packt and plotted for the Pope.
Nevertheless, there were diverse grave, learned, judicious, and religious men
convened therein, and no great favorers of the Pope. Amongst whom the Bishop
of Toledo sitting as Ambassador for his Master the King of Spain, spoke
thus; I have heard it often said, that if there were yet but one soul to be
saved (supposing that the propitiation for sins were not thoroughly made as it
is) Christ would descend again and suffer. Wherefore, quoth he, I marvel
with what Conscience the Pope can give himself any rest, having the cure of so
many Churches lying upon him, and no course taken to discharge the same. Thus
spoke he according to the common error and opinion of the deluded Princes and
people of those times, as touching the unlimited power and jurisdiction of the
Pope over all Churches: The application whereof were easy to be made in regard
of those many desolate and unprovided Churches in this our Land, but I omit it
for brevity sake, humbly referring it, to all pious, prudent, serious, and
religious consideration. For the longer that this matter is deferred, the more
pernicious it is to the State. God never yet left the contempt of his holy
word, and the holy Ministry thereof unrevenged, nor never will.

From hence I shall humbly crave leave to descend to the third, and last
particular, which I had in mine intention to have proposed to the said late
King, that is to say, for the working of the works of mercy and charity toward
the poor, in a magnificent sort, answerable to his regal estate, and in some
degree to the exigency of the people. For otherwise, as for the distributing of
small sums of money at certain times, we know there was an ordinary course
settled in the office of the Kings Almoner. About a year or two ago, I heard
of somewhat that was intended by the Parliament to be done in this kind within
the City of London. Which gives me the greater encouragement to speak and
treat of the matter here. I would not press this duty to the present State in
these so chargeable times, but that I know most assuredly how it may be most
easily and conveniently performed, notwithstanding any taxes or payments now
already imposed upon the people, or ever likely to be imposed. It may be done
in a privative way, and in a positive. In this place I shall only insist upon
the privative, for the increase of the works of charity, by substracting and
taking away from the works of superfluity, vanity, and overflowing
wickedness. My most humble and earnest request now therefore is, that a strong
permanent Act, may be framed and put forth against the pride of apparel. As I
conceive it, the pride of this Land will be the destruction thereof, if it be
not timely repressed: It is so excessive, that I suppose the divine justice of
God cannot bear it. Let not my fancy or folly be objected against me in this
case, but let the matter be examined by the Word of God, which is the rule of
truth. In the third Chap. of the Prophecy of Isaiah, there is a particular
enumeration and recital of those proud fashions and gestures which were used
among the Israelitish women in those days. If any man should go about to do
the like among us, as the Prophet does there, he would seem to trifle and to
deal absurdly and ridiculously. But the Spirit of God does not trifle, neither
is any Word of God idle or vain. If any man should doubt whether the eye and
observation of God were so upon all the actions of men and women on earth, as
to mark and take notice what apparel they wear, and what gesture of body they
use, he might be satisfied in it by the perusal of that place of Scripture. In
the end and close whereof there is no less punishment threatened, then the
destruction of the Land. And did God so hate the pride of women in those days,
and will he tolerate it now in the people of this our Nation? If the misery of
a civil war (which did manifestly threaten our destruction) cannot serve to
bring down our pride, how, do we think, should God deal with us? For in
respect of our obstinate rebellion, and disobedience, we do none other in the
effect, then make this the question: Whether we shall humbly submit to God, and
fear before him as we ought, or that he should yield to us, to give us leave
to live, and do as we list? Do we provoke him to anger, says the Apostle,
are we stronger then he? And both in Leviticus, and Deuteronomy, God threatens
the Israelites, that if they will not turn and repent upon his first
chastising of them, he will increase their plagues seventimes more. Our blessed
Savior in his divine Sermon upon the Mount, pronounces them blessed that are
merciful, as it is in the sixth Chapter of the Gospel of St Matthew, Blessed
are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. If they are blessed that are
merciful, then they are cursed that are unmercifull, and cruel. It is a true
inference, and it is Englands case concerning almsdeeds, and the relief of the
poor. In the proud carriages of men in these days, and their vain, foolish,
and garish attire, as there is a bold audacious presuming against God himself
(for it is done in his sight) so moreover there is a merciless, cruel
persecuting of the poor, whose eyes cannot but behold it, to the grief of
their hearts: according to that saying; The poor are persecuted in the pride
of the ungodly. I know there are diverse other ungodly, and uncharitable ways
of misspending the good gifts and blessings of God in the world, besides the
vanity of apparel. But I insist upon this, because I hold it for the most
general and expensive way. Concerning my poor and unworthy self, I declare
my conscience in this respect: I would not desire to be the Planter of wood,
no, nor of the Word of God it self, without exercising the works of mercy* and
charity to the poor, according to that ability and means, which God should
please to put into my hands: Considering how the Son of God, the second person
in Trinity was content to make himself poor, that he might enrich others, and
how the diffinitive sentence of absolution and condemnation shall go upon it
at the last day. It is not Popery to relieve the poor, as some are pleased to
account it now adays: It is pride, covetousness, and cruelty, not to do it.
No man possibly can know aright how to give alms, or to do any good work
whatsoever, save only the true Protestant, who believes, and knows that
salvation, life, and glory, are already purchased by the death and merit of
Christ, and therefore good works must be done to the glory of God, and Christ,
to testify our faith in him, and our love to him, who has so loved us, that
he gave himself a propitiation, and ransom for our sins. These things I am
bold to propose, because I hold my self bound thereunto in the behalf of
God, and for the public safety of the Land, that the loving favor of God may
rest upon it.

I might enlarge this Discourse to a very great length, but I will rather
abridge it. In the first Covenant that came forth from the Parliament diverse
years ago, this reason was given of all the common calamity that has
befallen us, namely this, that we have not received Christ into our hearts: And
I do verily believe it to be so. For if the love of Christ had been shed
abroad in our hearts, it would have kept us from those great, and manifold
transgressions, which we now stand guilty of: It would have led us into all
good ways, and learned us to keep his Commandments. Nothing in the world
would have been sweeter, and dearer to us. Since I knew this world (in which I
have lived a long time) I never heard the name of Christ so much in the mouths
of men as it is now adays, and has been of late years. That great, and holy,
and excellent Name is worthy to be mentioned, and had in honor, and to be
exalted, and magnified at all times, and in all places throughout the world.
But God grant we may have him in our hearts as well as in our mouths, least
otherwise our deep hypocrisy should be discovered at the last, and we be
found to have collogued with the world, and dealt untruly with God. Amor si
est, mira operatur; si operari renuit, amor non est. The love of Christ, if it
be in us indeed, will constrain us to do those good things, which will seem
strange unto the world: but if we refuse to propound him to us as an ensample,
that we may tread in his steps, how then abides his love in us? If we have yet
received Christ into our hearts, or if we will yet receive him, I am very sure,
the things that I have here proposed will be readily assented unto, and put in
due execution: Wherefore I will not doubt of the integrity, and sincerity of
the Superior Powers under which we live, but that they will set themselves
with all faithfulness and diligence to do the will of God in all things. It
was the voice of an envious malignant Papist, namely, the Cardinal
Matheolangi, that was heard in the Council of Trent, speaking thus to some of
his intimate friends, as concerning Luther: That Luthers demands, and his
vehement complaints against the abuses of the Court of Rome were just, and
reasonable; but that a poor Friar should reform all, this was not to be
endured. I am not so jealous of my poor credit in the world, but I can be
content to be neglected, and despised of all that are of it, of all that are in
it, so that God may vouch safe to have respect unto me, as to one that desires
to fear his Name in truth and sincerity, and to seek his glory, and the good
of his people. Although Monarchy were still on foot, and in place, and power,
yet nevertheless I would be bold to affirm thus much, being able to prove it:
that if this State and Commonwealth shall be preserved from ruin and
destruction, it must be by the benefit of Parliaments, in ordaining good, and
wholesome Laws, and not only so, but seeing them put in due, and strict
execution, partly by imitating the office of Censorship among the old Romans,
whereof we read in their History. I will shut up all with little more then the
recital of a very brief saying in Chrysostom, but somewhat pertinent, as I
suppose, to these proud, licentious, and luxurious times in which we live: It
is not so hard to refute Heretics, as to reform vices. Religion will decay
and dye where dissolutenes of manners is not repressed and kept down. It is
not any singular, censorious conceit of mine, but a common complaint, that the
pride of this Land was never so great as now. I am sure, it is such, and so
great, that it cries for Judgment, True it is, we enjoy great peace, and
quietness at this day, being far above, and contrary to our desert.
Nevertheless, I hold it a clear case, and undeniable, that by reason of
those great, and strange alterations, which have lately happened in our Land,
we do live as yet, but in a controverted divided State: And it is impossible
to secure, and stablish it by any other way, save only by repenting (without
hypocrisy) for the fore-passed time, and now hence forward walking humbly with
God, holding close with him, and working the works of piety, and charity, and
so advancing his glory: Because his loving kindness, and goodness toward us, and
our late Ancestors, and Predecessors, has been exceeding great, but we all
have been unfaithful, and unthankful, abusing our long peace, neglecting his
glory, and our own, and others Salvation, resolutely provoking his wrath.
Wherefore God also has as resolutely revenged his own cause by drawing out
money, and blood in abundance; as it is written; I set every man against his
neighbor.

And he the same God can and will yet further by one means or other, avenge
himself, and will do it like a God indeed* if we deal stoutly, perversely, or
deceitfully with him. Who ever waxed feirce against him, and prospered? So
says the Scripture. And again, it bringth in God thus speaking of himself; I
the Lord am he that searches the reins, and the heart. There is no State in
the world, but is subject to alteration: not any people more apish, more
ridiculous, more fickle, and inconstant then a sort of the English. There is no
stability to be found in the world, nor in the minds of men. It is only found,
and founded in God, who alone is immovable, immutable, worthy to be honored,
and magnified throughout the world, having freely reconciled it to himself, in
a wonderful, ineffable way, by the death of his only begotten Son; In whose
hands is our life, and our breath, who is blessed for ever. As long as I live I
will seek the honor of his Name, though others blaspheme it, and will
endeavor my self to show forth his praise: For his loving kindness is better
then the life it self, even as David says: Consider we then on the contrary
part, what his anger, and displeasure is. And let not mortal, and wretched
creatures, poor silly worms, and vermin, be presumptuous out of measure,
least their breath be suddenly stopped, and then they rue it to all eternity. For
there is somewhat to be feared that is worse then the fire of Hell, if a true
Saint, and Servant of God were not infinitely deceived in so saying, who yet,
without question knew very well, and thoroughly considered what he spoke, and
said in that point: Multi gehennam credunt esse extremum omnium malorum; at ego
e contra ^ hoc semper praedicabo, multo tolerabilius esse gehennam pati, quam
offendere Christum. Chrysostom. in Matheum. Thus did he esteem of the sin and
guilt of offending Christ, counting it much more intolerable then the very
flames of the fire of Hell. Woe unto those souls that shall one day experience
it in themselves. The merciful and gracious Lord preserve this our State from
being deep in that condemnation of offending Christ, and provoking that most
holy One either by words or deeds.

FINIS.

