A DECLARATION Concerning the KING.

From the Citizens of LONDON, AND Their Resolution and Protestation, touching
the Remonstrance of the Army: And Propositions concerning the preservation and
protection of His Majesty's Royal person from violence and injury.

With a Declaration from diverse of His Majesty's loyal Subjects, assembled in
Parliament, touching the Demands of the Army against the King, and their
several Speeches in behalf of His Majesty.

blazon of the City of London used as a printer's device

Also terrible News from the Isle of Wight.

nouemb: 23. London, Printed for Richard Collings, 1648.

A DECLARATION FOR THE KING From diverse of His Majesty's loyal Subjects in
both Houses of Parliament, and the Citizens of LONDON.
The Honorable Court of Parliament having received a Remonstrance, or
Declaration, from the Army, containing diverse Proposals exceeding high and of
great consequence; and upon debate thereof, diverse of the dis-as senting
Members declared a great dislike thereof, and his Majesty's moderate friends
desired it might be laid a side for some certain days others moved that it
might be ejected; and in the conclusion, after they had sufficiently declared
their full sense touching the Desires of the Army, they resolved to lay it
aside till Monday next.

After reading the said Remonstrance, Mr. Pryn made a very learned Speech,
concerning the Demands of the Army, his expressions tending much to the
dishonor of them, who argued very stiffly against the unlawsulnesse of their
Demands.

Diverse other Members seconded him, and desired to insist no further thereon,
but to wave their Proposals for a time.

Yet notwithstanding the said Arguments and Desires, the well affected party
declared a great unwillingnesse to dispense with any time, but to insist
thereon immediately, and to endeavor to give all speedy and possible
satisfaction to them in all things by them desired.

The Declaration of the Citizens of London, concerning the Demands of the Army.
Whereas we have lately received a Paper entitled the Remonstrance or
Declaration of the Army, We do unanimously declare, That We shall willingly and
freely comply with them therein, for the executing exemplary Justice upon all
capital Off^nders, and endeavor the restitution of the Freeborn people of
England to their common Rights, Liberties, and Freedoms, protesting to live and
dye with them therein, for obtaining, effecting, and making future provision
for the same.

Signed by many thousands of the well-affected party in and about the City of
London.

These mutual expressions are said to proceed from those Citizens, who are
known and distinguished by the Badge of Independency; But it is said, that the
Presbyterian party, and others, are resolved to thwart them in their
Engagement, and to declare against some particular Domands of the Army, whom
they conceive to be too high and unreasonable.

But concur with them in their Proposition for the executing of Justice upon
the visible enemies of peace provided a favorable construction may be had on
his Majesty's former actions and proceedings, and that they may be weighed in
the Balance of Equity and Compassion.

Mr. Speaker, The General Council of Officers at their late meeting here have
unanimously aagreed upon a Remonstrance, to be presented to you and in regard
it concerns matters of highest and present importance to your self, to Us*
and the whole Kingdom; I do, at the desire of the Officers, and in the behalf
of them, and my self most earnestly entreat that it may have a present reading,
and the things propounded therein may be timely considered.

St. Albans 2^. November. 1648. Your most humble servant, T. FAIRFAX.

The Charge and Proposals of the Army.
1 That the capital and grand Authors of onr troubles, the person of the King
may be speedily brought to Justice, for the Treason, blood, and mischief he is
already guilty of. 2 That a timely and peremptory day may be set for the Prince
of Wales, and the Duke of York to come in, and render themselves, by which time
if they do not, that then they may be immediately declared incapable of any
government or trust whatsoever, and to stand exild for ever, as enemies and
traitors, to dye without mercy, if ever after taken. And if they or either of
them, renders themselves within the said time, that then the Prince for his
capital delinquency (being in appearance next to his Fathers) and himself and
the Duke to be proceeded against in Justice, or remitted according as they
shall give satisfaction. But however that the Estate and Revenue of the Crown
may be sequestered, and all the matter of costly pomp suspended for a good
number of years, while the desolations and spoils of the poor people may be
repaired for ease of the peoples contributions, 3 That Justice be executed on
a competent number of his chief Instruments that are in the power of the Parl.
so that their exemption from pardon may not be a mockery of Justice in the
face of God and Man. 4 that the rest of the Delinquents (English) may upon
rendition of themselves to Justice, have mercy extended to them for their
lives, and fines set upon them with moderation, and those that have compounded,
to be freed from Suits, Arrests, etc. Now after Justice thus done upon the
forementioned particulars, we propound further for settling of the peace of the
Kingdoms, viz.

1 That a speedy period may be put to this Parl. and teat the power thereof may
again return to the people, by, and whom it was first constituted, and
provision for future, Annual or Biennial, upon grounds of common right
freedom, and safety.

2 That no Delinquents may elect or be elected, at least for some time, and
that there may be a certainty of their sitting, meeting, and ending.

3 That it be declared, that as to the whole interest of the Commons of
England; they are the supreme power, for the making, clearing, or repealing
Laws; for making War or Peace, and for final judgment in civil things without
further appeal; and that all the Commons of England, and all Officers of
Justice, and Ministers of State, shall for the outward man, and outward things
be concluded thereby; provided, these things be reserved from, and not
entrusted in the said Representatives.

1 The questioning or censuring of any man, for any thing said or done, in
relation to the late wars, but such cases as before mentioned.

2 The rendering up, or giving, or taking away of any of the Foundations of
Right, Liberty, and safety to the People, contained in a settlement and
agreement; which to be above Law, and to be signed unto by the People.

That no King; or other public Officer be hereafter admitted, without
subscribing to his settlement.

November. 22. Letters from the Isle of Wight say, That his Majesty begins to
grow exceeding discontented and melancholy, and fears much the present
Overtures of the Army, touching their seizing on his Royal person, which has
occasioned many sundry contemplative expressions from his Majesty, who says,
that if they execute their wills on Him, by spilling of his Royal blood, He
fears diverse more will follow. These dismal Representations causes much
sadness and mourning throughout several corners of the Nation. But it is
thought that some new addresses will be made from the several Counties, to the
Parliament and Army, in behalf of their dread Sovereign the King. And a
Declaration is supposed to be immediately set forth by his Majesty, concerning
the Armies Proceedings by way of Charge against His Royal person.

FINIS.

