Decay of Trade. A TREATISE Against the abating of INTEREST. OR Reasons showing
the inconveniences which will ensue, by the bringing down of Interest money
to six or five in the Hundred, and raising the price of Land in this Kingdom.

By a well wisher of the Commonwealth.

Printed at London for John Sweeting. 1641.

Reasons Against the Abating the Rate OF INTEREST.
Wherein first is showed how that it is not necessary to the raising of the
price of Lands, for that (beside the too much assistance of accidental causes)
Foreign Trade may by a more beneficial way effect the same.
THe Purchase and price of Lands in this Kingdom, does rise and fall by no
other The price of our Land may be raised also by a great increase of our
people and strangers, which would cause the more consumption of foreign wares,
and a less Exportation of our own, whereby the Kingdom would be soon
impoverished.
ways and means (for the common benefit) then by the profit or loss which is
made by the over or underballance of our We have no Treasure but by Trade.
Foreign Trade, that is to say, when we bring in and consume yearly a less
value in Foreign wares, than we export in our own Commodities, we may rest
assured that the difference is brought in and does remain to us in so much
Treasure. And contrariwise, if we consume a greater value in foreign wares
than we do export of our own Commodities, Then is our Treasure exhausted to
balance the account with strangers.

Daily experience does also teach us, that in those Countries where moneys are
scarce, there the Lands and native wares are Ireland, Muscovia, Poland, the
East Indies, and many other places:
cheap, so likewise where money does abound, there the lands and wares are
Spain, Italy, the Low Countries, etc.
dear; And thus it appears that although this Kingdom may be rich in it
self, yet it cannot be enriched but by Our wares make us rich, our Treasure
does enrich us.
Trade only, by adding Treasure to our wares, which Treasure being the price
and measure of all our other means both personal and real, it does thereby
enable many, and multiply the number of Purchasers, which consequently does
cause the sellers of Lands to raise the price; But if Lands be too much raised,
then the proprieties of moneys (or many of them) will endeavor to deliver it
for more profit at Interest, to supply the occasions of those who will employ
it in foreign Trade or otherwise; which does increase his Majesty's Customs
and Subjects Employments. The ill consequences of the Abatement of Interest.


And if the Rate of the Interest be abated thereby to enforce the monyed men to
turn all their means into Lands, then many losses will presently follow both
to the King and his Subjects;

First, if we take the business as it now stands in this Kingdom, There are
many men who have great sums of ready money, although they have neither Skill
nor Much money is put to Interest by the Gentry, Widows, and Orphans.
Will to manage it in Trade of Merchandise, except they should do it to the
ruin of themselves and others also, who have more knowledge and experience;
yet their money is still taken up at Interest and employed by able Merchants to
the benefit of the King and his kingdom;

Again, if the Rate of Interest be abated, it will presently decline the
quantity of our Trade, for monyed men will find means to make it over into the
The Banks of Italy do manage the moneys of their Gentry Widows, Orphans, or
whosoever.
Banks of Italy, and other places, where it may yield them greater profit.

The proof of this Truth is seen in the practice of diverse Nations,
especially, I will instance the Dutch, whose Lands are The Hollanders wealth
and foundation for foreign Trade proceeds not from their Native wares, but
from their fishing in the English Seas, and other industries which here I omit.
little and very dear, because their people are many, and although the
Interest usually given in their Country, does yield them at least double the
profit of their Lands, yet they convey a great part of their moneys into other
Countries where they find most gain. And it is very probable that at least
one third part of all the moneys which are delivered in London at Interest,
appertains to the Dutch, who manage it here by their Factors.

And if it be objected that it is our prejudice to suffer Strangers to carry
away the profit of Interest from his Majesty's Subjects, The answer is, that
(beside their freedom of Commerce) this loss by Interest is repaid with great
advantage to his Majesty in his Customs and Imposts (outward and inward) by
the increase of trade, which adds also unto the Subjects employment in
shipping and diverse other kinds. The Merchant also who disbursteth the
Interest to the Stranger, does thereby reap a greater benefit to himself in
his trade; which causes him to take up the money at Interest: All which gains
may import about 40 per Cent. yearly.

Now if the Interest here were brought to a lower Rate, then our Trade would
certainly decline, and the before written profits to his Majesty and his
Subjects would be lost, and lands would fall in price. For there is no doubt
that not only Strangers, but also the English would convey their moneys and
their plate also (if it be coined into money) into those Italy, Turkey, Spain,
the East Indies, Ireland. etc.
Counties where they can find greater profit: Nor can any strict law prevent
this evil if gain may be obtained.

And if it be yet further objected that a low Interest will give the Merchant
greater encouragement to take up money to enlarge his trade.

The answer is already given, that when the Interest is low, the Merchant shall
find little or no money to take up, which would disaccomodate and perplexe
others also who are no Traders, and force them daily to sell Lands at Where
money fails there land must fall.
low rates to supply their occasions, unto which I add only, that 2 or 3 per
Cent. abated in Interest, is far less considerable in the Merchants gain
than it would prove in the monied man's loss.

I might produce some other reasons to prove that the abating of Interest will
carry our money out of this Kingdom, decline our Trade, and bring down the
price of our Lands, etc. but I omit them for brevity.

The Interest which is given in several Countries: 12 per Cent. yearly. 15
per Cent. yearly. 18 per Cent. yearly. 20 per Cent. yearly. 25 per Cent.
yearly. 30 per Cent. yearly.

The Exchanges for Italy upon the Faires ^f Piacenza and other places, give 8,
9, 10.11, ^2, per Cent. more or less according to the ^^mes of plenty or
scarcity of money in those Countries.

Reasons against raising the Price of our LANDS.
IF the price of Lands should be improved to thirty years purchase as is
desired, shall not the fruits thereof, the Laborers hire, the Cattle, and
all men's expenses be raised in proportion? Shall not the Native Commodities of
this Kingdom, which serve for foreign trade, as Corn, Wool, and the like
together with their manufactures be proportionably raised?

Italy is a rich Country, and very populous, which makes their Land worth near
thirty years purchase, whereby also their Corn Victuals, Cloth, etc. are
sold at far greater prices than we pay here in England, where Land is much
cheaper, and the people nothing near so many in proportion, each Countries
bigness duly considered.

When our wares are thus made dear, whether shall we carry them? in what
Country shall we vent them? when at the prices they are already raised of late
years, we find that the Merchants gain is so little that many are
discouraged to follow their Trade as formerly they did; Is not the use of our
Wares in Foreign parts much declined, Mines of Lead and Tynne being lately
found out in other Countries.

The Company of Merchant Adventurers did heretofore vent fourscore thousand
Clothes yearly in the Nether-lands. And now (since the disturbance by the
Project of Dying and dressing of our Clothes here, which had a fair show, but
a bad effect) they vent not above thirty thousand Clothes yearly, which it
seems also they perform to very little profit; for the Netherlanders of late
years do make Clothes as well, and as good cheap as we can do, with Woolls
from Spain, which are of our English race granted them in the Reign of King
Henry the seventh, and Queen Mary. Now, consider I pray you, how, and where we
shall vent our Native Wares, if we raise their price to a higher rate than
other Nations can and do afford them.

The Exportation of our Corn which formerly returned us much money is now
totally lost by its The multitude of strangers which are now in this kingdom
do much increase our consumption of foreign wares and decrease the Exportation
of our native commodities, which is a direct way to impoverish this kingdom.
They also beggar our poor people by depriving them of their manufactures and
raising the price of corn, victuals, rents, and the like.
dearness here, And if our exportations thus decrease daily, how shall we
perform our Importations without exhausting our treasure.

I must confess that within the time of my remembrance the vent of our Cloth
in Turkey is increased about ten thousand Clothes yearly, but the reason why,
is worth our observation. The Venetians for a long time did serve
Constantinople and diverse places in Turkey with broad Cloth, until the
English about 50 years past, entering into the Trade in those parts, and being
able to afford their Cloth better cheap than the Venetians, they did in few
years drive them totally from that trade of Cloth in Turkey.

And thus we see by plain proof that cheap wares do increase trade, and
dear wares do not only cause their less consumption, but also decline the
Merchants trade, impoverish the Kingdom of Treasure, lessen his Majesty's
Customs and Imposts, and abate the Manufactures and Employments of the poor
in Shipping, Clothing, and the like, which are matters very considerable to be
well and duly ordered for the good of the Commonwealth.

FINIS.

