A DECLARATION FROM THE NOBILITY OF THE KINGDOM OF SCOTLAND IN Behalf of all
the Commoners of that Nation; Wherein is declared their most Loyal Resolution,
concerning (their Dread Sovereign) the Kings most Excellent Majesty.

Together with their Desires to both Houses of PARLIAMENT, touching the
preservation of His Majesty's Royal Person, and restoring of Him to His just
Rights and Privileges.

Whereunto is annexed,

The Kings Majesty's last Message, to His Subjects of ENGLAND touching the
immediate proceedings of the Army, briefly intimating His Gracious Resolution
and Protestation touching the same. Signed, CHARLES REX.

Imprimatur,

Cilb. Mabbotr.

LONDON, Printed for E. NORTON, and are to be sold near (...) Royal Exchange
in Cornhill. 1647.

A Declaration from the Nobility of the Kingdom of Scotland, concerning the
preservation of the Kings Majesty's Royal Person.
THE Kingdom of Scotland finding that their stability and happiness does so
much depend upon the safety and preservation of his Majesty's Royal person;
And being resolved, that no alteration of affairs shall ever separate them
from that duty and allegiance they owe unto him, nor from their constant
Resolution to live in all loyalty and obedience under his Government, have
often shown their earnest desires, and contributed their utmost endeavors,
toward the composure of these unhappy differences.

And the Houses of Parliament having by their Votes of the 26. of October last
intimated unto us their risolutions to apply themselves to his Majesty, and
that they are preparing Propositions to be tendered to Him.

We do desire that they may be expedited, and communicated to us; that
according to our many engagements, and relations, there maybe still a
conjunction of Councels in those things, that are for the common peace and
joint interests of both Kingdoms.

And for the better nsserting of them, and clearing His Majesty's doubts, and
for the giving and receiving mutual satisfaction: We do dosire (in the name of
the Kingdom of Scotland) that there may be a speedy and personal treaty with
his Majesty, as the best and readiest means to obtain the joint Desires of
both Kingdoms.

These we conceive to be the most probable and effectual meanei for attaining
an happy peace, settling of Religion, restoring his Majesty to his just Rights,
and continuing and strengthening a good understanding betwixt these kingdoms,
which are most earnestly desired by the Kingdom of Scotland.

By the appointment of the Commissioners from he Kingdom of Scotland. Lowden,
Lauderdaill, Charles Erskin, Hugh Kennedy, Robert Bu^clay,


^he Kings Majesty's Protestation to his Subjects of England, concerning the
late proceedings of the Army touching his Royal Person.
LIberty being that which in all times has been, but especially now, is the
common Theme, and desire of all men. Common reason shows that Kings less
then any should endure captivity, and yet I call God and the world to witness,
with what patience I have endured a tedious restraint, which so long as I had
any hopes that this sort of my sufferings might conduce to the Peace of my
Kingdom, or the hindering of more effusion of blood; I did willingly undergo:
Bus now finding by too certain proofs, that this my continued patience would
not only turn to my personal ruin, but likewise be of much more prejudice
than furtherance to the public good.

I thought I was bound, as well by natural as political obligations to seek
my safetp; by retiring my self for some time from the public view, both of my
friends and enemins. And I appeal to all indifferent men, to judge if I have
nor just cause to faee my self from the hands of those who change their
principles with their condition; and who are not ashamed openly to intend the
destruction of Nobility, by taking away their negative voice, and with whom the
Ievellers doctrine is rather countenanced then punished.

And as for their intentions to my person, their changing and putting more
strict guards upon me, with the discharging most of all those servants of mine,
who formerly they willing admitted to wait upon me, does sufficiently declare:
Nor would I have this my retirement mis-interpreted, for I shall earnestly and
incessantly endeavor the settling of a safe and well-grounded peace, where ever
I am, or shall be; And that, as much as may be, without the effusion of more.
Christian blood, for which how many times have I desired, pressed to be heard,
and yet no ear given to me.

And can any reasonable men think that according to the ordinary course of
affairs, there can be a settled peace without it; or that God will bless those
who refuse to hear their own King, surely not?

Nay I must further add, That besides what concerns my self, unless all
other chief interests have not only an hearing, but likewise just satisfaction
given unto them, to wit, the Presbyterians, Independents, Army, those who have
adhered to me, even the Scots) I say there cannot (I speak not of miracles, it
being of my opinion, a sinful presumption, in such cases to expect or trust to
them) be a safe or lasting peace.

Now as I cannot deny but that my personal security is the urgent cause of
this my retirement, so I take God to witness that the publipue peace is no
less before mine eyes; And I can find no better way to express this my
profession (I know not what a wiser man may do) then by desiring and urging,
that all chief interests may be heaad, to the end each may have just
satisfaction.

As for example; The Army: for the rest; though necessary, yet I suppose are
not difficult to conient, ought, in my judgment, to enjoy the liberty of their
Consciences, have an Act of Oblivion, or Indemnity, which should extend to all
the rest of my Subjects, And that all their Arreares should be speedily and
duly paid, which I will undertake to do, so I may be heard, And that I be not
hindered from using such lawful and honest means, as I shall choose.

To conclude, let me be heard with freedom, honor, and safety, and I shall
instantly break through this cloud of retirement, and show my self really to be
Pater Patriae.

CHARLES REX. For the Speaker of the Lords, pro tempore, to be commumunicatsd
to the Lords and Commons in the Parliament of England at Westminster, and the
Commissionert of the Parliament of Scotland: And to all my other Subjects of
what degree or calling soever. CHARLES RER.
THis day, being the fifteenth of this instant month, the general Randezvouze
began at Ware, and the rest of the towns adjacent, where was a great
appearance, both of Officers and Soldiers, the General is to be there in
person, and (as its said) has much to declare unto the soldiery, concerning
the present affairs of the Kingdom, and a speedy composure of all
differences, etc.

The dissenting party of the Army that first revolted from the General, are
increased to a great number, and have entered into a mutual Engagement each
with other; which Engagement, each Officer and Soldier, throughout the
respective Ragiments in the Army, wears a Copy thereof in their hats, with
this Motto prefixed thereon, Englands Freedom, Soldiers Rights.



FINIS.

