Spadacrene Anglica, The English Spaw, OR, The glory of Knaresborough,
Springing from several famous Fountains there adjacent, called the Vitrioll,
Sulphurous and dropping Wels; and also other Mineral Waters. Their nature,
Physical use, Situation, and many admirable Cures being exactly expressed in the
subsequent Treatise of the learned Dr. Dean, and the sedulous observations of
the ingenious Michael Stanhope Esquire. Wherein it is proved by Reason and
Experience, that the Vitrioline Fountain is equal (and not inferior) to the
Germain Spaw.

(...). York, Printed by Tho. Broad, and are to be sold in his Shop in the
lower end of Stonegate, near to the Common Hall Gates. 1654.

The English SPAW.
Written by Dr. Edm. Dean, late Physician in York.
CHAP. I. Of the situation of the Town of Knaresborow.
GNaresbrugh (commonly called Knaresborow) is a very ancient Market Town in the
West Riding of Yorkshire, distant 14 miles from the City of York; where the
Pole is elevated 54 degrees, and 20 odd minutes. On the South-west part
thereof is that fair, and goodly Fort, so much renowned, both for the pleasant
situation, and remarkable strength, known by the name of Knaresborow Castle,
seated on a most ragged and rough Rock; whence (as learned Mr. Cambden says)
it is so named.

Both the Castle and Town are fenced on the South and West parts with the
Rivers N^de: which is beautified herewith two fair Bridges of stone, which lead
from the Town into the Forest adjoining, as also unto a larg empaled Park of
his Majesty's, called Bilton-Park, well stored with fallow Deer: part whereof
is bordered with the said river.

The Town it self stands on a hill, having almost on every side an ascent to
it; and about it are diverse fruitful valleys well replenished with grass,
corn and wood. The waters there are wholesome and clear; the air dry and pure.
In brief, there is nothing wanting, that may fitly serve for a good and
commodious habitation, and the content and entertainment of strangers.

Many things are very observable in this place, which because they rather do
appertain to the volumnes of Geographers, and Antiquaries, then to the purpose
intended in this little treatise, are here omitted.

CHAP. II. Of the several earths, stones, and minerals, found near and about
this place.
ALthough there are in sundry places of this kingdom, as many or more several
kinds, and sorts of earths, quarries of stone, minerals, and mines of metals,
then in any other Realm whatsoever; notwithstanding, no one place has been
observed to have them either in such plenty, or variety in so small a distance
as this. For here is found not only white and yellow marble, plaster, oker,
rud, rubric, freestone, and hard greet-stone, a soft reddish stone,
iron-stone, brim-stone, vitreal, nitre, alum, lead, copper, (and without
doubt, diverse mixtures of these) but also many other minerals might (perhaps)
be found out by the diligent search, and skillful industry of those, who would
take pains to labor a little herein.

All which do manifestly demonstrate, that nature has stored this little
territory with a greater diversity of hidden benefits, then great and spacious
Countries otherwise abounding in outward native commodities, and that the
fountains, or springs of water hereabouts cannot otherwise then participate of
their several natures and properties.

CHAP. III. Of the fountains, of pure and simple waters, near and about the
Town.
AS generally most part of the West Riding of Yorkshire (especially the hilly
and more mountainous places thereof) are stored with fountains and springs of
clear, limpid and pure simple waters; so likewise the territory hereabouts is
not without plenty of them. Two whereof have gotten and purchased that
reputation, as to be Sainted: The one called by the name of Saint Magnus, or
Magnus-well: the other, that of Saint Roberts.

These, formerly for a year, or two, have been in great request in these parts
amongst the common sort, much sought unto by many, and great concourse of
people have daily gathered and flocked to them, both near, and afar off, as
is most commonly seen, when any new thing is first found out, Fama enim crescit
eundo, even unto incredible wonders and miracles, or rather fictions, and lies.
All which comes to pass as we may well suppose, through our over much
English credulity, or as I may better say) rather superstition. For to any such
like Well, will swarm at first both young and old (especially the female sex,
as ever more apt to be deluded) halt, lame, blind, deaf, dumb, yea, almost
all, and that for all manner of maladies and diseases, both inward and outward.

But for as much, as these are springs of pure, and simple waters merely,
without any mixture at all of minerals, to make them become medicinable, it is
verily thought, that the many and several cures, which have been attributed
unto them in those times, when they were so frequented, were rather fained and
imaginary, then true and real; and that those, who then visited them, were
desirous (either to uphold and maintain the credit, and reputation of their
Saints, or else, to avoid the scorn and derision of their own delusion) to have
others likewise deceived.

Time has quite worn all their strength, and consumed all their virtues; so
that nothing of worth now remains with them, saving only their bare names and
titles: Sic magna sua mole ruunt.

Wherefore to omit these, as scarce worthy the mentioning; those are chiefly
here to be described, which do participate of mineral virtues, and faculties.

CHAP. IV. Of five fountains near unto the town, which do participate of
mineral virtues.
OUt of the diverse Fountains springing hereabouts, five are worthy the
observation of Physicians. The first whereof is very near unto the river bank,
over against the Castle, called by the name of the Dropping-well, for that it
droppeth, distilleth, and trickleth down from the hanging rock above. The water
whereof has a certain quality or property to turn any thing that lies in it,
into a stony substance in a very short space.

Three of the others (being all of them much of one, and the same nature) are
termed by the country people thereabouts the Stinkingwels, in regard they have
an ill, and fetide smell, consisting most of Sulphure-vive, or quick brimstone.
One of them, and that which has the greatest current, or stream of water, is
in Bilton park

The other two are in the said Forest; one is near unto the Town; the other
is further off, almost two miles from it, beyond a place called Haregate head,
in a bottom on the right hand of it, as you go, and almost in the side of a
little brook.

The fifth, and last (for which I have principally undertaken to write this
short Discourse) is an acide, or tart fountain in the said Forest, commonly
named by the vulgar sort, Tuewhit-well, and the English Spaw, by those of the
better rank, in imitation of those two most famous acide fountains at the Spaw
in Germany, to wit, Sauuenir, and Pouhon: whereof the first being the prime
one) is half a league from the Spa, or Spaw Village; the other is in the middle
of the town.

CHAP. V. A more particular recital of the first four wels.
I Purpose to speak somewhat more in this place of the first four Springs
mentioned in the former Chapter, in regard the consideration of them may
perhaps give some light to those, who shall hereafter search further into the
secrets, which nature may seem to afford in the Country hereabouts.

The first is the Dropping well, known almost to all who have traveled unto
this place. The water whereof distilleth and trickleth down from the hanging
Rock over it, not only dropping wise, but also falling in many pretty little
streams.

This water issues at first out of the earth, not far from the said hanging
Rock, and running a while in one entire current, continues so, till it comes
almost to the brim of the crag; where being opposed by a damme (as it were
artificial) of certain spongy stones, is afterward divided into many smaller
branches, and falls from on high in manner aforesaid.

It is therefore very like that Mr. Cambden in person did not see this
fountain, but rather that he had it by relation from others; or at least wise
(if he did see it) that he did not mark, and duly observe the original
springing up of the water, when in his Britannia he says thus: The waters
thereof spring not up out of the veins of the earth, etc.

Concerning the properties and qualities thereof, I have nothing more to write
at this time (there being formerly little trial had of it) saving that diverse
inhabitants thereabouts say, and affirm, that it has been found to be very
effectual in staying any flux of the body: which thing I easily believe.

The other three are sulphurous fountains, and cast forth a stinking smell
a-farre off, especially in the Winter season, and when the weather is coldest.
They are all noisome to smell to, and cold to touch, without any manifest or
actual heat at all; by reason (as may most probably be thought) their mines and
veins of brimstone, are not kindled under the earth; being (perhaps) hindered by
the mixture of salt therewith.

Those who drink of their waters, relate, they verily think there is gunpowder
in them, and that now and then they vomit after drinking thereof.

The waters as they run along the earth, do leave behind them on the grass and
leaves, a gray slimy substance, which being set on fire, has the right savor
of common brimstone. They are much haunted with Pigeons, an argument of much
salt in them; of which in the evaporation of the water by fire, we found a good
quantity remaining in the bottom of the vessel.

One thing further was worth observation; that white metal (as silver) dipped
into them, presently seems to resemble copper: which we first noted by
putting a silver porrenger into one of these; unto which Sir Francis Traps did
first bring us. Which tincture these waters give by reason of their sulphur.

Touching their virtues, and effects, there may in general the like properties
be ascribed unto them, as are attributed unto other sulphurous Bathes actually
cold, participating also of Salt.

The vulgar sort drink these waters (as they say) to expel reef, and fellon;
yea, many who are much troubled with itches, scabs, morphews, tetters,
ring-worms, and the like, are soon helped and cured, by washing the parts
ill-affected therewith. Which thing they might much more conveniently and more
commodiously do, if at that in Bilton park, were framed to capacious Bathes;
the one cold, the other^ to be made hot, or warm by art, for certain known
hours a day.

CHAP. VI. A more particular description of the fifth, or last Fountain, called
the English Spaw.
THis, being the principal subject of this whole Treatise, is in the said
Forest, about half a league, or a mile and a half, West from the Town; from
whence there is almost a continual rising to it, but nothing so great as the
ascent, is from the Spaw village to the Sauvenir. This here springs out of a
mountainous ground, and almost at the height of the ascent, at Harcgate-head;
having a great descent on both sides the ridge thereof; and the Country
thereabouts somewhat resembles that at the Spaw in Germany.

The first discoverer of it to have any medicinal quality (so far forth as I
can learn) was one Mr. William Slingsby, a Gentleman of many good parts, of an
ancient and worthy Family near thereby; who having traveled in his younger t
me, was thoroughly acquainted with the taste, use, and faculties of the two Spaw
Fountains.

In his latter time, about 55 years ago, it was his good Fortune to live for a
little while at a Grange house very near to this Fountain, and afterward in
Bilton Park all his life long. Who drinking of this water, found it in all
things to agree with those at the Spaw. Whereupon (greatly rejoicing at so good
and fortunate an accident) he made some further trial and assay. That done, he
caused the Fountain to be well and artificially walled about, and paved at the
bottom, (as it is now at this day) with two fair stone flags, with a fit hole
in the side thereof, for the free passage of the water through a little
guttered stone.

It is open at the top, and walled somewhat higher than the earth, as well to
keep out filth, as cattle for coming and approaching to it. It is four
square, three foot wide, and the water within is about three quarters of a yard
deep.

First, we caused it to be laded dry, as well to scour it, as also to see the
rising up of the water, which we found to spring up only at the bottom at the
chink, or cranny, between two stones, so left purposely for the springing up of
the water at the bottom: Which (as Pliny observes in his 31 Book of his
Natural History, and the third chapter) is a sign above all of the goodness
of a Fountain.

And above all (says he) one thing would be observed, and seen unto, that the
source which feeds it, spring and boil up directly from the bottom, and not
issue forth at the sides: which also is a main point that concerns the
perpetuity thereof, and whereby we may collect, that it will held still, and be
never drawn dry.

The stream of water which passes away by the hole in the side thereof, is
much one, and about the proportion of the current of Sauuenir.

The abovenamed Gentleman did drink the water of this Fountain every year
after, all his life time, for helping his infirmities, and maintaing of his
health, and would oftentimes say and aver, that it was much better, and did
excel the tart fountains beyond the Seas, as being more quick and lively, and
fuller of Mineral spirits; effecting his operation more speedily, and sooner
passing through the Body.

Moreover, Dr. Timothy bright of happy memory, a learned Physician, while he
lived, my very kind friend, and familiar acquaintance, first gave the name of
the Engl sh Spaw unto this Fountain, about thirty years since or more. For he
also formerly had spent some time at the Spaw in Germany; so that he was very
able to compare those with this of ours. Nay, he had furthermore so good an
opinion, and so high a conceit of this, that he did not only direct and advise
others to it, but himself also (for most part) would use it in the Summer
season.

Likewise Dr. Anthony Hunton lately of Newark upon Trent, a Physician of no
less worth, and happy memory (to whom for his true love to me, and kind
respect of me, I was very much beholden) would often expostulate with me at our
meetings, and with other Gentlemen of Yorkshire, his patients, how it came to
pass, that I, and the Physicians of York, did not by public writing make the
fame and worth thereof better known to the world?

CHAP. VII. Of the difference of this Fountain from those at the Spaw, to wit,
Sauuenir, and Pouhon.
THis springs almost at the top of the ascent (as formerly has been said)
from a dry and somewhat sandy earth: The water whereof running Southeast, is
very clear, pure, full of life, and mineral exhalations.

We find it chiefly to consist of a vitrioline nature and quality, with a
participation also of those other minerals, which are said to be in the
Sauuenir Fountain; but in a more perfect and exquisite mixture and temper (as
we deem) and therefore to be supposed better and nobler then it. The difference
between them will be found to be only Secundum majus and minus, that is,
according to more, or less, which makes no difference in kind, but in
degrees. This partaketh in greater measure of the qualities, and lesser of the
substances of the Minerals, then that does; and for that cause it is of a more
quick and speedy operation; as also for the same reason, his tenuity of body,
and fullness of mineral spirits therein contained, it cannot be so far
transported from its own source and spring, without loss and diminution of his
strength and goodness. For being carried no further then to the Town it self
(though the glass or vessel be closely stopped) it becomes somewhat weaker: if
as far as to York, much more: but if 20 or 30 miles further, it will then be
found to be of small force or validity, as we have often observed.

Whereas contrariwise the water of the lower Fountain at the Spaw, called
Pouhon, is frequently and usually carried and conveyed into other countries
afar off, and remote, as into France, England, Scotland, Ireland, and to diverse
parts of Germany, and unto some parts of Italy; Yea, and that of Sauvenir,
(which is the better Fountain, and whose water cannot be carried so far away,
as the other may) is oftentimes used now a days at Paris, the chief City of
France.

But this of ours cannot be sent away any whit so far off, without loss and
decay of his efficacy and virtue, so ayrie, subtle, and piercing are its
spirits and mineral exhalations, that they soon pass, vanish, and fly away.
Which thing we have esteemed to be a principal good sign of the worthy
properties of this rare Fountain. So that this water, being newly taken up at
the Well, and presently after drunk, cannot otherwise, but sooner pass by the
Hypochondries, and through the body, and cause a speedier effect, then those in
Germany can. Whereby any one may easily collect, and gather, that this gets
his sovereign faculties better in its passage by and through the variety of
minerals included in the earth (which only afford unto it an halitious body)
then those do.

If then we be desirous to have this of ours become commodious either for
preserving of our healths, or for altering any distemper, or curing any
infirmity (for which it is proper and available) it ought chiefly to be taken
at the Fountain it self, before the mineral spirits be dissipated.

CHAP. VIII. That Vitrioll is here more predominant then any other Mineral.
WE have sufficiently been satisfied by experience and trials, through what
Minerals this water does pass: but to know in what proportion they are exactly
mixed therewith, it is beyond humane invention to find out; Nature having
reserved this secret to her self alone. Nevertheless it may very well be
conjectured, that as in the frame and composition of the most noble creature,
Man (the lesser world) there is a temper of the four elements rather ad
justitiam (as the Philosophers say) then ad pondus; so Nature in the mixture of
these Minerals, has likewise taken more of some, and less of others, as she
thought to be most fit and expedient for the good and behoof of man's health,
and the recovery and restitution of it decayed; being indeed such a work, as no
Art is able to imitate.

That Vitriolum (otherwise called Chalcanthum) is here most predominant, there
needs no other proof, then from the assay of the water it self; which both in
the tart and inky smack thereof, joined with a piercing and a pricking quality,
and in the savor (which is somewhat a little vitrioline) is altogether like
unto the ancient Spaw waters: which according to the consent of all those, who
have considered their natural compositions, do most of all, and chiefly
participate of vitrioll.

Notwithstanding for a more manifest, and suller trial hereof, put as much
powder of Gals, as will lie on twopence, or three pence, into a glass full of
this water, newly taken up at the fountain, you shall see it by and by turned
into the right and perfect color of Claret wine, that is fully ripe, clear,
and well fined, which may easily deceive the eye of the skilfullest Vintner,

This demonstration has been often made, not without the admiration of those,
who first did see it. For the same quantity of galls mingled with so much
common water, or any other Fountain water thereabouts, will not alter it any
thing at all; unless to these you also add vitrioll, and then the color will
appear to be of a bluish violet, somewhat inkish, not reddish, as in the
former, which has an exquisite and accurate conjunction of other Mineral
exhalations, besides the vitrioline. But this probation will not hold, if so be
you make trial with the said water being carried far from the Well; by
reason of the present dissipation of his spirits.

CHAP. IX. Of the properties and effects of Vitrioll, according to the ancient
and modern Writers.
THE qualities of Vitrioll, according to Dioscorides, Galen, Aetius, Paulus
Aegineta, and Oribasius; are to heat and dry, to bind, to resist putrefaction,
to give strength and vigor to the interior parts, to kill the flat worms of
the belly, to remedy venomous mushroms, to preserve flesh over moist from
corruption, consuming the moisture thereof by its heat, and constipating by his
astriction the substance of it, and pressing forth the serous humidity.

And according to Matthiolus in his Commentaries upon Discorides, it is very
profitable against the plague and pestilence, and the chymicall oil thereof is
very available (as himself affirms to have sufficiently proved) against the
stone and stopping of Urine, and many other outward maladies and diseases, (
Andernacus and Gesner add to these the Apoplexy) all which, for avoiding of
prolixity, I do here purposely omit.

Neither will I further trouble the Reader with the recital of diverse and
sundry excellent remedies, and medicines, found out and made of it in these
latter times, by the Spagyrick Physicians, and others: Insomuch that Joseph
Quercetanus, one of those, is verily of opinion, that out of this individual
mineral, well and exquisitly prepared, there might be made all manner of
remedies and medicines sufficient for the storing and furnishing of a whole
Apothecaries shop.

But it will (perhaps) be objected by some one or other in this manner: If
vitrioll, which as most do hold, is hot and dry in the third degree, or
beginning of the fourth, nay, of a caustic quality and nature (as Dioscorides
is of opinion) should here be predominant; then the water of this Fountain must
needs be of great heat and acrimony; and so become not only unprofitable, but
also very hurtful for man's use to be drunk, or inwardly taken.

To which objection (not to take any advantage of the answer, which many
learned Physicians do give, viz. that vitriol is not hot, but cold) I say:
First, that although all medicinal waters do participate of those minerals,
by which they do pass, yet they have them but weakly viribus refractis
(especially when in their passages they touch, and meet with diverse other
minerals of opposite tempers and natures.

Secondly, I Answer, that in all such medicinal Fountains as this, simple
water does far surpass and exceed in quantity, whatsoever is therewith
intermixed, by whose coldness it comes to pass, that the contrary is
scarce, or hardly perceived. For example, take one proportion of any boiling
liquor to 100. or more, of the same cold, and you will hardly find in it any
heat it all. Suppose then vitrioll be hot in the third degree, it does not
therefore follow, that the water which has his virtue chiefly from it, should
heat in the same degree. This is plainly manifest not only in this fountain,
but also in all others, which have an acide taste, being indeed rather cold
then hot, for the reasons above mentioned.

CHAP. X. Of the effects which this Fountain works, and produces in those
who drink of it.
EXperience shows sufficiently, besides reason, that this water first, and in
the beginning cools such as use it: But being continued, it heateth and
dries; and this for the most part it does in all, yet not always. For (as we
shall more fully declare afterward) it effects cures of opposite, and quite
contrary natures, by the second and third qualities wherewith it is endowed;
curing diseases both hot, cold, dry, and moist.

Those waters (says Renodaeus) which are replenished with a vitrioline
quality, as those at the Spaw, do presently heal, and (as it were)
miraculously cure diseases, which are without all hope of recovery; having that
notable power and faculty from vitrioll; by the virtue and efficacy whereof,
they pass through the meanders, turnings and windings of all parts of the
whole body. Whatsoever is hurtful, or endammageth it, that they sweep and
carry away: what is profitable and commodious, they touch not, nor hurt: that
which is flaccid, and loose, they bind and fasten: that which is fastened, and
strictly tied, they loose: what is too gross and thick; they incide, dissolve,
attenuate, and expel.

More particularly the water of this fountain has an incisive and abstersive
faculty to cut and loosen the viscous and clammy humors of the body, and to
make meable the gross: as also by its piercing and penetrating power, subtilty
of parts, and by his deterging and desiccative qualities to open all the
obstructions, or oppilations of the mesentery (from whence the seeds of most
diseases do arise and spring) liver, spleen; kidneys, and other interior
parts (and which is more to be noted and observed) to cool, and contemperate
their unnatural heat, helping and removing also all the griefs and infirmities
depending thereupon.

Besides all this, it comfort the stomach by the astriction it has from
other minerals, especially Iron, so that (without doubt) of a thousand, who
shall use it discreetly, and with good advice (their bodies first being well
and orderly prepared by some learned and skillful Physician, according to the
states thereof, and as their infirmities shall require) there will scarcely be
any one found, who shall not receive great profit thereby.

Moreover, it cleanses, and purifieth the whole mass of blood contained in
the veins, by purging it from the seresity peccant, and from choleric,
phlegmatic, and melancholic humors, and that principally by Urine, which
passes through the body very clear, and in great quantity, leaving behind it
the mineral forces, and virtues.

Their stools, who drink of it, are commonly of a blackish, or dark green
color, partly because it emptieth the liver and spleen from adust humors, and
melancholy, or the sediment of blood; but more especially, because the minerals
intermixed do produce and give such a tincture.

CHAP. XI. In what diseases the water of this Fountain is most useful and
beneficial.
OVer and besides the peculiar and specifical faculties, which this fountain
has, it shows diverse and sundry other manifest effects and qualities in
evacuating the noxious humors of the body, for the most by Urine, especially
when there is any obstruction about the kidneyes, ureters and bladder: Or by
Urine and stool both, if the mesentery, liver, or spleen, chance to be
obstructed. But, if the effect or grief be in the matrix or womb, then it
cleanses that way according to the accustomed and usual manner of women.

In melancholy people it purges by provoking the haemorrhoides, and in
choleric by siege or stool. If it causes either vomit or sweat, it is very
seldom and rare.

See here a most admirable work guided by the omnipotency and wisdom of the
Almighty, that a natural, clear, and pure water, should produce so many and
several effects and operations, being all of them in a manner contrary one to
another, which few medicines composed by Art can easily perform without hurt
and damage to the party. Wherefore being drunk with those cautions and
circumstances necessarily required thereunto, it is to be preferred before many
other remedies, as not only procuring these evacuations; but also (which is
more to be noted) staying them when they grow to any excess. For seeing that
here are minerals contained booh hot, cold, dry, appercive, astringent, etc.
there is none so simple, but must needs think and grant, that it cannot
otherwise be, but good and wholesome in grievances and diseases, which in their
own natures are opposite:

But I may instance in some few, for which it is good and profitable, and
therein observe some order and method; It dries the over moist brain, and
helps the evils proceeding there from, as rhumes, catarhs, palsies, cramps,
etc.

It is also good and available aginst inveterate headaches, megrims, turnings
and swimmings of the head and brain, dizzinesse, epilepsie, or falling
sickness and the like cold and moist diseases of the head.

It cheareth and reviveth the spirits, strengthens the stomach, causes a
good and quick appetite, and furthereth digestion.

It helps the black and yellow Jaundies, and the evil which is accompanied
with strange fear and excessive sadness, without any evident occasion or
necessary cause, called Melancholia or Hypocondr aca. Likewise the cachexy, or
evil habit of the body, and the dropsy in the beginning thereof, before it be
too far gone. For besides that it opens obstructions, expels the redundant
water in the belly, and contemperateth the unnatural heat of the Liver.

It cools the Kidneys or Reins, and drive forth sand, gravel, and stones out
of them, and also hinders the increase or breeding of any new, by the
concretion and sandering of gravel, bred of a viscous and clammy humor or
substance, the same it performs to the bladder for which it is also
beneficial, if it chance to have any evil disposition either in the cavity
thereof, or in the neck of it, and shutting muscle called Sphincter, whereby
the whole part or member, is let and hindered in his office and function.

Moreover if there chance to be any ulcer in the parts last specified, or any
sore, or fistula in perinao through an impostume ill cured, this water is a
good remedy for it in regard of its cleansing, cicatricing and constringing
power and virtue; and for that cause it is very proper and commodious for the
acrimony and sharpnes of Urine, and against the stopping and suppression of
Urine, difficulty of making water, and the strangury.

Although it is very available against the stone in the Kidneys, and against
the breeding and increase of any new there; yea and against little ones, that
are loose in the bladder; yet notwithstanding it will afford little or small
benefit to those, in whom it is grown to be very great and big in the bladder:
because nothing will then serve to break it, as Brassavolus says, but a smiths
anvil and hammar. Nevertheless, if in this case incision be used, it will be
very commodious, both for mundifying and consolidating of the wound, made for
the extraction of it.

It shall not be needful to speak much of the profit, which will ensue by the
fit administration of it in the inveterate venereous Gonorrhaea causing to
cease and stay totally, and correcting the distemper, and the ulcerous
disposition of the seed vessels, and the vicine parts.

There are very few infirmities properly incident to women, which this water
may not seem to respect much. The use whereof, after the advice and council had
of the learned Physician, for the well and orderly preparing their bodies, is
singular good against the green sickness, and also very commodious and
behovefull to procure their monthly evacuations, as also to stay their over
much slowing; as well to correct, as to stay their white floods; as well to dry
the womb being too moist, as to heat it being too cold, through which causes
and distempers conception (for the most part) is let and hindered in cold
Northern Countries, as England and the like. For by the help of it these
distempers are changed and altered, the superfluous humidities and mucosities
are taken away, the part is corroborated, and the retentive virtue is
strengthened.

This has been so much, and so often observed at the ancient Spaw, that it
cannot otherwise, but be also verified at this in after times, when it shall be
frequented (as those have been) with the company of Ladies, and Gentlewomen:
Diverse whereof, having been formerly barren for the space of ten, twelve years,
or more, and drinking of those waters for curing and helping some other
infirmities, then for want of fruitfulness, have shortly conceived after their
return home to their husbands, beyond their hopes and expectations.

Besides all this, it is good for those women, who, though otherwise apt enough
to conceive, yet by reason of the too much lubricity of their wombs, are prone
to miscarry and abort, if before conception they shall use it with those
cautions and directions requisite.

Also it respects very much the hard scirrhous and cancarous tumors, and the
grievous soars and dangerous Ulcers of the matrix. All these excellent helps
and many more it performs to women with more speedy uccesse, if it be also
received by injection. But here by the way, all such women, who are with child,
are to be admonished, that they forbear to use it during that time.

In children it kills and expels the worms of the guts and belly, and
lets and hinders the breeding, and new increase of any more.

I will here forbear to write any thing of the benefits which it affords
against old and inveterate itches, mohphews, leprosies, etc. in regard the
other three sulphurous fountains, before mentioned, do more properly respect
such like grievances. Neither will I now spend any more time in showing what
virtues it has in the cure of the Indian, commonly called the French, or
rather Spanish disease: because experience has found out a more certain and
sure remedy against it.

CHAP. XII. Of the necessity of preparing the body before the use of this water.
IT is not in most things the bare and naked knowledge or contemplation of
them, that makes them profitable to us; but rather their right use, opportune,
and fit administration. Medicines are not said to be Deorum Manus, that is, the
hands of the Gods, as Herophilus calls them, or Deorum dona; that is, the
gifts of the Gods (as Hippocrates believed) till they be fitly applied and
seasonably administered by the counsel and advice of the learned and skillful
Physician, according to the true rules, and method of Art.

Temporibus medicina valet, data, tempore prosunt,
Et data non apto tempore vina nocent.
That is,

Medicines avail in their due times,
And profit is got by drinking wines.
In timely sort; but all in reason.
They do offend, drunk out of season.
Therefore to know the original minerals, faculties, and virtues of this
worthy acide fountain, will be to no end, or to small purpose for them, who
understand not the right and true use, nor the fit and orderly administration
of it. For not only Physic or medicines, but also meats, and drinks taken
disorderly, out of due time and without measure, brings oftentimes detriment
to the party, who otherwise might receive comfort and strength thereby: So
likewise this water, if it be not drunk at a convenient time and season, in due
fashion and proportion: yea, and that after preparatives, and requisite
purgings, and evacuation of the body, may easily hurt those, whose infirmities
otherwise it does principally respect. For medicines ought not to be taken
rashly and unadvisely, as most do hand over head without any consideration of
time, place, and other circumstances; as that ignorant man did, who getting the
receipt of that medicine, wherewith formerly he had been cured, made trial of it
again long after for the same infirmity without any help or good at all;
whereat greatly marvelling, received this answer from his Physician: I confess
(said he) it was the self same medicine but because I did not give it,
therefore it did you no good.

To the end therefore that no occasion may hereafter be either given or taken
by the misgovernment, or over-rashnesse of any in using it to calumniate and
traduce the worth, and goodness of this fountain, I will briefly here show
what course is chiefly to be followed and observed by those who shall stand in
need of it.

First then, because very few men are thoroughly and sufficiently informed
concerning the natures and causes of their grievances, it will be necessary
that every one should apply himself to some one or other, who either out of his
judgment or experience, or both, may truly be able to give him counsel and
good advice concernning the convenience of this fountain. And if he shall be
advised to use it, then let the party (in the fear of God) address himself for
his way to it, against the fit season of it, without making any long and
tedious days journeys, which cause lassitude, and weariness.

Then, being come to the place, he ought after a days rest, or two, to have
his body well prepared, and gently cleansed with easy lenitives, or
purgatives, both fit and appropriate, as well to the habit and constitution
thereof, as also for the disease it self, and as occasion shall require,
according to the rule of method, which teaches that universal or general
remedies ought ever to precede and go before particulars. Now what these are in
special, to fit every ones case in particular, is impossible either for me
here, or any else to define precisely. Ars non versatur circa individua. We may
see it true in mechanical trades. No one Shoemaker can fit all by one Last: nor
any one Tailor can suit all by one, and the self same measure.

Yet in regard it may perhaps be expected that something should be said herein,
I say, that in the beginning (if occasion serve) some easy Clyster may very
fitly be given, as well for emptying the lower intestines from their usual
excrements, as for carrying away and cleansing the mucose slimes contained
therein. After that, it will be convenient to prepare the body by some Julep or
Apozeme, or to give some lenitive medicine to free the first region of the body
from excrements. For otherwise the water might peradventure convey some part of
them, or other peccant matter, which it finds in his passage either into the
bladder, or to some other weak and infirm member of the body, to the increase
of that evil disposition, which is to be removed, or else to the breeding of
some other new infirmity.

Some perhaps will here object and say, that the time of the year, in which
this fountain will be found to be most useful, will be the hottest season
thereof; or (if you list so to call it) the dog days, when it will be no fit
time to purge at all.

To this I answer and say: First, the purging medicines here required are not
strong, and generous, but gentle, mild and weak, such as are styled Benedicta
medicamenta: which may with great safety and profit be given either then or at
any other time of the year without any danger, or respect of any such like
circumstance at all.

Secondly I answer; although this observation of the Dogdayes might perhaps be
of some moment in hotter Countries, as Greece where Hippocrates lived, who
first made mention of those days: yet in colder climates, as England, and such
like Countries, they are of little or small force at all and almost not to be
regarded any whit, either in using mild and temperate purgatives, or almost in
any other; or in blood-letting, though very many, or most do erroniously say
and think the contrary. So that (if there be cause) they may as well and safely
then purge, as at any other time: Or if occasion shall urge, as in plethoricall
bodies, and many other cases, a vein may safely (or rather most commodiously)
be then opened, and so much blood taken away, as the skillful Physician shall
think in his discretion and wisdom to be needful and requisite.

Let no man here think that this is any strange position or a new paradox (for
the learned know the contrary) or that I am studious of innovation, but rather
desirous to root out an old and inveterate error, which in all probability has
cost more English men's lives, than would furnish a royal army, in neglecting
those two greater helps or remedies, to wit Purging and Blood-letting in hot
seasons of the year; which in all likelihood might have saved many of their
lives, while expecting more temperate weather, they have been summoned in the
mean time, or interim, by the messenger of pale death to appear in another
world.

Wherefore let all those who are yet living, be admonished hereafter by their
examples, not obstinately and wilfully to eschew and shun these two remedies in
hot seasons, and in the time of the Dog-dayes, (much less all other manner of
Physical helps) not once knowing so much as why, or wherefore, and without any
reason at all, following blind and superstitious tradition and error, happily
first broached by some unworthy and ignorant Physician, not rightly
understannding Hippocrates his saying in all likelihood, or at least wise
misapplying it: which has so prevailed in these times, that it has not only
worn out the use of purging, but also of all other Physic for that season,
because most people by the name of Physic, understand purging only, and
nothing else; as though the Art and Science of Physic was nothing else, but to
give a potion, or purge. Then we rightly and truly might say, Filia devoravit
matrem.

But forasmuch as most people are altogether ignorant of the true ground or
reason, from whence this so dangerous an error concerning the Dog-dayes, did
first spring and arise, give me leave a little to go on with this my
digression, for their better instruction and satisfaction; and I will briefly
and in few lines, show the case and mistake somewhat more plainly.

Hippocrates in his fourth Book of Aphorisms, the fifth, has these words: Sub
canicula, and ante caniculam, difficiles sunt purgationes. That is, under the
canicular, or Dogstar, and before the Dog Star purgations are painful and
difficil. This is all that is there said of them, or brought against them for
that season or time of the year. A great stumbling block against which many
have dashed their feet and knocked their shins, and a feafull scar crow, whereat
too many have nicely boggled. Here you do not find or see purging medicines to
be then prohibited, or forbidden to be given at all (much less all other
Physic) but only said to be difficil in their working partly because (as all
expositors agree) nature is then somewhat enfeebled by the heat of the weather;
partly because the humors being then, as it were, accended, are more chaffed
by the heat of the purging medicines; partly, and lastly, because two contrary
motions seem then to be at one and the same time, which may offend nature; as
the great heat of the weather leading the humors of the body outwardly to the
circumference thereof, and the medicine drawing them inwardly to the center.
All which circumstances in our cold region are little, or nothing at all (as
formerly has been mentioned) to be regarded. For as Jacobus Hollerius, a
French Physician, much honored for his great learning and judgment, has very
well observed in his Comment upon this Aphorism; Hippocrates speaks here
only of those purging medicines which are strong and vehement, or hot and
fiery; and that this precept is to take place in most hot Regions, but not in
these cold Countries, as France, England and the like.

Over and beside all this, those churlish hot purging medicines, which were
then in frequent use in Hippocrates time, and some hundred years after, are now
for the most part obsolete, and quite grown out of use, seldom brought in
practice by Physicians in these days; because we have within these last six
hundred years, great choice and variety of more mild, benign, and gentle
purgatives found out by the Arabian Physicians, which were altogether unknown
unto the Ancients, to wit, Hippocrates, Dioscorides, Galen, etc. which have
little heat and acrimony, many whereof are temperate, and diverse cooling, which
may most safely be given either in the hottest times and seasons of the year,
or in the hottest diseases. Let us add to these the like familiar and gentle
purging medicines more lately, yea almost daily newly found out since the
better discoveries of the East and West Indies. So that henceforth let no man
fear to take either easy purgatives, or other inward Physic, in the time of
Canicular or Dog-dayes.

The same Hollerius goes on in the exposition and interpretation of the same
Aphorism, and confidently says: Over and besides that we have benign
medicines, which we may then use, as Cassia, etc. We know and find by
experience, no time here with us more wholesome and more temperate (especially
when the Etesian or Easterly winds do blow) then the Canicular days, so that
we find by observation, that those diseases which are bred in the months of
June and July, do end in August, and in the Canicular days. Wherefore if a
disease happen in those days, we fear not to open a vein diverse times, and
often, as also to prescribe more strong purging medicines.

Wherefore away hence forth with the scrupulous conceit, and too nice fear of
the Dog-dayes, and let their supposed danger be had no more in remembrance
among us. And if any will yet remain obstinate, and still refuse to have their
beams pulled out of their eyes, let them still be blind in the midst of the
clear Sunshine, and groap on after darkness: and let all learned Physicians
rather pity their follies, then envy their wits.

CHAP. XIII. At what time of the year, and at what hour of the day it is most
fit and meet to drink this water.
TO speak in general terms, it is a fit time to drink it, when the air is
pure, clear, hot and dry: for then the water is more tart, and more easily
digested, then at other times. On the contrary, it is best to forbear, when the
air is cold, moist, dark, dull and misty: for then it is more feeble, and
harder to be concocted.

But more specially, the most proper season to undertake this our English Spaw
diet, will be from the midst or latter end of June, to the middle of
September, or longer, according as the season of the year shall fall out to be
hot and dry, or otherwise.

Not that in the Spring time, and in Winter it is not also good, but for that
the air being more pure in Summer, the water also must needs be of greater
force and power. Notwithstanding it may sometime so happen in Summer, that by
reason of some extraordinary falling of rain, there may be a cessation from it
a day or two. Or if it chance to have rained over night, it will then be fit
and necessary to refrain from drinking of it, until the rain be passed away
again: or else (which I like better) the Fountain laded dry, and filled again,
which may well be done in an hour, or two at the most.

Touching the time of the day when it is best to drink this water,
questionless the most convenient hour will be in the morning, when the party
is empty and fasting about seven a clock: Nature having first discharged her
self of daily excrements both by stool and Urine, and the concoctions
perfected. This time is likewise fittest for exercise, which is a great good
help, and furtherance for the better distribution of the water, whereby it does
produce its effects more speedily.

CHAP. XIV. Of the manner of drinking this water, and the quantity thereof.
THose who desire the benefit of this Fountain, ought to go to it somewhat
early in the morning; and, if they be able and strong of body, they may do
very well to walk to it on foot, or at least wise some part of the way. Such as
have weak and feeble legs, may ride on horseback, or be carried in the
Coaches, or born in Chairs. As for those whose infirmities cause them to keep
their Beds or Chambers, they may drink the water in their lodgings, it being
speedily brought to them in a vessel or glass well stopped.

It is not my meaning or purpose to describe here particularly what quantity of
it is fit and meet for every one to drink: for this is part of the task and
office which belongs to the Physician, who shall be of counsel with the
Patient in preparing and well ordering of him: who is to consider all the
several circumstances, as well of the malady or disease it self, as of his
habit and constitution, etc. Nevertheless I may advise, that at the first it
be moderately taken, increasing the quantity, daily by degrees, until they
shall come at last to the full height of the proportion appointed, and thought
to be meet and necessary. There they are then to stay, and so to continue at
that quantity, so long as it shall be needful. For example, the first morning
may happily be sixteen or eighteen ounces, and so on by degrees to 20, 30, 40,
50, 60. or more, in people who are of good and strong constitutions. Toward
the ending the abatement ought likewise to be made by degrees, as the increment
was formerly made by little and little.

Here by the way every one must be admonished to take notice, that it is not
always best to drink most, lest they chance to oppress and overcharge nature,
that would rather be content with less. It will therefore be more safe, to
take it rather somewhat sparingly, though for a longer time, then liberally and
for a short time. But, indeed, the truest and justest proportion of it, is ever
to be made and esteemed, by the good and laudable concoction of it, and by the
due and orderly voiding of it again.

It will not be here amiss to add this one observation further: That it is
better to drink this water once a day, then twice, and that in the mornings,
after that the Sun has dried up, and consumed the vapors retained through the
coldness of the night, etc. as is formerly declared. After drinking it, it
will be needful to abstain from meat and other drink for the space of three or
four hours.

But if any one, who has a good stomach, shall be desirous to take it twice a
day; or if any shall be necessarily compelled so to do for some urgent cause,
by the approbation of his Physician, let him dine somewhat sparingly, and drink
it not again, until five hours after dinner be past, or not until the
concoction of meat and drink in the stomach be perfected: Observing likewise,
that he content himself in the afternoons with almost half the quantity he
uses to take in the mornings.

CHAP. XV. Of the manner of diet to be observed by those, who shall use this
water.
THe regiment of life in meats and drinks, ought chiefly to consist in the
right and moderate use of those, which are of light and easy digestion, and of
good and wholesome nourishment, breeding laudable juice. Therefore all those
are to be avoided, which beget crud and ill humors. There ought furthermore
special notice to be taken, that great diversity of meats and dishes at one
meal is very hurtful, as also much condiments, sauces, spice, fat, etc. in
their dressing and cookery.

I commend hens, capons, pullets, chickens, partridge, phesants, turkies, and
generally all such small birds, as live in woods, hedges, and mountains.
Likewise I do approve of veal, mutton, kid, lamb, rabbets, young hare or
severits, etc. All which (for the most part) are rather to be roasted then
boiled. Nevertheless those, who are affected with any dry distemper, or those,
who otherwise are so accustomed to feed, may have their meats sodden, but the
plainer dressing the better.

I discommend all salt meats, beef, bacon, pork, lard, and larded meats, hare,
venison, tripes, and the entrails of beasts, puddings made with blood, pig,
goose, swan, teal, mallard, and such like; and in general all water-fowle, as
being of hard digestion and ill nutriment.

Amongst the several kinds of fishes, trouts pearches, loaches, and for most
part, all scaly fish of brooks, and fresh rivers may well be permitted.
Moreover smelts, soals, dabs, whitings sturbuts, gurnets, and all such other,
as are well known not to be ill, or unwholesome to feed on. All which may be
altered with mint, hyssop, anise, etc. Also cre-fishes, crab-fish, lobsters,
and the like, may be permitted.

Conger, salmon, eels, lampries, herrings, salt-ling, all salt fish, sturgion,
anchovies, oysters, cockles, muscles, and the like shel-fish are to be
disallowed.

White-meats, as milk, cruds, cream, old cheese, custards, white-pots,
pudding-pies, and other like milk-meats, (except sweet butter, and new cream
cheese) are to be forbidden. Soft and rear eggs we do not prohibit.

Raisons with almonds, bisket-bread, marchpane-stuff, suckets, and the like,
are not here forbidden to be eaten.

Let their bread be made of wheat, very well wrought fermented or leavened; and
let their drink be bear well boiled and brewed; and let it be stale, or old
enough, but in no wise tart, sharp, or sower: And above all, let them forbear
to mix the water of the fountain with their drink at meals; for that may cause
many inconveniences to follow and ensue.

Let me advice them to eschew Apples, Pears, Plumbs Codlings, Gooseberries, and
all such like summer fruits, either raw, in tarts, or otherwise: Also pease,
and all other pulse; all cold sallets, and raw herbs; onions, leeks, chives,
cabbage or coleworts, pompons, cucumbers, and the like.

In stead of cheese at the end of meals, it will not be amiss to eat citron,
or lemon pills condited, or else fennel, annise, coriander comfits, or biskets
and carawayes, as well for to discuss and expel wind, as to shut and close
the stomach, for the better furthering the digestion of meats and drinks. And
for that purpose, it would be much better, if the Physician, who is of
counsel, should appoint and ordain some fit and proper Tragea in gross powder
mixed with sugar, or else made into little cakes or morsels. Likewise marmalade
of quinces either simple or compound, (such as the Physicians do often
prescribe to their patients) may be used very commodiously.

After dinner they ought to use no violent exercise, neither ought they to sit
still, sadly, heavy and musing, nor to slumber and sseep; but rather to stir a
little, and to raise up the spirits for an hour or two, by some fit recreation.
After supper they may take a walk into the fields, or Castle yard.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Symptoms or accidents, which may now and then chance to
happen to some one or other in the use of this water.
ALthough those who are of good and strong constitutions, observing the
aforenamed direction, do seldom or never receive any harm, or detriment by
drinking this water: notwithstanding it may sometime so fall forth, that some
of the weaker sort may perhaps observe some little, or small inconvenience
thereby, as retention of it in the body: inflation of the belley: costivenesse,
and the like. Wherefore to gratify those, a word or two of every one shall
suffice.

1. Then, for to cause a more ready and speedy passage of it by Urine, it will
not be amiss to counsel the party after his return to his lodging, to go to
his naked bed for an hour or two, that thereby warmness and natural heat may be
brought into each part of the body, the passages more opened, and nature by
that means made more fit and apt for the expulsion of it. During which time it
will be very requisite to apply hot clothes to the stomach: but not so as to
provoke sweat. Or else, to cause it to void and evacuate either by urine,
stool, or sweat, exercise will be a good help and furtherance; if the party be
fit for it. But if neither of these will prevail, then a sharp glyster ought to
be administered.

The inflation or swelling of the belly happens principally to those, who have
seeble and weak stomachs; who may do very well to eat annise, fenel, or
corriander comfits at the fountain between every draught, and to walk a little
after; or else some carminative Lozenges, made with grossepowders, spices and
seeds for breaking of wind: or what other thing the learned Physician shall
deem to be most fit and proper in his wisdom and judgment. But if the
inflation chance to be very great, then a carminative glyster must be ordained.

Such as shall be very costive may do well to eat moistning meats, and to use
mollifying herbs, raisons stoned, corants, damascene prunes, butter, or the
yolks of eggs, and the like in their broths, or pottage. If these will not be
sufficient, then let a day be spared from drinking the water, and let the party
take some lenitive medicine, laxative corants, or some such like thing; whereof
the Physician has ever great choice and variety, wherewith he can fit directly
every one his case; to whom present recourse ever ought to be had, when any of
these, or the like accidents do happen, as likewise in all other cases of
weight and moment.

A Relation of certain particular Cures, Done by virtue of Mineral waters, near
Knaresborow in the West Riding of the County of Yorkshire.
By Mr. Michael Stanhope.
BEFORE entrance be made into the ensuing Narrations, it will not be amiss for
the satisfaction of such who are mere strangers to the knowledge of these
waters, to let them know, that it is now full six years since notice has been
given to the world by a Book called Spadacrene, or the English Spaw, (written
by Dr. Deane, a learned Physician of the City of York) of certain Mineral
waters, seated in the Forest of Knaresborow, in the West riding of Yorkshire.
Since which time diverse have repaired to them from remote places, (according to
their several necessities) to experiment them, invited by the Doctors promised
probabilities of their useful operations. What has been the event and
success, I have undertaken to present to the public view.

That Spaw Springs though they usually challenge (as does the Spaw in Germany,
which is the reason we give them the same name) a singularity in easing and
curing (such as are curable) of the Stone and Gravel, as also in opening the
obstructions of the Spleen, and allaying all Melancholy effects and passions,
yet it will appear by the subsequent Discourse and Relations, that this kind
of water has other rare and secret influences and operations, which has
procured no small wonder in those who have observed the effects; the particular
instances whereof, (without any longer suspending thy expectation) I now intend
to enter upon, beginning first with the cure and alleviation of the stone, and
other distempers incident to the Kidneys and Reins.

In the year 1626. Mistress Rolf of Hadley in the County of Suffolk, having
occasion to give a visit to some of her near friends in Yorkshire, within a
few weeks of her stay there, she found her self suddenly surprised with
extraordinary sharp fits, which by their symptoms did manifestly appear to be
the stone. Hereupon she applied her self to the Physicians advice, but finding
little or no ease by their prescriptions (though probable ones) she was
persuaded to try the new water at Knaresborow, where she had not continued
above a fortnight, but she voided many stones, to the number of an hundred
bigger and less, whereby she was quit of all her pain, and has ever since
continued in health, free from all manner of annoyance in that kind.

Henry Curra of Whardale in the Western parts of Yorkshire, servant to Sr.
Peter Middleton, about the age of 50 years, having suffered much pain for
diverse years, his fits of the stone being so violent, that he was not able to
rid on horse back, or to ly in his bed an hour together without rising, nothing
that he could take affording him any ease, he went at last to the Spaw Spring,
where having drunk the water about a month, he voided diverse stones, some
whereof he has to show, being bigger then a great Pea. He returned home eased
of all his pain, he recovered his strength, and is now well able to ride about
his occasions without any disturbance, nor has he ever since (being now three
years) had any fits worthy of complaint.

Henry Rowly of Linton, near Weatherby in Yorkshire, of the age of sixty
years, much perplexed a long time with the stopping of his water, by his repair
to the Spaw, voided much gravel, and from that time was no more troubled so
long as he lived:

Mistress Barker of Doare in Darbeshire, about the age of 34 years, had a
dangerous ulcer in her Kidney, besides a very obstructed body, wherewith she
was brought so low, that she was not able to go without the support of one or
two; her stomach had lost its appetite, not able through weakness to digest
any meat, no nor the most apt broaths that could be made, so that she was
forced to sustain nature by returning to her infant pap. In this weak and
desperate condition (having formerly not spared to use all the helps that could
be devised by the Physician) she was gently brought to the Spaw, not expecting
(as she told me her self) to be recovered, only she thought it not fit to be
wanting to any means that might be propounded. It pleased God to give such a
blessing in the use of the water (which she daily drunk as well as she was
able) that within a few days there came from her an incredible deal of putrid
matter, which gave her such ease, that by degrees she gathered strength, her
inward parts were deopilated, her stomach restored, and within the compass of
five weeks she was (to the wonder of all that had taken notice of her) reduced
to a most apparent state of health and ability of body. I seeing her this
Summer, 1631. at the Spaw, (for it was the foregoing year she had received her
Cure, and this year came only to the water to confirm her self) could not but
admire to behold so fresh a look, and so well-liking a body, considering the
report of her former exceeding weakness.

I will not say it were time lost, but it might be better spent then to
multiply all the known examples in this kind, the foregoing ones being of
sufficient proof to make good the waters efficatious use in the infirmity of
the stone. Not that I am to seek for more, for I might (but that I willingly
avoid superfluous tediousnes) add to the other.

Mistress Ellis, wife to Mr. Ellis Minister at Beaverley, who received a
wondrous cure in the like ulcerated part.

Mistress May, a Citizens wife of York, who after many years trouble, (being
of great age) was absolutely freed from her long continued fits of the stone,
with diverse others whom I purposely omit (nothing being more ordinary) that
others may come into play (though of a differing kind, yet) of remarkable note.

For Melancholy and Splenetique effects, there are few or none (that I have
ever yet heard of, who have repaired to this Spaw water, but have found
extraordinary ease, and a great abatement of those disturbances which are the
ordinary unwelcome attendants of that distemper.

Amongst others Mr. Sacheveril of Derbishire (hearing of this Spaw water) came
to York to advise with D. Dean, who after he had fitly prepared his body (a
rule grossly omitted by many) sent him to Knaresborow to drink of the water,
being in the year 1630, to his great relief. For whereas he had been
exceedingly long time perplexed with many fearful passions, and upon slight
occasions apt to entertain horrid and astonishing imaginations, (the ordinary
companions of that disease called Hypochrondriaca passio) he returned to York
to give D. Deane thanks for his sending him to the water, professing his
spirits to be much cheared, his fancy cleared from all cloudy and misty
conceits, which his very look and inspection did witness, and so he returned
home, continuing ever since in a constant tenor of a quiet and uninterrupted
condition.

Mistress Air, wife to M. Anthony Air of Rampton in Nottinghamshire, a
Gentlewoman of much worth and esteem for her approved virtue, and all other
rerequisites that give luster to her Sex, had (with the expense of much money)
tried what could be done in the taming and qualifying of that same dull
melancholy humor, her self not unseen (as in many rare secret so) in curious
receipts of that kind, at length grew weary in trying conclusions, receiving
little or no benefit by any. She was drawn at last by report of the Yorkshire
Spaw, to try the effects of it, which was in the year 1629. where she found
more comfort and case by one months use of the water, then she could ever
receive by all the best advise her money could purchase.

Others I have known affected or rather afflicted in this kind, who have
acknowledged to have received great benefit by this water, whose names and
stories I spare, the forenamed being sufficient instances of the powerful
effect of this water in moderating this same Ludibrium Medicorum, the
melancholy humor.

I shall now present a missellany of other cures, or rather wonders, worthy the
serious consideration of the learned, and the admiration of all.

M. William Thompson Postmaster of Weatherby in Yorkshire, had continued
desperately sick of a hectic fever 28 weeks, living then in Cambridge shire.
He had used the advice of the best Physicians in those parts, and was at last
given over as a man past hope, his weakness being such, that he went not to
stool in all that time, but by the help of a suppository, or the like means. In
this poor estate (hearing of this water) he adventureth in the depth of winter
(a most unseasonable time by the consent of all those who write of the use of
these kind of waters) to experiment them, and so with some difficulty he was
brought to Weatherby being distant from Knaresborow four miles. Having rested a
day or two, he began to drink of the water, which had such good effect in him,
that without any pain at all he had the benefit (the first day) of nature, and
within a few days he found a strange alteration in his body, his stomach was
quickened, and his spirits strangly revived. He continued the drinking of the
water 14 days, till at length he was not sensible of any defect that might
cause him to make any longer use of it.

To be short, within a small time (through Gods blessings) merely by this
water, he was restored to be a perfect man, and so continues. This was in 1628.

Mr. Fowls a gentleman of Scotland, and advocate of Edenborow, about the age
of 57. years, through a weakness of all his limbs proceeding (as may be
supposed from a relaxation of the sinews, was not able (but with much
trembling) to lift his hand to his mouth, or to get on, or off his horse, but
with much help, he came to Knaresborow in the year 1627. where having staid
about a month, drinking every morning of the Spaw spring, and making use of
the Sulphur water by way of bath at his lodging, before he departed he was able
to perform all fit offices about himself, without the aid of any, and has
continued in good state of body ever since.

Mr. Rauden of Rauden in Yorkshire, had been many years soar vexed with
terrible pangs, and gripings in his body, so that through the continual
extremity of his distemper, his flesh was decayed, his appetite lost, and his
sleep very short and unquiet. He had used the advice of some of the best
Physicians of the Kingdom, but finding little or no ease, he came to try what
the Spaw water would do, being then but newly divulged. Not many days after
he had drunk of the water, he avoided two great chains of worms, being either
of them above a yard long, which though they seemed diverse worms linckt
together, by several motions in many parts at once (which had they been, would
have amounted to thousands) yet were but one, of which the learned report that
kind of worm to be of a strange and scarce credible length. About four days
after he voyded 4 other single worms, great and very long, but dead: After
which he voided no more, but was freed from all manner of pain, and by degrees
and steps ascended again to his former best health, and has continued a a
sound man ever since.

The confident knowledge hereof invited a Gentleman (a neighbor of his) called
Rockley, having continued long a very infirm man, and not able by any means to
understand the cause of his weakness, to try the water, where after he had
staid a few days, there came from him fourteen worms, or rather Monstra as
some will term them, every one about an inch long and alive, their heads were
black, and their tails tipped with black, all of them having many feet, about 6
days after he voided 4 more of the like form alive: Most of them he kept alive
in a box a few days which were seen of many, with no little wonderment. Since
which time he has recovered strength, and lives now in very good health.

The Lady Vavasor (wife to Sir Tho. Vavasor Baronet of Yorksh.) had lost in a
manner the use of all her limbs through what distemper I know not, but she was
brought to such a degree of weakness, that child like she was rockt in a
cradle: there were no means unassayed which might re-inable her, but all in
vain. In this estate she was brought to the Spaw water, by the use whereof (by
Gods mercy) she was restored to strength and health.

One William Shan of Medley in Yorkshire, being much troubled with the stopping
of his water, which caused intolerable pain, in a desperate method in one of
his fits (being a man of extraordinary courage) caused an instrument of Iron to
be made by an ordinary smith about the bigness and length of a pack-needle.
This (not any other daring to do it) he (boldly rather than wisely) thrust up
into his yard, and pulling it forth violently, he opened the passage, so that a
great quantity of water with an intermixture of blood issued forth, by reason
of a dangerous wound made by the instrument, which after proving ulcerous,
could by no means be healed. He (at his last refuge) repaired to the Spaw
water, where within a few days he received not only cure of his former
stoppage of water, but was perfectly cured of his ulcer.

One Walls of Copeland in the County of Northumberland, about the age of fifty
years, being of an extraordinary corpulency of body, his belly especially of a
vast greatness. For diverse years he had not been able to go the space of an
hundred yards (especially if it were an ascent) without resting himself, his
breath failing him upon the least extraordinary motion. By the drinking of the
Spaw water he was brought to that pass within three weeks, that his belly did
fall to an ordinary size, he was able to go from the Town of Knaresborow to the
Spring (which is a mile and a half, part of it being a great ascent) without
any desire of ease, and has continued ever since a man as able to foot it, as
most of his age.

The like effect the late Right Honorable Countess of Buckingham found, who
this last Summer 1631. vouchsafed to honor the Northern Spaw with her presence.
Her infirmity (I have it from her own mouth) was a shortness of breath, not
being able to get up an ordinary pair of stairs, but with much difficulty of
breathing, and resting once at the least. There is none will question but her
ample fortune was able to command the choicest helps of Physic: Which failing
she had recourse to Wellingborow, but even that water (so much famed) was not
able to perform any thing worth her stay. At last she was advised by a learned
Artist (who was no stranger to this our Spaw) to make trial of our water. Her
Honor was pleased to tell me (having drunk orderly of the water about ten
days) that she found the whole frame of her body reduced to a very good
temper, and for that particular, which occasioned her coming to the water, she
did profess seriously, that she was well able to mount two pair of stairs
without either support, or the least desire of respite. The time of the year
was somewhat too far spent at her coming to the water (for it was the middle of
August) so that the coldness of the air and frequent showers, forced her
departure before the water could finish its work, which was no small prejudice
to her after being.

Mrs Fairweather of the City of York, dwelling in Micklegate had been long
troubled with a dizinesse in her head (call it the Vertigo or what you please)
so that if she did but stoop to the ground (looking downwards) she was ready to
fall; by the use of the Spaw water for the space of a month was absolutely
freed from this her distemper.

The Lady Hoyl wife to the new Lord Mayor of the City of York, after she had
been the mother of four children, did fall into a strange infirmity. Her face
(for the most part every ten or eleven weeks after she had conceived) did swell
and grow very red, many knots arising in diverse parts of her face. The swelling
sometimes was such that it almost deprived her (for the time) of her sight:
during the continuance of which trouble she miscarried of three or four
children together. It must be supposed one of her ability (being happy also by
enjoying a tender loving husband) could want no means that part could afford,
but no proof or good success was found. She was at last advised to repair to
the Spaw, where she stayed about three weeks, finding apparent signs of her
bodies alteration. Within two months of her return home, it pleased God she
conceived, continuing in a constant state of health to the time of her
delivery. She has since then been blessed with diverse children, not having the
least touch of her former distemper.

A poor boy about the age of 13 years, had often strange fits like those of
the Epilepsie, or falling sickness, yet somewhat differing from the ordinary
fits of that disease, neither soaming at the mouth, nor showing any distortions
of countenance. He would lie (as if he had been dead) the space of a quarter of
an hour, without the least motion. In this case he had continued a year and
more, and did usually fall two or three times a day. He was brought to drink of
the Spaw water, and within ten days did so alter, that he did not fall above
once in six days space. He returned home in hope of recovery, yet too soon if
my advice might have taken place; but the party that brought him thither, told
me he was not able to stay in regard of the charge.

Mistress Sadler daughter to that same reverend Sage of the Law, Sir Edward
Cook (let her pardon me that I close the relations of the Spaw with her name,
who for her worth and excellent parts deserved to be ranked and equalled with
the best of her sex) came to the Spaw in the year 1630. Her distemper, (as near
as I can inform my self) was a long continued fixed pain in her head: It is
very probable that she received benefit by the waters use, which encouraged her
to repair to the water again the last year 1631. And pity it were she should
not find good success, she showed her self so rare a pattern of patience, in
attending the issue of six weeks stay, not any one that I have observed,
proceeding in the whole course in drinking of the water, with such constant
observation of all those Rules which are requisite to be observed, by those who
expect the benefit by the water.

And now having finished what I think fit to instance concerning this our Spaw
water, I will add a few experiments of the Sulphur Spring.

Maud Bogge (for by that name she is commonly known) a woman of an ordinary
condition, dwelling in the City of York, about the age of 50 years, had a
swelling about her ancle, which had continued long: the place was for the most
part, very red and hard, whereunto was applied diverse means by the Surgeons to
bring it to a head, but nothing availed. Her pain did daily increase, the part
was grown monstrously great, whereby she began to lose the use of her limb. She
was at length advised to go to the Sulphur Spring near Knaresborow, whither
(with much ado) she was brought on Horseback. The next day after her coming,
she drunk liberally of the water, which purged her in a violent manner, and at
night she bathed her leg in the water at her lodging. This course she continued
three days, during which time the swelling abated very much, and she was able
the fourth day to tread on the ground so boldly and firmly that without
expecting any further operation of the water, she returned to the City of York
on foot, as if she scorned any other help, and within a week she was so
perfectly cured, that diverse who had seen her sweld leg, did admire to see her
trot up and down the City, as if she never had ailed any thing. This was in the
year 1627. This Summer being 1631. I spoke with her at York from whom I had her
story. D. Dean and diverse in York taking special notice of it.

In 1629. there came a poor man to make use of the Sulphur Spring, whose name
and abode I have not had the opportunity to learn. He had a great swelling in
his knee which had continued long; be place was exceeding hard to feel too, and
grown over with hair nor could the force of any medicine make it to yield to
any abatement or suppuration. He drunk of the water daily, which purged him, and
bathed his leg often in it, within less than a fortnight the part did
sensibly soften, and soon after did break; whence issued a great number of
small worms, to the amazement of diverse. Freed from these he was much
refreshed, and in few days returned home, by all appearance a sound man. A
noble Knight [St F.F.] (who lived then near Knaresborow) took (as there was
good cause) special notice of this strange cure) whose unblemished reputation
is a sufficient warrant to satisfy me in the publishing of it.

One Benson who dwells near the Spring, assured me a poor woman had received
the like cure in one of her breast whereof he was a witness.

There is nothing more familiar then for poor people to repair to this Spring,
most of them (that have the patience to stay) receiving cure of old sores, and
ulcerated parts. What inward diseases this water does properly respect, has
not yet (which is great pity) been judiciously examined: but that it may be
usefully applied, this one following instance may fully satisfy.

One Smith, a Shoemaker dwelling in the City of York, was extremely overgrown
with the Scurvy, so that he was in some danger of his life, usual medicines
nothing availing. He was at length advised by a learned Scholar in the City
(by profession a Divine, yet versed of late in Physical notions) to send for
the Sulphur Spring water to his house, which he not very willingly did,
thinking it a hard task to drink water in the cold of Winter. His ordinary
draught was half a pint in the morning, which had such good success in him,
that within less than a month he was by this and other means, quit of this
disease.

The like effect a good old man in the City experimented to his great relief.

Lo here two Springs of admirable operations! And if an exact Sumetritian by
the proportion of Hercules his foot, be able to collect the whole fabric of
his body, why may not the learned (whose serious thoughts are bent upon the
Theory of Natures secrets) from these examples deduce excellent conclusions of
large and ample use.

I had thought to shut up this Discourse, but that I am loath to smother any
thing that may tend to the public good.

Those who have observed the wonders of this our happy Isle, have taken notice
of a Spring seated underneath the Castle of Knaresborow, commonly called The
dropping Well, famous for the turning of whatsoever is cast into it, or
casually falls in (as moss, leaves, sticks, and the like) into stone:
whereupon it is that this Spring is visited of many by way of admiration. But
time has of late discovered a Physical use of this water, namely that it is
an infallible cure for a flix.

This year 1631. it was my chance to be a witness of this particular, A
Minister of Yorkshire, one Greatheed, came to Knaresborow to give his
attendance on a Noble Gentlewoman, whose infirmity did crave the aid of the
Spaw water: He (not intending to drink of the water seriously) thought he might
safely now and then (as many do for companies sake) take a few draughts of the
Spaw Water: within a weeks stay (by what accident I know not) he was overtaken
with a violent flix, which continued three days in such a degree of excess,
that there was just cause to fear. At that time there was happily in the house
a Physician of good note, one Dr Web (a Gentleman of extraordinary curious
parts, besides his exact knowledge in his profession, to whom those Northern
waters are indebted for his careful examination of them, and his willingness
to advance their due fame) whose advice being craved, (and time it was to
advise, for the party was brought so weak, that he was stepped into a degree of
convulsions) he (out of former experience in a noble Lady in the same case, who
(all other means failing) had present help by this Dropping Well) presently
caused him to drink a draught of the said water, which without dallying
instantly stayed the flix, so that within a few days he became a strong man.

FINIS.

