A DECLARATION MADE By the Rebels in IRELAND, AGAINST The English and Scottish
Protestants, Inhabitants within that Kingdom.

ALSO A traitorous Oath and Protestation lately contrived by the Confederate
Rebels in a Council held at Kilkeney, against the Parliament of England, and
Protestants of the three Kingdoms.

AND A general Proclamation (published by the said Council) for arming of all
Catholics from 18. to 60. for subduing of all Protestants in the Kingdom of
Ireland.

Published according to Order.

Printed at Waterford by Tho. Bourke, Printer to the Confederate Catholics of
Ireland: AND Reprinted at London by R. Austin, for J. T.. 1644.

I Have here presented to your viewes what effect the first Cessation of Arms
with those bloody Miscreants, the Irish Rebels, has wrought. 1. The sending
over of an Army to take part with the Malignants in our own Kingdom against
the King and Parliament. 2. The fresh arming of many thousands of the Rebels by
supply from Dunkirke, France, and diverse parts of the Low-Countreyes; by which
means infinite store of all sorts of Ammunition is come to them. 3. A
sufficient scope to fortify themselves in diverse of their strong holds, and
victualling themselves, by receiving the last Summers Harvest. 4. Unheard of
bold and insolent Propositions to His Majesty for a peace, justifying
themselves in their bloody rebellious actions, as has already been made
appear to all men's view: which Propositions of theirs cannot but be
destructive to all Protestants within His Majesty's Dominions. For confirmation
whereof I pray you take notice upon what condition Protestants may live among
them: by this ensuing Oath framed by their supreme Counsel (as they term
themselves) to be tendered to all Protestants in that Kingdom, seconded with a
general scandalous Proclamation, for the arming of all persons from the age of
18. to 60. the better to overawe that poor handful of our English Protestants
yet scatteringly remaining among them, in which Proclamation is set forth also
what character they hold of these honorable Houses of Parliament, and of all
our well-affected Protestants: after the reading of which Proclamation, I hope
there is no well-affected Protestant within His Majesty's whole Dominions, that
will desire, or wish any other peace with that wicked portion of Babels
children, then Joshua and the Israelites had with the Canaanites, but will
rather set their heads, their hearts, their hands (and what else possible may
be conducible) to bring that Kingdom to an habitation for Gods true
Israelites, that the Gospel of Christ may once more flourish there; and that
more gloriously then ever; to which my prayers and service are wholly dedicated.

A Declaration of the Lords, Gentry, and others of Leinster and Munster, of
their intentions toward English and Scottish Protestants, Inhabitants within
this Kingdom.
WHereas we are informed, that it is generally conceived and believed by the
English, and Scottish Protestants Inhabitants of this Kingdom, that we the
Lords, Gentry, and others of the said Kingdom have taken Arms, and taken
Forces, for the extirpation and banishing of them out of this Kingdom, thereby
to acquire to our selves their goods and estates: we therefore desire to be
rightly understood: for we hereby declare, that we never consented, nor
intended, nor newill intend, nor condescended to any such act, but do utterly
disclaim them: but that each man known to be a moderate conformable
Protestant, may (as well as the Romish Catholics) respectively live and enjoy
the freedom of their own Religion, and peaceably and quietly possess their
own estates, so far forth as they, or any of them, shall join with us in this
Oath following:

I A. B. Do in the presence of Almighty God, and all the Angels and Saints,
and by the Contents of the Bible, promise, vow, swear and protest, to bear
true Faith and Allegiance to our Sovereign Lord King Charles, and the heirs
and successors of his body begotten, and will defend him and them, as far as I
may, with my life, power, and estate, against all persons that attempt any
thing against his or their Persons, Honors Estates, and Dignities: and that I
will with the exposing of my life, power, and estate, join with the said Irish
or any other, to recover his estate, royal Prerogatives, forcibly wrested from
him by the Puritanes, in the Houses of Parliament in England, and to maintain
the same against them and all others, that shall directly or indirectly
endeavor to suppress or do any act contrary to regal government; as also to
maintain Episcopal Iurisd^ction, and the lawfullnesse thereof in the Church,
powers and Privileges of Prelates, and the lawful Rights and Privileges of
the Subject: And I will do no act or thing direct^y or indirectly, to hinder
the free and public exercize of the Romish Catholic Religion in any His
Majesty's Dominions, and that I will join with, and be assistant to the
members of this Commonwealth for redress to be had of the grievances and
pressures thereof in such manner and form as shall be ^hought fit by a lawful
Parliament, and to my power as far as I may I will oppose and bring to condign
punishment, even to loss of life, l^berty, and estate, of all such as either
by force, or practice, counsels, pl^ s conspiracies, or otherwise, do or
attempt any thing to the contr^r^, of a^y Article, Clause, or any thing in this
present Oath, Vow, or P^otestation, contained, and neither for reward, fear,
or punishment, or any respect whatsoever, shall relinquish this Oath and
Protest^tion. So help me God.

This Declaration and Oath was entered in the Counsel Book of Kilkeney, and
this is a true copy thereof. Witness the hand of

Jeremy Green, Clerk of the supreme Council of Kilkeney.

God save the King. By the Confederate Catholics of the Supreme Council.
WHereas the Scottish Army in the Province of Ulster, and other their adherents,
in the said Province, and other parts of the Kingdom, have of late (as often
before) taken a traiterous Oath of Covenant against his sacred Majesty, his
Crown, and Dignity, and made an unchristian and profane Vow for the utter
extirpation of the Irish Nation, and total suppression of the Catholic Roman
Religion, Subversion of Monarchical government, and introduction of confused
Anarchy within this Realm: and not contented with the inhumane and unparalleld
Massacres by them committed on poor laborers, women, children, and many
thousands of other Innocents of our Nation, without distinction of age, sex, or
condition before the conclusion of the Cessation at Siggins Town, on the 15.
of September last, notwithstanding continual depredations, robberies, thefts,
burnings, and destruction of all the Corn and Inhabitants in many Counties and
territories within the said Realm, and elsewhere by them acted before the said
Cessation: the said traiterous Covenanters receiving their maintenance, support
and orders, from the Rebels now in arms against His Majesty in England; have
augmented, and do rather multiply and increase, then diminish their exhorbitant
courses: and whereas the said rebels have joined in a strict union and
confederation to destroy the Irish Nation root and branch (as they term it)
and their Ministers and adherents, by their directions, at Sea as well as at
Land, do exercise no less cruelty: for, as often as their shipping do meet any
weaker Vessels at Sea, transporting men from this Kingdom for His Majesty's
service in England, if Irish men, though Protestants, and valiant and useful
servitors against the confederate Catholics in this war, the Irish are thrown
over board, as does appear by the late throwing into the Sea, and drowning of
an Irish Company of Foot of Colonel Willoughby's Regiment, all Protestants,
and servitors as aforesaid; and many women in their passage from Dublin to
Bristoll, by one of the pretended Parliament ships, and sundry other examples
of that kind, against the Law of War and Nations. And whereas the said
Scottish Army, all composed of Rebels and Assassinates, are now in their march
in great numbers toward the three Provinces of this Kingdom, to accomplish
the plots and machinations aforesaid: And whereas the said Rebels in England
have provided a great Navy, a considerable part whereof does surround the sea
coast in this Kingdom, and are resolved the next Summer, if it rest in their
power, which God defend, to land great Forces in the Province of Munster and
Leinster: and the said Rebels of Scotland have the like design of landing of
Forces in the parts of Ulster, next unto the Province of Conaght: And whereas
the Auxiliarie Forces of the three Provinces, designed and raised for the
necessary defense of our Religion, King, and Nation, are now marched to the
Province of Ulster, under the Command of our very good Lord the Earl of
Castlhaven, General, appointed by the last general Assembly for the
expedition of Ulster, to repel the said fury and insolency of the said Rebels.
Wherefore we hold it of absolute necessity for the safety of the Kingdom, and
His Majesty's interest therein, that all the said other three Provinces be
forthwith in Arms, as well to preserve themselves at home from the said
intended invasions, as also to be ready to assist the said Army abroad marched
into Ulster, if need require. We do therefore by this public Act and
Proclamation, order, command, and require all the Lords, Knights and Gentlemen,
Freeholders, and all other persons, from the age of 18. years, to the age of
60. forthwith to put themselves in arms and posture of defense; and such as
want arms and ammunition, and are able, are hereby required to provide the
same forthwith, for themselves, their servants and retinue. And for the better
effecting this high and important service, we do hereby require, order and
command all and every the Governors, Deputy-Governours, Majors, Sheriffs, and
all other Head-Officers of the respective Counties, Cities, and incorporate
Towns of this Kingdom within our quarters, viz. the Governors,
Deputy-Governours in the Counties where they are Governors, to call to
assistance the high Sheriff, and two or more of the Commissioners of the Army:
and in Counties where there is no Governor, the high Sheriff, calling to his
assistance three, or more of the Commissioners, of the Army: and in Cities, and
corporate Towns, the Major and other Read-Officers, taking to assistance the
recommended Sheriffs and Bailiffs thereof, or any one or more of them,
forthwith to summon all the Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and Freeholders, and
others, able and fit to bear arms, between the ages aforesaid, to appear
well armed upon a certain day, and in a certain place, with the said
respective Counties, Cities and Towns respectively, and upon such appearance,
to inlist the names, sirnames, age, arms and ammunition of every person, who
will so appear, in a book fairly written, and the said Governor,
Deputy-Governours, Major, high Sheriffs, and other Head-Officers, taking to
their assistance, as aforesaid, are hereby required and authorized to impose
Fines, to the double value of the arms and ammunition, upon any person or
persons so summoned, that will make default, who ought to have, according to
the meaning of this our Proclamation, and of other our former Proclamations, to
this effect: and to impose the single value of the arms he should have, upon
such as will appear, and not be armed as becomes: And we require the said
governors, and other Officers aforesaid, at their perils to make due return
unto the general Assembly now near at hand, or unto us, in a fair book
fairly written, of the number, names, surnames, arms, ammunition, defaults,
and fines aforesaid, at the furthest, by the 6. day of the month of August.

Given at Kilkeney the 6. of July. 1644. Mount-Garret. Fz. Tho. Dublin. Antrim.
Nettevill. Arthur Iveagh. John Cloynfect. Tho. Preston. Edmond Fitz-Morris.
Rich. Bealing. Tirlogh O Neile. Patrick Darcy. George Comins.

Printed at Waterford by Tho. Bourke, Printer to the Confederate Catholics of
Ireland.


