A DECLARATION From his Excellency, with the Advice of his COUNCIL of WAR:
Concerninghe present distempers of part of Commissary General Iretons and of
Colonel Scroops Regiments to undeceive the deluded party, and to leave those
excuselesse who refuse (upon pardon herein offered) to return to their former
obedience.

Signed by the Order and appointment of his Excellency the Lord Fairfax, Lord
General and his Council of War.

Aulton, Hamshire. MAY 12. 1649. Ri. Hatter Secret.



LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for R. M. 1649.

A Declaration from his Excellency the L. Fairfax, with the Advice of his
Council of War.
BEing informed by the Officers of Commissary General Iretons Regiments, of the
late unheard of, and not to be paralelled violation of the Government of the
Army by diverse Soldiers, who without and against their Officers (no just cause
or provocation being given for their so doing) have seized four Colors
belonging to the said Regiment, and are marched away with them; and since of
the like practice in Colonel Scroops Regiment, endeavoring (as I hear) to
persuade others unto the like unlawful actings.

I have though fit to publicsh this Declaration to see if it shall please God,
the persons so offending, will be by the reasons therein contained, convinced
of the evil of their actions, and return again to their obedience; and to
prevent others from the like practice: And if not, that I may thereby be clear
from all the misery and evil likely to ensue thereupon, in case there shall be
a perfisting in the said disorder, and I be necessitated out of the duty I owe
to God, and the disharge of my trust to the Parliament and People of this
nation to enforce a submission and obedience to the Authority committed to me
for the good of the public.

This heady and unlawful action has these two evils in it, the one, against
God and his sacred name, the other against the liberty and peace of the
Commonwealth.

You are not ignorant what a blessing has gone along with your endeavors
against the enemies of God, and your Country, whilst you stood faithful to
the trust reposed in you, engageing your selves against the Common enemy, to
our liberty and peace, and all this by the presence of God with you. But by
this unwarrantable act of yours, how do you avowedly declare your disowning of
that Providence, trusting rather to the violence of your own spirits, then
waiting to see what issue God will give to the great affairs of this Nation.
And if you shall persist herein and be the occasions of another war, you will
give the enemy advantage to say, their Cause has been good all along, and that
now this division amongst us is a Judgment of God upon us for opposing them,
and doing such things especially in the execution of Justice, as does rejoice
honest hearts to think of, but the enemy so much study to revenge.

Secondly, you do also disowne the act of God in denying obedience to those who
by his clear Call are set over you, without any provocation on their part, or
so much as reason given by you for your so doing; and herein you will be found
resisters not of man but of God. No man is able to foresee the manifest hazard
likely to befall this poor wasted Nation, by this act of yours, for

First, You will hereby give opportunity to the Cavaleirish party to shelter
themselves an fly to Arms under the protection of this distemper, and

Secondly, You do manifestly hinder the relief of Ireland, where many persons
of honor and honesty are ready to be swallowed up by those blood-thirsty
Rebels for maintaining the very same cause with s here: And if it shall happen
that they be ruined there, what can be expected but an immediate coming over of
those forces into England to revive their old cause and quarrel here.

And if I be rightly informed, I hear that you make this to be one of your
pretenses, to this your irregular and ungodly acting, That you are necessitated
to go for Ireland, which if you shall refuse, you shall be disbanded
dishonourably. Although I know, and you might have known also (if you would
have had patience to have been rightly informed) that indeed there is not a
word of truth, neither in the one nor in the other; The Parliament nor my self
resolving to compel any one to that service, or to punish in the least for
refusing the same. The Lot being cast (as it was) put the disposal of men for
that employment upon God, who has thereby decided it; and if you can satisfy
your consciences in neglecting so clear a call, let that be between God and you,
that being all the inforcement or compulsion that either was or is intended.

And though you may pretend that things are not settled for the good of this
Commonwealth, yet how unwarrantable a thing is it for you upon such deceitful
pretenses, sithence, the said things might for ought you know in due time be
settled; nay, and are now upon a settlement, (if these distempers of yours
hinder not) even upon a bare supposition to run into a positive and notorious
act of mutiny and disobedience, against all rules of honesty and good
conscience, yea and against the known lawful Authority of this Nation, which
has done greater things for the good and welfare of the people, then any of
their Predecessors have done in a thousand years before.

And if you have not quie lost your understandings and consciences, (and are
thereby become incapable of satisfaction) what reason have you to quarrel at
the Parliaments Proceedings, who have improved their time in doing the most
necessary things first? which if they had not in their wisdoms preferred in
point of time, to those you would have (for there lies all the ground of
murmuring in discontented spirits) the good things you pretend to, and some
call for, could never have come in to act at all, no more then they are like
now to do, if by this outrageous act of yours the Land be brought into another
war; the only design and means the Malignants and other the implacable
enemies of the welfare of the Nation have, to keep those good things from us:
And therefore I shall desire all men amongst you, who are capable of
satisfaction, a little to consider how the Parliament have spent their time
since they were free to act for the good of the Nation, and then weigh (whether
the things they have done could have given place to those, you, and some other
murmuring spirits would have? and whether it be lawful for you to rise in
Rebellion upon a bare supposition and pretense, that the things you stand for
will not at all be brought to pass? whereas indeed the Parliament has
declared their resolutions therein, and are at this time in a hopeful way to
accomplish them, if they be not hindered by this so unwarrantable act of yours.

The Parliament begun with that great act of Justice, which was by good men so
called for, and was indeed so necessary a duty to take off the pollution of
innocent blood, wherewith the Land was defiled; wherein what was done, through
what difficulties, and how much time was spent, is obvious to all unprejudiced
Persons.

In the next place the removing of the House of Peers, which challenged so
great a share in the Legislative power, without whose concurrence every thing
that tended to the public good received a stop, and could not pass into a
Law, and therefore would be without effect, whereby the Legislative power is
brought into the Representatives of the People, with what difficulty this was
obtained they best know who had the trouble of it? and what time and labor it
cost to effect this, and to make Laws against Kingship, and a House of Peers,
that they never return again upon us, (except by this Act of yours) is
likewise most evident.

The next in point of time was the providing to secure trade by putting a fleet
to sea, and what they encountered with in this work, the stores of the Navy
being emptied and all treasuries exhausted by those in Parliament, who drove on
the Kings design, on purpose to make it impossible to get out a fleet this
Summer, that by this and disbanding the Army they might the better bring on an
unworthy and unsafe Peace with the King, and thereby cause our misery the
subversions of our Liberties, and Tyranny to fall irresistably upon us; And
notwithstanding all these difficulties the Parliament has to the securing of
Trades, and defense of the Nation from foreign invasion, put out the greatest
fleet to sea that ever this Nation did, whereby the Trade is revived, which was
almost sunk, and the enemy disappointed of their mischievous designs against
us.

In the last place before the things you so much urge could be thought on, it
was judged by the Parliament a thing most necessary, to take off free quarter
to prepare wherewithal to relieve Ireland, and to provide for Soldiers
arrears: in all which they have so far proceeded, (though with much expense
of time and meeting, many sad obstructions by reason all Treasuries were so
anticipated) that free quarter is totally taken off, except you now again
begin it, (and then I doubt the Country will hardly judge you friends to their
Liberties, or at all trust your fair pretenses.) The relief of Ireland also
is so provided for, as that the Soldiers who is designed thither is equally to
be paid with those remaining in England, and both theirs and those here, so
taken care for in point of Arrears; as that the only best and most present
security and satisfaction in England, viz. the late Kings Parks and his
Revenues is by the Parliament settled for their satisfaction; And to the endt he
Soldiery might neither be delayed nor defrauded in the stating and auditing
their Accounts, it is referred to the Field-Officers of each respective
Regiment to perform the same; and if this Justice and favor deserve the
requital of such actings as these? let the whole Nation judge.

These things being done, and the other things of settlement comprised in the
Agreement (presented with all humility from the Council of the Army,) being
begun upon, and now in hand, and that in particular of putting a period to this
present Parliament, and settling a future equal Representative, the first in
their consideration; what is the cause, and how will it be answered to God or
men to have so rash an act as this is, performed by you upon no provocation so
much against your duty and trust, and all obligations which may be expected
from honest men?

For you (I say) to cast off this Authority upon so weak and mistaken grounds,
how think you? are you able to answer the same?

Many things more might be urged in aggravation of this offense but because I
had rather see you return to your obedience, then delight to put my finger
upon the fore; I thought fit to let you know, that if after all this, you all,
or any amongst you shall submit and return, I am ready and willing to pass by
and pardon: But if you shall persist in your obstinacy, I shall endeavor by
force to reduce you, and therein put my self and the business upon God.

FINIS.

