A DECLARATION AND REMONSTRANCE OF THE INHABITANTS OF SOVTH-WALES.

WITH The last transactions between the Scots and their King, And other
remarkable intellignece of the proceedings of the Kirk Parliament and ARMY of
SCOTLAND.

ALSO, The Lord Deputy of Irelands Summons sent to General Preston Governor of
Waterford and General Presitons answer thereunto.

TOGETHER With a MESSAGE from the Prince of Orange to the Magistrates of
Amsterdam,

June 28 LONDON, Printed for J. C. and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange,
and without Cripplegate, 1650.

A LETTER FROM NEW CASTLE, CONTAINING The last Proceedings in Scotland, and the
progress of their declared King.
SIR,
TWo ships are brought hither, which were taken prize by Capt. Halls squadron,
he has been very active, in securing these parts from Pirates and Robers;
those; now taken are French, a Capt of one of the ships reports, that the
declared King of Scots was at Sea, and for two or three days after his putting
forth the weather was fowl and stormy, his resolution (says the relator) is
for Scotland, but that might change with the wind, and then he is carried back
again, or some other way. The news we have from Scotland is to this purpose,
Committees are appointed in the several Shires, to take account of the
Magazines and furnish men with Atms; The recruits have arms already delivered
out to them, and are in a daily posture, some say in expectation of a Southern
Alarm, others that they may be ready to attend their tituler King, who is as
zealously expected, as surely disposed of it once amongst them; the rumor goes,
that if he comes into that Kingdom, he shall be brought to Aberdeen or Glasco,
and not to Edinburgh, and that the Parliament will rejourn thither, and if he
be thus conformable to the Kirk, and receive benediction to his sacred Crown
(as they call it) oh what hopes will it give of a Presbyterian-Prosolit fit to
plum the wings of Jure devino, that they may prey upon the Civil authority. One
Smith (I cannot learn what Country man he is) was apprehended and committed
into the Marshals hands) for saying that the Clergy, and the Lords of Scotland
consulted together to keep the people in slavery, the condition of the common
people there being little better then those in England which once held
vilianage, and for that they find, that many of them begin to take notice of
that freedom which others do enjoy, the Lords fearing their Diana should fall to
the ground, labor to support the hight of a Tyranical Government, and thereby
to keep the people in a state so far from relieving themselves, that they shall
not have means to know the happiness of good Commonwealths, where none can
truly say they are miserable or unfortunate. Its thought he will for this
suddenly undergo the Church censure; and then you know what judgment follows,
by the late execution of their Kings Cosen. Lieut. Genesis Lambert has a gallant
Brigard toward the Borders, and Col. Pride is marching that way. All things
are in a peaceable condition here.

Newcastle 23. of June 1650.
A Letter from Bristol.
THe report goes that the Scots declared King, is gone Northward, a ship is
latly taken the Cap. whereof had a Commission from the Prince. From Ireland we
receive Intelligence as follows. The Lord Deputy Ireton has his head
quarters at Clomwel, he has sent a Summons to Waterford, with certain
conditions for the Soldiery, which if they accept of, they shall have liberty
to march away accordingly, the conditions are these, viz. 1. That the Soldiery
shall have liberty, to march away with Ammunition, Arms, bag and baggage, and
have a safe convoy four miles. 2. That at the four miles end, they shall lay
down their Arms, which shall be delivered to such as his Lordship, or the
Superior there shall appoint. 3. That when they have laid down their Arms as
aforesaid they shall enter into an engagement, not any more to take up arms
against the Parliament of England. 4. That upon performance of the particulars
aforesaid, they shall have Protection to live peaceably at home, and enjoy what
is their own; And some Officers have liberty to travel beyond Sea. 5. That the
Inhabitants of the town shall have liberty to dispose of their own Estates.


General Preston being Governor of this place, returned answer, That it was
the first Summons and conditions that ever he rec^ived from any assailant, and
although he we^^ besieged, he is an old soldier, and could not accept of
conditions unsought for.

Unto this the Lord Deputy sent a reply, letting him understand, that if he
remained obstinate, the business would shortly be in another way desided
betwixt them; and he doubts not, but God will continue the owning of his own
cause, and be avenged on such an idolatrous Rebel, having nothing whereof to
boast but (Devil-like) his long continuance in sin.

The Inhabitants of South Wales, considering with themselves the happy peace
and freedom, they enjoy under the present Government, and the present dangers,
by reason of discontented and disaffected persons, have jointly set forth a
Declaration, which follows, Hic Verbis.

That the singular clemency and favor extended by you to our long seduced
Country, as well in clearing the Inhabitants thereof from the guilt wherein they
had involved themselves, with Offenders of a deeper stain, and interpreting all
their failings, as the effects of fear and self-preservation, as in man fasting
your care and goodness for the eternal Welfare of a people whose ways had
lately been in opposition to your just proceedings, is an abundant refreshment
to our hearts, and an ample Testimony to the world, That the spirit of him who
prayed, and laid down his life for his enemies, is your great Counselor, in
the high and weighty affairs you manage for the Commonwealth: And that the
inestimable benefit which we do, and our posterity in after ages shall reap, by
that Act for propagating the Gospel, is an indelible engagement upon us to to
bless God, that inclined our hearts to grant the same: And we trust it will
appear to your eternal honor, that the preaching of the Gospel, is not the
least and most inconsiderable means, to secure and establish your present
Government.

Now for these so large and acceptable favors, so far beyond our merit or
expectation, proceeding from the Load through your piety and prudence; The only
return we are enabled to make, is, our most humble and thankful
acknowledgements thereof, with our cordial profession of all our future loyalty
and integrety, by Gods assistance, to the utmost hazard of out lives and
fortunes, to the advance, and due execution of all services, according to your
honorable and just commands.

Letters from Holland verefie, that the P. of Orange gave the Magistrates of
Amsterdam a visit. And sent them a Message to this effect, viz. That the
General of the united Provinces desired Audience in Common Council; but was
denied.

FINIS.

