A PUBLIC DISCOVERY OF A SECRET DECEIT.

OR, The Man of Sin unmasked, his sheeps-clothing of glorious pretenses pulled
off; and his Wolvish inside set forth in its colors. Where may easily be
discerned Satan transformed into the resemblance of an Angel of light, in that
Sect or Society commonly called QUAKERS.

BEING Nineteen Quaeries, directed to their Speakers at the Bull and Mouth near
Aldersgate: and answered by that grand fomenter of Heresy, James Nayler. With
a Reply thereunto, and Fourteen Queries more returned by him unto me, fully
answered: And Twenty four more proposed.

By me JOHN DEACON.

Isaiah 9.16. For the leaders of this people cause them to err, and they that
are led of them are destroyed.

Jude 16.19. These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts,
and their mouths speak great swelling words.

These be they who separate themselves, being sensual, having not the Spirit.

Revel. 3.9. Behold I will make them of the Synagogue of Satan which say they
be Jews and are not, but do lie.

LONDON, Printed for Jer. Hirones, at the sign of the Bottle near the great
North door of Paul's. 1656.

Unto the Reader I wish establishment in Truth exemption from Error, and
assurance of everlasting Felicity.
Courteous,
ANd I hope, Christian Reader, I am not unsensible that he which passes the
Press to present his Labors unto public view in this manner, must undergo
several censures of various opinions; and whosoever writes with a purpose to
publish what he so attempts to compass, must as well exercise his patience, to
bear with the scandals of the discontented, as (perhaps) the too much applause
of the well affected. Therefore, that I might not despair by reason of the
first, nor be lifted up in respect of the other, I resolved, when first I
began, to value neither; and so, because that as he that writes the best shall
have some enemies, so he that writes the very worst shall have some friends,
and therefore have I respect unto neither, but the justice of my cause, which I
am certain is Gods, who is no respecter of persons: And kind Reader, for me to
praise my own Practice were vainglorious, in respect I am not unsensible of my
own disabilities; but to commend my intentions, is but justice without
partiality, because they are precedent from sincerity, that so there might be a
right understanding of, and distinction between Truth it self and Error, that
in this quaking Fraternity thus endeavors to imitate, and comes veiled under
the name, yet having little or nothing of the nature of truth in them; that so
with the less suspicion, and the greater prowess, it might triumph in secret
deceit and hypocrisy.

And since (I suppose) your expectation looked for, and usual custom requires
a satisfactory Relation of the cause and manner of my undertakings herein, I
shall in a brief, yet exact rehearsal, satisfy your expectation, and fulfill
your desires herein; for, Courteous Reader, what is here presented to thy view,
comes rather, in some sort, miraculously to thy perusal in print, then
willingly to the Press; not that I mistrust the truth thereof, but am rather
loath to disturb your thoughts, which perhaps are more religiously employed then
to harbor a remembrance of, or be troubled with the noise of so viperous a
generation as those commonly called Quakers, who as so many subtle foxes seek
to destroy the Vines of Christ's Vineyard, and who, as the Philistines, the
Canaanites, the Sidonians, and the Hivites, are become thorns in our sides to
tempt us to Apostasy; of whose most erroneous opinions, when I was first
informed, I could not be convinced that so monstrous a portion of the nature of
the Serpent could possibly be resident in any less then an Infernal Fiend, or
something of his nature; but when I heard again of their so near and public
resort and meeting at their great Tavern Chapel in St. Martins, I earnestly
desired to be resolved of my doubt, whether their Doctrine and Tenets were so
diabolical as commonly reported, or more divine then I was informed, which I
found so far to exceed and exuperate common talk for satanical heresies, as
does the brighntess of the radiant Sun, the glittering of the twinkling Stars;
insomuch that a pious zeal so far inflamed my patience with a kind of sacred
passion, that I could not retain my tongue in silence, but with some others did
my endeavor to oppose their heresy, where our endeavors, for the most part
(through his assistance who is alsufficient) were prevalent; whereupon being
desirous to employ my pen, yet so as not to silence my tongue to oppose their
(I think unparalled) heresies, I at the last drew up 19. Queries, and was
urged by some friends to put them up unto their Speakers, which I did in August
last, and received a pretended Answer, with 14. Queries from them to me,
subscibed James Naylor; which when I perused, they being partly filled up with
the politic deceits of the man of sin, but more principally with most
notorious lies, I thought them unworthy of an answer in the least, and so
minded them not, but lent them to some friends who desired the perusal of his
Titular Answer; where I slighting, and not valuing of them, I thought they had
been put to their proper use, and made waste paper of; but when this froward
fastious Society saw no Answer returned as they expected, they not only
publicly boasted of the Victory before the Encounter, but also upbraided
others as well as me, who opposed them as I did, that I was unable to answer
what they had proposed unto me; whereupon I used all possible means to regain
the paper which before I had neglected, but found no possibility of procuring
it, whereupon I made means to some of their Society to procure another Copy,
and promised an answer; but before I could prevail that way, beyond all
expectation I miraculously procured the former Copy that I gave over for lost,
and through the special assistance of the Almighty, have both replied to that
they called an Answer, and also answered their Queries, all which I intended to
have returned in writing; but having some information that they intended to
prefer it to the press, if they so thought good when they saw it, therefore I
thought it better to publish it my self, then to stand to their alteration or
addition of it and since I have began, I shall in no wise be backward to
maintain the controversy, the cause being not man's but Gods, I know and am
sure he will assist to the end.

And (Courteous Reader) because I intend no needless enlargement, but all
compendious brevity, I shall neither innumerate discourse out of prodigality,
nor abbreviate out of penury; but since the Fabric is not superfluously large,
the Porch shall not be too spaciously enlarged, lest the obvious prospect of
too fair an entrance, promise a more beautiful Mansion then is contained within
the circumference of so small a Tract as the ensuing Treatise; and therefore as
you find it, so accept it; for I shall promise you no more then the hasty
fruits of some vacant, yet scanty hours, which, with the assistance of divine
providence, led me to compose what I here present unto your perusal: And though
I seem not worthy of recompense for my labor, yet grant me thanks, and not
hatred for my good will, which is the least I can expect from the virtuous, and
more then I desire from the vicious, except it prove as profitabe to their
conviction, as are my prayers vigilant for their conversion, that so those of
them which have not sinned unto death, may take with them words of repentance,
and turn unto the Lord and say, Blot out our iniquities, forgive us our
transgressions, and receive us graciously; that so being purified, they may
also be justified, and so live, as to live unto the Lord, and in dying, dye in
the Lord, That so whether they live or dye, they may be the Lords.

Thine in all Christian observance to my power, JOHN DEACON.
December. 27. 1655.
A PUBLIC DISCOVERY OF A SECRET DECEIT. An Answer to Nineteen Quaeries,
subscribed JOHN DEACON.
1. Quaere.

IF every man that comes into the world have light in him sufficient to
salvation, how then do you say that I am in darkness? for either you must grant
your first or second Assertion to be false, or prove me not come into the
world, or not born of a woman?

Answ. 1. The cause why thou art in darkness, is because thou do not believe
and follow that light which is sufficient according to Christ's words, John
8.12. For they that turn from the darkness to the light, have the promise; but
the unbeliever is condemned in darkness, yet is the light sufficient, John
3.15, 16, 17, 18, 19.

Reply. 1. When first I undertook to encounter with thee, O subtle Deceiver,
and secret Deceit; though I looked not for the innocence of a Dove, but rather
the ravening of a spiritual Wolf, yet I find the subtilty of a Serpent; though
not the purity of Christ, yet the policy of Antichrist. But as Satan is a
Serpent, so is Christ, Rev. 12.19 Genesis 3.1. Ioh. 3.14.
and that a brazen one too; and as the Deceiver is a Lion that seeks whom he
may devour; Number. 21.9. 1 Pet. 5.8.
so is Christ a Lion, and that of the Tribe of Judah; and as the serpent to
subtle to deceive, so is Christ no less cunning to preserve unto his
everlasting habitation, who has began a good work of faith in our souls, and
also will do it, the end whereof is everlasting salvation. When I quaeried, 1
Pet. 1.19. Ephesians. 2.8
since you affirm that all that come into the world have light in them
soul-saving; how then I being come into the world, and so in general affirmed
to be in light, that you in particular should conclude me in darkness, as if
not come into the world at all? and therefore I quaeried how the contradiction
could be reconciled to a concurrence, you put me off with a pretended Answer,
which indeed is but a Sophistical flash of the Deceivers policy, with an
uncharitable, I had almost said, diabolical Assertion, that I am in darkness;
when this I can affirm with joy, that God has so far enlightened me as to see
your deceivableness; and I fear, hellish darkness.

2. Qu. If that Light be universal that is soul-saving, shall all be saved, yea
or no?

Answ. 2. All that believe, shall; but he that believes not, Isa. 49.6. Romans
1.16.
the light is his condemnation, John 3.19

Reply. 2. That all which believe shall be saved, we need not you to teach us;
but since you affirm all have soul-saving light, the question was, whether all
should be saved? if not, your Doctrine is false, which says, there is in all a
sufficiency. But you pretend private (I may say, a new light) lest your deeds
being as dark as Antichristian, they should be brought unto the public light,
Christ and his Gospel, and so by that light that evil be made public, which
now lies hid in you under glorious pretenses.

3. Qu. If you say yea, I query further: How is it then that you say I am
damned, and where is the Reprobate?

Answ. 3. Thou art damned by thy unbelief, Joh. 3.18, 19. And where Christ the
light of the world is not known within, but denied, there is the Reprobate, 2
Cor. 13 3.5.

Reply 3. Here I find two diabolical, satanical, censorious, uncharitable
Assertions, both beyond thy spiritual presumptuous determination: First, that I
am damned; Secondly, that I believe not; both which are devilish in a double
sense; First, as presuming to step up into the seat of Gods Tribunal, and to
define that which only belongs unto him to whom judgment is given; But who art
thou that judge another, Joh. 9.22
and judge not thy self? Secondly, as being a lie, that I believe not; prove
this if thou can, or else it proves thee a liar; but if it be so that I must
believe your heresies, and then be a believer; and though I believe in Christ,
yet still be an unbeliever; let the devil be the first and if he will, for I
will be the latter: And here thou abusest the Text, in saying that where Christ
is not known within, there is the reprobate; as much as to say, he may be there
unknown. But can thou hide the Sun, O deceitful Deceiver, that it shall not
shine forth? If thou could, yet this celestial Sun of righteousness cannot
be kept under, but will banish all sinful clouds, and illuminate resplendently
to the obvious prospect of that soul where it is: And the Apostle says, Christ
is in you Corinthians, except ye be Reprobates, giving thee the lie, who say
Christ is in Reprobates as well as Saints.

4. Qu. If this light ought only to be minded, and all external means utterly
abolisht, I query wherefore you teach, and to what end serves the Scriptures,
which were for the making perfect the man of God? 2 Timothy 3 16, 7.

Ans. 4. We teach to turn peoples minds to the light and word, which is the one
thing needful to be minded, 2 Pet. 1.19. 2 Cor. 4.1. to the 8th. And the
Apostle preached that word to the people which was in their hearts, Romans 10.6,
7, 8. And their preaching was to open the blind eyes, and to turn from
darkness to light, and so from the power of Satan, unto God the Father of the
Light, Acts 26.18. And the Scripture serves for declaring and testifying that
this Christ is he that is the light of the world, and lights every one that
comes into the world, and the Savior of all that believe, John 12.46. John
1.9. 1 Timothy 4.10.

Rep. 4. Here you grant a damnable heresy, that all external things are
useless, none excepted, in that you pass it over with a consent of silence, and
hypocritically say you teach to turn peoples minds to the light, and yet
elsewhere declare against all them, and so confusedly against your self here,
that say the light in every man, Reprobate and Saint, is not sufficient to lead
and guide out of all the ways and works of this dark world, See your letter
extant in the Quakers whitest devil unvailed. p 1.
into the ways of God, without the help or teaching of man; confusedly there
declaring against, and now attesting for the self and the same thing. But let
me here so far presume on your vitiated patience, as to salute you with this
one query, Is it not as lawful for others as for you to teach? and may not
their doctrine be as effectual to this end, to turn peoples minds from darkness
to light, as is yours? and whether it be not the spirit of Satan in you, that
cries down that in others, which it preaches up in your self? And is it not
the spirit of confusion, that cries up one while, and down another, the self
and the same thing? And are not Scriptures external means, and so granted by
you to be useless? and how then are they means of perfection, if they be not
useful, or do you mean something not external, and so entitle a false thing
Scripture? But I fear your Ministry is rather misery then mercy; for if you had
received the mercy that Paul had, you would also renounce the hidden things of
dishonesty, as Paul did, not walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of
God deceitfully as you do: Romans 10.^4.
And if you look a little further into the very same chapter of Paul to the
Romans you shall find him make it a matter, not only of difficulty, but also of
impossibility, that any should believe without hearing, or hear without a
Preacher by whom Christ is preached, even by them that bring the word of God,
whose feet are beautiful: And this is the word nigh us, even at our doors, not
leaving us to travel to Jerusalem, as of old, to hear the word of the Lord,
which now is nigh to us, though he be in heaven, and we on earth, by faith in
him: But if that that light in every individual man and woman be the sure word
of Prophecy, is there then a Prophetic light in all, if so, what does it
prophecy of life and righteousness for sinners in a Mediator, or of death for
disobedience? and if this be the light that shines in a dark place, what is the
day star, and the Sun of righteousness? for though the Apostle has said, 1
Cor. 14.31. 1 Cor. 12.29. Number. 11.29
that all may prophecy one by one, yet has he said again, are all Prophets?
no, but I wish the Lords people were all such, and that Preaching is powerful I
believe, though you once denied it; and I now see truth is no truth till it
serve your turn: And for every thing that you add further, we know it without
your teaching, as that every man which comes into the world of nature, Christ
as God enlightens with the light of nature, as reason, sense, and the like, and
that he is the Savior of the world.

Qu. 5. And if that the external means be useless, to what end were those most
sacred gifts bestowed upon men? Ephesians. 4.10, 11, 12. And how the end and intent
for which they were given became void?

Answ. 5. The end of those gifts was for perfecting the Saints, and bringing
all into one faith unto a perfect man, which they that teach that none can be
perfect by those gifts while they live, do set up a faith in people contrary to
the end of those gifts; and by setting up external things in stead of these
spiritual gifts, have you lost the gifts, and have made them void, and so are
become enemies to the end and intent of them in others who have them and
believe the end of them: And thus the end and intent for which they were given,
are become void to you, Ephesians. 4.10, 11, 12.

Rep. 5. Here also you abuse my intentions, and wrest my meaning (as you do
the Scripture) unto your own will, which we are not to query what; for that I
know as well as you can tell me, if not better; but if external means were
useless, and so consequently these gifts, how became their end void for which
they were given? so that you answer not at all to the question, but at confused
randum, and stuff up lines with lies: First, that to teach that none can be
perfect in this life by these gifts, is to set up a false faith; produce a
president of one person in all the Scripture that ever was perfect by any
means whatsoever (except Christ) if you can, or else yield yourself a liar.
Secondly, that by setting up external things for those spiritual, I have made
them void, which is another lie, and that twofold. First, prove that ever I
set up external things in stead of spiritual things, if you can; but have not
you and your Ghostly Father the Pope done it, in setting up carnal dictates of
your own brains, for that of the spirit of God? Secondly, that I have made them
void; testify this if thou can, O subtle deceiver. Thirdly, that I am become
an enemy to the end of these gifts in others; I declare in the presence of God,
I honor, though you oppose them, wheresoever they be; which is backed by a
fourth lie, that the end and intent of them is become void to me, when my end
is is not yet come; but how soon it may, God knows; but this I can testify,
the fruits of those gifts have I reaped in my measure, and by them in others
have been both established and instructed in the truth, and so I can witness
the effects, though not the end of them as yet: But what means Paul by the
spirits of just men made perfect in heaven, if they were perfect before on
earth, and whether is Paul or you a liar herein?

Qu. 6. If natural light be sufficient without the help of the means, what then
is become of the work of grace? Ephesians. 2.5, 8. Romans 11.6. and of the growth of
faith, Luke 17.5. Mark 9.24. The practical use of Ordinances, 1 Cor. 11.2, 23,
24. As Baptism, Matthew. 8.19. The Lords Supper, Reading, 1 Timothy 4.13. Preaching,
Matthew. 28.20. and several other places, Prayer, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. Romans 12.12.
Communion of Saints in public Assemblies, Heb. 10.25.

Answ. 6. The light of Christ is the gift of the grace of God, which brings
salvation, which teaches to deny ungodliness and worldly lasts, and to live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, Tit. 2.11, 12. And with
this light is the work of grace seen; but thou that call this natural light,
or would make people believe it is not sufficient, must needs be ignorant of
that spirit, whereby that work of grace, and growth of faith, Heb. 11.6.
prayer, and communion of Saints, Supper and Ordinances is known; for without
faith in the light of Christ, these are not known nor accepted, though dark
natural imaginations may make an imitation from them in the letter, 1 Cor.
2.14. And thus are the works of grace become to all that deny the light and
spirit of Christ within, and take up a tradition from the letter without
sensual, having not the spirit, Jude 19.

Reply. 6. O deceitful sophistry! Is this an answering, or a baffling? Is it a
satisfactory resolve, when I asked you what was become of the work of grace,
faith, the growth of Faith, which is by the natural use of ordinances, etc. all
which we own, as did the Apostles, though you deny most, if not all of them,
when you wave it, and proceed contrary to request, to declare, though but
shallowly, what the work of grace is, how sin, and how the rest are known, all
which is impertinent to the thing required; and therefore it being only a
titular answer, it scarce deserves a reply, so that it rests, as at the
first, wholly unanswered, not on thing being properly cleared.

Qu. 7. Whether the Bible be the written word of God yea or no; if not, what
means the Apostle? 1 Cor. 14.36.37, 38. Gal. 1.10, 11. 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.

Answ. That is the word which the Bible declares of, Psa. 119.11. Rom 10.8. 1
Pet. 1.23.
which is invisible and eternal, which they that received it of God, and had it
in their hearts, did speak, or write it down, which writing they called a
declaration, Luke 1.1. 1 John 1.3. But does no where say the Bible is the word,
but God and Christ is the word, John 1.1. 1 Pet. 1.25. And of this word the
Apostle means, which was of God, and not of man, nor by man; and the word of
God is the name of Christ, and not the name of the Bible, Rev. 19.13.

Reply 7. I must needs confess, though I am loath to use it, See your Reply to
Harris.
thine own language best beseems the exordium of this Reply. Thou blind Sot,
can thou so much boast of the spirit of light, and yet be so far blinded in
darkness, as not to discern between the co-essential and coeternal word with
God, and the temporal expressive word of God? And if they received this word of
God, as you acknowledge they did, how then can it be, but it must be the word
of God from whence it did proceed? and the Scriptures quoted by thee are
nothing to the purpose. For John. 1.1. The word was with God, and the word was
God: And so this temporal word is but the expressive word of that co essential
word; and so it is a lie to say that this is that word that the Apostle means
when he says, For this cause thank we God always, 1 These. 2.13.
that when ye received the word of God which ye heard of us, ye received it not
as the word of man, but (as it is in truth) the word of God. This is clear, and
the Apostle says, that it was not of man, nor by man, but by the revelation of
Jesus Christ; and so not the word Christ, but the word of Christ, who is God:
And for the other, it is so clear, speaking plainly of writings, that it needs
not be discoursed: And a learned Author renders that place Rev. 19.13. as being
spoken of Christ, Fr. Du. Jon.
as to his co-essential name; and I the rather believe it, in respect that the
same St. John records and testifies of what he writ as from the mouth of an
Angel, Rev. 19 9.
These are the true sayings of God, and makes a distinct difference between the
word of God, and the testimony of Jesus; and such like titles are usually
attributed to the holy volume of the Scriptures as the word of God, Mar. 7.13
Acts 13.44.46. Acts 17.13. Acts 8.14. Acts 6.7.
the word of the Lord, Mar. 7.13 Acts 13.44.46. Acts 17.13. Acts 8.14. Acts 6.7.
the commandments of the Lord, and the like. Almost every chap. of the Old
Testam. and Jer. 30.2.4. 1 These. 4.15. 1 Pet. 1.25 Act. 16.32. Deuteronomy. 11.1.27.
But that the Scriptures should say that the Bible is the word of God, is
absurd to imagine, because it is a word not there to be found, it being a word
of Art used to express the whole volume of the Scriptures in general; but yet
that which is therein contained, is so called, and is so indeed.

Qu. 8. If the Ministry now established be Antichristian, where then, and who
be Orthodoxal?

Ans. Those Ministers who have their Authority from Chr. are such as abide in
the doctrine of Christ, and these are they who are hated of the world, and ever
was, for crying out against the deceits and filthiness of the world, Priests
and people; And whereas thou ask where they are? I say in Gaoles and Prisons
in this Nation, many of these are for the same now, by means of those who live
out of the doctrine of Christ, and in the steps of the false Prophets, Scribes
and Pharisees, seeking for their gain, bearing rule by their means, being
called of men Masters, etc. all which are forbidden by Christ, Isay 56.11. Romans
10.8 Matthew. 23.9, 10.
and for bearing witness against such, much innocent blood has been shed,
though they ever call themselves Orthodoxal, and the Ministry of Christ
established by men.

Reply 8. That these Ministers who are of Christ, abide in the doctrine of
Christ, we know and witness, and need not you to teach us; and hereby are
assured you are not of him, but of some other: And the persecuters in all Ages
(like you) sought to set up a doctrine and way of worship of themselves, and
yet were sensual, having not the spirit, though separated as peculiarly sacred,
such as are you and your Founder the Pope: Yet still was it their practice,
like as you do now, to cry down, and, as the Eagle to her prey, pick forth
first the right eye of Christianity, to wit, Acts 4.12, 17, 18.
the Ministry, that they might no more speak uprightly of that name in which
only is Redemption; that so the Shepherds being destroyed, and the flock
dispersed, they might with the more ease, and the less difficulty, be devoured
by such wolfes as thy self, and so be made a prey for the deceiver. But since
you say the true Ministers are in Gaoles and Prisons in this Nation; who do
you mean, the Romish Priests, from whence you sprung, and such like? if these
be they, speak out; or are they some of those branches which are sprung from
that grove of heresy, to wit, your vagabond fraternity taken up, as strayed
from their habitations, and from their Religion too. But that these are for the
same now, that the true Saints in former times were martyred for, is a most
notorious lie, and prove it if thou can that ever any dyed for this cause
wherein you now persevere, except Jesuits; and you seem to accuse us, as being
out of the doctrine of Christ, as also says Rome, because we are not one with
you and them: And you seem to allege that they seek for their gain from their
quarter, speaking of our Ministry, of which, in my Answer to your Queries; and
bearing rule by their means, Heb. 13:7.17.
speaking of Scribes and Pharisees, which is another lie; for it is by Gods
Authority they rule over us, and watch for our souls, and you again further
add it, being called Masters of men, which is cleared by that most Reverend
Mr. Baxter, and answer him if thou can: And then thou sealest all this with
thine own Signet, a most damnable lie, that it is forbidden of Christ; and that
for bearing witness against such, much innocent blood has been spilt; but
whether you mean the Gunpowder Traitors, or Garnet that Jesuit, with the rest
of those Romish Priests, whose beginning was at Tyber, and whose end (not
undeserved) at Tyburne; but prove that ever any, unless such, dyed for that
cause you now stand for, if you can name them.

Qu. 9. Since that you say that Presbiterians, Independents, and the like
differing Forms, are of Babylon, and under the destruction thereof; I quere who
are out of it, and where is the true Church?

Qu. 10. And if you say a small number of Quakers, I query again, where then
has the Church of Christ been since his passion, for this 1600. years and
more? till this upstart Faction spread it self abroad like an infectious
cloud; for if in all this time there were no Church, then could Christ be no
Head without a body, nor no Husband without a Spouse, nor a Savior without a
people saved?

Answ. All forms differing from the light of Christ, are in Babylon darkness
and distraction, and the true Church is in God, 1 Thessalonians. 1.1. Such only are
out of Babylon, who are gathered out of the world by the spiritual light of
Christ, and there it has been ever since his passion, and he has never been
without, though but in a small number which he has saved, which the world
hated and scornfully miscalled, and into Prisons and corners have they been
driven all this time of the man of Sin and his Papal Priesthood; but now he
is come, who is spreading his truth, and multiplying his seed as a cloud to the
Egyptians, wherefore the Heathen rage exceedingly. But it seems by thy Query,
that thou ownest the Church all along since the Apostles, to have been in the
multitude of the Popish Priests, rather then in the Martyrs, seeing thou
speak so scornfully of a small number to be the Church of Christ, who are so
contemptible, which the Church ever was, and so it is at this day, Luke 12.32.
Mat. 7.14. Mat. 20.16.

Reply 9, 10. Now I believe you speak truth, as that all Forms differing from
Christ, and so yours among the rest, are of Babylon, and under the destruction
thereof; not but that there may be difference in circumstance, and yet a
concurrence in substance, as there was in the Primitive times, even amongst the
very chief of the Apostles; and though there be some difference in part of
opinion, yet may those so different, be Christians still; but not so, if like
you, they err in the main. Act. 15.39. Gal. 2, 11, 12, 13.
And what you tell me here, is nothing but what I knew before ever I heard of
you, and is nothing to the thing required at all; for we know, and are sure
that there now is, 1 Cor. 1.1. 2 Cor. 1.1. Gal. 1.2. 1 Cor. 16.19 Phile. 2.
and ever has been a Church on earth, as also was that of the Thessalonians,
as well as other Churches, which is evidently declared in many places: And what
I queried, was concerning a visible Church, not of an invisible Church, of
which you speak nothing at all; and in that you grant that Christ had ever a
Church since his passion, you also grant your selves to be none of his Church,
you being never heard of, until of late years, unless in the days of holy
Moses; but if you follow their ways, Numb. 16.1.3.
be careful of their end: And for what you further add, it is nothing but of
words without proof, and the Pope calls them that dye for the testimony of his
Apostasy, Martyrs, which are rather malefactors; and for them who are Martyrs
indeed, they dyed for the testimony of that Religion, Doctrine, and Ordinances
which we profess, and you now oppose, and like the Heathen, rage exceedingly
against the Ministers and professors thereof, who are so contemptible in your
eyes, and others of your society, as to be railed against with the
unchristianlike terms of dumb dogs, serpents, sons of perdition, instruments
and children of the Devil, and the like; and if this be the language of the
spirit of God, what then is the speech of Satan?

Qu. 11. Whether you own the Resurrection of the body after death; if not, of
what does and shall Christ's Kingdom consist, for he can be no King without his
subjects?

Answ. I say yea, the Resurrection I own, according to the Scriptures.

Rep. 11. This is no satisfactory Answer in general, unless you do descend unto
particulars; for I know not whether you do mean according to the sense you
wrest it unto, and so by such subtilty, smother perhaps heresy in privacy; for
some of your Fraternity have affirmed to me, that there is no other
Resurrection spoken of in Scripture, but in this life, as from the death of the
first Adams sin, unto the life of the second Adams righteousness; contrary to
the true meaning, and so not according to the Scriptures, which usually speaks
of a resurrection from the dead, after a dissolution of the body; therefore
speak out your meaning plainly.

Qu. 12. Whether you acknowledge the Trinity of the persons in the Godhead, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, one substance, but three in subsistence or
manner of beings?

Answ. For the word Trinity, thou may send it to Rome, from whence it came;
but God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and that these three are
one, I know and acknowledge according to the Scriptures, 1 John 5.7.

Reply 12. Now O subtle Deceiver, yet simple Etymologer! does not thy pen here
stink with the tinkture of ancient Heretics, whom you here imitate, in that
you say that the word Trinity came from Rome, in a derision of it. I shall not
stand to dispute it as a Controversy, because perhaps you brought it thence
with most, if not all of your Tenets; but this I know, it was a word long time
used, and never disallowed that I know of by any unless erroneous Heretics;
for the Latins have it as well as the English, thus Trinitas, as we Trinity,
both signifying three in one, John 5.7.
and so agreeable unto Scripture. But O wretched imitator of Heretics, who
with thy self has stumbled at this word, See Rosse his revel. of Heretics. p.
53
Michael Servetus, that heretical blasphemer, compared the Trinity unto
Cerberus, the Porter of Hell-gate, and Arius, that notable Heretic, counted
the word Trinity a Fiction and a laughing stock, whose end was as wretched as
his life was wicked; See R. p. 58.
for in easing himself of natures courses, he disburdened himself of his
bowels; and the same opinion is now upheld by his Successor Biddle, a man no
less obstinate then erroneous. Page 59.
The Turkish Mahomet and Sabellio, likewise held the word Trinity in derision,
as do you and many more of your Society; and I fear in many more of your
Tenets concur with them.

Qu. Whether Jesus the Son of Mary incarnated in the flesh, Godman in one
person, who dyed at Jerusalem upon the Cross, rose from the death to life the
third day, and ascended on high into the highest heavens, and sits on the
right hand of God, be the true Messiah that you own and say is within you?

Answ. Jesus the Son of God, and Eternal Word which came down from God,
became flesh, borne of the Virgin, God and man, who dyed at Jerusalem, rose
again, ascended, and sits at the right hand of the Father, the true
Messiah, which Christ we own to be within us, which no carnal mind which
denies his light can comprehend, and Christ in you except ye be Reprobates, 1
Cor. 10.4.

Reply. 13. This is in some sort, more then any of the rest, satisfactory; but
that the true Messiah is within you, I have not faith to believe it, because I
see such opposite actings to him, or any thing of his spirit. That I apprehend
them rather congruant to Antichrist, then the true Messiah: And as no natural
mind, that either denies the true light, or sets up a new light in its stead,
cannot apprehend these things; so neither can they in that state, distinguish
between the spirit of Christ, and that of Antichrist: 2 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15.
And this inded is the reason why you and your Society are so deluded, and take
that for the true Messiah, which is rather something crying crying, Lo here,
and lo there is Christ in you, which is only the spirit of delusion; and the
rather I believe it, because it so much opposes Christ Jesus, the true
Messiah, in his Institutions. And for what you add further, the Text I have
cleared elsewhere already.

Qu. 14. Whether the soul of man be mortal or immortal? if mortal, for what
then did Chr. Jesus suffer to purchase eternal glory, And what profits
holiness in life? If immortal, where then shall it abide after death, since you
say there is no heaven nor hell, but in a man's conscience?

Answ. The first part of this Quere I answer, the soul is immortal; but the
latter part being made up of a lie, I return it back into thy Fathers bottle,
from whence it came, till thou have proved that ever I said there is no Heaven
nor Hell, but in a man's Conscience.

Reply 14. Since it is usual with thee, O secret deceit!] to speak that in one
breath; which thou will deny in an other, I wonder the less to see you still
uphold your lying practice, else you might remember the superscription of my
Queries were thus, For the Speakers, plurully, (not for you their Speaker,
singularly) of that Society called Quakers; neither did I know who was to speak
at that time when I brought them with me, whether you or another yet resolved
to deliver them to him, I should there find, when probability gave me good
reason to expect Hoberthorn rather then your self, to exercise there at that
time, because he was there the Lords day then last past, and I think not
before, and then durst not own his own name and practices: And though I
confess I cannot prove it against you in particular, though perhaps others
may, See Rosse his view of Reli. p. 383. See Baxter against you, p. 25.
yet is it commonly known to be the opinion of the Quaking Faction, and so of
them to whom my Queries were directed; and therefore you here lay under the
guilt of a two fold lie: First, in denying that which is truth (to wit) that it
is not the doctrine of your Fraternity, that there is neithet heaven nor hell,
but in a man's conscience, pure Familists! Secondly, in giving me the lie, when
I spoke the truth; but I see you bear in mind your old profession, your
bottle, and so your plow, though you have now changed it for a less laborious,
yet diabolical employment, fomention of Heresy.

Qu. 15. If you are perfectly free from sin, as you assert you are; what then
is the sting of death, or are you in the flesh immortal on earth?

Answ. The former part of this Query I return thee back, with the latter part
of thy foregoing, being both of one root; but to the latter part I answer,
where the new birth is witnessed, which is not of corruptible seed, but
incorruptible, 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57.
partakers of the Divine Nature, the life of Christ, made manifest in mortal
flesh; and where life and immortality is brought to light, there the sting of
death is seen to be abolisht on earth; but this Cain's generation knows not
where death reigns, and therefore would murder such as are translated from
death to life.

Reply 15. Now O incomparable hypocritical liar, let us try the contest,
whether you or I in this be the liar, nay let thy own writings decide the
controversy, which thus asserts expressly, them who say they have faith, and
yet their life is not the life of Christ, and say they cannot be saved from
their sins in this world, but in part. Them, and their Faith we deny; and, as
I told you in public dispute, so say I now again, if this be not perfect
perfection, what is? or was the life of Christ imperfect? And is not perfect
purity from sin, perfect perfection in righteousness? But you then replied,
though I denied it in others, said you, yet thou lie, (plain English) to say
I own it in my self; but if it be not hypocrisy to disown that in another, to
wit, imperfection, if thou thy self art not perfect; 1 Timothy 4.2
and is not this the Character Paul gives of a false Prophet, Teaching lies
(says he) in hypocrisy. But let us see if you lie not here again, for you
further add in the same page, speaking of that light in every man, this light
we believe and follow, (observe that) and by this light are led out of all the
ways, works, and worships of this dark world; and if this be not perfect
perfection, then is light darkness; so that it is proved, not only to be
taught and upheld by your society, which had been sufficient, but also by you
in particular; so that here you lie under the guilt of a double lie again, as
before, and that others of your Society have taught and upheld the same, I need
not stand to repeat, it being so clearly proved against you, and Hoberthorn
affirmed the same the Lords day before I delivered my Queries in. Now my Querie
being thus justified, it rests wholly unanswered in the least; and therefore
your pretended answer might be justly cast by, without any further reply, but
out of charity take this as an alms, not a debt, that the former part of my
last Query, and the latter part of this, are both of one root, I acknowledge,
(to wit) the false doctrines of your spirit, which how infallible soever, is a
lying one. And here you again abuse the Text; for that incorruption is not to
be put on, till this corruption shall be put off by a dissolution of the body;
till when, the sting of death remains, which is sin; but then, when by a
natural death, as due for the disobedience of the first Adam, we shall rise
again to incorruption, and life everlasting, as due for the meritorious
obedience of the second; and when the last enemy, death, shall be destroyed,
then O Death, where is thy sting? and O Grave, where is thy victory? but not
before; and therefore all that you seem to heap up as a mountain, is nothing
pertinent to the thing required; for if the sting of death were wholly
abolished, then death could have no power on us, and this were terestrial and
present immortality, the enjoyment whereof, is not till having put off this
corruptible, by death we shall have put on incorruption, which is not earthly,
as you pretend to say it is in this life, but heavenly, and in another; so that
you know neither how, nor where death reigns, nor where or when it reigns
not; and though I question not but you have Cain's malice, yet blessed be God,
if you had also his might, you could not so far reach, as to murder them that
are translated from the death of sin and condemnation, through a dissolution
of the body by a natural death, unto everlasting life and salvation; for there
is, and ever will be, Luke 16.26
a gulf between you and your Captain General, and their eternal habitation.

Qu. 16. And if you have no sin, to what end is Christ beneficial as an
Advocate, Intercessor and Mediator; or is he no such?

Answ. 16. Christ, that gives a man a light to see his sin, who redeems and
cleanses him from sin, is of use to us, and all that knows him, as the
Mediator; and of use to keep his from the wicked one, and that he touches them
not, 1 John 5.18. And the same who sets free from sin, is he that keeps free
from sin; and this benefit we have by him as Advocate, Intercessor and
Mediator, Ephesians. 16.17.

Reply 16. And here, O secret Deceiver! you grant what you so lately denied;
for if you had not owned perfect and present perfection, this Query had been
void, and not to have been answered; and therefore in answering it without any
exception or caution in the least, you grant the subject perfect perfection,
and to this alludes the whole drift of your Answer, namely, to justify what
you before denied, even perfect purity, or perfection; and so endeavor to
ordain Christ a new matter and manner of officiating as Advocate, Intercessor,
and Mediator; and that Christ gives a man that believes in him, light to see
his sin, I own and witness; and therefore you knowing not your sins, it is
unto me an evident manifestation that you have not the true light of Jesus
Christ; but to particulars. Intercession is a passing between, or being surety
to undertake to satisfy for ones debt: now if you acknowledge no debt due for
sin, what need have your of a surety? is he not useless unto you in this
respect? And a Mediator is one that goes betwixt, or withstandeth a matter,
that it goes not forwards; that is, betwixt us and Gods wrath against us for
sin; and how can he withstand that which is not? And if there be no sin,
what need is there of an Advocate to plead for us? will not innocence acquit it
self? But if any man sin, (not else) we have an Advocate with God the
Father, 1 John 2.1, 2.
Jesus Christ the reghteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins: that
is, a Sacrifice for to appease Gods anger (for so the word signifies) kindled
by our sins, and quenched by his blood; Heb. 9.22.
for without blood is no Sacrifice made. Now if we have no sin, there can be
no wrath, unless God can be unjust, which is impossible; and therefore there
needs no appeasment, where there is no anger; And thus if you have no sin, is
Christ useless as a Mediator and Advocate for sin. So this Query rests
unanswered also.

Qu. 17. And if you are perfect in purity; what is the cause you are not also
perfect in glory?

Answ. 17. Perfect glory is perfect purity, and every one according to their
measures are glorified therewith; but this world knows not whose glory fades,
neither can they judge of it with their impure spirit, 2 Cor. 3.18. And of this
glory all the Saints have a measure in this life; but the world hates it.

Reply 17. Here you also grant again that which before you denied (to wit)
perfect purity; that you in no wise here deny, but rather justify the present
enjoyment of it; but if you are now perfect in purity, and glory, is there not
yet a greater, and more sublime perfection of both to be expected by the
faithful? and if there be, is not this you now pretend to enjoy imperfect, by
reason of that which excels? and if there be not, what then? is Scripture
untrue? and is not this an alluding unto an immediate enjoyment of heaven upon
earth? and if so, then that which you before denied, is here also confessed,
concerning heaven upon earth; and if this be perfection, then I am sure, that
as is the world, so is thy spirit, ignorant of that which indeed is perfect,
and true perfection, which no carnal, or apostatized eye can see unto, for it
is spiritually discerned.

Qu. 18. And if you disown method in teaching, I Quer^ whether you have any
command against it? and whether you esteem confusion better then uniformity?

Answ. 18. That method and teaching which is out of the doctrine of Christ,
which is in the wisdom of man, and in the wisdom of words of man's wisdom,
out of the unity of the light of Christ and his Spirit; this we see to be
confusion, and not uniformity, and against it we have a command, which was
judged with the spirit of the Apostles, so do we, 1 Cor. 2.

Reply 18. This pretended titular answer savours so much, either of ignorant
folly or of sophistical deceit, and is so far exorbitant from the thing
required, that it rather deserves to be laughed at, then in the least to be
replied unto,

Qu. 19. Whether ever intentively the Gospel was promised to be made known? or
practically, that it was made known without the means, (to wit) the
Ministration of man? if not, why then do you resist it?

Ans. 19. The Gospel was made known and promised intentively and practically to
the servants and children of God, without the ministration of man, as to Adam,
Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isay, and all the Prophets, John Baptist, Simeon, the
Shepherds; Paul, and diverse others; and the same he does at this day, and none
can limit him, nor do I resist what means he uses; but such as resist his
works, deny his light, and would limit him, Genesis 3.15. Genesis 9.9. Genesis 17.7 Luke
3.20. Luke 2.10. Gal. 2.11, 12.

Reply 19. O blind Sophister! could probability have rendered such absurdity, as
possible to be in any (especially one so much pretending peculiar and sacred
knowledge) as to bring the means as a testimony against it self, as you do;
and as absurd would it be to imagine that any should preach the Gospel of
Christ, as from themselves, (though I dare presume to say you do) for then
would it be of man, not of God. And I mean thus, whether ever God, by promise,
or by practice, intended, or did make public his Gospel, but by the use of the
means (to wit) man; which it could not be, but it must be first revealed to
man, and so be by man, but not of man, as you falsely affirm it is, which means
was Enoch, who preached the Gospel in public, which had been revealed unto him
in private; Jude 14.15. 2 Pet. 2.5.
and Noah the eighth person was a Preacher of righteousness, and so was Isay,
insomuch that I have heard it made a question, whether he were most properly a
Prophet, or an Evangelist; and so were the rest of the Prophets Preachers of
the same Gospel; and therein were those means which you seem to deny; Mat.
3.1, 2. Mark 1.4. Luke 3.3. Gal. 1.11, 12 Col. 1.25. 1 These. 2.4.
and the like was John the Baptist, a Preacher of the Gospel, and therefore a
means and a Minister of it; and so was Paul also a Preacher of this Gospel,
who received it by the revelation of Christ Jesus, and declared what he had so
received; so that though it were of Christ, yet was it by man still; deny this
if thou can* But tell me, has that man any one spark of grace or truth in
him, that cannot see you are truthlesse? or has he the least faith in Jesus,
that is so faithless to his cause, as to believe in, and be besotted with your
false delusions, and erroneous heresies? and is not he blind with error, that
sees not your ways are erroneous? and may not any, whose eyes are not wholly
darkened, see Antichrist in your Doctrine, and that man of sin in your
practices? Prove what you say by Gospel, or else be silent.

An Answer unto 14. Queries, subscribed JAMES NAYLER.
By me JOHN DEACON.
Quere 1.
NOw seeing you so much oppose the light within, and spirit, and sets up the
letter for the light; I say, seeing it is plain all the Saints had a light in
spirit to guide them in ways accepted in all Ages before the Letter was; if
you be spiritual men, give it in writing what that light was, where is was, and
how they came by it, when they had no letter? or was it sufficient before the
letter? is it the same now? or when, or how was it changed, and the letter set
in its stead?

An Answer to the first Query.
Mr. James Naylor, what that Fabric will be, whose Foundation is a lie, may
easily be discerned by an impartial eye; and what the Exodiam will be of that
Epistle, whose exordium is an untruth, the fruition of this discourse will
demonstrate, and a thing beyond the limits of my faith to believe it is, that
when I see Satan as the Porter stand in the porch, that in that Palace should
be inhabiting one spark, much less the whole, of the spirit of God; for a most
incomparable lie it is to whisper in a corner, much more to sound on the point
of your pen to the world that horrid falsehood, that I oppose the spirit or
light of Christ; 2 These. 1.4 1 Cor. 3.17
far be it from me to oppose it in the meanest of his Saints; and farther be
it, or at least as far from me to own that for the light and spirit of Christ,
which indeed is only and alone the spirit of Antichrist, which as God, sits
in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God. That the Saints in all
Ages had a light within them, and now have the same by faith in Jesus; Christ
in you Colossians the hope of glory; Mark 13.22. Mat. 24.24 Mat. 2^.5. Mar.
13.21, 22. Luke 21.8 Deuteronomy. 5.22
This I own, and will rather cease to be eternally then deny; but would be as
loath to own every thing for Christ, which shall take on it the name of Christ.
But since the latter part of this Query consists of an examination of the
original being and authority of the Scriptures, the unity and difference of the
Law heretofore written in man's heart, and now in the letter, I shall be the
more large in my answer, because it is one of the most principallest
controversies betwixt us Christians, and you Quakers. When Adam stood in his
created state of innocence, there was then an exact Law engraven, not then in
Tables of stone, as afterward, but in the fleshly Tables of his heart; this I
suppose you grant. But then when he fell from that state of bliss unto
wretchedness, he also fell from the Image of God unto the effigy of Satan, and
so became so far from accomplishing that command which called for exactness in
moral righteousness, that he was wholly alienated from Sanctity, and nativitated
in or to sin; so that by continual increase of transgression, the ingression of
sin, wrought the exgression of sanctity, insomuch that this Law became
abbreviated, if not extinguished; Genesis 6.6 Genesis 7, at large. Gen 6.5, 7
for so much did sin ex^perate, notwithstanding the Relics of this Law, or
book of natural conscience, that God repented that ever he had made man; yea,
and so far repented as to destroy them utterly, except a few: And the Lord
seeing how frail man struck sail unto the pride of Satan in the turbulent
Ocean of this transitory world, and sin by its subtilty aspired that
sovereignty, as to subdue and extinguish for the most part, that Law once
written in man's heart; Joh. 8.58. 1 Pet. 1.10, 11. Matthew. 1. Genesis 12.1, 2 Isa.
51.2. Deu. 7.7, 8 Genesis 46.5, 6. Romans 9.7, 8, 9. Exodus 2.9, 10.
and God having determined by an eternal purpose to redeem wretched man from
that lost state wherein he stood, chose in his due season Abraham from amongst
all the men on the earth, that he might raise from his Posterity a Messiah, and
a deliverer unto his Israel; and it so happened in the days of Jacob, the
great Son of Abraham, the Son of Isaac, the child of promise, that by
reason of the Famine that was in Canaan, Israel was driven into Egypt, where
they sojourned, till God in his good pleasure, harkening unto the groans of
their oppressions, willing to deliver his Israel from their unsufferable
bondage, sent his servant Moses, one of their brethren, by a strong hand to
conduct them into the Land of Promise; and in their journey to their rest, at
Mount Sinai God made unto them a repetition of that Law once written in man's
heart, which Steven calls the lively Oracles of God, then not a dead letter.
This is the time and manner how it was changed; and that which once was written
in man's heart, and was sufficient, is now become unsufficient; Act. 7 38, 53.
for else, if it either then was, or how is sufficient of it self, then has
God wrought a work in vain, which to assert, is to suspect, if not to accuse
God of folly: But then, if that Law written in man's heart, were not sufficient
to its proper end, as to direct and guide in matters of moral righteousness,
but that it was necessary that the Law should enter on mount Sinai, Romans 5.10
Romans 3.19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Romans 7.9, 10. Heb. 10.20 Isa. 42 16. Romans 8.3. Gal.
3.13.
as an exact rule, that so offenses which were not manifest, might abound in
the eyes of sinners; how much less could, or can that Law, which brings the
knowledge of sin and a curse, and yet is but the same that once was written
in man's heart: and therefore that which you so much stand for, both justify
and glorify; wherefore it was a gain not only necessary, but of necessity,
that the Gospel, or Law from Mount Sion, the Law of Faith should also enter,
which leads us in a nearer way by a Mediator, who came to do what the Law from
Mount Sinai, or in man's heart, could not do; and hence it is that both your
Society, Romans 2.14. Phil. 3.9. Isa. 53.1. Romans 10.14 Luke 24.47.
and naturally all men, runs unto Mount Sinai for righteousness and life, in,
and by personal obedience, because it is that Law which is, or at leastwise
once was, written in man's heart, which cannot but own, what it could not so
fully dictate; and you, with the rest of your factious Fraterty, put your
Proselytes upon, Romans 4.15
and man so easily closes with contrary unto the Gospel, which is not first
made known (this I dare boldly assert) by seeing within, but hearing tidings
without; and in that you ask what that was which led the Primitive Saints
before the Letter was written in ways accepted? I say, when there was no Law,
there was no transgression; Exo. 16.8. Josh. 5.11.12.
so then it must needs follow, that their sins were no sins, because they
were not imputed; not that I believe this only, though perhaps more
principally presented them excepted; but it is probable, and I partly believe
it too, that they had immediate Revelations of Gods will; for before the
Scriptures were in the Letter visible, there was still a supply of Prophets,
whereby that which is now fully written, was then by peece-meals revealed, as
occasion required; and as Israel, when they had no crop or vintage, they were
supplied with a sufficiency of manna from Heaven; but when they came into the
land of their rest, a land flowing with milk and honey, where all things were
settled in a competent standing order; they had no more manna by piece-meals as
their allowance, they had all things supplied by a constant course, sufficient,
Heb. 1.29.
nay in redoundancy, and lay (as we use to say) at rack and manger; so when
that which by peace-meals was revealed, was written in an absolute literal
method, there needed no more revealing by degrees, when we have always in
store the whole, and despise them not, for such offense has certainly a reward.

Quere 2.
Seeing you say the Scripture is a Rule, declare in plainness, is the whole
Scriptures a rule to all men and women to take up the practice thereof? or how
much of it is? and to how many people? and to whom in particular? seeing the
Saints in all Ages had their particular commands, how may weak people know
which of their commands they must take up, and which they must not? and when
they have found the commands, where they must have the power? and whether that
which gives the commands, be not the power only accepted for performance? deal
plain herein, that people may know what to do; and what they have done, that
they be not always learning, and never able to come to the end of their
labors and rest of God.

An Answer to the Second Query.
When first I considerately perused this your Query, I in part determined to
have returned it back as I found it, holding it a thing cautious, whether it
were a subject lawful to dispute, without a prejudice to conscience, savouring
so much of spiritual presumption, that I leave it unto you to consider and
examine, whether it extend to heretical abomination, or no? But considering the
instability of your vitiated brains, which with a blast mounts upon the
falatious clouds of vain glorious imaginations, as to boast of the victory
before the encounter; I thought better to give it a curb, then to pass it by
uncorrected. Forasmuch as you query how much of the Scripture is useful, how
much not? it evidently appears you suspect, if not assert some of it to be
useless, which seems unto me an apparent suspecting of Gods perfect ways in
his actings; for if God has made, or composed any thing that is useless, then
has he wrought in vain; and this to believe and teach, appears unto my
apprehension little better, if any thing at all, then blasphemy in a high
degree; for private Saints had never particular and peculiar commands, but that
which was pleasing to God in one, was also acceptable in another; so the
command was not particular, or at the least not peculiar; for this were to
affirm mutability in God, that the thing which pleased him now, should not
content him another time, except upon some more then extraordinary occasions;
and this would be, at the least, partiality in him, which is abominable to
suppose; but it is freely confessed, that the Saints in their particular
employments had particular commands, as Noah, Genesis 6.13, 14.
that all mankind might not be destroyed, had a particular command to build an
Ark, and Moses to deliver Israel from their bondage, had a peculiar command to
Egypt, to lead them through the Sea, to hew forth Tables, to receive the
Commandments, and to consecrate. Aaron had a command to array himself in
Priestly Ornaments; Exodus 3.10, 11. Exodus 14.16, 22. Exodus 34.1 Exodus 28. chap.
^ Joh. 1.33. Mat. 10.5, 6, 7. Mark 6.7. Luke 9.1, 2.
St. John to Baptize, and the Apostles to Preach, and the like; all except the
two last, were peculiar to them without others; the two last particular to them
with others, and an innumerable more might be named, but it is needless; yet
this is no inducement at all to occasion a division of that sort, in that which
God has inseparably united, although there be remedies for every malady, cures
for every contagion, and medicines for every misery spiritual; and as the
Pooles of Bethesda for all persons, and all diseases. This has been discoursed
of at large, by several reverend pens, extant in many volumes, to which I refer
you. And for the power to fulfill these commands and precepts in the word of
God, I shall be brief; there is no power but of God, Paul may plant, 1 Cor. 3.6.
and Apollo may water, but it is God, and he alone must work with their
labors, and give the increase.

Quere 3.
Seeing Christ preached the Kingdom of God within unbeleevers, and the Apostle
says, Luke 17.20, 21. Romans 1.19. 2 Cor. 4.6.
That which may be known of God, is manifest in them; and that they came to the
knowledge of God and his glory, by the light that shone in their hearts, which
God showed them, etc. Deal plainly, and let people know how it now comes to be
without, and denied within, as it is by you. Prove your practice and judgment
herein by plain Scripture.

An Answer to the Third Query.
In this Query I find no less then two lies at the least, if not three. The
first laid on Christ, God-man blessed for ever, that he preached the Kingdom
of God within unbeleevers. The second on the Apostle, in that you say he says
they came to the knowledge of God and his glory, by the light that shone in
their hearts: Luke 17.21
And the third on me, in that you say I deny that light which declares God and
his glory to be within. This I term a lie, if you speak and mean particuarly of
Saints, and a truth if you speak of Reprobates; but I own it not wholly
outwardly upon any account; but I shall proceed to clear the Scriptures,
wrested and abused by your spiritual impious impudence and presumption. So
Leigh, so Trap, so Major, and several others upon the Testam. So Pumroy Killit,
and Glisson against your Society. 2 Cor. 13.5 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.
For the first, * I have observed the Relatitions of all the Expositors, who
have upon any occasion commented upon that place, that ever I could procure the
sight of, who all concur in one opinion, and render it thus from the Original
Language; The kingdom of God is within, or among you; the word in the Greek
signifying both, and so you have it in the Margent of your larger Bibles: Now,
if the word in the Original signify both, then the one so well as the other
may be used; but that must needs be most proper, which most concurs with other
places; and therefore among, rather then within, since Paul says, Christ in
you (writing to the faithful, not to the faithless) except ye be Reprobates;
and again, Know you not that no unrighteous person inheriteth the Kingdom of
God; where it is clear, that it does not possess men, as inheriting them, for
this implies a contradiction; but it is to be possessed of men, and they to
inherit it; Luke 7.28. Mar. 10.15 Mat. 25.21 He might enter into it, but it
could not enter into him.
and from this inheritance the unrighteous are excepted and exempted too;
therefore it is certainly a most notorious lie, to say Christ preached the
Kingdom of God in unbeleevers, though among them; for he himself, and all his
excellencies that attended him in his Incarnation were among them, but not in
them, and an error in the Translation, makes not an error in Christ's Doctrine.
Thus for the first; I come now to clear the Apostle from your falsehoods; for
you (speaking of unbeleevers) say he says that all which may be known of God,
or of his glory, is manifest in them. Romans 1.19
This you pretend to be a proof, that there is a light in every man to reveal
all that may be known of God, or of his glory, which I say can be nothing less
then the Spirit of God, when if you read the verse following, for the first
has a dependency on the latter, you shall see the extention of the former
expression; Romans 1.20 Joh. 14.25
The invisible things of him from the Creation of the world, are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made. Now this cannot be the Spirit of
God or Christ, which teaches all things needful for salvation, except you can
prove him to be made at the Creation, and so a creature, and not a Creator;
Genesis 1.26
and therefore it must be something in the creature, which can be nothing else
but the eye of the rational soul, which is reason, by which may be seen the
invisible being of God; and that he is so, Cicero, Aristotle, and Plato, but
mere Heathens, have attained unto, therefore this is humane, not divine. I
shall not stand to state arguments to prove it experimentally, because I intend
brevity. I Come unto the other Scripture which you add, that the Apostle
says, that they (speaking of unbeleevers still) came to the knowledge of God
and his glory by the light that shone in them. A most notorious lie, wresting
the meaning of the Apostle unto your own wills, and I leave it to you to
examine with fear and trembling, whether it be not also unto your own
destruction too; for the words are these, For God who commanded the light to
shine out of darkness, 2 Cor. 4.6.
has shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the grace of
God in the face of Jesus Christ. Where is observable, First, what it was that
shined, God, that commanded the light to shine out of darkness has shined.
Secondly, the persons to, and in whom he shined, in our hearts. Now the word
(our) makes a separation between Paul and the Corinthians, to whom he writ who
were Believers and Reprobates who believed not; therefore you must needs
acknowledge you have belyed him, in saying he spoke of unbeleevers, when he
spoke to, and of Saints, in our hearts, unless you can prove that that Paul
and the Corinthians were such as you speak of, even unbeleevers. Thirdly, the
intent and purpose for which he shone, to give, (it was not free to all, as you
say, but particularly given to some) the light of the knowledge of the glory of
God. And then Fourthly, the manner how, in the face of Jesus Christ, I intend
not to write an Exposition on the words, but only rightly to divide them, and
so to clear them from the scandal laid on them by you, which is clear. So that
your Query being thus handled, 2 Timothy 2.15.
I suppose there can be no more required in answer to it; and far be it from
me, to hold a judgment willingly, any further then is concomitant to and with
Scripture proofs and practice. Learn to speak truth, and cease to endeavor
the building of so lying a Babel, which is not in that one language of God, but
that of Satan; For every lie is of Satan the Father of lies.

Query 4.
Whether that New Birth spoken of in the Scriptures, be Christ within, or some
other thing? and if not he, then what is it? and how people may know it by the
Letter without the Light, when they have Christ, and when they have a spirit of
delusion? and whether the light of the Spirit alone, be sufficient without the
letter to reveal the Son of God, the Father, and all truth, and judge of all
spirits whatsoever, without any addition to it?

An Answer to the Fourth Query.
The New Birth, or Regeneration, is a repairing of the Image of God, once in
the first Adam, through the effectual working of the Spirit and grace of God,
John 3. Genesis 1.26, 27. Ephesians. 3.5, 8 Romans 5.18, 19. 1 Cor. 2.14 Genesis 3.1.5 Genesis
3.23, 24. 2 Cor. 5.20, 21. 1 Cor. 1.2.30. 2 These. 2.13. Ephesians. 5.26. Act. 26.18 1
Pet. 1.2. Tit. 3.5. Act. 5.3, 4 1 Cor. 3.16 1 Cor. 6.19
by faith in the second Adam; which they that look unto the first Adam, and in
their own strength endeavor to renew, cannot comprehend; for it is spiritually
discerned, though the policy of the Serpent may so far prevail, as to cast
them into a kind of pleasing slumber of Security; and so pretending to lead
them back unto that earthly Eden by personal obedience, which they lost by
disobedience, like lambs led to the slaughter, they may pass a Celestial
Paradise by, and perhaps arrive at a perilous disconsolate place of eternal
sorrow; or if you will, it is a remission of sin, and a renewment of
sanctity, called Sanctification, on the whole Doctrine whereof, to insist at
large, would require a greater volume then either I intend to trouble you to
peruse, or my self to compose; but for the satisfaction of them among you or
elsewhere, whose intentions are to be informed out of sincerity, not curiosity,
I shall speak a little unto some particulars of it: In brief, man has no hand
at all in this work, but the spirit of God, for even as in the compositure or
making of any thing, there must two things concur; First, the Agent or
Workman which gives the form, shape, or being to the Work; Secondly, the
matter whereof the work must be made or formed, the which cannot be said to
work it self, but only to suffer the operation of the Worker: This is the
sum of Regeneration: First, the the spirit of God is the workman in this
work, he is the begetter of this new man, the framer of this new creature, and
the re-builder of this sacred Fabric. 1 Cor. 12.4, 5. 2 Cor. 6.16 Isa. 6.19.
Act. 28.25 John 3.6. Mat. 19.26 John 3.8.
Secondly, the mind and will of man, is the matter whereof this new creature,
or image of God in man is made, not working together with the Spirit of God,
but only suffering the operation of the holy Ghost; this is the Epitomy of
this whole work, for Regeneration is nothing else but a sanctified mind and
will; so the begetter of this new man is God (even the Holy Ghost) For that
which is borne of the flesh, is flesh, and that which is borne of the spirit,
is spirit: So that this New Birth is the work of the Spirit; and although by
the Ministry of man as the matter; yet not any thing that men or Angels are
able to conceive, but only the finger of God, 1 Pet. 1: 13.
is able to accomplish it, as the worker; for with man it is impossible, but
not with God; for though we may hear the word of God sounding in our ears as
a whistling wind, yet cannot we comprehend the secret motions of it in our
hearts, and therefore not understand the depth of this unsearchable Mystery. In
a word, the begetting or fashioning of this New Creature, the Ministry of the
word of God by man, is but the instrument whereby the spirit of God works,
without the which it is no more able to form this new creature, 2 Pet. 1.21
Gal. 1.11, 12. 1 John 4.3.
then are the tools belonging to any work able to bring the same to pass
without the hand or guidance of the Artificer; and he that knows it by the
Letter of Scripture, knows it not without the light, for the Scripture was
written by man, but revealed by the true light, and therefore the words of him
from whom it proceeded, and God is pleased to reveal himself but two ways to
the best of my knowledge, and that either ordinary, by his written Word, by
which we may try, and in some sort judge of spirits too, that he which denies
Christ as come in the flesh, is a liar and an Antichrist; and he that denies
the use and ministration of Ordinances mentioned there, resists that power that
instituted them; and he that resists, receives unto himself damnation, a sad
word; or extraordinary, by his spirit, which is not commonly usual, but still
with this limitation, he never reveals himself to any by his spirit to oppose
his commands in the letter. And since your spirit is such a one, I leave it
unto you to examine, whether it be a spirit of delusion or no; for Christ never
resists his own will and ordinances, and if it seems so unto you, remember
Satan has transformed himself into an Angel of light; and if you be his
Ministers, as the tree, Antichrist is known by his fruits, heresy in Doctrine,
cease to call thy self the Minister of Christ, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15. Mat. 7.15.
and pull off the sheeps clothing of your fair pretenses, that so we may
discern you in your colors and see the Pope in your wolvish shapes.

Quere. 5.
Whether the least measure of saving faith in Christ Jesus be not present power
above the Devil, and all the powers of darkness? which if it be, then what is
the cause that men must be captivated to commit sin while they live? whether it
is want of faith, or that there is not power in faith to overcome the evil one?
or has any faith in Christ further then they have power over sin and the
world? or is there any rest to a believer short of that power?

An Answer to the Fifth Quere.
The least measure of saving faith in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.33, 34, 35.36, 37,
38, 39. 1 Pet. 1.4.5
is sufficient to support us from everlasting misery, and from the condemnation
which the Devil would by his power bring us under, and to build us up to that
inheritance immortal, which fades not away, but is reserved in heaven for us;
and it is present power above the destructive powers of the Devil and
darkness; but not against the disturbative power of sin; whose policy has
in the first Adam purchased an interest in all his posterity, unless that with
the second Adam we became one in unity and glory with him; and if it were
present power to conquer Satan and all the powers of darkness, and by its
puissance to wholly subdue him presently, Ephesians. 6.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
this were present victory, which is the end of war, when as a Christians
pilgrimage to heaven is a continual warfare, the victory whereof is only
sealed perfectly in death; Gal. 3.22.
for though by faith in Christ we are free from the dominion of sin and death
too, yet is the most faithful not perfectly free from the remnants of sin,
Mat. 16.23 Mat. 26.70, 72, 74. Gal. 2.11, 12, 13, 14. 2 Cor. 12.7 Gal. 2.20.
Phil. 4.13 Romans 7.22, 23, 24. Judge. 2: 3. Judge. 3.1. 2, 3, 4. Rev. 2.10. 1 Pet.
5.4. 2 Cor. 2.2, 3, 4. Romans 7.19, 20. Gal. 2.20.
which is the sting of death; for though the least measure of saving faith in
Christ be sufficient to free and keep us from the dominion of sin, yet the
greatest portion or fullness that ever was distributed unto the greatest of the
Apostles, exempted them not from the remnant of sin, not only original, but
also actual too; for Peter he was accused, get thee behind me Satan, and after
denied his Master, and then dissembled so as to be contradicted by Paul, who
also was so far lifted up on the wings of ambition, that he needed to he
corrected, and therefore received a prick in the flesh, which was neither
through the wants nor disabilities of faith, through which he boasted he could
do all things; but the law of his members, the remnants of sin, there warring
against the law of his mind, brought him captive to the law of sin and
death; which remnants are commonly called sins of infirmity, which are left as
thorns in our sides, to prove us whether we will continue faithful to the end,
that so we may be crowned with glory. And who had faith so much, and so strong,
as to be translated in the spirit, and give his soul the prospect of that no
less eternally sacred then incomprehensibly glorious object of the third
heavens; and by this overcame the power as a Saint, but could not shun the
temptation as he was a man, but both his will and affections were so far
subordinate, as the latter to those powers of darkness, that, says he, the
good that I would do, that do I not, and the evil that I would not, that do
I; but then as the former, If any man may boast, much more I, I live, and yet
not I, but Christ that lives in me; and until the one be separated from the
other, there can be no perfect perfection; 1 Timothy 1.15 Romans 3.23 Jam: 3.2. 1
John 1.8, 10. Heb. 12.5. Phil. 3.21.
for the same Apostle asserts this is a faithful saying, Christ died to save
sinners, of whom I, not only was, but am the chief, and we (including himself
too) have all sinned, (all, none excepted) and come short of the glory of God;
and James says also the same, that in many things we offend all; and John that
Apostle of love, and Eagle-ey'd Evangelist, to pry into the secrets of those
Mysteries of the Son of glory, records this, that he that says he has no
sin, is a liar, and the truth is not in him; and therefore you are liars, and
void of the truth; if then the Apostles who had the most eminent faith above
all others, were not free from the remnant of sin, nay, and some gross ones
too, I cannot be convinced that perfect perfection can be in any before a
dissolution of mortality, and a resurrection unto glorification. I say, since
that they were contented to rest without discomfort in perseverance, till Jesus
the Author and Finisher of their faith should come to change their vile bodies
(therefore not pure) and make them like his glorious body; I cannot apprehend
that any one shall attain any higher perfection, until they come to the end of
their race, eternal rest, if they run so as to obtain; and they that content
not themselves therewith, to sit down, and rest here, as did the Apostles. For
the present I shall leave it to them to examine whether they fight not against
Gods Councels and determinations; and let them be careful how they grope for a
heaven on earth, lest they miss it where it is, Ps. 16.11.
even above all Principalities and powers, in Christ his presence, where there
is fullness of joy and pleasures for evermore.

Quere 6.
Seeing you say the Scriptures is the ground of faith, and that they who can
read the Scriptures have power to believe, as you did the last first day; then
I say can any believe who have not read or heard the Scriptures? if yea, then
is not their faith without ground (by your opinion) or is there more grounds of
faith then one? or is the Scriptures Christ?

An Answer to the Sixth Query.
Most impudent, and no less disconsolate and thrice wretched man! whether it
be properly the fruits of thy spirit to speak truth, or a lie, seems unto me a
matter neither doubtful nor disputable, but apparent; for the first are as rare
to be read in thy writings, as to see a blazing star in the Firmament, for
ought I can conjecture, I had almost said, as to see a Phoenix in England,
which was never known but in Arabia; for what you relate that I said the
Scripture is the ground of faith, is as notorious a lie, as to affirm James
Naylor to be no liar, and both as incomparable untruths, as to say light is
darkness, or darkness light; yet I say the Scritures read and preached, is a
means to work faith, for faith is by hearing, Romans 10.17 1 Cor. 3.5.
and who is Paul, or who is Apollo, but Ministers by whom ye believe? And since
your brains are tosticated with invention and fomenting of heresy, which
breaths forth nothing but lies and falsehoods, and has raised this forgery
among the rest, that I said he that could read, had power to believe; were thou
not led by the Father of falsehood, to heap up shame unto thy self, though thou
intendest it for others, thou may remember I asserted, that no man by any
native light inherent in him had power to believe, except he had an
augmentation thereof; and therefore finding the foundation of thy Quere but thy
own invented lies, I shall return it back unto thee, to whom of right it
belongs, being forgeries of thine own head, and no expressions of mine; I send
thee back thine own, and if you please you may send it unto the Devil, the
father of lies, whose it was at first, I deal plainly, as you desired me.

Quere 7.
Seeing you affirm that none can be Ministers of Christ but who are called of
man, and are learned men; whether was the Apostle Paul a true Minister, who
says, he was neither of man, nor by man; and what he preached, was not after
man. Nor was it but by revelation, Gal. 1.2, 11, 12. Or was Peter, John, and
the rest, true Ministers, who were unlearned and ignorant men, Acts 4.13. And
what lets that God may not choose such now?

An Answer to the Seventh Quere.
If ever Satan had the penning of a paper stuffed up with untruths, or
Beelzebub the portraying of his unexpressible hypocrisy to the prospect of
humane eyes, with the pen of his falsehoods; then certainly he or his Agents are
the Inditors of this your packet of lies, and particularly this Query, which
deserves rather censure then answer, or at the least to be turned back without
either; yet since you endeavor to render me odious in the eyes of your
Proselytes, I shall answer according to truth, and return thee thy lies,
according as thou sentest them to me; and yet be so far from revenging thy
injurious slanders, that I shall pass them by with an honorable scorn. And
whereas you say that I affirm that none can be the Ministers of Christ but such
as are called of men, is a branch of thy old root, a most impudent lie; for
that were all one in effect to assert all that are called of men are the
Ministers of Christ, and none else; and this were by consequence to affirm
James Naylor, that grand fomenter of Heresy, to be a true teacher of Divinity,
because unto me he appears as called of m^n, or of himself, and so by man, or
else goes not being sent, and runs when the Lord bids him not go; for called
of Christ he cannot be, because he opposes his commands, and belyes his
Institutions in general; and he that preaches down Christ in any thing, so
much preaches up Antichrist, and therefore is his servant whom he obeyes; Romans
6.16
and it is want of learning among the vain praters of your Society that
errors so much predominates, as to exuperate in them, who being ignorant of
the truth, speak evil of the things they do not understand; and for Paul, he
was a true Minister, and one who was faithful in the distribution of that
Gospel whereof he was made a Minister, Gal 1.1 1 Cor: 3.10 Tit. 1.5. 1 Timothy 3.
c. Tit. 1.7, 8, 9:
not of man, nor by man, but of Jesus Christ, as a wise Master builder; who did
not err, though you may suppose he did, when he transmitted of his Authority
to Titus, to ordain Elders in every City of Crete; and for which end he was
left there, and directed Timothy whom to make Bishops; who himself had
received the gift of Prophecy, by the laying on of the hands of the Presbyter:
And that Paul's doctrine was not after man, but by Revelation of Jesus Christ,
proves thee a liar, and a seducer too, that says, It is the words of men, and
therefore not Jesus: And Peter and John were true Ministers of Christ; and
though that the high Priests and Rulers perceived them to be unlearned and
ignorant men, Acts 2.6.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
yet this is most sure, that they spoke with all manner of tongues, none
excepted; and if this be ignorance void of learning, I speak of humane
learning, I would gladly be informed what learning is; and for Divinity, if
they were unlearned and ignorant, woe unto them who build on their writings;
and ignorant indeed was Paul, who says, The Scriptures are able to make a man
wise unto salvation; but this I am bold to say, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16.
that if they were ignorant, I would we were all so, and such fools, as by our
foolishness we might become exceeding wise, and thereby obtain eternal
Redemption; and there is nothing lets, but that God may do what he will, for
he cannot be limited, with whom all things are possible, and therefore nothing
impossible; but yet this I dare boldly assert, that God never did, nor never
will use any extraordinary means, to destroy the ordinary standing means, as
you endeavor to do; neither did he, or ever will send any, though he may
permit them to preach up Antichrists doctrine of Heresy, as do you; neither
did ever any, except false Prophets, come to claim credit unto the words that
he spoke, unto the best of my knowledge, but he was to give proof of it, either
by the mighty operations of the spirit of God by him, or by the testimony of
them who before had come with such works; for the spirits of the Prophets are
subject unto other Prophets; or else if he were a Prophet, the event was to
declare whether he was of God, or no; and yet still, if the matter of his
exhortation were to withdraw us from the known will of God, as is yours, and
the rest of your praters of the Quaking Society, though the signs and wonders
should come to pass, as the man of Sin shall abound with such
deceivablenesse, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10. Pro. 14.15 Deuteronomy. 13, 1, 2, 3.
yet we ought not to hearken unto it, though the simple believe every word; for
the Lord by such as you proves us, whether we will be faithful to the death,
that we may inherit a crown of life, by keeping his commandments.

Quere 8.
What eye is that which the god of this world has blinded? how he has blinded
it, and how it is opened? and by what, and whether the Letter can open it yea
or no?

An Answer to the Eighth Quere.
This seems unto me a Fiction of your own brains; for to the best of my
knowledge, I remember not that ever I read any such phrase, as that eye which
the god of this world has blinded; and therefore till you produce the proof,
this might suffice; but I shall freely enlarge to tell you, that Paul speaks to
this effect; if the Gospel be hid, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4.
it is hid to them that are lost; and then he adds, whose mind the god of this
world has blinded; and for minds, I suppose you will grant that there is no
more but one in general, and them whose minds are so blinded, to them also is
the Gospel hid, and it is hid from them only who are lost; and therefore I
leave it to you to examine with unexpressible fear and trembling, whether it
be not hid from you, since you see it not as it is the word of God, but of men;
and thus he that is most blind may see it, for no one can see it in a lower
degree; and for the manner how blinded? by unbelief; and how opened? by faith,
of which, more at large in my Answer to your fourth Query; and whether the
Letter can open it yea or no? the question is absurd; for though it be a
material, it is not the sole and absolute means of it; for, though faith be by
hearing, yet is hearing not unto them to whom God has given ears that they
may not hear; but unto them properly whose ears are sanctified by the grace of
the spirit; for though Paul may plant, and Apollo water, yet it is God must
assist to give the increase, or else it is unsufficient; but I might as well
ask thee the question, whether your plow would accomplish its proper end,
tillage, without you or some other wrought with it or the tools of any
Artificer form the work intended, without the Workman give it motion, and
direct guidance, which to imagine is simplicity, but yet as wise arguing as is
yours.

Quere 9.
Whether the true Ministry of Christ be the same now for matter, means, and
maintenance, that it was in the Apostles time? or when was it changed into
great Livings, Tithes, and set maintenance? and by whom, and in what must it
now differ from these?

An Answer to the Ninth Quere.
The true Ministry of Christ is the same now for matter, means, and
maintenance, that it was in the Apostles days, though you would change it unto
that which is no Ministry of Divinity, but rather a mystery of iniquity. I have
partly proved in my answer to your seventh Query, as to matter and means. I
come now unto what remains concerning maintenance, for there I showed how
Paul, the wise Master builder, who yet was servant unto all, was to, and did
ordain and choose by de putation other workmen in the same employment with him,
as fellow laborers in the Vineyard of the Lords Church; and so it is the same
now: And concerning maintenance, 1 Cor. 9.6, 7, 8.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. 1 Timothy
5.8 1 Cor. 11.8. Luke 9.3. Mat. 10.10 Luke 9, 10
the same Apostle having proved the necessary convenience of a maintenance for
Gospel Ministers, by many unquestionable Arguments he comes at last to this
Assertion, Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel,
should live of the Gospel: And certainly he so ought to live, as that he may
not become worse then an Infidel, but provide for his own Family, and the
Rehearser of that Ordinance was also a practitioner in the use of maintenance;
for this he testifies of himself, I robbed other Churches, taking wages of
them to do you service: And therefore, since it was lawful for him (as
certainly it was) to take wages, for so he calls it, of one Church, to do
another service, then sure is it much more tolerable for a Minister to take
wages of a Church to serve the same: And though the Apostles in the time of our
Saviors presence with them, took neither purse nor scrip with them, because
their employment required haste, yet this is annexed, The labourer is worthy of
his hire; and to take two coats, might have been cumbersome, and therefore they
went light; but as you read of their going forth, so do you of their coming in
too in the same Chapter; and our Savior, who first instituted, also
disannulled this command, and bids him that has, use, and him that has not,
buy; Luke 22.36.
and they being then to travel from one Region to another, were to plant, not
keep in order the Vineyards, and therefore I could not be settled in any
constant employment, and therefore enjoyed no standing maintenance that I have
read of, except Paul, as before named, for wages, must be some certain
allowance; and in that the Scripture allows and ordaines a maintenance, and
pet prescribes not the sum, it is evidently clear that it is left to humane
providence to order that; and so Paul seems to admonish, when he says, Let
all things be done with decency; and in all things I suppose this was included.
And since you have nothing else to upbraid our Ministry withal, 1 Cor. 14.26.
you rail against, and abuse Paul as well as them, when you cry out against
hirelings, and therefore false Prophets, say you; so that it is neither changed
nor different from the Primitive Institution: And therefore the latter part of
this thy Query, with most of thy Tenets, thou may send to Rome to thy great
Grandfather the Pope, who has both added to, and diminished from the true
Ministry, and yet calls it the true still. And if this satisfy thee not, I
shall refer thee to more able pens, who have writ on this subject above
mentioned, as Mr. Baxter, and others.

Quere 10.
Whether the light of Christ be as sufficient to lead to God now, as it was in
Abraham's time? and if not, what must now be added to it to make it sufficient?

An Answer to the tenth Query.
This thy Query has been sufficiently answered in my Answer to thy first
Query; for that which wrought effectually in other Saints, wrought also in
Abraham, who believed, and therefore was justified, in that his actions were
counted to him for righteousness, so that his righteousness was of faith, not
of works, for then would it have been an action of the body, when faith is an
act of the soul, by which he, and every believer is, and shall be saved, and
by faith was he satisfied so as to be accepted; and that faith which then was
sufficient, is the same still, even unto the end; for he that believes, shall
be saved; And by grace are we saved through faith, and that not of our selves
(observe that) it is the gift of God: And the difference is not of the matter
whereof it was, and is wrought, but in the means and manner at which you are
offended, in that because he then wrought himself immediately, he does not the
same now, but by his Ambassadors, beseeching us to be reconciled unto him: But
if this be not a limiting of God, what is then? for shame cease to profess thy
self the servant of God, when thou seek to pervert his will; for that
cannot be the spirit of God in thee which so fights against it in the
Primitive Saints.

Query. 11.
Can any preach Christ, who have not Christ in them? and where he is, is he not
sole teacher what to preach and pray, and how, and when, and to whom? and is he
to be limited by any external thing, or to any external thing? or is any
ordinance to be practiced, but what he in spirit leads the creature to?

An Answer to the Eleventh Query.
It is possible that there may now be, as in the Primitive times there were,
them which may preach Christ, and yet not have Christ within them; for far be
it from me to deny, or to imagine otherwise, but that Judas the Traitor
preached Christ, as well as any other of the Apostles, Phil. 1.15, 16. Phil.
1.18 1 Cor. 9.27.
and Paul testifies as much unto the Church of Philippi, that some there were
that preached Christ, out of envy to his cause: Such I fear thou art, and many
more of thy society, and some of strife, and some of good will, but yet still
of them all; thus testifies Paul: that whether in pretense or in truth Christ
is preached. I do rejoice, yea, and will therein rejoice: And the same
Apostle, though to another Church, renders it a matter possible, that whilst a
Minister teaches, to save others,.6.
he may become a castaway himself, when this is an assured certainty, that
where Christ has begun a good work of faith in any, he will perform also it:
and the rest of this your Query I suppose tends to that which you and more of
your Apostatized Brethren have asserted, as that we ought to wait in silence
till the Spirit move us; and that whosoever uses the Scriptures, are robbers and
stealers of others men's words: This you once asserted to me, and so
consequently urging all to forsake reading, teaching, and praying, or any such
like exercises, unless the Spirit by irresistible motions move us thereunto;
against which I utterly declare, as have others done; for this were first, to
bereave us of that glorious privilege of communion with God, he speaking unto
us in his word, we unto him in prayer. Secondly to shut up the Kingdom of God,
in some sort, from the sons of men, in bereaving us of the means; for
discipline and observance is the security of an Army in wars and what are glad
tidings, if they are not told? Thirdly, this is to press us to the omission of
duty which is questionless commission of offense. And fourthly, this leaves
all open to the assaults of Satan, we laying down in our infirmities, and not
standing up against his invasions and temptations. And lastly, this gives way
to sluggishnesse of spirit, and to an unwatchfulness in matters of salvation,
and endeavor to engage us to a confidence of belief, Matthew. 24.23, 24. Luke
21.8 Act. 17.11.
in and to every thing that shall come in the name of Christ, and so to receive
Antichrist, not leaving us the privilege of the brains, to try the words of
an Apostle, by the umpire of all controversies, the sacred Scriptures, which is
absolutely opposite unto the truth, and contrary, yea far exorbitant from the
known will and temporal expressive word of God; for though he has said, Joh.
14.26 1 Timothy 4.15. 2 Timothy 2.15. Romans 12.12. 2 Thessalonians. 5.17.
The Spirit shall teach us all things; yet has it said again, Meditate on
these things, give thy self wholly to them. Now wholly excludes all negligent
intermission, and the manner how is prescribed too; for Study to show thy self
approved, and stir up the gift in thee, as fire which sometimes is covered with
ashes; and again, Be constant and instant in prayer, and pray continually;
which includes all times and seasons; wherefore we ought to put up our
supplications at the throne of grace, not only when the spirit especially
moves us, but when our occasions or necessities require; Matthew. 25.25, 26.
and far be it from me to imagine that the Spirit of God moved the Apostles to
preach when they did only, and at no other time, and that they always waited
in silence till then; for then it stirred up it self, they stirred it not, but
rather hid their talents of grace in the earth, and so were unprofitable, if
not unfaithful servants; and since the holy Ghost advised, and the the Apostles
so practiced, as to meditate, study, and pray without ceasing, it appears
plainly unto me, that Christ neither limited or constrained them respectively,
in particular, but only notionally, in general, so to do, giving them
repenitent hearts to sorrow for sin, and grace to believe, and power through
that grace to exercise faith in the performance of those duties; and when they
prayed, Christ also prayed with them, and, as a faithful Mediator, making
continual intercession at the throne of grace, that the fruition of their
prayers might be the accomplishment of their desires; and far be it from me to
imagine that Christ can be limited by any external thing, though I suppose, and
really believe, that it is possible for any man to limit himself, and then
much more for Christ, who is God, and therefore with him all things are
possible, and so may limit himself in any thing if he please.

Quere 12.
What is the ground and rise of your knowledge? whether it be received within
man from God, or without, from the Letter? And if without, whether this be not
the knowledge which all the vain janglers comes out of, and the generation of
persecutors comes out of, as the Jews was in, which professed the Letter, and
were strangers to the life of God? And whether this generation of men, and
Professors in our Age, do not begin to manifest the same as the persecuting
Jews did, yea, or nay?

An Answer to the Twefth Query.
Act. 19.2,
My knowledge, as was Paul's, is neither perfectly the one nor the other, and yet
partly both; for as the disciples of Ephesus were ignorant of Jesus, though
baptized unto John, and had not so much as heard of that name, or that there
was a holy Ghost, notwithstanding any inward light, until they were informed of
it by the outward teaching of Paul, and then they believed on Jesus, and so
their says and their knowledge too was from without, not within: but the
Jews, who like you thought to inherit glory by a Covenant of works, not of
grace, endeavored to pervert and subdue all knowledge, Mat. 5.14.
save of their way, who professing obvious light, were found to be in obscure
darkness, and therefore, persecuted the lights of the world, the Apostles and
Ministers of Christ, fearing lest their deeds should be brought unto the light,
and be found evil, as you do, and so they walked short both of the Spirit and
the Letter too; yet professing as much, and as peculiar sanctity as your
selves; and you and your generation manifest as much malice as did they,
wanting only their might against those precious candles of the Gospel, who
waste themselves, that we may grow up unto perfection; and I speak sincerely,
and I suppose I may do it without breach of Christian Charity, That if ever we
should live to see that dismal disconsolate day, wherein Quakers should
predominate in might, as much as now they do in malice, I fear fire and
faggot would be a dear commodity, through the frequent use thereof; for any
may see with a single eye, without a pair of spectacles, not only the
persecuting and censorious Jew, but also the Saint-murdering and truth-opposing
Pope enthroned both in your malice and your Tenets. The Lord defend us and his
cause from your envious power.

Quere 13.
What Scripture have you for your manner of worship, as to read a Chapter, and
to give meanings to it, and call it expounding? to take a text of another man's
words and raise points, reasons, and uses, etc. to sprinkle Infants, to sing
David's words in order of your ballads; to stand praying in the Synagogues at
your set times, before and after your glass? Prove your practice by command
from Christ, or practice of Gospel Ministers, else for shame cease to call it
Gospel Worship, since none of Christ's Ministers worshipped in that manner.

An Answer to the thirteenth Query.
When first I read this common hackny and overthredbare worn Query, which has
been the public frequent Strumpet of all your blemished, vitiated pens,
answered more then once and again, I could not but smile to fee your so often
battered armor wherewith you war against the cause of Christ, become the
harness of your resistance in the list of this controversy against the truth
at this time also; and though in respect it has been as often answered as
proposed, by several learned pens, who have writ on this occasion, and by
others who have treated on this subject, whose abilities are manifest in their
works, of precious concernment, which might induce me to wave my Answer. But as
I said before, so say I now again, that since your intosticated brains are so
soon lifted up on the haughty wings of vainglorious pride of the victory
before the encounter, I shall give it a curb, if not a crush. And I very much
wonder that you should enquire for an outward evidence, when you say yours is
within; and may not we say the same? But that you and the whole world may know
we practice not the dictates of our own minds, but bow all to the commands of
God; be it known to thee, and whosoever else shall enquire after the same, that
an evidential command we have, and what we do is of an obediential submission
to Gods revealed will. And for expounding of Scriptures, I answer, if thou
know not, but art ignorant, I shall do my endeavor to inform thee, that
it was the practice of the Church in all Ages to read the Scriptures
distinctly, and give the senses; and is not this expounding? Nehem. 8.8.15.
Luke 4.17, 21. Luke 24.27.32.
and be there not doctrines, reasons, and uses in all the Sermons and Epistles
of the Apostles? and did not our Savior himself take a Text, expouned it, and
apply it? who also began at Moses, and all the Prophets, expounding unto the
Disciples in all the Scriptures the things concerning himself, insomuch that
the hearers hearts burned within them at his doctrine whose words were with
power. Acts 28.23. Act. 17.2, 3 2 Timothy 3.15.16.
Philip also took a Text and expounded it, and beginning at the same Scripture
preached Jesus unto the Eunuch. Paul also expounded unto the Romans the
testimony of the Kingdom of God, and the things concerning Jesus, both out of
the Law and the Prophets, from the morning until evening who also testifies
this unto Timothy, That the Scriptures are able to make a soul exceeding wise
unto salvation, and are profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction,
and (observe this) for instruction in righteousness; which I suppose
comprehends all things mentioned by you, except you can prove them not
necessary to that end, to direct in matters of righteousness, that the man of
God may be made perfect. So having thus proved that Scriptures were expounded
by the Apostles and Ministers of Christ, 2 Timothy 2.15.
our practice is justified; and further, yet we have this not only as a
President, but a Precept, rightly to divide the word of truth, as workmen that
need not to be ashamed. Now, if there can be any right division without parts,
prove it if you can; nay further still, study is required in this exercise, and
commanded also by Paul's spirit, although cried out against by yours; and though
you dare boldly blaspheme the word of God, and call it the words of men, and so
call God a man by consequence, I fear you will find it a terrible word in the
last day of Christ's judgments, when you shall be found a liar, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.
1 Cor. 14.37.
and Paul a Preacher of truth, who calls it in truth the word of God, and the
commands of the Lord. And for your questioning of Baptism administered unto
children, I now find the root from which you spring, even from that
wellspring and fountaine-head from whence flow streams unto every heresy;
for the truest Relations that ever I could come unto the perusal of since John
of Leyden, that grand fomenter, and prick-louse Preacher, the founder of that
Sect, See Rosse his view of Religion, p. 229.
I have not read of any grand Apostate or heretic but what sprung from that
truth-corrupting Faction, as witness most of your Society, for to hinder the
children of Believers: The privilege of Baptism seems unto me a dividing of
that Covenant, I will be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee; observe
that, to thy seed, as well as unto thee. Now I shall leave it unto you to
examine, Genesis 17.7
whether it be not a clipping of the wings of Gods dominions, and a limiting
of, and setting a bound unto his Authority, that when he has said, I will be a
God unto thee, and to thy seed; and this shall be a Covenant between me and
thee for ever; yet you shall put a period uno the time, and a limitation unto
the condition, and so allow him only the first, and deny him the latter; and
certainly there were children in the house of Israel, 1 Cor. 10.2
when they marched through the Red Sea, and were all baptized unto Moses in the
cloud, and in the red Sea, where was also the Element, water, and surely there
were some buds of this now unmeasurable Sect in the Church, when Paul says,
The unbelieving Wife is sanctified by the believing Husband, and the
unbelieving Husband by the believing Wife; for else were your children unclean
(observe) but now are they holy; and if so, then how much more are they holy,
when both the Father and Mother believes too; and if they are so holy, why may
not they enjoy holy things, as Baptism, etc. And who does know whether the Lord
shall sanctify unto himself a Jeremiah in the womb? Jer. 1.5. Mar. 9 36.41.
Act. 2.39.
And our Savior himself thus declares, setting a child before him, Whosoever
offends one of these little ones that believes in me, (observe) that believes
in me, (where its possible they may believe) it were better for him that a
millstone were put about his neck, and he cast into the Sea. Now what greater
offense can there be, then to exclude them from their society and fellowship
with Christ? Peter also speaking to the Jews, testifies this, The Promise is
to you, yea, and to your children also; not dividing that which God has put
together, neither robbing God of his subjects, by impairing his Dominions, nor
bereaving his subjects of that glorious privilege of being his people; but as
God said, I will be a God unto thee, and to thy seed; so said he, The Promise
is unto you and to your children; and therefore, as said the Angel to Peter, so
say I unto you, That which God has sanctified, count not you unclean. And for
singing of David's Psalms in meeter, establishes a concord in the harmony;
Act. 10.15 Mat. 7.3.
and the matter being the same, it is nothing to the lawfulness or
unlawfulness of the thing; but O thou hypocrite! see thou the mote in
another eye? pull first forth the beam (or if you will, add an s, and make it
beams) out of thine own eye; Mat. 26.30. Act. 16.25 Col. 3.16.
and for singing Psalms, we have the practice of our Savior himself, Paul,
Silas, and the recommendation of James, and of Paul also; and it is reported of
Theodorus, that under the cruel persecution of Julius the Apostate, suffered
much in martyrdom, and being on the Rack, to the amazement of all the
beholders, sung Psalms most harmoniously; and if there can be any song
spiritual, and yet unlawful, why then did Paul admonish us to exhort one
onother in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs? and there can be no song,
but there must be meeter, for so the word signifies, and therefore take them as
songs, our practice is justified. And if you look for more, I refer you to them
who have writ largely on this subject. And for prayer, I wonder you should
cavil about it, when your society so much abominates the exercise; but it seems
you look on the posture of the body, more then the sincerity of the heart; and
for your Lordly commands, send them to them that will be commanded by you; if
it be a Bull, it is likely sooner to be baited then feared by any, unless your
Papistical Fraternity, or some of Romes Society, all which and whom we
abominate; but, as was the beginning of thy first, so is the end of this thy
Query, a lie, in saying none of Christ's Ministers worshipped so.

Quere 14.
Are you wiser then the Jews was, or stricter in your profession, or more able
to search the Scriptures, or are you fuller in your wisdom and prudence for
that work, any of you who deny the light of Christ? And was not they ignorant
of the voices of the Prophets, though they was read every Sabbath day, and so
fulfilled in condemning him? And are not you in the same work, as to the word
of Christ, though you have them every first day, beating in your Synagogues,
and haling before Rulers, and think that you do God the best service, when you
are greatest opposers? And so fulfilling the measure of wickedness, as they
did; and how can you escape their end? Mark 13.9. Acts 13.27. Matthew. 24.9. John
16.2, 3. 1 Cor. 10.2
And are not they who are in envy, in Cain's way, out of Christ? has God any
respect to their sacrifice, yea, or no?

An Answer to the fourteenth Query.
What the natural wisdom of the Jews was, and how profound, I care not to
enquire; and what the strictness of their profession, or rather superstition
was, you know best, who so far know, as to imitate their Pharisaical
preciseness, not of sacred devotion, but rather secular hypocrisy; but to
search the Scriptures, and the Mysteries therein comprised, and for wisdom
and prudence* to that work, we are fuller then they were, though you having
eyes see not; for Christ having opened our eyes with the eye salve of his
grace, to pry into the mystery of Gods word, which has been hid from
generations, Col. 1.26. Acts 4.12.
and from you (I fear) also, but is revealed unto us by faith in him, we can
see that he, even Jesus, is the Christ, the Son of the living God, and that in
him, and his name only, is eternal Redemption to be found or preached and
salvation in no other under the Sun; that he is bodily ascended unto glory,
and sits at the right hand of God, making intercession for us; and this they
could not see, though we see this, and much more by faith in him; and we can
see the way wherein we must run to attain the end of our race, even eternal
rest, which neither they, nor you, their successors could, or can see. But
since with a parenthesis of nonsense you seem to direct your latter part of his
Query, (To any who deny the light of Christ) find them out, and let them
answer it, for it concerns not me; and so I have ended my Answer. And if you
please, you may begin your progress to your ghostly father, Pope Alexander the
11th. and implore a blessing for better fortune in your future undertakings,
that so the fruits of your future policy may have more prosperous fruition,
that so he may have cause to rejoice with singing Te Deum, when his sheepskin
of glorious pretenses shall better hide his wolvish inside, then thus to be
unmasked.

Having accomplished what you and others of your Faction so much bawled for, to
wit, an Answer to your Queries, I hope I may claim it as a debt, rather then a
courtesy, that you also answer what I here propose afresh, that so a discovery
of the truth may be further made, and I doubt not but that truth will discover
your falsehood.
Query 1.

WHether your quaking and trembling be not the effects and tokens of those
curses, 1 Samuel 14, 15. Deuteronomy. 28.65. Psalm. 69.23. And whether the Lord has not
given you eyes that you should not see? And whether the god of this world has
not blinded your minds? And whether the Lord has not given you over to a
spirit of delusion to believe lies? And whether you slumber not in that
self-pleasing trance of Security? and whether it be a blessing or a curse, that
you know not your sins? and whether Satan drill you not to himself with the
lure of present perfection? and whether all this be not inflicted on you as
judgments for your Apostasy?

Qu. 2. Whether there ought not to be a special distinction made betwixt the
dictates of the spirit of God, and the spirit of man? and whether it be not of
the latter that proceeds from you, if not worse? and whether you err not in
laying it on Christ? Gal. 1.2.


Qu. 3. Whether that expression of Paul, quoted by you, That he was an Apostle
not of man, nor by man, was spoke of officiating that Office, as being an
Apostle, and therefore a Teacher of Christ, not of man, or the manner of his
choice and election to that Office? or is that a warrant to assure any that
there can none be Ministers of Christ but who are immediately called and chosen
by Christ himself, as was Paul? and then are not such Apostles of Christ as
well as Paul? and whether hereby you intend not to claim equal authority with
Paul, both in your preaching and writing, and so set your self free from
obedience to any of his Epistles, and enjoin others to observe yours as well as
his? and whether we may not smell the Pope in this your practice, as well as in
many others? and is not this spiritual pride?

Act. 15.40 Act. 1.23. Tit. 1.5.
Qu. 4. And since Paul chose Silas, was not Paul a man? or was Silas no
Minister? and was not Matthias, who succeeded Judas, chose by man? or was he
not an Apostle? or was it by usurpation that Paul took unto himself that
authority to transmit power to others to ordain Elders in every City? or did
he err when he gave instructions to Timothy whom to make Bishops? and whether
were they of Paul false, or of Christ true Ministers so chosen? and since
Timothy received the gift of Prophecy by the laying on of the hands of the
Presbyter, 1 Timothy 4.14.
was that Presbyter a man or no man? if a man, was it not then by man, though
not of man? if no man, what then was he? and what hinders that there should not
be the same power in man now, the state of man being the same still that it was
then?

Qu. 5. And since you say there is a light in every man and woman that comes
into the world, sufficient if minded, to lead out of all the ways and works of
darkness; Act. 9.11, 12, 17. Acts 10. Act. 8.26.
is not this a leading to perfection? and if it be so, that there is that in
every man which is sufficient; was it not then a needless light that the Lord
sent? by Ananias to Saul; by Peter to Cornelius; by Philip to the Eunuch? or
was it not that there was no sufficiency in them? And then do you not lie, to
say there is in all a sufficiency? or was it that it then was unsufficient,
although it now is sufficient? and how came it now to be sufficient, more then
then it was? or was it not this indeed that God thereby gave them, Act. 18.24,
25, 26, 27, 28.
and us, and all future posterity an evidential example of his manner and way
of conversion by the concurrence of two, the ministration of man, and the
operation of the spirit? and if so, why do you resist it? or is not your
opposing of it a fighting against God, and a spirit of delusion in you, which
calls it self Christ? and why was it that Apollo, though he was zealous in
what he knew, which was only the baptism of John, Act. 18.26
yet understood nothing of Jesus till he was taught it of Aquila and Priscilla?
is it not an apparent evidence that there is nothing in man to bring him to
that knowledge without either an extraordinary inspiration, or an ordinary
tuition?

Qu. 6. And if Christ preached the Kingdom of God within unbelievers, as you
say he did, what then is the difference between the faithful and the
faithless, and wherein does it consist? or is there none? or shall both be
saved? if yes, how so? if no, what is the reason, since there is power in all
(as you say) why is not the Redemption to all? or is it that the light is
sufficient in one, and not in another? or does God will all to salvation, but
some men superwill, and so come to condemnation.

Qu. 7. And whether is your spirit a lying one, 2 These. 2.13. 1 Cor. 14.37.
which says the Scriptures are not the words of God, but of men? or Paul's
spirit, which says, Of a truth it is the word of God; and that what he writ
was the commands of the Lord; or is a command consistent of words, or no? if
not, of what then does it consist? or if yes, how can the command be Gods, and
the words man's? Speak out plainly in truth according to Scripture, and cease to
equivocate sophistically to delude silly souls.

Qu. 8. Whether it be any better then hypocrisy, to prate of, and call for
Scripture, and yet deny the prerogative of Scripture, that it is not the word
of God? and what do you say unto the commandments, are they the words of God
yea or not? Exo. 20.1. Rom 19.9
if not, what is meant by that phrase, God spoke all these words saying, was
that God, or was it something else that called it self God, and was not so?
and if they are the words of God, why are not other Scriptures the same? and
how is it that some of you say the word of God cannot be contained in ink and
paper?

Q. 9. And since you say that Christ only is the word of God, I query whether
he be meet to be a Teacher of others? nay, has he not need himself to learn
the first principles of Religion, that cannot discern between the temporal
expressive word of God, and the co-essential and coeternal word with God, for
so is Christ.

Q. 10. And if that the Law written in every man's heart were since Adams fall,
and now is sufficient to teach us what to do and observe, as to sanctity,
wherefore then did the Law in the Letter enter on Mount Sinai? Romans 5.20
and if you say, that so offenses might abound, which were not made manifest in
the eyes of sinners, this I grant; but then how could that Law in man's heart be
sufficient, if it were in some sort unsufficient, and not perfect in every
degree to its end? and wherefore afterward entered the Gospel, the Law of Faith
on mount Sion? and to what end, if not to direct in a new way by a Mediator?
which neither the Law in man's heart, or on Mount Sinai could do; or was it
once of such force, and is it not the same still? if not, how came it to be
disannulled?

Heb. 5.12.
Q. 11. What be those first principles of the Oracles of God, made mention of by
Paul, as needful for believers to know what the oracles be, whether the
Scriptures, or what else be the Oracles, or the Principles, how learnt, and
after what manner, and by what means? or if the Scriptures be the Oracles of
God, why not the Word of God also? and what differerence between the oracles
and the word? and wherein consistent? Heb. 6.1.
and what those principles of the doctrine of Christ be? whether the same with
those of the oracles? wherein different? and wherein congruant? and what the
growing up unto perfection is? and when the end? and whether in this life, or
in another?

Q. 12. What is the Kingdom of God that our Savior speaks of, Luke 11.21, and
what that Kingdom, Mat. 11. how did it suffer violence? by whom? and after what
manner?

Q. 13. What is that Election? Matthew. 24.22, 24. Romans 9.11. and 11.15. Tit.
1.1. 1 Pet. 2.10 Act. 10.24. and 13.48. Jude 4. Romans 8.5, 23. (...) Gal. 4.5.
Ephesians. 1.5. Joh. 6.44.
what that Ordination? what that Adoption? and what that drawing so oftentimes
spoken of in Scripture? and who they be that are capable of it here? and after
what manner administered? and make out your judgment herein by plain Scripture.

Q. 14. And since I have proved Scriptures may be expounded, why not a verse,
or a chapter, or more or less? and since it ought to be divided, can there be
any division without parts? if so, prove it; if not, why may it not be
distinguished under the names of Doctrines, Reasons, Uses, and the like, as
well as to go without name? or do you resist it, because the Scriptures
allows it?

Q. 15. And since you seem to exhort that none ought to begin or conclude their
speech in Preaching, till the spirit move them thereunto by irresistible
motions; did ever the gift of the Spirit exclude prudent reasons so much, as to
set men's tongues so on going, as that they had no power to stop them? and is
not your tongue oyled with a spirit of confused delusion?

Q. 16. Whether it extend not unto, or come within the limits of the blasphemy
against the holy Ghost, to cry down that which he has set up, and to belch
forth lies, slanders, heresies, false doctrines, and perhaps blasphemy, and yet
to lay all on this spirit? or what is that sin which is unpardonable?

Q. 17. Are not the Ministers you now cry down, the same that Rome would
destroy? and with you, say they are false Teachers, and no true Ministry? and
were not the holy Martyrs as Theodorus and Ignatius, etc. and in Q. Mary's
days, Cranmer, Latimer, Hooper, Ridley, Farrar, Mat. 12.3
Bradford, Philpot, Saunders, Glover, Tailor, and many others of the same
profession? or wherein did they differ? or were they false Ministers, and so
died as evil doers? and were they not called Masters, took tithes, and preached
upon Texts, and in Pulpits? and do not you justify their murders, in
condemning their cause, and so join with their persecuters, and condemn those
afresh? and is not the spirit in you a truth-opposing and Rome-upholding one?

Q. 18. Is Baptism and the Supper Sacraments, yea or no? or whether there can
be any Sacrament without some outward sign? or whether a Sacrament is
consistent in words? or an Element? or of the one? or of the other? or of both?
or of neither? and how there can be any Sacrament without an Element? speak
plainly to the purpose.

Q. 19. And since you say I am damned, where is that pious charity spoken of by
Paul, 1 Cor. 13. or is it to be owned by, and practiced of a Christian, yea or
not? if yea, after what sort, and in what measure, and why do not you use it?
if no, when was it made void? and whether it be the spirit of Christ, or of
something that calls it self Christ, that says, Judge not, lest ye are judged?
or of Satan, which seeks to drive men into desparation without cause? as thou
art damned; when, and at what time were you made privy unto Gods determinate
will, to know that I am damned? or to his secrets? that I believe not? or
savors not this of a diabolical, censorious envious spirit in you? and how
comes it to pass that I must believe James Naylor, and then be faithful? and
though I believe in Christ, yet be faithless? is there more objects of faith
then one in unity? and what be the degrees? and what the effects? and what the
grounds of a saving and sanctifying faith? and how known?

Q. 20. Whether the power that works in you, and in the rest of your quaking
Fraternity, be divine, or diabolical? if divine, prove it by Scripture; or may
we not know the Tree Antichrist by its fruits, heresies in you? if diabolical,
then cease (like Simon Magus) to seem to be some great one, to draw disciples
after you, and resist this spirit in your self; better repent, then perish.

Q. 21. Whether it be by the spirit of Satan, or the power of God, say you,
that works by charms, whereby some of your Proselytes have been possessed
with devils, as Gilpin, Mary White, and others? and whether Peter, or Simon
Magus be the Apostle of Christ? or whether it be the work of the spirit of God,
to inspire with the holy Ghost, or with Satan? and hereby let us know whether
you be Saints or sorcerers? make it out upon a Gospel account.

Q. 22. And since you so much rail against superiority and dignities, 2 Pet.
2.10, 11. Heb. 13.7, 17 1 Cor. 4.1 Tit. 1.7.11 Tim. 3. Cor. 3.10 Act. 14.15.
Eccl. 12.11 1 Pet. 3.6. Act. 20.25 Act. 26.2, 27. Act. 16.30
when as the very Angels in heaven bring no railing accusations againg them?
and wherefore did our Savior speak against being called Masters, and upon what
occasion? and why may not Ministers be called Masters as well as Rulers? and
what is the difference between a Master and a Ruler? and is the title of
Ministers of Christ, the Stewards of the Mysteries of God, Ambassadors of
Reconciliation, Bishops, Overseers, inferior to the word Master? did Paul
transgress? or was he no Minister, because he called himself a wise
Master Builder? or did the holy Ghost err when he called teachers Masters of
Assemblies? or did the spirit err when it commends Sarah for calling Abraham
Lord? or Paul, who called Festus most noble Festus, and Agrippa, O King
Agrippa? did not Paul and Silas own the title Sirs from the Jailer? or do you
not stumble at a straw, and run over a mountain? and see a mote in another
eye, but not a beam in yours?

Q. 23. Did not your spirit speak in Corah, Dathan, Number, 16.3.
Abiram, and their adherents? and did not they rail against their Ministers?
ye take too much upon you; and say not you the same in effect? and said not
they, all the Congregation is holy, and so themselves in their own eyes? and
you say you are pure; said not they The Lord is among us? and so say you, The
Lord Christ is within us; 2 John 9.
and is not the same spirit in you, that was in Diotrephes, who rejected the
Epistles of the Apostles? And did ever any more presumptuously boast of, and
yet act more contrary unto the Spirit of God? or did ever any generation show
such audacious arrogant impudence, in opposing the Doctrine for which Martyrs
and holy men of God have spent their blood for the testimony thereof, and yet
take unto themselves the justice of their cause for a defense of their
baseness? and is not this spiritual presumption, if not abomination?

Q. 24. Is a lie the fruit of an infallible, or a fallible spirit? and may not
a true Church err, and so be fallible, or may it err, and yet still be
infallible? or is pretense of infallibility an assurance that that Church so
pretending it is a true Church? or did any of the Apostles boast of
infallibility, as do you? or are you more infallible then they were? And if
you have the same spirit, why then what hinders that you do not the same
miracles? is it that the spirit is now less able then it was then? and so is
not the spirit fallible? or is it not rather that there is in you a deceivable
spirit that calls it self infallible? and did ever any besides your self and
the Church of Rome your Founders, stand upon so presumptuous a score of
infallibility, and yet acted with more fallibility in doctrine and opinion? and
is it not hellish darkness in you, and them that calls it self pure light.

J. DEACON.

FINIS.

