THE DECLARATION And Resolution of ROBERT EARL of VVARVVICK, Lord Admiral for
the King, Parliament of England, And all the Officers, and Seamen A Board, His
NAVY touching the Personal TREATY:

And their Resolution to Join with the Prince, in Case the Treaty shall be
either Retarded, Obstructed, or Opposed by any Party, as well the Army, as all
others: and their Vows, and Engagement to stand for the three States, King,
Lords, and Commons; Against all Opposers, and Gainsayers Whatsoever.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1648.

The Declaration and Resolution of Robert Earl of Warwick, etc.
IT is not unknown unto all the whole Kingdom how faithfully and zealously, we
have behaved our selves in the service of King and Parliament, and we leave all
the world to judge how readily we ventured our lives, and laid out our estates,
toward this work of Reformation, to the ends of the Covenant, and our first
engagement, and we believed that the bringing home of the King to his
Parliament, was the only means, which might perfect the work in hand, and we
were verily persuaded, that our present and pressing troubles, could no ways
have a period, but by a free convention betwixt King, and Subjects in
Parliament, conceiving that to be the means to remove all mistakes and
misunderstanding, betwixt King and people, we shall not stand to rehearse all
the Covenant, Vows, and protestations put upon us by the Parliament for the
maintenance of the protestant Religion, the Kings honor, Person, and Estate,
the privileges of Parliament, and the established known Laws of the Land, for
which we first engaged both lives and fortunes, against those we supposed were
the Common Enemies. But now sinding by woeful experience, that we are likely to
be worse inslaved by a company, who behave themselves like the Turkish
Janizary; in imposing taxes on our estates, and forcing our person out to fight
against we know not who, for woe know not what, to satisfy the bondles lusts
of a company of factious, seditious and covetous persons, who have the
influence and greatest stroke in the houses and Army, we know them very well,
but shall forbear to particularize them, til another opportunity, but it is not
necessary to insert their names, by reason they are too well known to this
Kingdom, the total ruin and downfall of all religion, government, and
discipline, not only in this, but in the other two Kingdoms. And this we
should not offer, but upon good grounds, will prove what we say and declare; to
be as true as their actions are unjust and dangerous, and indeed the
wickedness of these men, we did not of a long time (and till now of late)
deserne the continual masking themselves under the names of Reformers, and
would forsooth be called the honest and faithful party, none more forward to
speak good words to the people, and make great promises, where and to
whomsoever they came, of enlargement from slavery and pressures, then they,
when indeed (as is apparent) they meant nothing more then to destroy, and ruin
them, Thus have they kept their vizards on for these many years to the blinding
and deluding of many poor souls in this Kingdom, who being thus mislead by
their specious pretents, and dancing after their pipes, to the loss of both
lives and estates under these men, by their false suggestions, insomuch that
these three Kingdoms have bled and groaned this many years to the desperate
hazard of their utter dissolution and loss.

And now these men appearing in their own colors, and letting the world be
spectators of their insolencyes, and imperious carriages to the great terror
and amazement of all modest and peaceable people.

And truly had they not appeared thus audacious and bold, without limits or
bonds as hye as the destruction of both King, Lords and Gentry, and that they
pretend the house of Commons to be the only supreme power, and that house they
will not take notice on, unles it be molded of a party of their own choosing
and faction.

We say that was one main cause of our now declaring, and engaging, And truly
our affection were so great to that Army and Party both in the house and City,
that we would have willingly laid down our lives to justify them, and whosoever spoke against them, we either thought them Malignants, or men void of
grace, and charity, but now their insolences [and our burden] force us to
speak that which heretofore we should have blushed to think.

And now we have great cause to bless God for his goodness, in making us such
clear discerners of their juggling and Machavonills demeanors, and do look upon
it as the greatest mercy that we are undeceived, in that we have some hopes
left us to secure our selves and help our poor distressed fellow subjects from
under the ejection slavery, which these men have brought us to wade to the
knees in already, we cannot but believe, but that this faction, which does so
predominate both in the house and field, are of a Jesuiticall spirit, knowing
very well that that Army abounds with Priests and Jesuits, under whose
Counsels we cannot think our selves in safety, or this Kingdom, since they
are the only men, that carries on and has the business, and has the
transaction of most things done both in the house and Army, these things
appearing plain to the understanding of us, we conceived we could not prosper,
nor expect a blesing from heaven so long as we remain silent after it had
pleased our maker to make us knowers off, and since it is a matter of so great
concernment as Religion, law and liberty; we doubt not but we shall have
assistence from Heaven above, and al honest and Godly men who love the
happiness flourishing of 3 (now dying Kingdoms) which must inevitably come to
ruin, if we suffer these cruel Egyptian Taskmasters thus to rule over us,
which slavery we are resolved to quit our selves from, and bring our selves
from under; and we doubt not but heaven will smile upon us as well as it did
when we were abused by an exorbitant power gotten from the King by a party who
loved him not.

And now we shall declare who we will not have to bare rule amongst us.

1 We declare against that party who denied to observe the Parliament Orders at
New Market and engaged themselves contrary to the Orders, Votes, and Resolution
of both houses, to stand in Arms, till they were satisfied in unjust and
treasonable demands.

2. We Declare against those who violently carried his Majesty away from
Holmby, contrary to the Order, Votes, and Ordinances of both houses of
Parliament, from house to house whither they pleased on purpose to force him to
own them in their treasonable undertakings.

3. We declare against that party which deserted the house and ran to the Army,
and brought them into the City of London, and joined with them for the
expelling and driving away all the honest Godly peaceable members of the houses
and City.

4. We declare against those who plotted, contrived and effected his Majesty's
imprisonment, and the party set on in the time of his Majesty's imprisonment,
to poison or take away his sacred life.

5. We declare against all those which have broken the peace and engagement
betwixt us, and our brethren of Scotland.

6. We declare against all Brownists, Anabaptists, Seekers, Independents,
Antitremptarion, and all blasphemers.

7. We declare against all Taxes, Excise, Contribution. Sequestrations and
Committees.

And now to let the world know that we desire the benefit and prosperity of
these three Kingdoms, we shall declare and show what we wish and desire

1. That Keligion may be established according to the rule of Gods word, and as
near to the Covenant as is possible, admitting the example of best reformed
Churches, and that Discipline may be speedily set up, and put in execution to
the bridling of licentious liberty, and the destroying and routing out of
heresy and Schism,

2. That this personal Treaty may be hastened and cherished with all the honest
oportunities that may tend to the restoring of the King to his just rights, and
that his Queen may with his children come home in safety and honor, and live
with his Majesty as all other Queens have done in former times.

3 That the Freedoms of Parliament and privileges may be known and declared,
to the end we may not be brought to a contempt of their Authority through
ignorance, and that this present Parliament would be pleased to set a time for
their ending, that so the subject may be eased of many taxes which now lies
upon them through and by their means.

4 That all Armies may be disbanded und paid off out of Forrest-lands and
course taken that all idle persons who have bin Soldiers may be set at work or
sent beyond the Seas.

5 That all Garrison may be slight, demolished and dismantled except such as
are Sea port Towns, and inlets to a foraign enemy.

6 That all Widows and Fatherless children whose husbands and fathers have
bin slain, in these wars may be provided for in some competent measure to keep
them from beggary and starving.

7 That a considerable Army may be raised for Ireland, of such honest and sober
principled men, as will observe the command of the authority that levyes them
and pays them, that they may disband when it shall be judged by that power fit.

8. That there may a firm act of Parliament be made and concluded, that the
Kingdom may be governed according to the known laws of the Land, by King,
Lords and Commons, and that an oath may be taken throughout the Kingdom by all
persons to acknowledge the same government, and that it may be death or
banishment for any to refuse the same.

9, That a considerable company of honest moderat men may be sent into Scotland
to take up the difference betwixt us and our brethren, that so we may prevent
the effusion of any more Christian blood, and that we may continue our late
engagement with them (as it is just) in love and charity.

10. and Lastly, We desire that all such persons who shall any way retard,
obstruct, or discountenance these things may be declared against as Traitors
and Rebels, to the King, Parliament and Kingdom.

These things we conceive to be the only means, under God, to make these 3
Kingdoms happy, and we should not have declared thus far, but that we see a
many of persons who endeavor to interpose betwixt us and our peace, by
petitioning against a Personal Treaty, and that their petitions and
expressions, words and actions tends to levelling and ruin of both King and
Lords and are so bold as to say the repream power rests in the house of
commons, to which men, we will be so bold as answer, they know not what they
ask, therefore forgive them father, for if the Commons of England be the
supreme power, then he that can make the best friends shall have what he
desires, though sit be to the ruin of (a whole) or many familyes, We are
already satisfied, that it is as dangerous a thing to be governed by Votes, as
it is to be governed by armies, when especially in such a time as when so many
men, so many minds.

And now we have given the world to understand what we desire, and are assured
that what we wish and desire is well pleasing both to God and all moderate
minded men, and if these things shall be opposed, we shall endeavor to
strengthen our selves both by Sea and land, and join with his highness the
Prince of Wales, and the fleet under him, which we doubt not but will bring a
happy peace to these three Kingdoms, and ruin and shame to their and our
Enemies.

Printed and Published by the Command of Robert Earl of Warwick, and all the
Commanders and Common Soldiers under him, the Navy raised for defense of King
and Parliament.

FINIS,

