A DECLARATION AND REMONSTRANCE Of the present engagement of the Kingdom of
SCOTLAND.

With their resolutions and intentions (according to their late solemn League
and Covenant) to establish the Presbyterian Government in the Church, to
redeem his Majesty from the hands of Schismatickes, and place him in his
Parliament, with honor and safety, to procure the peace of the three Kingdoms,
to vindicate the worthy Members of Parliament, falsely impeached by the Army,
with the true Privileges of Parliament, and Liberty of the Subject.

All which are not only endangered, but by likelihood ready to be destroyed,
by the power of an over-awing tyrannical Army, under the conduct of Sir Thomas
Fairfax.

Aug: 17 Printed in Edenborough, 1647.

The Oath taken by the Parliament of Scotland, and by them prescribed to be
taken by all His Majesty's Loyal Subjects.
Whereas it has been customarily used at all National Assemblies,
Parliaments, and Counsels, that at our first coming together, to take a
solemn Oath before God and Man; Protesting not to determine or execute any
thing contrary to the word of God, or prejudicial to the honor of His
Majesty, only that all their studies, indevours, counsels and determinations,
should be employed to the increase of Gods glory, the advancement of his
Majesty's honor, and the peace, quiet, freedom, and blessed prosperity, of
Kirk and Commonwealth, which Oath and Protestation, is as well for the
inducement of others, (to wit all his Majesty's loyal Subjects) as themselves,
since it is not in their power to perform what they protest, without the
assistance of such his Majesty's subjects, as shall be commanded by them, to the
fulfilling of whose commands, such an Oath and Protestation binds.

And to the end that none may be ignorant or plead excuse, after themselves
have taken the said Oath and Protestation, They caused to be published in
Print, that every man may know what they have promised, and what they are to
command, and likewise what every ones duty is, and must be if he desire to have
any share or portion in their Religious protections.

An Oath taken by the Parliament in Scotland.
FOr as much as the honor greatness and happiness of the Kings Royal
Majesty, and the welfare of the Subject, depends on the purity of Religion
(as it is now established in this Kingdom) the Laws, Liberties, and peace
thereof, which ought to be sought after by all good Christians, Loyal
Subjects, and true Patr^ots, and to be furthered and maintained by them against
all such as by any means endeavor to shake or subvert the same.

Therefore we under scribers, and every one of us do in the presence of
Almighty God promise, and vow, that in this present Parliament, we shall
faithfully and freely speak, answer, and express our selves upon all and
every thing which is or shall be propounded so far as we think in our
conscience may conduce to the glory of God, the good and peace of the Kirk,
and State of this Kingdom, and employ our best endeavors to promote the same,
and shall in no way advise, voice nor consent to any thing to our best
knowledge, n^^ think not most expedient and conducible thereunto: As also that
we shall maintain and defend with our lives, powers, and estate, his
Majesty's Royal Person, Honor and Estate, as is expressed in our National
Covenant, and l^kewise the power, and Privileges of Parliament, and the
lawful Rights and Liberties of the S^bject, and by all good me^nes and ways
oppose, and endeavor to bring to exact trial, all such as either by force
practice counsels, plots, conspiracies, or other w^yes have done, or shall do
any thing to the prejudice to the purity of Religion, the Laws, Liberties, and
peace of the Kingdom: And further that we shall in all just, in all
honorable ways, endeavor to preserve union and peace, betwixt the three
Kingdoms Scotland, England, and Ireland, and neither for hope, fear nor other
respect shall relinquis^ this vow and promise.

Thus considering how we stand engaged as well by this Oath as our late
Solemn National League and Covenant, to maintain his Majesty's Royal
Person, Honor and Estate, and finding his Majesty to be in apparent danger,
and environed with Sectaries, whose pernicious and destructive principles are
well known unto us, to be directly against Monarchy, as may appear by their
late desperate speeches concerning his Majesty (as by one Lilburne and many
others) as that the House of Commons should think of that The just man's
justification. page 1.
great murderer of England meaning the King, for by the impartial Law of God,
there is no exemptions of Kings, Princes, Dukes, Earls, more then Cobblers,
Tinkers, or Chimney-sweepers, etc.

And in another place where they speak more plainly The Remonstr^nce of many
thousands. page 6.
we expect according to reason that ye should in the first place declare and
set forth King Charles his wickedness openly before the world, and withal to
show the intolerable inconveniences of having a Kingly Government from the
constant evil practices of those of this Nation, and so to declare King
Charles an enemy, and to publish your resolutions never to have any more.

By these and the like speeches, all reasonable men may understand, what such
Sectaries (whatsoever they pretend,) intend for his Majesty's safety and
honor, especially since we are bound by Oath to deliver his Majesty out of
the hands of such Miscreans. 1. We vow and Covenant to the utmost of our Lives
and Estates to effect the same. 2. Consider the great design they drive at,
which is to new mold the House of Commons, better to effect which, they first
suspend Eleven Members, and so more and more suddenly, introducing many of
their own Independent Members in their rooms, that so (if possible,) they
might, promote their wicked designs in a Parliamentary way. 3. Consider that
they intend the ruin and destruction of the House of Lords as may appear by
many of the Sectaries printed Pamphlets and Petitions, as when the Lambs
Congregati.
Petition to the House of Commons, where they say, That the Lords of this
Realm ought not to sit in Parliament, unless they do come in by election, as
Members of the House of Commons do: And in a Pamphlet against the House of
Lords, they say thus, Just man in bonds. page 1.
That the Lords are but painted Puppits, and Dagons, that our superstition and
ignorance their own and craft and impudence, have erected no natural issue of
Laws, but the Mushromes of Prerogatives, The weens of just Government, put in
the body of the people to pain, as well as occasioning deformity, sons of
conquest they are and usurpation, not of choice and election, intruded upon us
by power, not constituted by consent, not made by the people, whom all power,
place, and office that is just, in this Kingdom ought only to rise. And in
another place thus, Pearl in a dunghill. page 3.
Why presume ye thus, O ye Lords, set forth your merits before the people,
remember your selves, or shall we remember ye? which of you before this
Parliament minded any thing so much as your pleasure, Plays, Masks,
Feastings, huntings, Gamings, Dancings, etc. For what other have you been, but
a mere clog to the House of Commons in all their proceedings, how many
necessary things have you obstructed, how many evil things have you promoted?
And again, A Remo^^trance of ^any thousands p^g 7.
That the Lords must stand to be chosen as Knights and Burgesses by the people,
as other the Freemen and Gentry of this Nation are: By all this is apparent
that they intend the destroying of the House of Lords. 4 They drive on for a
Tolleration for all sorts of Heresies, and heretical opinions, which they
term Liberty of Conscience; for they boldly assert, W^lli^ms bloody ^^^en^,
pref^ce pa. 2.
That it is the will and command of God, that since the coming of his Son the
Lord Jesus Christ, a permission of the most Paganish, Jewish, Turkish or
Antichristian c^nsciences and worships being granted to all men, in all
Nations and Countries.

And again, C^m^os. Sam^a^. p^ 5.
That Liberty of Conscience is to be allowed by every man, to worship God in
that way or manner as shall appear to them m^st agreeable to Gods word: By the
length of this foot we may guess at the whole body, and what Babylonish
confusion this will be, let all true Christians judge.

5. That they intend (past intention, for they have done it already) to pull
down Orthodox and godly Ministers, placed in their Livings by Ordinance of
Parliament, and to take upon th^^s^lves (though the very scumme of the people)
the Pasto^s office, abu^e godly Minister^, saying, Their Ministerial calling
is Antichristian, their maintenance Jewish, their preaching illegal, and their
persons contemptible, preferring before them Gromes of Stables, Botchers,
Cobblers, and all Mechanics how ignorant soever. 6. That having a power (the
sword in their own hands, as they have often bragged off) do protect their
own Independent Members (who are guilty of Capital Crimes) from a due and
Legal trial, they draine the City of London which now lies at their mercy, of
vast sums of moneys, burden their Subburbs by free Quartering; and the like;
retard the relief of Ireland, elect Members of their own factions, slight
and set at naught the House of Lords, keep the King still at a distance from
the Parliament, list Soldiers continually, and yet would make us believe they
intend Having bottomed their proposals, they promised to aquiesce.
peace; demand unreasonable things of the Parliament, and more then they can
honorably grant, seaz upon all the strong holds and forts in the Kingdom, and
must not be denied any thing they ask.

They accuse Members of known integrity and faithfulness to the Parliament and
Kingdom, upon mere surmises, and lamentable lame informations of some of
their phantasticke brethren, they resist the solemn league and covenant, for
uniting the two Kingdoms of Scotland and England, they dissolve the
Parliament, and seek to new cast it in an Independent mold. They countenance
desperate Malignants, who vindicate them in their proceedings, and suffer them
to be about the person of the King.




These things having taken all into our serious considerations, truly weighing
them in an equal balance, and laying them to heart, we cannot but apprehend
what miseries will be intayled upon us and our posterities, if we shall not
stand as one man, in the name of all that have taken the Covenant with u^,
Humbly to petition the Parliament, for the speedy disbanding of the Army, so
soon as their Arceers can be paid, Declarations against them revoakt, and the
act of Indemnity enlarged, That those Counties that were petitioners to Sir
Thomas Fairfax, should represent how surreptitiously the petitions were gotten,
by whom fomented, contrived, and su^scribed, that they may come to condign
punishment, for so high an affront against the Parliament: that the eleven
Members may be again taken into the House, or others legally and fairly
chosen, to attend the service of the House, till the charge can be proved
against the accused. That none may be admitted Members of Parliament, or have
any place of trust in the Kingdom, that refuse to take the solemn League and
Covenant: that some persons of trust and valor (as Field Marshall Skippon, or
Major General Massy) may be put into supreme command for the affairs of
Ireland: that his Majesty may be speedily brought with honor and safety to
the Parliament: that such wholesome Laws may be enacted that may procure a
firm and lasting peace.

Else we shall be enforced speedily according to our Covenant to make such
provisions of Arms, and other Millitary forces, as may secure our Religion,
our King, Kingdom, and Parliament: And make no doubt of the blessing of God
together with cheerful concurrence of all good people and well affected of
both Kingdoms that desire freedom from Sects, Schisms, and Heretics, with
inflamed vigor and alacrity to oppose their enterprises, and maintain the
honor, and Religion of both Kingdoms against all Tyrants whatsoever to the
comfort of Gods people to the rescuing and vindicating our wronged Brethren,
delivering them out of the jaws of destruction, and the establishing of truth
and peace in these three Kingdoms.

From Edenborough, August, the 13. 1647.
FINIS.

