THE DECLARATION AND RESOLUTION OF The County of Leicester.

Delivered in Answer to to His Majesty's Speech, made to the whole County.
Wherein they express their Zeal and Loyalty to His Majesty and also their
unchangeable constancy to maintain the Proceedings of Parliament against all
Opposition.

Also the Protestation of the County of Lincoln, delivered to the Lords, by the
Lord Willoughby of Parham, and by a Message communicated to the House of
Commons, and by them approved of.

Also the Parliaments Charge and Command to all Justices.

Ordered, that this be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

July 29. Printed for J. Wels. 1642.

THE DECLARATJON AND Resolution of the County of Leicester, to his Majesty.
When His Majesty came into Leichestershire. He was pleased to deliver
himself, his Intentions, and Desires, to the understanding of that County; the
Particular Grounds of whose Speech, were, That as he was their lawful
Sovereign so he might find their Loyal and faithful acknowledgement of that
Royalty, which he made no question they were fully resolved was due unto him.

And that they would deliver up unto him the town of Leicester, and the Arms,
which he did conceive did belong unto him, and which was for a long while
against their Loyalty detained from him, and was disposed of contrary to his
intentions, and their Obedience.

And also that for the safeguard of his person, the Trained Bands might attend
him, while he should remain in those parts.

His Majesty having thus delivered himself, after some deliberation, answer was
returned again to his Majesty in the name of the whole County.

That they hoped his Majesty did not so misconstrue their true and Loyal
hearts, as that they should make any question of his undoubted Supremacy; whom
they always held, and will for ever maintain to be their lawful and Royal
Sovereign.

And that they would against all opposers whatsoever, maintain His Majesty's
Honors and Dignities, so far forth as his Majesty shall love the Honor of
God, and the Liberty of the Subject.

And yet whereas now according to the ancient custom of Parliaments, they and
the rest of the Counties within his Majesty's Dominions; had entrusted some
select members with their (...), and liberties, to be directed, and rectified
according to their judgment, and according to Law and Equity.

And whereas there has bin bred some unhappy differences betwixt his Majesty
and his Parliament, occasioned by the malignants, thinking to bring this
Kingdom to destruction.

We are very confident, that well affected people will not prosecute any thing,
but what shall be for the glory of God, the advancement of the true Protestant
Religion, the Honor of his Majesty, the enlargment and advancement of his
Crown and Dignities, and the liberty of the Subject.

His Majesty having received this Message, seemed, and was very much
discontented, and moved, and as it is reported, has raised some Forces against
Leicester Town, and is resolved to obtain that by force of Arms, what he could
not persuade nor entreat from them.

Many have bin the troubles in Lincolnshire, concerning the Militia, and the
Lord Willoughby who was elected by the House of Parliament, as one fit and
worthy of so great a place, had the Militia of that County committed unto him,
yet in the execution of that Trust he has bin molested, and found much
opposition.

Yet that County has no way been defected in their faithful expressions unto
him, which moved the Lord Willoughby to signify the same unto the House.

Whereupon, upon the 19. of July a Declaration or Protestation was presented to
the Lords, the Number of them being complete, by the Lord Willoughby of Parham,
from the County of Lincoln, which Declared their fidelity co the Houses
Commands, touching the Militia, which being communicated to the House of
Commons by a Message, was received with much alacrity, and approved of, and it
was desired that thanks might be returned in both Houses Names for the same.

The Parliaments Resolution concerning the Commissions of Array:
Whereas several Commissions of Array have lately issued out under the Great
Seal of England, into the several Counties of Leicester, Worcester, and other
Counties of this Realm, tending to the great danger of his Majesty, and the
disturbance of the peace of this Kingdom: For the preventing thereof, and of
the Execution, and issuing out of any such Commissions for the time to come, It
is ordered by the Lords and Commons, That the Judges and Justices of Assize, of
the several Counties of England and Wales, be required in their several
Circuits, at the Assizes and great Sessions to be next held for each County,
within th^^ Realm, and the Dominion of Wales, in open Court, and in their
several Charges to be delivered to the Grand Juries at the said Assizes openly
to declare and publish, that the said Lords and Commons have upon mature
deliberation, Resolved upon the question, That the said Commissions of Array
are against Law, and against the Liberty and property of the Subject: And that
all those that are Actors in putting the same in execution, shall be esteemed
Disturbers of the peace of this Kingdom, and Betrayers of the Liberty of the
Subject.

Ordered that this be printed and published.

John Brown Cler, Parl. Hen. Elsing Cler. Parl. D. C.



