A DECLARATION Against the ANTINOMIANS, and their Doctrine of LIBERTY.

Their chief Tenants briefly and fully answered; and the danger of those
erroneous points manifested: With a caution to such as are or have been so
misled, to persuade with them to turn from that evil into which they are or
have been seduced.

These being their Conclusions, understood by most Auditors. I. That God does
never inflict punishment upon the Elect for their sins. II. That God is never
angry with his children. III. That God sees no sin in those that are his. IV.
That such as are elected, are at all times beloved of God; in what condition
soever they be, be they never so great sinners, yea, in the very act of sin
it self. V. That sanctification of life in duties of Piety, is nothing at all
esteemed of God. VI. That the godly find no difficulties in the way to Heaven,
but live in much pleasure and delight in this world. VII. That those who belong
to God, are able in this world presently to distinguish betwixt Gods people and
the wicked.


PSALM. 119.92.93. Unless thy Law had been my delight, I should then have
perished in my affliction: I will never forget thy precepts, for with them thou
have quickened me.

ISAY. 45.19. Do ye seek me in vain: I the Lord speak Righteousness, I declare
things that are right.

Nouemb: 2d London, printed for John Jones. 1644.

A Declaration against the ANTINONIANS, and their Doctrine of Liberty.
WHereas the Antinomians, by their dangerous and wicked conclusions, which they
falsely gather from Gods free grace, has of late years been so far spread,
and corrupted so many people, I have thought good to declare what blasphemy is
taught therein; and have briefly and fully gathered such testimonies against
them, as I hope will be sufficient to satisfy any reasonable man: And yet no
blemish at all arise to the glory of Gods free grace.

I. They say, that God never inflicts punishment upon the Eloct for their
sins.

This is directly against the Word of God, and a very dangerous Doctrine to be
taught; for if we look upon the dearest of Gods people, we shall find them
often under the rod for their sins. The Israelites to whom God says that he is
the Lord their God, ( Levit. 26.13.) and tells them that he will remember the
Covenant that he may be their God, verse. 44.45. Yet for all that, in the 14.16.
and 18. verses, the Lord threatens them, that if they sin and forsake his
Commandments to do wickedly, the Lord will send many plagues upon them, and
will set his face against them, and destroy them by the Enemy. And if they go
on in their sins, the Lord tells them that he will punish them seven times more
for the same.

Who can have greater assurance of being an Elect child of God, then good
David had; yet because he sinned, God often punished him. Insomuch that he
cried out, Lord I am afflicted and ready to die, from my youth up; while I
suffer thy terrors I am distracted. Thy fierce wrath goes over me, thy
terrors have cut me off, Psalm. 88.15, 16. Is not death it self a punishment
for sin, the wages of sin is death says Paul, Romans 6 23.

This Doctrine of thirs is a very nursery for wickedness and vice, for if men
may cozen and cheat; and under a show of Religion, cloak over their sins with
a seeming profession, only if a man be persuaded that God has Elected him,
and therefore whatsoever sins he committs God will never call him to account
for it, nor lay any punishment upon him, neither in this life nor in the life
to come, it is no wonder that such a man, hearkens to the motives of the flesh,
to follow that which is evil; and so that he can but hide it from the eyes of
the world, take his fill of sin, in Gluttony and Drunkenness, Whoring,
Cozening, and all manner of secret wickedness, If a man be persuaded that God
will never call him to reckoning, what need he care how he lives, so the world
see it not, like the Heathen, who say, God is a good master and will not beat
them, and therefore because they fear the devil, they are afraid to offend
him, but presume upon Gods goodness, and serve the Devil in all wickedness.

II. They say that God is never angry with his children. A full place against
this error is, Psalm 38.3. There is, (says David) no soundness in my flesh,
because of thine anger: neither is there any rest in my bones b cause of my sin.

I do wonder what thoughts they have of God, who think the Almighty to be such
a one, as will let them live in sin, and do any filthiness before him, and yet
never once be so much as angry with them, surely the Heathen have higher
thoughts of their Idolds; Can a man endure to see himself abused (as all men
by sin dishonor God) and stand by and behold the same, and yet not be angry,
and shall we think that the Great God of Heaven and Earth is not provoked to
anger, when his children sin against him. Nay the truth of it is, that by the
sins of his own people, God is most of all provoked, in so much that if they
provoked him by such wickedness, as ungodly men do, and follow Wine, and
Wenching, and profane liberty, God will make his anger smoke against them,
Psalm. 7 4, 1. But these Antinomians are like Achemon, who was a fellow that
lived in all kind of wickedness and cruelty, oppressing his neghbours by all
kind of injuries, and inhumane outrages, and thought that no evil could
befall him, and shortly after he was caught by Hercules, as the Poets write of
him, and hanged by the heels at his club. And let those who have such unworthy
conceits of God, presume as much as they will of Gods mercy, which is very
large and gracio^s to those that fear him, yet this is certain, that if they
carry such proud insulting thoughts in their hearts against God, if they repent
not: they shall one day find, not Hercules (concerning whom it matters not for
the truth of that story) but a company of Devils to carry them to Hell, and
thrust them thither by the head and shoulders.

III. They say, that God sees no sin in his children.

This is so apparent a blasphemy against Gods truth, that it strikes at one of
his own Attributes; and denies God to be Omniscient, for if any thing be hid
from his knowledge God cannot be said to be Omniscient. He that formed the eye,
shall not he see, he that teaches man knowledge, shall not he know. The Lord
knows the thoughts of man that they are but vanity. Psalm. 94. The whole
Psalm is against them.

This doctrine of theirs keeps men back from examination of their sins, and
pouring out their souls before God, by humble and hearty repentance, the only
comfort that Christians find (of all intercourses) between God and their
souls; It may be if these men would lay down this fond opinion and fall to
examination, and confess their sins unto Almighty God, the Lord might be
pleased to enlighten their souls and give them better knowledge of him. If
they would I say go to God, and in their closets confess,

Imprimis. Such a day I offended the Lord by cosening and cheating such a
neighbor, and such a friend so and so, and why should I not make restitution
of it again.

Item. Such a day I was drunk, and I wasted and spoiled the good creatures of
our God, and spewed them upon the ground.

Item. At such a time I offended God by the filthy sin of Adultery.

Item. So many Sabbaths I have profaned, so many opportunities of grace I have
slighted, so many good people I have seduced, and shall I think that the
Almighty Omnipotent God sees not these things.

There is a great deal mo^e hopes of such penitent Publicanes, that humbly
confess their sins to God, then of those proud Antimonian Pharisees, who would
hide their sins from Gods eyes; and without repentance are like to go to
Heaven, when Sy^^iphus has rouled his stone over the infernal Hill; or
Tantulus filled his belly as full with golden apples as his eyes.

IV. They say that such as are elect are at all times beloved of God, in what
condition soever they be, be they never so great sinners, yea in the very act
of sin it self.

But God loves his elect, not as they are sinful, but as they are in Christ
because of Election, and in that respect they are greatly beloved of God, Romans
8.33. But as they are sinners, and as God looks upon them in the act, they are
not beloved of God: Those who are in the flesh, and walk in sin cannot please
God, Romans 8.7, 8. Living in sin, estates a man in one condition, and the
election of grace in anothe.

In respect of the person, God may be said to love a man that is in sin,
because of Election, and fore-knowing his repentance and faith; but as he is in
a sinful condition, God loves no man: Whosoever is born of God does not commit
sin (allowing of it in his heart) for his seed remains in him (says John)
and he cannot sin, because he is born of God. 1. John 3.9.

A man may say of Ornus, that if the Ass was beaten away he might make up his
Ropes, but as fast as he twists, the Ass stands by and bites them off (as the
Poets have feigned) and so may I say of these men; if they could beat the
Devil away, it were a manifestation of Election, and God would love them; but
they cannot beat the devil away whilst they practice and allow of sin, and
have such base thoughts of God; and consequently, there can appear no
manifestation of their Election; except they cast away the deeds of darkness,
and put on Christ the Armor of light, and then is a sign they have put on
Jesus Christ, Romans 13. the latter end.

Do you think that God will love you, or manifest any love unto you whilst you
take liberty in sin, and teach men so; and encourage one another in such wicked
ways. No, assure your selves God hates sin, and all the sinful ways of man:
And therefore depart from evil, and do good, and dwell in the love and favor
of God for ever. Psalm. 37.27.

5. They say, that sanctification of life in duties of Piety, is nothing at
all esteemed of God.

But let me tell those who are of this opinion, that although a sanctified life
do not justify us, yet the servants of God before they can attain everlasting
life, they must have their fruit unto holiness, Romans 6.22. And in the 5.
Chapter of Matthews Gospel, Christ teaches his Disciples, and in them us
also, how exactly he requires of those that will be saved, to live in an holy
and godly conversation. But this damnable doctrine of b^ating down a
sanctified, spiritual, pious, and holy life, is a dangerous erro^r, and gives
way exceedingly to looseness, and none can be imagi-more dangerous in that
kind then it is; tending to the ruin and overthrow of a nation, both Church
and State.

This makes no difference between a man's own wife and his neighbors, his own
goods, and others, never checks his lusts, nor stays his malice, it cannot
stop his mouth from drunkenness, nor his heart from pride, dissimulation, and
all manner of evil; every man like Ixion in hell, may turn the wheel of their
inventions continually, and still be the same men; and like Acessius stay for a
better Moon then Astrologers could ever yet discover and when they have done,
conclude with the Preacher, saying, I said I will be wise but it was far from
me. Eccles. 7.23.

Without doubt every honest man, that truly fears God, has a great respect
to duties of Piety, and to perform them with great reverence before Almighty
God, trembling to think of those imperfections and failings which he finds in
himself, his sins cost him many a sob and sigh, and often groans before God,
for almighty God has promised to bottle up all such tears, Psalm. 56.8.

VI. They say that that the godly find no difficulties in the way to heaven,
but live in much pleasure and delight in this world.

This is Contrary to what our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ taught;
that those that go to heaven strive for it, and exhorting his Disciples to take
pains in so difficult and hard a work, he tells them plainly that the reason
why it does so much concern them, to strive for Heaven, is, because the way is
so exceeding straight, that many shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able,
Luke 13.24.

And when the Hebrews that were Converted to the Faith of Christ were cast
into prison, and contradicted by wicked and sinful men, railing against them,
at which they began to be much troubled, Paul told them that they must expect
yet greater Difficulties then they had suffered, if they would be saved, they
have not yet resisted unto blood (says he) striving aginst sin.

It is true, the yoke of Christ is easy, Matthew. 11 30. (but yet it is a Yoke)
for the yoke of sin bows a man to eternal damnation in Hell; so in that
respect the yoke of Christ, though it be a Yoke is an easy one, but these men
draw out a fatal conclusion from hence, to give way to an idle and lazy life:
But there is a woe denounced against those that are at ease (yea even) in Zion
Amos 6.1.

And those that teach this looseness in liberty to sin, are like the lewd
Srumpet: Ezekel. 23. When the voice of a multitude being at ease was with her,
and with the men of the common sort, were brought drunken Sabeans from the
wilderness, which put bracelets upon their hands, and beautiful Crowns upon
their heads, for which God proceeded against them, as against shedders of
blood. And let them remember what the Preachet says, Ezekiel. 11.9. Remember that
for all these things thou shall come to judgment.

VII. They say that those who belong to God, are able in this world perfectly
to distinguish betwixt Gods people and the wicked.

This is something like a mean pillar of the Church of Rome, Rhemist Anotati.
in John 14. verse 16. Bellarmine pleads hrad for it. That the Catholic Church
cannot possibly err, not only in matters absolutely necessary to salvation,
but in any thing which it imposes and commands, whether it be contained in
the Word of God or not. Bellarmin. De Eccles. lib. 3 cap. 14. By the Church
here they mean not only the Ministers or Governors of the Church (as Doctor
Willet observes in Sinopsis) but the whole company of the faithful.

But the contrary is proved by Scripture. 1. Before the coming of Christ, the
Jewish Church erred. 2 Kings 3.14.4. And secondly, in Christ's time the Church
erred; Math. 26.22. And lastly, since Christ's time the famous Churches of
Corinth. Galatia, etc. have erred: 1 Cor. 6 5. 1 Cor. 15.13. 1 Cor. 11.21. Gal.
3.1. But especially that place of Scripture is most full to clear this, Rev.
2.17. where it is said; To him that overcommeth will I give to eat of the
hidden Manna, and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name
written, which no man knows, saving he that receives it.

How then, or from whence shall any in these times, have such clear judgments
to discern more then any other men that ever were in the world. Quomodo erit
Ecclesia in isto tempore, perfecta sine macula and ruga cujus membra non
mendaciter, confiteantur se habere ^eccata: (says Augustine contra Pelag. 2.
Epist. lib. 4. cap. 7.) How can the Church be perfect in this life, without
spot or wrinkle, whose members do truly confess, that they are not without
sin. And as themselves have sometimes confessed, Iudicium Ecclesiae non nunquam
opinionem sequitur, quam and fallere saepe contingit falli. The judgment of
the Church is many times ruled by opinion, which both may deceive and be
deceived. Decret. Greg. lib. 5. tit. 39. c. 8. Innocent. 3.

These Doctrines therefore of the Antimonians are to be held, Non bona sed
malae exemplum, aedificans ad delictum. Tertull. de velandis virginibus. Not as
an example of good, but evil, edifying (or imboldning) unto sin. It is, Factum
minus rectum occasionem praebens ruinae, A deed ill performed, yiedling
occasion of falling; (as Aquinus says, Aquin. 2.2. q. 43.) and justly to be
reproved.

FINIS.

