THE DECLARATION AND PROPOSITIONS OF THE NAVY With the Oath which they have
taken, concerning an Admiral for the Seas, and who they made choice of for the
present.

A Message from the Kentish-men to the Lord General, and his Answer thereunto.
A thousand of them come in, and Dover Fort taken.

With the taking of Chepstow Castle by storm, the Governor Sir Nicholas
Kemish, and others slain; with the number of Officers and prisoners taken.

As also another Petition to the Parliament, from the City of London, and what
is desired therein.

London, Printed by B. Alsop, 1648.

A LETTER From Sandwich in KENT:
SIR,
FOr the prevention of false informations, I shall communicate to you the most
certain intelligence we have in these parts. On Friday last Vice Admiral
Rainsborough came ashore at his own Castle at Deal, the occasion was, because
some of the Kentish men had endeavored to get the possession of the Earl of
Warwicks Castle of Sandon, the castle of Warbrough, and this Castle, which are
all three within a mile and a half one of the other. And when the Vice Admiral
had done his endeavor to secure them he went in a small Pinace to his command
again at Sea; and when he came to the ship which was under his immediate
command, those which were in her forbad him to come aboard, saying they would
obey him no longer, but would have the King brought to London, etc and told him
if he came aboard, it was at his peril, but if he pleased, he might depart in
the Vessel he was in, and after many threats, and other uncivil carriages
toward him, he came for London; when he was gone, they hung forth a flag,
which signified, that there should be a Council held, and the respective
Captains in all other ships, were to appear aboard on the Vice admiral, and
diverse of them met accordingly, but Captain Penrose came not. Whereupon they
sent him three or four Canon shot, and afterward sent a message to him,
commanding him, in the name of the Vice admiral, to come to the Council:
whereupon he returned answer that he knew the Vice Admiral was not there, and
therefore conceived, they had not power to call a Council, or command him to
come thither, and therefore he was resolved not to go.

This Message was carried back, and upon the receipt thereof, about 40. men went
with their swords drawn, and other weapons of war, came to him in another
ship, and told him, that they were sent by the Admiral to fet him. Captain
Penrose asked who was that Vice admiral, they replied, that his name was
Lenoall: then captain Penrose said, he knew such a man to be a Bostons Mate,
but no otherwise, and was resolved not to go with them; then said they, we must
force you: the captain now addressed his speech to his own men in the ship
saying, Gentlemen, will you stick to me, and we will defend our selves, and not
obey this illegal command; but contrary to his expectation, he found a
division amongst his own men, and many of them cried out, Go, go, this being
so, captain Penrose for the better prevention of further mischief, went along
with them, and when he came aboard the Vice admiral, he was d^^i^ed to sign a
Petition, which he refused to do, and finding him whom they for the present,
h^d chosen to be Vice Admiral, to be this inferior man, which was but a
Bostons mate.

Capt. Penrose said, I will not join with you in this Petition no^ approve of
your course in refusing to be commanded by the Vice Admiral which was put in
by the Parliament.

And, I pray, do you quite cast off all subjection to them.

to which they generally replied no, they were for King and Parliament: then
said he, it were fit that you should mrke choice of some honorable person,
that is true to both, for this is a place not fit for any other, etc. he had
no sooner spoken this, but one of them named the Earl of Warwick,and all the
rest cried out presently, a Warwick, a Warwick: then they agreed to send a
Letter to his Lordship, and another to the Speaker of the house, setting forth
their proceedings, and that if the E. of Warwick came to them, they would live
and die with him, in defense of the cause for King and Parliament, according to
the first principles; and they made choice of capt. Penrose to bring these
Letters, and before his coming away, he told them, that it might be when he was
gone, they would make choice of some other; and to give satisfaction to the
contrary, they all took an oath, not to receed from this choice until the E.
of Warwickcame to them, etc.

On Friday last the Kentish men took the Fort near Dover Castle, whereof capt.
Bethel, a very deserving Gentleman, had the command, they shot many pieces
against the Castle, but finding no probability of doing any good against it,
they gave it over, which is all at present, from

Sandwich 28 May, 1648. Your assured friend, M. D.


May 29, the Parliament taking into consideration this business of the Navy, and
voted the E. of Warwick to be Admiral; whereupon his Lordship took his journey
thither on Tuesday morning: the Parl. debated on a letter which they received
out of Kent, and passed a vote, that the business concerning their taking up of
arms should be referred to the L. Genesis and as for that part of their petition,
concerning the King, the house will do that therein, which shall satisfy them
and the whole Kingdom: whereupon his Excellency with a body of horse and foot,
marched this 30. of May to Black Heath, where the Kentish-men said they
intended to keep their Randevouz, who at sight retreated to a Village, lining
the hedges with musketeers, and presently after sent a trumpeter to the Genesis
desiring a teeaty; but the answer was, he would send an answer by a messeng^r
of his own. About 12. of the clock the same day ca^e letters to the Parl. that
1000. of the Kentish men were come in to the Genesis with their arms, which they
laid down to him, and declared, that they were deeply sensible of the errors
they had committed, etc. the re^t of the Kentish men are retreated back to
Rochester, and desire a treaty by way of pacification.

A Capt. brought Letters to the house the 29 of May, certifiing that Chepstow
Castle was taken on Thursday last the manner thus, those in the Castle
Wednesday, the 26 of May, hung forth a white flag desired a parley which was
granted, at which parley those in the Castle, stood for conditions, and upon
terms, which were denied on the other part So the parley was soon over and
when it was taken of Lieutenant General Cromwells men stormed it, and by their
batteries made a large breach at which they entered and upon their for approach
the soldiers called quarter which was granted, but Sir Nicolas Kemish the
Governor refused to take any, and by that means ended his days there. There
were 21 prisoners taken about, 20 Officers, and 150 Arms, the Capt. which
brought the news, and did good service in the action had 50 l. given him for
his pains and charges in this journey.

Tuesday May 30 A Petition was presented to the Common council of the City of
London, subscribed by many persons of quallity, the said City desiring the
approbation of that honorable Court to a Petition to the honorable houses of
Parliament, praying that there may be a present treaty with the kings Majesty,
and that for the better safety of the Parliament City and peace of the Kingdom
there may be an association of the City and several Counties adjacent, which
petition was approved of and, ordered to be presented to the Parliament at the
next opportunity.

Imprimatur

Gilbert Mabbott.

FINIS.

