THE MODEST VINDICATION OF JOHN DAY of LONDON, MERCHANT: Unto an invective,
false, and scandalous Remonstrance, presented the 2. of July, 1646. Unto the
Right Honorable the Committee of Lords and Commons for the Admiralty and
Cinque Ports.

By JOHN DAY.

peacock

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCXLVI.

The modest VINDICATION of JOHN DAY of LONDON, Merchant.
HAving lately seen a Remonstrance presented by John Peacock, at present
living in S. Nicholas lane, unto the Right Honorable the Committee of Lords and
Commons for the Admiralty and Cinque Ports, having got a Copy thereof, as
likewise of his Attestations; which seriously perusing, I conceived it so false
and scandalous, that I fully resolved to put forth this my Vindication in
print, with a true and full narration of all the passages of my negotiation in
his and other men's business, both here and beyond the seas, as likewise his
unjust proceedings against me since my return, which I will leave to the
judgment of the Reader. First, I will set down the Remonstrance truly copyed,
delivered July 2. 1646.

To the Right Honorable, the Committee of Lords and Commons for the Admiralty
and Cinque Ports. The humble Remonstrance of John Peacock of London, Merchant,
on the behalf of himself and diverse other Merchants trading to Flanders.
SHOWS,

THat your Petitioners having a Ship called the Barak and Deborah, bound from
Amsterdam to London, laden with Merchants good to the value of 10000. l. was in
June 1645. by one Fowder, Captain of a Kings man of Waare, taken and carried
into Ostend; whereupon your Petitioners gave Procuration to John Day Broker to
repair to Flanders, and there prosecute Restoration of the said Ship and
goods, and to that end obtained a Letter from Master Green to Doctor Walker,
then Agent extraordinary for the Parliament in Flanders, unto whom he was to
apply himself, and receive and follow his advice. But the said Day contrary to
your Petitioners Order repaired not to Doctor Walker till two months after his
arrival in Flanders, but brake open the said Letter, and made use thereof to
his own ends, to the great prejudice of your Petitioners, who entrusted him in
that employment.

That the said Day for the space of three months or thereabouts continued in a
debauched and impious manner of drinking and ryoting with the said Fowder and
other Pyraticall Commanders and Seamen then at Ostend, publicly calumniating
the Parliamant with vile and reproachful language, as by the Attestations
annexed appears; and in particular, some worthy Members of the Honorable
House of Commons, as will be proved.

That the said Day contrary to the trust reposed in him, dealt most injuriously
with your Petitioners, as appears by two Attestations hereunto annexed; And
instead of rendering of a just account of his proceedings as was expected from
him at his coming into England, preferred a vexatious Bill in Chancery against
your Petitioner Peacock and the Master of the Ship, where it still remains.

That the said Day by his keeping company with the Malignant party, and
deceitfully complying with them contrary to the trust reposed in him, and by
his foul carriage there, was not only a means to keep the said Fowder from
having the Arreast awarded by the Privy Council laid upon him, but did also
much prejudice the public affairs of the State, and retarded and disturbed
the proceedings, to the great Encouragement of those pirates and Malignant
party, scandal of the Parliament, obstruction of Trade, hinderance of the
Customs, and grief and loss of the petitioners and other well-affected.

Now forasmuch as the premises are not only Damageable to the Petitioners in
their private interest, but do contain matter of State and are of much
public concernment for the Advance of trade at home, and removing all
misunderstandings abroad, to have the said Day that has been so scandalously
Malapert in his Language against the Parliament, and deceitfully false in his
trust, and treacherous to the public, to be made exemplary in his punishment,
that others may be deterred from the like hereafter.

The Petitioners humbly pray, that the said Day may be convented before his
honorable Committee, And the premises apearing to be true, that he may not
only be ordered to give the petitioners satisfaction for their damages, but
have open punishment inflicted on him according to Justice.
Upon which I presently put in a Vindication, the which I have likewise set
down being delivered the 9. of July.

To the Right Honorable, the Committee of Lords and Commons for the Admiralty
and Cinque Ports.
The humble Vindication of John Day of London, Merchant, unto a most false and
scandalous Remonstrance of John Peacock the second of July, 1646.
SHOWING,

THat your petitioner did go over unto Ostend at the entreaty of the said
Peacock and diverse other Merchants, as in his Remonstrance is expressed, and
there did them faithful service to the uttermost of his endeavors.

That it may so appear to this honorable Committee, it is most humbly prayed,
that in regard of your great affairs your Honors would be pleased to refer
the examinations thereof unto any two Merchants whom your Honors shall think
fit, or the petitioner is content that the said Peacock shall make choice of any
two Merchants, whereby they may examine the truth of the Business and so report
unto your Honors.

That in the Remonstrance he sets forth diverse scandalous truths, producing
of attestations, which if should be really Truth, I confess I deserve death;
whereas in his prayer he desires your petitioner might be convented before
this Honorable Committee, And the premises appearing to be true, that your
petitioner may have open punishment according to Justice, All which is most
heartily desired of your Petitioner, That if this Honorable Committee shall
think fit, That the Examination of these Attestations, the Conditions and
Qualities of the persons of the Attestators, may be examined by some
indifferent men, as your Hoshall think fitting.

Your Petitioner humbly prays, that the said Peacock may forthwith declare
what other Merchants are complainers against your petitioner besides himself,
no man's hand to the Remonstrance but his own, and that this may be with all
expedition effected, the rather, in that your Petitioner has great
employments, as the sole printing of the Bills of Prices, to the advance of
Trade, increase of Custom, great benefit to the Merchants in general, to the
Honor of the City, and to the profit of the State many thousand pounds Per
annum, which your Petitioner cannot proceed in, until this vexatious business
be ended, the said Peacock being many hundred pounds in your petitioners debt,
and seeks to pay your petitioner with false scandalls and vexatious suits, as
having arreasted your petitioner in Eleven hundred pounds Action, which is
still depending in the Common Pleas

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc.
About the 27. of June, 1645. I was desired by M. Peacock and some others
interessed in a Ship taken coming from Amsterdam bound for London, by one
Captain Francis Fowther that went to Sea with the Kings Commission, and
brought up to Ostend; I had no great mind to go, but at their earnest
importunity, and by virtue of the Procuration, dated the 27. of June, which
Procuration follows in these words: viz.

ON this day, the 27. day of the month of June, in the year 1645. style of
England, before me Abraham der Kinder Notary and Tubellion public dwelling in
this City of London, by the authority of the Kings most excellent Majesty of
Great Britain, admitted and sworn, and in the presence of the underwritten
witnesses personally appeared John Peacock, George Coney, Richard Streater,
John Freeman, William Carter, Ralph Grafton, James Sotheby, Matthias Air, John
Gibbs, and Robert Hammon. all Merchants and inhabitants in this city of London
aforesaid; The which said Appearers jointly and every of them severally have
authorized and constituted even as they do authorize and constitute by these
presents, John Day, John Hadgshon, and Robert Jefferey, all three Merchants,
residing here in this City of London, being present, and taking upon them the
charge of this procuration; Giving and granting unto them and every of them
severally, full power and authority, and special Command, for and in the names
of them, Constituants, and every of them to claim, ask, demand, recover and
receive out of the hands of whatsoever person or persons wheresoever they are
or shall be found, all such goods, wares, merchandises, and other things
whatsoever, as they constituants and every of them jointly and severally are to
have, and unto them are belonging and appertaining, the which were laden in the
months of May and June last at Amsterdam in Holland for this port of London,
aboard the ship called the Barak and Deborah of London, Mr. William Rous, and
afterward taken in Sea by Captain (...) by him brought into Ostend in
Flanders, of their Receipts to Pass Acquittances in due form, and in the
whole to pass all such acts; instruments and notes as there unto shall be
needful and requisite; And (if need be) to prosecute the Recovery of the
premises before all Lords and Magistrates against whom and for what occasion
the same may be, to agree, compound, etc. And further (as well in Law as
without) to agitate do and leave undone as in and concerning the premises
shall be needful and required; And as they Constituants might or could do, if
they were personally present, with power to substitute one or more Attorneys in
their steads, And they Constituants and every of them aforesaid do promise to
hold for good firm and of value all and whatsoever by their said Attorneys and
every of them and their substitutes shall be done and procured in the
premises; To stand to the Law and perform what shall be adjudged (if need be)
salvo sibi in omnibus justo computo inde reddendo.

Thus done and passed in this City of London in the presence of Hillary Ashton
and Edmund Webberley as witnesses hereunto called. And they Constituants have
here subscribed with the said Witnesses; were subscribed John Peacock, Ralph
Grafton, Richard Sedgewicke, Factor to Mathias Air, John Gibbs, Hillary
Ashton, Edmund Webberley.
Haec praesens Translatio concordat substantial. cum sue originali.

Ita attestor, Abraham der Kinder Notar. Public.



By which you may perceive the power given me, and at the same time received
from Peacock, his instructions truly here set down directions under his own
hand writing by him confessed before M. Stephen Burton, M. Thomas Brown, M.
Lucas Luce, all known Merchants and honest men, being our Arbitrators, as
hereafter shall more appear, viz.

Directions how to buy in the goods of John Peacock, in case you cannot recover
them.
London this 27. of June, 1645.
The Potashes at 6. gl. or 7. gl. or 8. gl. the C. or 9. gl. or the whole 6.
Fatts at 600. gl. or 700. gl. or 800. gl. or 900. gl. 4 KP.


The Oil at 30. gl. or 35. gl. or 40. gl. or rather then fail 50. gl. per
Hogshead: or if they will sell by the Ame at 25. gl. or 26. gl. or 27. gl. or
28. gl. or 30. gl. per Ame. 4 KP.


The Mollasses at 120. gl. per tun, or 125. gl. per tun, or 130. gl. per
tun, 4 KP.
or 140. gl. per tun, or 150. gl. per tun. The ten Hogsheads and the little
Barrel makes two tons and an half, or it the utmost 7. gl. 10. st. per C.

A Fat of Wire the Ring at 20. st. 30. st. or 40. st. or the whole Fatt 320.
gl. or rather then fail at 350. gl. or if they will sell it by the C. at 20.
gl. or 30. gl. or 40. gl. per C. No. Pl. 15.


This Fat of Wire at the same prices and conditions. No. Pl. 15.


The biggest bundell of small Wiers at 20. st. per Ring, or 30. st. or 36. st.
per Ring, or the whole bundell at 80. or 90. gl. or by the C. at 20. 25. 30.
35. or 36. gl. per C.

The lesser bundle of loose Wire small, 20. st. 30. st. or 34. st. per Ring. or
60. or 70. gl. the whole bundle, and as the former bundle by the C.

A Fatt of Iron Wier at 30. gl. or 40. gl. or 50. gl. per C. or the like by the
pound. 4 No. KP. 6.


Four Bundles of loose Wier at 12. gl. or 13. gl. or 14. gl. per C.

The Fatt of Iron Wier at 20. st. or 40. st. per Ring, or 20. or 30. gl. or 40.
gl. per C. 4 No. KP. 5.


Ten Hogsheads of Brimstome at 8. 9. or 10. gl. per C. 4 No. KP. 6. 11. 4. 9.
1. 26. 22. 21. 5. 2.


The Goat Skins at 7. gl. or 8. gl. per Dicker, that is, every ten skins.

And claim the Ship for me John Peacock, and John Freeman, and buy it at 300.
l. or 350. l. or 400. l. with her Rigging, and all other Tackle.

After my arrival there in that place, I enquired what goods were unsold, what
and unto whom sold, I used all possible endeavors to buy those that were
unsold, applying my self to die said Captain Francis Fowther, and did so
temporize with him, that I bought the Ship, and most part of the goods that
were unsold: And afterward I went to Master John de Lavillety, who had bought
most part of M. Peacocks goods, told him, I came from the Proprietors to
challenge the goods, I understood he had bought great store of them, desired
that I might have them at moderate prizes, being it was for the owners. He
replied, that what he had bought was for diverse other men that lived out of the
Town, and the most part he had sent away; for what was in his hands he would
advise them, and use his endeavors to persuade them unto reasonable profit. I
am persuaded, had I come one week before, I had bought all the goods for less
then one third part of what they cost. I went to advise, whether there was no
course to be taken to arrest the Ship and Goods, and was informed there was
none: howsoever I would very feign have tried. For within three days after my
coming, I did see a Fatt of Kettles going aboard of a Billander for Bridges,
presently went to the Bailiffe of the Town, desired him to lay an Arrest upon
it, promising him, he should be well contented; but he told me he durst not:
then I offered him 100. gil. With that he went with me to the Burgo-master
Eggelston, who was Deputy for the Admiralytite of Dunkerke, showed him my
Procurations, told him I was sent over expressly in the behalf of the
Proprietors: he answered me very mildly, that the Ship and Goods were condemned
at Dunkerke for Prize, and that that Town was subordinate to the Admiralty
Court of Dunkerke, they had no power to disobey their Commands, and indeed he
said durst not: it was not only the loss of the place, but something else. I
desired him to advise me what I had best to do; he told me there was no
other way but to go to Bruxels to the Supreme Court there; if I could procure
any Order from thence, he would be ready to do me all the favor that could
be. The 30. of June the same day I arrived, I advised Peacock himself, as
likewise the 10. of July and the 5. the Answer of which was dated here the 11.
of July, which Letter will be very material to be inserted, and hereafter
follows in these Words.

Luis Deo. London this 11. July, 1645.
LOving friend M. John Day, Salut. Yours of the 30. of June primo Julii and 5.
Ditlo I have received, and see you have drawn upon me 300. l. upon three days
sight. I have acccepted your Bills, and I will see to pay them. I hope you have
bought more of my goods, I wonder things should be gone so suddenly. And if the
Captain could be got out of Ostend in any other Town, sure Law would take
place. Pray be wary and not buy the Goat Skins too dear, for I fear they be
spoiled with lying, the worms will eat them up. Were I there and could any way
learns which way any of my goods were gone, I would follow and arrest them. At
Ostend they are Rogues altogether, see if the Brimstone be to be had, and buy
it, for I need it. If you cannot have all, buy these 4. Hogs-heads; seem to
make no choice, but choose these 4. Nomb. 4. 6. 9. 11. And though you give 12
gl. per C. If you have not bought the Goat Skins buy them not higher them 12.
st. per skin. I cannot understand what you have bought the Lin-seed Oil for.
It may be some of them are leeked out, and so we may pay more then they are
worth. Sure if you enquire all the goods will be yet in Town. I pray you be
not so hasty to come home, but go to Walker and inform him, and hear what
advise he will give you and us to help our selves, for to loose our goods in a
friends Country, this fashion is very absurd. You write me in your letter that
you have drawn 300. l. at usance and 8. days. But your Bills are at 3. days
sight, and you never, write to any one at what price you have drawn, assure
your self we know the price how the course goes. M. Hudson writes you have
bought in the Lin-seede Oil at 50. gl. per the hh. If you have, it is above my
Order. I hope to see you have gone under Order, but not above. By all means
see to get it under hand, who bought all my goods, or enquire it out diligently
who bought my goods that are gone; And more, pray what goods is bought or what
goods there is there for London let be Laden for London. And let the Masters
Mate bring the ship over, if they will not suffer the Master to have to do
with her. Here is one will come over to Load the goods, but we will have our
goods come in the Deborah, and I hope they will now give her a free pass not
to be molested by any now. But howsoever there is no coming without Convoy in
respect of the French; Therefore let them stay so Convoy if you do mean us any
good. Pray freight out ship off and when she is full whom you please: I have
spoke about the Bever wool, this was exceedingly cladded together, if it be so
cladded, it is not worth above 10. s. if as good as this and not cladded. 15.
16. 17. 18. s. per l. And for S. Michaels Woad, M. Ramsey says, that it is
worth from 6. s. to 12. s. the 100. You know the goodness, he says, if but
mean, I hear it will yield 7. or 8. s. not else. Pray give M. Lavillety Bills
upon S. Daniel Le Brum of Antwerpe for his 300. l. or what more you shall
need for my account, and so send me a note from M. Lavilletty to me to receive
these Bills in, and let him have his money at Antwerp; Not else in haste, God
keep you.

Your loving friend, John Peacock.


By which you may perceive, that he had received my three Letters; in that of
the 5. of July I had advised him at large of all what passed, desiring him to
take some course to ease me of my employment, being very sorry I undertook it;
and for my part I was resolved not to stay. He answered me in these words, I
pray be not so hasty to come home, but go to Walker, and inform him, and
hear what advice he will give you and us to help our selves, for to lose our
goods in a Friends Country this fashion is very absurd. Now here was a
contradiction to my desire, which was, to return home, according unto my
promise to him and the rest; for though I took an absolute Procuration from
them, yet I did declare my self that I could make no long work of it, and that
I would not stay there above five or six days, and that by no means I would
undertake any Lawsuits, and that they should give me 10. l. toward my
charges, and that if the Ship and Goods were not sold before I came, and that I
did buy them, they saying the Ship and Goods were worth 10000. l. I would be
contented with 3. per C, but in case that they were sold, then to have such
satisfaction for my expenses and loss of time, is should in reason be thought
fitting. After they had verbally promised this, I considered with my self that
I went upon uncertainties, with all the great loss that might be in my
employments. He prayed me to go how soever, I should be well contented to my
own desires, as by this will appear.

WE underwritten do confess, that about the 27. of June last, That M. John
Peacock did come unto John Day upon the Exchange, asked him if he were resolved
to go for Ostend: John Day seemed very unwilling, saying, He was loath to go,
fearing he should do you little good. Upon which M. Peacock answered, Go
howsoever, you shall have satisfaction to your own content, or words to that
purpose.

Thomas Stone. Thomas Cowell.


Upon which faithful promises I departed that night, and used such diligence,
that five days after I came to Ostend, as formerly declared. In this Letter of
the 11. July, 1645. he advises, that he had accepted my Bills of Exchange of
300. l. and would see to pay them. In my Letter of the 5. I advised him, that I
had drawn upon him at 3. days sight 300. l. but wished him by all means to
send me a note from M. Luce, whereby I might recover the moneys which he did
not do: M. Lavillety would undertake no further then he had Baiard in the
stable, which if I had done so, I had never run into this inconveniencie. You
may be pleased to observe, that Ostend is a Town of little or no trade, only a
Garrison for Soldiers; And all that time the only Randevous for Pirates.
There Is no exchange nor moneys to be had, but what is sent per Post or other
wise for Antwerpe or Lile, which at that time was so dangerous, that scarce a
Post could ride, for the Duke of Lorraines forces lay between Bridges and Gaunt
upon the one side of the River, and the Prince of Orange on the other, between
Ostend and Lile, the French lay about Iper and those parts, so that for diverse
days no Post came. Captain Fowther was very earnest for his money, I told him
the reason was, no Post came; About the latter end of July there came a Post
and brougth some moneys, but not all, about 1600. gl. wished M. Lavillety to
pay M. Peacocks account 1400. gil. Which was done accordingly, faithfully
promising unto the Captain by the next post to pay him all, as indeed I had
done, if I had recovered money to have done it withal. The next week before the
Post came arrived (...) ^helwell with Procuration from Doctor Walker and
arrested ^ptaine Francis Coleman and all the goods that he could meets with,
that were not delivered nor paid for; what moneys were any way owing unto him,
and would have arrested Cap. Fowther, but he says since, that I conveyed him
away. The next day the ship of Fowther, as like wise all goods and montys that
were any way due or belonging unto him, he arrested in M. Lavillety his hands
and in my hands, what moneys I owed unto Fowther, I got a coppie of his
Procurations, the Doctors Remonstrance, and the order for the arrest, came for
England, acquainted the Merchants, staid some ten days, and at the entreaty of
the Merchants went over again, for indeed I could not in Conscience leave the
Business so imbroild, but before I went back was commanded to attend the
Honorable Committee of the Admiralty, where I appeared and some Merchants with
me, where it was desired that their Honors would be pleased to write unto the
Agent Doctor Walker to accomodate the Merchants in what he could for recovering
of their goods, one of the Honorable Committee asked me, if I knew M. Thelwell?
I answered, yes; another asked me, what I thought of him? I told them in plain
terms, that he was a man very urfit for any Honorable employments. I went the
next day back for Flanders, where I used such diligence, that within six days
I was at Bruxells, but before my coming about six hours M. Thelwell had
received a letter from a friend of his, that belonged to the Committee, showed
me the letter and who wrote it, but the party has since denied it, and shall
be no more questioned by me, but whosoever he was, he did somewhat enlarge in
his Relation. Thelwell so soon as he had received his letter, told the Doctor
that I had abused him sufficiently before the Committee, but it was no great
matter, for I had abused his worship, speaking strange scandalous words of him
before M. Bailey of Bridges and others, the next morning coming before his
Worship, after I had done my duty, and presented his Worship with some letters,
began to be very angry, asking me what offense he had ever done me, that I
should abuse him? I admired what he meant, protested unto him, I never had any
reason to do it, he told me, he could prove it, I answered, I should be
ashamed to look him then in the face, called M. Peter Thelwell, asked whether
I had not abused him in words, replied, yes, I demanded when and before whom, he
said at Bridges, before M. Bailey, told his Worship, that I was certain M.
Baily would not justify any such thing, knowing that I had better breeding then
abuse a Gentleman of his quality, especially one that I never saw in my life
before, desired M. Baily might be sent for, who then was in Town, and lay but
hard by: At my entreaty he sent one of his foot boys for him, before his
coming his Worship had occasion of other business, next day invited me to
dinner, M. Thelwell invited M. Baily, where we were very kindly used, after
dinner he told me, that he was very well satisfied I had not spoken ill of him,
I desired his favor in Respect of the Merchants, he bid me comply with M.
Thelwell I should find him very ready, knew not well what do; M. Thelwell,
having had so late notice of the words spoken of him, howsoever I confess the
words, M. Baily made us both friends; After we had drank together, then we
came to a Treaty, M. Baily was very helpful unto us both. It was argeed
between us and allowed of by the Doctor before a Public Notary under the
seal of Bruxels bearing Date: which Agreement I have extant, by which it was
underhand agreed, that I should pay unto M. Baily 60. Pistolls, which I was
contented to do, with this proviso, that if I did not recover the Ship and
goods my obligation was to be of no validity. I thought my self certain all
was right, but coming to Ostend showing my Council the agreement, they
advised me to go to the Burgoemaster M. Eggleston, who told me, he could not
deliver the ship and goods without they were praized, unless it was agreed
between the Agent that pretended interest, and Captain Fowther, that they were
both contented with a certain Sum be it little or much he would accept it,
otherwise it would be a long and troublesome business, there was no remedy,
but I must back again, came to Gaunt, where I found his Worship and M. Peter
Thelwell, repaired unto them, told them the occasion of my return, desired
there might be no further delays: Doctor Walker promised me very fair
stillbade me comply with M. Thelwell, I came thither about the fourth of
October, being upon a Friday or Saturday, we met, where we compared notes, and
I told him that the Proprietors who had trusted me, would expect some
accommodations for their great charges, besides their extracted loss other
ways, and that my loss of time was precious, I entreated him of all
friendship, that things might be accommodated so for as if possible they might
give content, he promised me he was sorry that the Burgomaster of Ostend would
not follow the order he had given, and because it shall appear to the world my
sincerity, I have translated that agreement with the Procuration given by
Doctor Walker by Master Thelwell, dated the eleventh day of September, 1645.
which Procuration I have also thought fit here to insert, viz.

On this day, the 11. of the month of September. in the year 1645. before me
Jacob Van Bossuiit Public notary by the Sovereign Council of his Royal
Majesty in Brabant admitted residing in Brussells and the witnesses heareafter
named personally appeared the worshipful Peter Thelwell as being constituted
and authorized especially to the Causes here under written by the well learned
Walter Walker Doctor in the Laws Prolegate of the Parliament of England,
according to the contents of the instrument thereof, being dated the third day
of August last past, subscribed by the said constituant with his sign and
seal hereupon imprinted in red wax, now showing and appearing unto me Notary,
and the said Appearour, has by virtue and according to the power of the said
Procuration declared even as he declares by these Presents to consent unto
John Day Merchant in the City of London in England aforesaid, as appointed and
authorized by M. John Peacock, George Coney, Richard Streater, John Freeman,
William Carter, Ra. Grafton, James Setheby, Matthias Air, John Gibbs, and
Robert Hamon, all Merchants and inhabitants in the said City of London: That
the said John Day in the said quality, forasmuch as it may concern him,
appears in his said Quality, notwithstanding the Arrest made by him Appearor
upon the goods hereafter written by the person of Peter Thelwell, may take up
under sure and sufficient bail by him put in the goods and wares hereafter
written, to wit, the Ship and what belonged unto her, four chests with blades
for Rapiers, two of them marked with the letters ME. and the other two with the
letters R.G. Item in hundred and twelve Bales of Anniseeds marked with the
letter L. Item four Cases with Skrewes of Pistols marked with the letters J.G.
Item two cases of Bever Wool. Item four small barrels of Quicksilver. Item
two cases with Salsaperilla, marked with the mark R4. Item one small barrel
with Mace, and a number 1 ww. of Goat Skins, besides two Cases with Shrewes of
Pistolls, one small case with Locks for Pistolls; All the which goods are lying
at Ostend Sequestered by the Lords the Committees for the Admiralty of Dunkerke
by Order of His Royal Majesty in his private Council Dated the fifth day of
August last past, and that in diverse places within the said City of Ostend
thereunto appointed by the said Lords Committees, and came out of of the Ship
Barak and Deborah, whereof was M. William Rous of London taken in Sea by
Captain Francis Fowther and by him brought into Ostend in Flanders aforesaid,
the said goods being of the said Arrest and he appear our consenting to the
said John Day or his Order hereof this present Act, for according to the power
thereby to prosecute the recovery thereof, with putting in su^ty of one hundred
Pounds g^ once into the hands of the said Committees through the person of M.
John de la Valette Merchant in Ostend, Promising to hold the same consent, for
good and of value under Bond of his and his Constitutors Persons and goods
present and to come. Thus done in this City of Brussells in the presence of
H^bert Vander Meulon, and Paul Baily as Witnesses hereunto called, and the
Draught thereof was subscribed by the said Appearours with me Notary. Quod
attestor, was subscribed Jacob Van Bassuiis Notar.

You may be pleased to take notice, that this Procuration was mended at Gaunt
afterward by Master Thelwels consent, something being added, and likewise in
Latin I set down Doctor Walkers Procuration unto Master Thelwell, which bred
all this confusion. M. Thelwell promised me to do what I would desire, but I
must give him 80. Pistols, besides the 60. Pistols that I formerly promised to
pay unto M. Bailys more, that I should promiss him as hundred Pistols, to
clear Captain Fowther from Arrest, the which I would not yield unto
conceiving that no Agent should make any such unjust demands to the prejudice
of the honest Merchants. This was his demand about 6. of October following.

Copia Mandati.
UNiversis ad quos pervenerint presents, salutem. Ex remonstratione facta
Domino Regiper nos Walterum Walker Legum Doctorem Prolegatum Parliamenti
Anglia, ordinatum ost de Sequestratione bonorum in quadam Navi, cujus erat
Joannes Tomason Magister nuper de facto intercept' and vi^lenter occupat' per
quendam Capitaneum Coleman, and de arrestatione corporis dicti Coleman pro
cautione interponenda de omnibus bonis dissipatis prout in ordine continetur,
Quid tamen no^ Prolegatus antedictus ad Dankerkham, and Ostend, and alibi pro
pr^ratione executionis dicti ordinis co^mode itinerarinon possumus,
constituimus, and per praesentes nominamus and constituimus dilect^m nobis in
Christo Petrum Thelwell Armigerum, nostrum Procuratorem, Actorem, and Factorem,
tam qaoad pramissa, quam quoad omnes alias causas and negotia in absentia
nostra, nomine nostre, vel pro nobis expediend', damusque and concedimus eidem
Petro Thelwell potestatem generalem and mandatum speciale, de agendo, faciende,
and procurande totum and quicquid and omnia and singula quae nos si praesentes
personatitor interessemus opud Dunkerc vel Ostend. vel aliquo alio loco
expedire facire vel procurare possemus.

In cujus rei testimonium manum nostram praesentibis opposuimius. Datum
Brussellis tertie die Augusti, 1645. Signatum Walt.Walcher.Prolegatus
Parliamenti Anglia cum sigille rubre ad lntus impresso.
Concordat cum originali.

Quod attestor, Van Bossuiit Notar. P.



Presently I wrote to Doctor Walker, to desire him to stand for the good of the
Merchants, acquainted him with the proceedings of M. Thelwell, desired him for
Gods sake that they might not suffer in their estetes; he would not answer my
Latter 12. of Octber; returned to Ostend, intending for England, came to Ostend
the 15. the 16. I wrote unto Master Peacocks, the Copy of the Letter hereafter
follows in these express words.

Ostend, 16 October, 1645.
MAster John Peacock, Loving friend, I came hither last night from Gaunt, where
I had been with Master Thelwell eight days to have composed your unfortunate
business, and in conclusion effected nothing, his demands being beyond my
expectation, far beyond his deserts, 80. Pistols to be paid presently, 60.
Pistols to pay Paul Baily, 100. Pistols to release the Arrest upon the person
of Cap. Fowther, though not yet arreasted; I could not find Pistols to sheet
off so fast; I am in such a strait, I know not what to do. My resolution is,
God willing, to write no more to you: expect an Answer of this, so to return,
in the mean times, I pray speak with the rest among you, appoint some body
either to come hither to discharge me, and to look after your goods, or order
me or deliver over your Procurations to whom you will appoint, for I take God
to witness, I am so weary of this business, that I wish to have given 50. l.
out of my own purse, that I had never come over, or advise the rest of the
interessed to take some speedy course, that you may not be cozined of all, I
have writ to the Agent, desiring him to be assistant unto you, whereby you may
be fairly dealt withal; truly he is a very honest gallant Gentleman, and one
(as I conceive) will do no unjust act; but there is one again with him of a
broken fortune, M. Thelwell, that looks nothing more, but to enrich himself by
other men's losses. I could be larger in writing of very strange passages, but
dare not, remembering well where I am, that for small matters make nothing of
killing men, but God bless me with safety to returns, I shall declare to the
Honorable Committee, and to the Merchants, the true state of the business
here. I have written to M. William Christmas, I wish you to confer with him,
with my love remembered.

Yours to command, John Day.
Postscript. I received by the last Packet not a Letter from no man, forget me
not, I do not you. Here is a report that a Dagger Boat lately gone out with 6.
Gunnes is taken and carried to London, the Captains name Hooker, a gallant
man, his crew answerable to himself, that these Parliament dogs that he can
take, God damn him shall overboord, or else carry them to Argiers. Here are
many brave Captains, not to compare to this. I pray remember my service to
Captain Cramley, if he be taken, he can and will take some course for his
safety.




By which I advised him of my fruitless voyage, staid at Ostend three or four
days, in that interim Coleman was released, had notice of other goods that
were conveyed away, as Platts which were conveyed to the hands of M.
Christopher Meystron^ for the satisfying of a Bill of Exchange of M. Thelwell.
After advise I saw apparent, that there was an absolute agreement between
Humbleton and Thelwell to cozen the Merchants of their estates, went to the
Burgo-master Eggleston, acquainted him of their purpose: he told me that he
could not help it, he had released Coleman by virtue of M. Thelwels
Procuration from the Agents I told him I was very confident our Agent had no
notice, nor knew thereof; he bade me acquaint him, if he would send any
contradiction, he would take such care, that the Merchants should not have
their goods embezelled.

Whilst I staid there, I was so cruelly tormented with Rous the Master of the
Ship, in that I had not in all that time cleared the Ship, and did keep such a
quarter with me, as by this Certificate will more at large appear. I set it
down, because he had sworn the contrary in his Answer, viz.

WE whose names are here underwritten, do testify for truth, that about
four or five months passed at Ostend Master William Rous Master of the Barak
and Deborah, did can plain unto John Day being then at Ostend of his long
delay is not clearing the foresaid Ship, that the said Day did declare, that he
could not help it, but said, he did it for the best, and hoped to save the
owners some money; that if the said Rous would give him a note of his hand,
whereby the said Day might not be damnified, he would presently go with him to
M. Livillety, and give him the money to clear the said Ship, or words to that
effect, that the said Rous denied so to do.

21. Jan. 1645 Henry Batten. George Blake.


I knew not what to do, at last I resolved (though it cost me my life) to go
once more to Doctor Walker, and to acquaint him with Thelwels proceedings,
arrived at Gaunt the 22. of October, where I advised Master Peacock, the Copy
of the Letter I have here set down.

LOving friend, this Letter I could not send by the last Packet, since yours of
the 3 wherein you write you find little performance; for Gods sake come over,
or send some that can do more. You would have M. Rous his Ship cleared, D.
Walker says no, he hopes to got it for nothing, but what is already paid, I
wish it were so. Captain Fowther is in a manner contented with 1800. Gilders,
shall I pay or deposite 2600? M. Rous is impatient, I cannot blame him. What
between M. Thelwell, you, and your Skipper, makes me almost mad. Tomorrow for
Bruxels once more, to bring a period, if possible. Howsoever expect as
abovesaid. So resting,

John Day.


The 24. I came to Bruxels, lodged at a private house, sent unto Doctor Walker
a Letter, wherein I humbly desired his Protection, that I might come and go
unto him without any danger of my life, by reason of M. Thelwell; that I had
business of concernment to declare unto him: he sent his Secretary, who told
me, that I might freely come and speak with him. I did so. But for fear of
the worst, I took a Soldier with me for my guard. Who coming before Doctor
Walker, I truly related what Thelwell had done, in releasing out of prison
Captain Coleman, in the cozening the Merchants of their money and sharing it
amongst them; the taking of Merchants goods out of the warehouses, converting
them to their own use, as Platts; M. Thelwell confessed before Doctor Walker,
that he had and was to have 3000. gil. as likewise the taking out of the
Platts, but said, it concerned me nothing, I had nothing to do with any of
those goods that were taken by Colemen: I replied, and showed an Order from
Master Fr^man for five Fates, withal telling him, that if I had not that, I
was fearful he might as well do some dishonest act, to the prejudice of the
Merchants that I was entrusted for. After many words, he told Doctor Walker he
had put in good security to the Parliament for any thing that he should act. I
desired Doctor Walker to ask him who was his security, he said his cozen M.
Thelwell the Parliament man and his cozen Charles Loid, I told Doctor Walker,
that if he could make that any ways appear, ^ should rest satisfied, would
presenly depart for England well contented, and trouble him no further, he then
told Doctor Walker he had it under his Cozen Loyds hand, he would show it him
the next day, I must truly confess, that Doctor Walker did seriously protest,
that he knew not of any of those passages, neither the releasing of Cap.
Coleman, the sharing of the money, nor taking of any goods, I humbly entreated
him, that he would be pleased to give a little note of his hand to the
Burgomaster of Ostend for preventing of the further knaveries, and security of
the Merchants goods, which he would not do, the next day I came to him,
desiring to know whether M. Thelwell had showed him the letter from his Cozen
for security, he told me he had not, neither did he beeleve, he had any such, I
advised the Worshipful Alderman Kenricke who was interressed in the money, that
was so shared as likewise M. William Christmas with diverse others thereof, the
30. of October I presented an humble Petition unto Doctor Walker, the Copy
whereof I have truly set down in these words.

To the Honorable, Walter Walker, Doctor of the Law, Agent Extraordinary for
the Honorable Parliament of England.
The Petition of John Day, Merchant, in the behalf of Jo. Wood, Roll. Wilson,
Jo. Frederick, Jo. Peacock, and diverse other worthy Merchants of London.
Humbly shows

That your Petitioner was sent over into those parts by the Merchants
abovesaid, with full power and Authority attested by the seals of London and
by Public Notaries Authenticke, as likewise with a Letter of Credit unto your
Honor for your assistance for what your Petitioner should require concerning
the Ship and goods of the Barak and Deborah M. William Rous M.

May it please your Honor that your Petitioner has been most unjustly
retarded these nine weeks by M. Peter Thelwell and yet is, which has been by
a power, that your Honor gave him Dated the third of August last.

By which power the said Thelwel has cunningly and underhand done diverse
strange things to the great prejudice of the Merchants, and to a very ill
example, as the releasing out of Prison Cap. Coleman, taking Merchants goods
out of the Warehouses; all which has been done without your Honors privity
and consent, as your Petitioner verily believes.

For prevention of the future, let M. Thelwell without delay put in very good
security such as your Honor and your Petitioner shall think fit that nothing
shall be done to the prejudice of the Merchants. Or else

It is most humbly prayed, that your Honor will be pleased take from the said
Thelwell the Order or procuration. Dated as abovesaid, or at least give Order
under your Honors hands unto Seignior Eggleston Burgomaster of Ostend, that he
should not suffer any goods of the Merchants arrested, either the goods taken
by Captain Coleman, or Captain Fowther to be delivered out to any man without
your further Order.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc. John Day.

By which means you may plainly perceive, that I did to the uttermost of my
endeavors desire Doctor Walkers assistance for the safety of the Merchants
goods, and withal I told him, that I understood Giles M. Thelwells man was to
go for Ostend, and of what dangerous Consequence it was, desired of him to
give me two or three lines under his hand, to send to the Burgomaster, he would
not, but called for M. Thelwell, and asked him why he did not make an end with
me, he told Doctor Walker, that I demanded more goods then I had procurations
for. I told him, that my Orders should show the contrary, he told Doctor
Walker, that if I would leave my Procurations and Orders with him, he would
peruse them, and what I had Order for I should have; Thereupon I delivered him
my Procurations, came to him, two or three days after to know his pleasure, he
would neither resolve me what he would do, nor give my Procurations again,
but bid me come by them as well as I could, upon which I Petitioned Doctor
Walker again, the Coppie whereof follows in these words viz.

To the Honorable Walter Walker Doctor of the Law, Agent extraordinary for
the Honorable Parliament of England. The Petition of John Day, Merchant, in
the behalf of Jo. Wood, Roll. Wilson, Jo. Frederick, Jo. Peacock, and diverse
others Worthy Merchants of London.
Humbly shows

THat as yet he has not received any satisfactory answer from M. Peter
Thelwell, concerning the Petition in the behalf of the Merchants given unto
your Honor the 30. of October 1645.

May it please your Honor, as you always have bin inclined to do Justice,
and that deluyes are hateful unto you, your Honor will be pleased forthwith
if it be with your Honors goodlikeing to call in your Procuration, Dated the
third of August last past, wherein your Honor did absolutely Authorize the
said Thelwell to arrest the person and goods of Captain Coleman and Captain
Fowther, which Authority your Petitioner knows for certain, that the said
Thelwell has lately much abused, and without your Honors speedy redress the
Merchants are likely to be very much Damnified.

That the said M. Thelwell has and does to the great prejudice of your
Petitioner, especially to the Merchants interessed, detain in his Custody the
Procurations and special Commissions given your Petitioner, from the said
Merchants, having been a loveing way often desired to restore them, as well
before your Honor and your Secretary, as diverse others, which he does most
unjustly deny to deliver, so that your Petitioner is very confident that he
has some ill intent.

Your Petitioner well knowing how tender you are of your Honors reputation
least any thing should reflect upon your Honor, your Petitioner humbly
desires you will be pleased to cause his said Procurations and Commissions to
be restored, and by your Honor to be enabled to prosecute the said
Procurations according to their true intent; That your Petitioner shall act
nothing, nor receive any goods, but such as he has absolute authority to
receive, and for which he will be responsive, otherwise your Petitioner is
resolved forthwith to go for England, to give a just and honest account to the
Honorable Committee and the Merchants, that your Petitioner may go with the
more courage.

It is most humbly prayed, that your Honor would be pleased out of your wonted
goodness to give unto your Petitioner a note under your hand to the
Burgomoster of Ostend, that none of the goods arrested, either the goods taken
by Cap. Coleman, or by Cap. Fowther, shall not be disposed of to any intent
whatsoever, until your further order.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc. JOHN DAY.

At last I got my Procurations and Writings, but not until I understood his
Honor was resolved for England: To pass by many dilatory premises, Thelwells
intention of murdering me, and had done it basely, had not his man and M.
Dinse, Doctor Walkers Interpreter, prevented him, who staid him as he was
running at me with his drawn Rapier, as I was standing by the fire side.

Now I will leave him, and come to Doctor Walkers voyage for England, which he
having resolved of, I intended not to leave him, waited upon him to Dunkerke, I
passed by Ostend to inform my self whether any thing had lately passed,
desired master Rous the Master of the Ship to come presently to Dunkerk to
speak with D. Walker, who did so; we desired D. Walker that we might have leave
to clear the Ship, that he would be pleased to take off his Arrest, and to
take his power which he had formerly given unto M. Thelwell, back again, which
he would not do. I was advised to send a Notary to protest against him for all
damages that might happen to the Merchants, did so, the 10. of November, 1645.
upon which he said he would take away his Procuration from M. Thelwell, and
would have a care that nothing should be acted to the prejudice of the
Merchants, until further advise from England. I still urged him for is none to
the Burgomaster, but could not have it. I told him plainly (I did conceive) he
did beyond his Commission, for to my knowledge he was desired to be assisting
to the Merchants in what they should desire, and not to seek to destroy them.
Whereupon he was very angry. So I being resolved to go for England, yet I
prevailed with him to go to Seing' Clausons, one of the Judges of the
Admiralty, with M. Thelwell, unto whom he did speak in Latin, declared, as he
told me in English, that he had taken away his Procuration and that he had
desired nothing might pass to the prejudice of the Merchants; I did go with a
special friend unto Seig' Clausons that evening, and desired of him to know,
Whether that the Agent had said was effectual to prevent M. Thelwell, that he
could do nothing to the prejudice of the Merchants, he told me, what the Agent
said to him was but words, and would avail nothing, for if he should aver he
had said so, the other might deny it, which was but Pro and Con. By all means
I should got a note of his hand, I went to the Agent about it, but he would do
nothing, the next day took Shipping, arrived the third day in the morning at
Dover, where I left him: the next morning I come to London, and sent his Letter
to his wife of his safe arrival, and come now to my Merchants, especially
Peacock, how he rewarded me for all my pains and trouble into Flanders. I
should be too tedious in writing down of all his Letters, only take a briuse
abstract of some few, who in his Letter of the 4. of July does express in
these very words.

LOving friend, I have since thought with my self, that if you arrested the
Captain that took our Ship, you cannot do amiss^, and arrest the Ship also,
and what goods you can find. But I (...) the business to do as you shall see
most advantageous.


By this you may perseive some confidence he had in me, leaving of it to my
discration. The 5. of July he advised me by M. William Rous the Master, to so
furnish him with what moneys he should need; accordingly I did furnish him
with what he demanded, as formerly declared by the Certificate of M. B^ and M.
B^ and would have paid him the full money to have cleared the Ship, only
desired a note of his hand to save me harmless when I came into England. In
this Letter of the 22. of August, 1645. if in case there be any Law of recover
them, do you endeavor, Doctor Walker said, I should not buy them, this day
and that day they should be recovered. The 9. of September he writes thus: I
pray deposite the money, if the Ship cannot otherwise be freed, let what Suit
of Law come of is that will. He knew full well, I had paid 1400. Gilders
before, was then upon agreement with Fowther upon an Arbitrament that the Ship
should not have stood them in above 1900. Gil. had not M. Thelwell hindered it.
I have had diverse employments for sundry Merchants, but never met with such
changeable instructions and orders; for first he directed me to give for his
Wire 40. Gil. then presently he thought 24. would be sufficient. In his Letter
of the 18. of July, 14. days after, when I had in a manner bought it, by his
Letter of the first of August I must not exceed 15. Gil. in his Goat Skins the
like, so that he did almost make me mad. He sent me from Antwerp 400. pistols
current at 9. gil. per pistol to pay for the wire (...) after orders me to send
it back unto Master Le Bruyne that sent it, I did so, Had I kept this 400
pistols toward my large expenses and loss of time, he and I had never
differed; but after once he had got beforehand with me, I was gone. I shall
with as much brevity as I can declare how after my return home I repaired unto
him and the rest, and told them what had passed, advised what I conceived was
best for them to do, informing them, that by the means of Doctor Walker, the
Ship and their goods were retanded, and that they should do well to Petition
the Honorable House of Commons, none being so forward as M. Peacock in the
business: thereupon they concluded of a Petition to the Honorable Committee
of the Lords and Commons for the Navy, the Copy whereof verbatim here
follows, viz.

To the Honorable Committee of Lords and Commons for the Navy. The Petition
of diverse Merchants, whose names are here underwritten.
HVmbly shows unto your Honors, that about June last, the Ship Barak and
Deborah coming from Amsterdam was taken by one Captain Francis Fowther a
Pyrate; and carried to Ostend.

That upon advise thereof your Petitioners sent over John Day with full
authority to demand your Petitioners Goods and Ship, so well by Law and
otherwise he should think fit; but before he came, your Petitioners goods were
sold, part of the said goods the said Day has bought, as he says, and paid
the most part for them.

That on the third of August following, M. Peter Thelwell by authority from the
Worshipful Doctor Walker did arrest your Petitioners goods, by which your
Petitioners are much damnified.

Your Petitioners humbly pray, that your Honors will be pleased to call before
your Honors the said Doctor Walker and John Day, whereby we may have some
satifaction, the rather in that tht Convoy is come, and our goods are left
behind. Nicolas Adams. John Peacock. Edmund Webberley. Robert Jeffery. James
Burkin. Joas Eversen. John Clar. Thomas Hood. Ralph Grafton.


M. Peacock is the first man that underwrites, goes along with it very earnest,
the Ship and Oils being not then come. In his Petition I beseech you observe,
that he does there confess, that he sent me over with full power to demand the
Ship and goods so well by Law as otherwise I should think fit, but if he
forswears this hereafter you must conceive, it is for his own profit. By
earnest writing unto M. Lavillety to assist Rous in what possible he could to
get his Ship away, most faithfully promising unto Lavillety, that he should be
no ways damnified, he did assist him, and used that means, that the Ship and
goods safely arrived here, Peacock and Rous they had no more thought of giving
satisfaction for my excessive expenses and great vacancy of time being above
21. or 22. Weeks upon that sole employment, but to the contrary the 9. of
December arrested me in two actions of 1100. l. Although I never had to deal
with him for two pence, I went to prison in the Compter, where I lay 2. or 3.
nights, sent for the Gentlemen, who came unto me with much a do, asked him
whether I had deserved such hard dealing from him, what was his reason to
demand against me, was this the satisfaction for all the care and pains I had
taken for him? He told me, that Rous and M. Sincler had told him, that I had
paid nothing for the Ship and Oils, that they had run away with them,
therefore I must give him 300. l. back, I replied that were it so, I expected a
greater recompense for my charges and loss of time then the 300. l. I desired
him not to deal so cruelly with me, and withal told him, I had made a vow
never to put in bail, nor to go to Law, offered if he would refer it to any
indifferent men, I would put him in good security to stand to the Award, he
told me I should rot in prison if I would not put in bail. Presently after I
had a friend that came unto me, persuaded me to put in bail, I told him what a
serious vow I had made, being a man of Quality went to the Guardian of the
Prison to prevail with him upon a paroll to be a true prisoner, that I had
liberty to go abroad to appear when I should be sent for, I prosecuted it so by
friends that I got him the 17. of the same month to refer it to M. Thomas
Muschamp and M. John Frith, when at the Mermaid Tavern after long debating
they found some moneys coming unto me, and did offer what appeared to them, to
give me, besides my charges and loss of time, which they would take into
consideration, and that I should have content, I not having my accounts from
Lavillety, I desired a little time, they gave as by their award appears until
the 17. of Jan. Within 14. days I received my account, repaired unto M.
Peacock, desired a further meeting before the said Arbitratours, he would not
upon any entreatyes, but prosecuted with the greatest violence that possible
could be, on Christmas day in the morning went to Sheriff Foots, under whose
command I was, desiring him I might not go abroad, saying his actions upon me
was for 1100. l. That I really owed him many hundred pounds (a brave way to pay
debts) I went unto the Sheriff, certified him the truth, whereby I conceived I
had given him good satisfaction, howsoever such was his importunity, that the
6. of January I was remanded to Prison, who contrary to my faithful promise,
was forced to put in bail the same day, or else I must have lain and rotted,
if that he might have had his desire. I with much entreaty of friends, and
indeed for meer^ shame, he was content to have another Reference, but I must
refer it to M. Lucas Luce and himself, I conceived it very hard terms, the
harder in that I must put in security in 1500. l. to stand to their award,
knowing how just my cause was, yielded thereto, the 20. of Jan. 1645. I was
bound and my loving friend M. Jo: Frith, we had a meeting who after long debate
M. Luce told him that it was very unfit that he should be judge in his own
Case, howsoever if he would make choice of a third man to be an Umpier, he
doubted not but to give him Satisfaction, which Peacock utterly denied, would
condescend to nothing without he might be Ump himself, unto which demand there
was no reason to yield unto, so that the arbitration broke off, I was forced to
remove his ernest to the Common place and presently to put in a bill into the
Chancery, which my bill came in against Peacock and Rous in February, his
answer and Rous came in 21. February 1645. After I had taken out their answer
being but 79. sheets, I look a great deals of pains in perusing of it, where
I did find such and so many manifest untruths, that I stood amazed; first for
M. Peacock fol. 3. that I showed my willingness to go the voyage, where he
known the contrary, as by the Attestation appears; fol. 5. that it was fully
agreed that this defendant should pay unto the complainant 3. l. upon every
100. l. for what he should buy, a most false untruth, there was never such an
agreement made. It is true I did propound, that if the goods were not sold
before came, and if I did not buy them not staying above 5. or 6. days, I
would be content with 3. per. C. for my pains and labor, they paying my
charges fol. 7. And these defendants do deny that they or either of them, with
diverse or others did earnestly or otherwise entraute the complainant to go
for Ostend, whereas by the Testimony of diverse extant to prove it, that
Peacock did most earnestly beg and entreat of me to go. I do pass by many
shall faults fol. 13. and this defendant both deny, that this defendant and the
said other persons nominated, with this defendant in the said Letter of
Attorney, did by the same writing or otherwise give unto the complainant any
authority to do according to his discretion. Cast your eye upon his Letter of
Attorney, and his Petition to the Committee and see there if I have not full
authority to do as I shall think fitting, as if they themselves were by and
present, see but his Letter unto me of the 4. July. wherein he expresses these
very words, I leave the business to do, as you shall see most advantaguous,
Fol. 14. And these Defendants say, and either of them says, that they do not
believe, that before the Complainant arrived at Ostend aforesaid, upon his
voyage thither, in the Complainants Bill mentioned most part or any part of the
goods in the said Ship were sold and delivered, or that the said Ship or goods,
or any part of them, were at any time judged for Prize by the said Admiralty of
Dunkerke or elsewhere. Rous before my arrival at Ostend was gone for London,
and had contracted for his Ship, bought diverse goods out of the said Ship from
the Captain, amongst which a great parcel of Amsterdam English Bibles. Master
Peacock knows that most of all his goods were sold before I came thither,
there went three over with me about the same business, two of them joined with
me in the Letter of Attorney, M. Hudson, M. Robert Jeffery, who had likewise
goods in the said Ship, that were sold before they came. M. Hudson did buy part
of his goods at the second hand. for Rous and Peacock to swear that the goods
were not adjudged as Prize, they might as well deny that I went to Ostend by
Sea, all one, for no man dare sell Ship or goods there, until they have been
first at Dunkerke, and bring order from thence to the Admiralty there, Fo. 18.
Nor do these Defendants believe, that the Complainant having respect to the
good of the owners, would give so great a price for such goods, when as this
Defendant John Peacock faith, that he did when the Complainant undertook the
said voyage, give the Complainant his directions not to give (...) then 30.
gil. for a Hogshead of the said Oil. Do but look upon his Directions under
his own handwriting, I must leave this to your judgment, whether M. Peacock
has liberty to forswears himself.

I have passed but to Fol. 18. there are 60, more behind, which were it not too
tedious, there is not three leaves but apparent un-truths justified upon oath,
as the receiving of the 300. l. and many other shameful things. I will only
instance one or two more that Peacock swore, Fol. 19. That I did trade with his
money and credit, whereby I enriched my self. God knows I never traded with a
penny of his money, neither ever had more moneys from Lavillety, as for expenses
and other extraordinary charges, but I will take my oath, and publish to the
world, that I am even undone by him, and am worse in my estate and livelihood
by 500. l. then I was when I undertook that unfortunate voyage, and all long
of him, and his Comrade M. Peter Thelwell, Fo. 54. And this Defendant William
Rous further says, that after the Complainant arrived at Ostend aforesaid this
Defendant did see openly in the street of Ostend, aforesaid six, Fatts of
Potashes of the goods of the said other Defendant John Peacocke, which this
Defendant did then acquaint the Complainant of, to the end the Complainant
might attach or use some means to obtain the same, but the said Complainant
did refuse so to do, or to stir any way about the same for the regaining
thereof. And therefore and for the reasons aforesaid in this Defendants Answer
set forth and declared, this Defendant John Peacock says, that he did cause
the said Complainant to be arrested at this the Defendants suit in an Action or
Actions for or to this Defendants damage, and the damages of other the owners
aforesaid 1100. l. or thereabouts. I beseech you observe now one of the
principal causes of my Arrest, that I would not attach nor arrest these
Potashes.

First for Rous, he knew full well that no goods there were arrestable, but
such as brought order from the Chief Governor or Admirallty of Bruxells,
which he knew I had not, neither power to release his ship, nor any Merchants
goods that were arrested by M. Thelwell, at the same time he knew there was
brought up a Ship ot Barwicke, laden with Salmon belonging unto M. Watson, his
man being then there, labored by all means possible, to procure an arrest to
be laid upon the Ship or goods, it could not be done, the goods sold before his
face, and durst not scarce open his mouth, Rous being then present, to my
knowledge this Ship being taken by one Captain Hooker, presently after another
taken by Cap. Dorset coming from the East Country laden with Potashes, Hemp,
and diverse other goods, partly belonging unto M. Amiss and M. James Plat
dwelling in Leaden-Hall-street, and M Patrick Smart a Scotchman, which two came
over with Letters of Commendations, had as good friends, if not better then I,
came before the goods were taken out of their Ship, saw them sold before their
own eyes, Rous being by and present, could they arrest or hinder the sale
then, nor durst once speak, neither could they scarce have the privilege to
bid for their goods, but if they would buy them, most do at the second hand
without any exceptions. I would feign know of Rous and M. Peacock, if a Ship
and goods were condemned here by the Admiralty, and sold either by the
Commission or by the interested to whom they were judged as Prize, who should
or dare arrest those goods in the parties hands that bought them? I protest
seriously, Rous and Peacock, have sworn so to the purpose in many things to
such impossibilities, that I am almost afraid, that if I should long contest
with them, they would swear me out of my own name. Before I end with them, I
must declare unto you what part or interest these two owners have in this Ship,
which cost but 2600. gil. each of them one sixteenth part; John and Jonathan
Gibbs each a sixteenth, which is not 16. l. sterling. for each of their parts, yet
some of them have vowed to spend ten times more then their parts, but to make
me fly my Country. After I had taken out this Answer, by much persuasions of
friends I got another Reference, upon condition, that he should choose two men,
and I one, which was concluded on. We sealed Bonds with security, he made
choice of M. Stephen Burton and M. Thomas Brown, two very honest men, I had M.
Luce, any two of them to conclude. M. Burton and M. Brown met, sat a great
while upon it, M. Luce could not meet at that time, I entreated them for Gods
sake to make an end as they should think fitting, gave them the Account, the
Copy of which is here set down. They did somewhat except against some things
there as too much, I referred solely unto them to do what they pleased, so I
might have an end.

Master John Peacock and diverse other Debtors unto John Day for a miserable
voyage to Ostend, being undertaken by virtue of a Procuration dated the 27 of
June, 1645. at the earnest entreaty of those whose hands are thereunto
subscribed.
Gilders. For the buying the Ship Barak and Deborah faithfully paid 2600.
Gilders, having order to have given as much more. 2600 0 0 For ten Hogsheads of
Lin-seed oil for the particular account of Master lohn Peacock, as his
pretended goods. 0470 0 0 For money paid unto Rous by Lavillety, as by his
Account. 0530 0 0 For money lent the said Rous besides 50. Gilders, M. John
Freeman is to pay more for him 0018 0 0 For my expenses by M. Peacocks express
order, three times going for Bruxels, following the Law, much extraordinary
expenses, thrice going from London in 23. weeks. 1970 0 0 For my loss of time,
and extraordinary pains, being out 23. weeks, at 20, 8. per diem. 1610 0 0 For
my charges, being arrested by this John Peacock here in London upon two Actions
of 1100. l. sterling, whereas he was much in my debt, to my damage 50. l.
sterling, a great deal more, being almost my utter ruin, at 37. s. is 0555 0
0 For Port of Letters from Land. and other places 0075 0 0 7828 0 0

M. John Peacock and Company per contra Credit'.
Gild. For 10. l. received of them at the Antwerp Tavern behind the Exchange
according to every man's proportion, as M. Peacock gathered 10. l. sterling. he
having received with his own proportion much more at 37. s. Flemish is 0111 0
0 For 300 l. sterling. drawn upon M. Peacock for to pay for the Ship and his
Oils, he taking every man's share for their parts of the 2600. Gilders, at 37.
s. is 3330 0 0 3441 0 0 Resting due to me to balance -- 4387 0 0 7828 0 0

They would not conclude at that time, but referred it to another day that M.
Luce might be with them, did so. At that meeting they were all three together,
and took a great deal of pains, being confident that they would have
concluded, but by some accident or words that Peacock spoke, M. Burton and M.
Brown were unwilling to conclude, but agreed we should seal new bonds, and
that they should be added unto them. M. Henry Hunt and William Garrroway, M.
Peacock promised to yield thereto, the next day I came to the Scrivener that M.
Burton appointed, brought my bond sealed a new. M. Peacock brought his bond,
promised the like, but referred the time until the first arbitration was out,
he then denied to seal, saying John and Jonathan Gibbs and the rest of his
partners would not agree to any Reference, but would go to Law, and never leave
me whiles I was worth a groat. I have set down all the Partners, by which all
the world may judge whether I am not likely to be well rewarded. The first of
these, John Peacock one sixteenth, William Rous one sixteenth, William Peacock
one sixteenth, Peter Sallawins one sixteenth, Peter Bocles one sixteenth,
Mathias Eyres one sixteenth, John Freeman one sixteenth, John White one
sixteenth, John Gibbs one sixteenth, Jonathan Gibbs one sixteenth, Daniell
Rouswell one sixteenth, Garton one sixteenth, John Drew one sixteenth, Roger
Sotherby one sixteenth, and one 32. Edward Davies one 32. Auron Powell one
sixteenth, was ever man Shipped with such a Medley, so many Bre^hren of Amsterdam
of all sorts? God of his mercy deliver me out of their hands.

Fol. 4. he does set forth, that there was some discourse between him and me
concerning the taking upon me to go to Ostend for the clearing of the Ship and
goods, but does not say, that he gave me any Procuration or Power to do it,
but concluded that I have not regarded my promise, but intending to deceive the
said John Peacock, nor has laid out any part of the 300. l. but I have refused
to do my endeavors, whereby he is dampnified 600. l. he has 15. partners
besides himself, and has upon his oath declared that he has received here in
London 1 12.5. Which was for 7/16 and the other 9/14 without all question he
has received, being lately come from Amsterdam. By which you may plainly
perceive in what a misery he seeks to bring me, for if he is damnified 600. l.
for his part; the other 15. partners without all doubt will do the like, in
what a case shall I be in? This is not all, he has been in Flanders, and has
there given his Procuration unto M. Peter Thelwell, by which he hatn Petitioned
the Admiralty of Dunkerke 15. May 1646. By which he desires the money in M.
Lavillety his hands may be brought into the Court, that he is engaged for me,
so that they sue me here, makes large demands. Lavillety he keeps diverse
goods of mine in his hands, there pretending he does not know how he may be
damnified by reason of M. Thelwell proceeding. God is my judge, I never
received penny of the 300. l. but as any occasion was for my expenses, 1400.
Gil. I did cause M. Lavillety to pay unto Captain Fowther as formerly
declared, there is by balance of my account 4387. Gild coming unto me, and
truly I think in modesty no indifferent man will allow me less then what I put
to account. For my loss of time, and the daily danger I was in, whosoever
would give me the same employment, and engage himself for seven years to give
me more, I take God to witness I would not undertake it. Mister Peacock has
not only by his fraudulent oppression sought my ruin, but used all means, as
much as possible in him lay, to defame and to make me odious to all the world,
as by procuring Attestations to take away my life, by complying not only with
M. Thelwell the Parliaments Agent, but with M. Hambleton the Queens Agent:
Whereby there is Attestation, as he has told me, wherein it will be made
appear, that I did there speak ill words against the Honorable Parliament. I
could willingly wish, that any of them were here to justify the words. Nay
that is not all, but he did write over, which was published by John and
Jonathan Gibbs, that I played away a great deal of money at Dice, slung
handfulls of Pistols at a time, saying, Hang it, let it go, it is Roundheads
money.

I have lately entreated M. Peacock to make an end of our business, offering
him that I will be contented to refer it to M. Stephen Burton or M. Brown,
that were formerly his good men, or any other honest Merchan^ whom he pleased.
He protests unto me, that he has wrote to his Partners in Amsterdam, so
soon as he shall hear from them he will resolve. For my part I am resolved,
if by any possible means, I will not go to Law with them. I am told, there is
now a Committee for Oppression and Extortion, I will fly thither as fast as I
can; if there be none, it is great pity, there was never more need. I am sure I
can hardly write good English, but will conclude in Latin,

Felix, quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.
POSTSCRIPT.
Gentle Reader,
I Have used all possible endeavors to have my Vindication read before the
Honorable Committee, but by reason the multiplycity of their great affairs,
and their seldom s^tting cannot yet be effected, but I am very confident will
very suddenly; In the interim I thought good to Paraphrase upon M. Peacocks
Remonstrance, whereby the world may judge of his malicious intent against me:
first concerning the breaking open of Doctor Walkers Letter, it was upon this
occasion, coming to Dover, and having no Pasport, I went to M. Ginnaber the
Cl^rke of the Passes to have one as formerly accustomed, for I am certain I
had passed twenty times in the like manner, but M. Ginnaber told me, that there
was an Order of Parliament that none must pass without Order from the Houses
of Parliament or from the Custom house of London; I stood amazed, the Packet
boat goeing away that night, I broke up the Worshipful Giles Green his
Letter in the presence of the said M. Ginnaber and M. Ratcliffe being M. Rookes
his man the searcher, howsoever they would not suffer me to pass: being
aboard, the foresaid Ratcliffe commanded me ashore, and the boat went away;
being three hours at Sea, by contrary winds forced back, the next day I went
to the Major of Dover, told him the occasion of what concernment it was to
diverse Merchants, showed him the Letter to Doctor Walker, he being a very
honest Gentleman, and knowing of me well did procure that I had a Pasport and
went away that night, the next day we arrived at Ostend, where I wrote unto
Doctor Walker the same day and sent his Letter, as by the Date of mine will
appear, if Doctor Walker will be pleased to produce it, as he has faithfully
promised to do. In November last, before the Honorable Committee in the
presence of Doctor Walker and Peacock, I did satisfy their honors concerning
the breaking open of the Letter, whereas he most falsely alleges, that I was
to repair to Doctor Walker, and follow his advice, whereas before I went, I
declared my self, that I would not go to Doctor Walker, nor entertain any
suites of Law, neither would I stay above 5. or 6. days as I can justify by
many Witnesses.

The second material thing that he alleges against me, that for the space
of three Months or thereabouts I continued in a deboist and impious manner of
drinking and Rioting with the said Fowther, and other Pyraticall Commanders and
Seamen at Ostend. Unto which I answer, that for the time I was at Ostend,
after the first four or five days that I had dispatched my business so much
as possible I could do, I never after kept the said Fowther or any other of
that Pyraticall crew company, neither indeed durst; for it is well known to M.
George Blage, M. Henry Battin, Julian Wills, three Masters of Ships that
belonged to the Merchants of London, that were at the same present at Ostend
the continual danger I was and went in, that I was so far from keeping them
company, that I durst not come where any of them were; nay I durst not walk in
the streets, for I was advised by the said Shippers and diverse others well
effected that they had vowed my death, and swore they would cut me in pieces,
having waylaid me between Ostend and Pl. Where I had certainly ended my
days, and Peacocks Commission, but by the said honest Shippers timely advice:
which being prevented, four or five of those blood-sucking fellows came upon
the Market place, assaulted me, would have pulled me off from that place,
calling of me Parliament dog, swearing most fearfully they would be the death
of me: and had not those Shippers with diverse others well affected been by, and
presently got me out of their handling, certainly they would have murdered me.
For my Rioting, I appeal to those Shippers, of whom for the most part whilst I
was there I had my diet aboard their Ships, and seldom or never was out of
their company, neither did ever keep company with any of the Captains or
Seamen, if I could any way have prevented it, that were against the Parl. I
never had any great desire to stay long at 0stend, neither do I think spent in
all a month there, but was at Bruxels and other places. Whereas Peacock further
sets forth, that I did publicly calumniate the Parliament with vile and
reproachful language, as by the Attestations appears; I have the Copies of
them. First, for William Humbleton, he is the Queens Agent, a mortal enemy
to the Parliament, one that lately changed his Religion from a Protestant to a
Papist. He is the only Treasurer for the Captains, and the man that has
disposing of Letters of Mart against the Parliament, Ten pounds is his price,
and does sell them as the Popes Nuntio does his Pardons. I must entreat you to
take notice, that this Attestator is the only sharer with M. Thelwell, so well
in the Merchants money, as in diverse other goods, as will be proved, they were
fellow servants together to M. Charles LLoid, and very much of a condition; For
M. Thomas Wherry he is M. Humbletons Gossip, and one that is as a Broker
betwixt them if they do not agree upon their division. Indeed his Attestation
is very modest, only apt to mistake, for he says, that I should in general
words say, that they were all Rebels and Rogues together. Now he does in a
manner infer, that I should mean the King and Parliament, whereas in truth
if I spoke any such thing, I meant really M. Thelwell and Humbleton. There is a
Letter likewise produced dated the one and twentieth day of October, 1645.
wrote to M. Thelwell, but I have no hand to it, it is wrote by Proxy, that he
had the report of Gills or Gillam that I should speak Traitorous words against
the Parliament, and advised him that he should presently write unto the
Parliament, but never made known nor declared before the 2. of July 1646.
There is an Affidavit likewise made by one Sinckler, but that is not concerning
any Traitorous proceedings against the Parliament, but of some misdemeanors
against M. Peacock, as some words that Doctor Walker should tell him, which
Doctor Walker has since denied, as likewise I might have arrested Peacocks
Sop^-ashes, he might as well have sworn I might have brought them home in my
pocket, God forgive them. M. Peacock further says, and in particular some
worthy Members of the Honorable House of Commons, as will be proved. I shall
use all possible endeavor to press that Honorable Committee, that he may
bring forth his proofs. Whereas M. Peacock says, that I hindered Fowther from
being arrested, which is most false, that by my company keeping with him, and
my foul carriage, did much prejudice to the public affairs of the State.
Concerning my carriage whilst I was there, and my well-affectednesse to the
State, I appeal unto three Letters wrote unto an Honorable Member of the
House of Commons, and one of the Honorable Committee of the Admiralty and
Cinque Ports, wherein this my Vindication I trust will be tried, the Copy of
which Letters I have by me, bearing date the second, ninth, and two and
twentieth of October, a Letter written to M. P. Jones, M. Tho: Britewell, and
M. Samuel Langham, Common Council men of this City; at likewise a Letter wrote
unto the Worshipful Captain Richard Crainlay one of the Commissioners for the
Navy, all which I have Copies of. If it be Treason to the State to spend his
labor, pains, and charges to the uttermost of his power to give advice of what
passed any ways to the prejudice of the State, to run diverse hazards in
being at the charges of sending well-affected Seamen as Spies to Newport, where
then lay the Earl of Antrim, having two Ships ready to go to Sea laden with
Arms against the Parliament, giving them directions what they should do, and
money to bear their charges, the one of them was George Blags man, and the
other James Sinckler, besides diverse times I went my self, and if this be
Treason, then I confess I am a Traitor.

Thus far he has accused me Criminally as a Traitor to the State, for which
I shall most humbly crave a fair Trial, the rather in that it is his humble
prayer I may be convented before that Honorable Committee, but in case that
their Honors shall not have leisure to examine it, that they would transmit it
to a Council of War, where I will expect no favor, but the most extremity
according to my deserts. M. Peacock has nor only desired my exemplary
punishment, but has most cunningly and maliciously, publicly and privately
declared upon the Exchange and other places, that I had cheated him of many
hundred pounds, and has endeavored to alienate those that are my friends,
(such that I got my livelihood by) to be my enemies, averring such untruth unto
them, that I think hardly can be paralleld. I will only instance in one or
two. The Wor^ Guinne Company having, notice of my going employed me to recover
or buy some goods that they had taken in the same Ship, which did. At my
coming home they gave me thanks, and 30. l. for a gratuity, yet such has been
the malice of this Peacock, that he has possessed some of them, that M.
L^villety and I seek to coz^n them, and does labor by all means, that they
should take the Procurations out of my hands, and give one unto M. Thelwell,
whereby the money owing by any of us may be put into the Magistrates hands. I
hope these Gentlemen will be wiser, and desire the money which is behind may be
paid into their own hands, if that it may be, there shall want no furtherance
of mine. If M. Peacock were not better experienced in his trade for Amsterdam
then in the Laws of Flanders concerning depositing of moneys, he had never got
so much money by Raizens as he is now like to do. I was desired by M. George
Hadley, and M. Samuel Chaplin, two worthy Gentlemen, Grocers of London who had
in the said Ship 500. Pieces of Raizens, to recover or buy them as I should
think fit; before I came, they were bought by one Adram Van Toore a Merchant of
Ostend, of whom afterward so many as were left, I bought, and presently shipped
them in Julian Wills, drew 200. l. upon them, they paid the money, there was
more disbursed by me, yet this M. Peacock did labor by all means, persuaded
them that I had cozened them, and had not paid any moneys; I was forced to send
for Attestations, Acquittances, and so satisfied these Gentlemen, that they
paid me all the money that I had truly disbursed, but for my labor and pains
I could expect none, their loss was so great, for the Raizens lay 22. weeks a
Shipboard for want of a Convoy, that they were not worth a fourth part of what
they cost. If M. Peacock could do these Gentlemen that favor, as to prevail
with his friend M. Thelwell, that the moneys that he arrested by virtue of D.
Walkers Procurations, for the use of the Proprietors, in the hands of Van Toore
may not be embezeled and shared, as M. Lincoberks Beaver Wool, and M. Graftons
Brass has lately been, for it belongs unto them.

I will only instance one more of his cunning tricks, he persuaded M. James
Sotherby to make an Affidavit which I did once see, and do declare that what
he swore was truth, and was extremely for M. Peacocks turn, for he swore, that
I was to have 3. l. per. cent. for what goods I bought at Ostend, but did not
declare the other conditions, that if the goods were sold before I came, and
that I did not stay above 5. or 6. days, and I would undertake no Law suits
upon any terms. Let M. Sotherby be pleased to go before my Lord Major or any
Master of Chancery, and make Oath, that this I did not say before my going
over, I will give him what satisfaction he shall desire.

I will now conclude, wishing good success to the endeavors of M. Thelwell
and M. Peacock, so that they may extend to the good of the Proprietours, and
that they may have better success then many formerly have had. I have known
those Countries above these twenty years, and never yet knew any got by going
to Law, if he could make any reasonable agreement. I will instance in one
Passage, of late M. Thomas Horth a Merchant of Yarmouth that had a Ship of
Oils taken and carried to Dunkerke worth 1500. l. M. Horth used such
diligence, that he got the Oils to be sequestered, sold, and the moneys to be
deposited, they were sold between 6. or 7000. gilders, and then to Law he
went, after two or three years he obtained his suit, had Order to receive his
money, but the party in whose hands it was, demanded 500. gilders for keeping
of it; I heard M. Horth protest that it had been far better for him, that the
Ship at first had been sunk, for it cost him more in charges and loss of time
then ever he recovered. I could instance in diverse other nearer home, but I
will not trouble your patience any further, only craving your favorable
opinion, that you will not be a partial Reader, but to weigh what I have here
writ in an equal balance, especially you that are interessed, and have lent
your assistance and moneys unto M. Peacock to be employed in Law, and have upon
his reports alienated your affection from me. Judge charitably and mark the
event, I will not, fail you, but what my intelligence can produce any ways for
prevention of prejudice to any of you, be confident I will truly advise. I
would have none despair, but that you may have your goods, for I assure you
there is great hopes, and the times have proved very fitting and seasonable to
that purpose, yet do not too much presume, God of his mercy send all to the
best, and to your contents.

FINIS.

