A DECLARATION by the Presbytery at Bangor, in Ireland, July 7. 1649.

Setting forth the apparent ruin of Religion, and the great violation of the
COVENANT following upon the present change of Command in this Province:

With some observations upon the Lord Vicount of ARDS late Declaration, of July
4.

Printed Anno Dom. 1649.

A DECLARATION by the Presbytery at Bangor, the seventh of July, 1649. etc.
AS we have upon every remarkable change of affairs in this land, from our
watch-towre blown the trumpet unto the people, by setting before them the true
state of their own condition, and giving them warning of their duty in these
dark and troublesome times: So a greater mystery of iniquity being now
discovered, then was any before, and of greater danger to the people of God,
then any former design which hes been known among us; we cannot forbear to
cry aloud to our flocks, to beware of ravenous Wolves who are risen to devour
them. The danger we were in by Sectaries, we have formerly represented at
large, and have sufficiently vindicate our selves in all our actions relating
to them: The late unexpected invasion by Malignants, we have faithfully
informed our people of, and pressed upon them their duty for opposing the
same. And now it has pleased the Lord to suffer men among our selves to be our
enemies, these who took sweet counsel together with us, renewed the Covenant,
and entered in a solemn Declaration: do now lift up themselves against us, and
under a pretense of delivering us, have indeed been the principal instruments
to ruin us and the work of God among us, if the Lord restrain them not from
the accomplishing their whole design: The chief head of those who pretend
authority above the rest, is the Lord Vicount of Ai^ds: whose presen actions
are so repugnant to his former Professions, that no Christian or ingenuous man
can think upon them without horror and detestation: His forwardness to renew
the Covenant: His fervency to have a solemn band and Declaration subscribed
and entered into: His large promises to defend Religion: His disclaiming all
conjunction, with Popist or Rebels with words of zeal and disdain: His
i^sinuations upon all honest men for gaining them to him: His consenting to all
public orders against Malignants being compared with his late undertakings,
must clear to pre^ent to even man's view the great dissimulation and betraying
of the people and Covenant he is guilty of; for which our sorrow and grief is
no less, then our rejoicing, had been great to have seen his Lordship stand
faithful, which was one of our chiefest desires.

For (whereas the danger of such accidents being foreseen) an Article was
insert in the Declaration, to acknowledge the Kings Commands; He confirming
all the Articles of the Covenant, before he were admitted to the exercise of
his Royal power, without which clause many would have trembled to join with
him: Yet he hes now clothed him self with a Commission from his Majesty, who
as yet refuses to give any satisfaction in Religion unto the just desires of
the Kingdom of Scotland. Yea, his concessions are less then these granted by
his Royal Father; which yet were declared by Church and State,
unsatisfactorie, and therefore, the executing of such a Commission, is nothing
else but an endeavor to set up the Kings Majesty, not only before Religion,
but in a quarrel destructive unto it. For the first difference between the
King and his people, was touching his absolute and unlimited power in Civil
things, and his adherance to Prelacie, and maintaining their power; for which
both our late Sovereign, and his Majesty who now is, did raise Arms against
their Subjects, and to this day that same quarrel is avouched and owned by his
Majesty: and all his Commissions tend to the bringing him to that power which
was justly demed to his Royal Father. And it seems the Lord of Airds does
own the same, for he says in his new Declaration of the fourth of this
instant directly. That the Kings Commission did ever procure respect and
obedience until the worst of a me, which must needs be meaned of that time,
when the Kingdoms were united by a Covenant, in opposition to such Commissions
given by the King to Malignants. And that one phrase may give us a taste what
may be expected from ^he rest (...) his Declarations concerning his professions
to Religion. For if the refusing any Commissions from the King, was in the
(...) oftimes, then surely the taking a Covenant, the Union of the Kingdoms,
casting out Praelac^e, bringing down Malignants, all against a personal
Commission is accounted by his Lordship, to How from the iniquity of the times:
Moreover in his Declaration he further discovers his thoughts of Reformation,
when he professes to endeavor the bringing of the King to his Throne, whence
he is debarred by wicked men, who (as he says) hes overturned Church and
State in other his dominions (by which we conceave, he understands both
Scotland and England, since no other but this is excepted) whereby his
Lordships judgment of the government of Scotland would appear to be that it is
both Civilly and Eccelesiastically overturned; what good shall we expect from
him for Religion who thinks so. Yea, it appears his Lordship thinks that same
of us, when he says; There were some who would have had him run in absolute
opposition to the Kings party, as well as to Sectaries: By whom we conceave
among others, he must understand the Ministry, who were indeed earnest to
oppose Sectaries and Malignants equally, which in his judgment is but a
preferring our own opinions and ends to the well of the Kingdom. What
assistance shall we expect from him in the future for the good of Religion,
when he makes our former faithfulness our reproach. And whereas he promises
to endeavor to procure from His Majesty a feeling of our Religion, we conceive
Him to mean Religion either in the large extent as it can take in Prelacy, and
as He calls it thereafter, The Protestant Religion, or else we believe He hes
little ground to think that He will obtain that from His Majesty, which He hes
refused to grant to His faithful Subjects of Scotland, to wit. An
establishment of the Solemn League and Covenant; without which Religion can
never be truly secured here, it being to small purpose though His Majesty
should tollerat Presbyteriall Government in this Province for a time, and yet
refuse to setle it in the rest of His Dominions.

It is moreover observable, that his Lordship never mentions Presbyteriall
Government in all his Declaration, nor does he once name the Covenant, or
promise any thing in relation to it which is too gross a character of his
Lordships disaffection to Reformati^n, and may seem clearly to be done that He
may be answereable to His Majesty for his Professions, that they are no larger
then His Commission allows Him to make them, which is not, either to defend
o^^res Dy^^^ i^ (...) Government or the Covenant, but to receive His commands
from the Marquess of Ormond, who he^ been still an Enemy to both, and who
has made a Peace with the Rebels destructive to Religion; unto which Peace the
Lord Airds contrary to his many professions and subscriptions, his now joined
himself: For his Commission imports no less binding him (as we are Informed)
to protect and be careful of His Majesty's Catholic subjects. His late
actions also declares it, for He employed Irish Papists in His service for
subduing the two Garrisons of Be^fast, and Craigfergus, as is clear, not only by
His avouching the chief command over them, and giving them Orders, but also in
His Declaration He seems not obscurely to justify their invasion, calling them
by the friendly names of strangers, and making their quarrel to be but a
pressing the Kings interest, which He says, was not sufficiently secured among
us. And in another placed speaking of them, He says that the Quarters are not
able to be such a burden without ruin. By which seems His L^^ would not
weary of them, if the Quarter could be able to bear them, all which as it is
but a mockry of the Public Declaration, so it is a notorious breach of
Covenant, for He is sworn to oppose all Malignants who are against that solemn
League, or would divide the King from His People in their defense of it, ye^ He
joins with Malignants who blasphemes the Covenant. In the Covenant He is
sworn to exti^at Popery and Prelacie, yet He puts on a Commission which
binds Him to maintain Protestant Religion in the large extent and Papists in
the exercise of their Religion. Yea, the Marquess of Ormond, from whom He is
to receive commands is an avouched maintainer of Prelacie, and retains still
the old English Liturgy (as We are informed) in his public devotions. In the
Covenant He is sworn to endeavor the bringing to punishment those who would
divide the King from his Kingdoms or one of them from another, yet He execute
such a Commission which foments the distance betwixt His Majesty and the
Kingdom of Scotland, and is a mighty obstruction unto His Majesty's granting
of Their just desires. In (...) Covenant He is sworn to defend to His
uttermost pow^^ all the^e who (...) in the Covenant, in the defense the (...)
He under (...) long of strengthening, betrayed Covenant (...) bound (...) to the
Covenant, by bringing for the (...) bound the power of a command opposite to
the Covenant. As these things makes clear as the beams of the Sun, the
unlawfullnes of his Authority by such a Commission (any thing his L. brings in
defense of it in his Declaration notwithstanding) for He pretends nothing
there but necessity and His good intentions, none of which can excuse Him from
so unhard of violation of his vows and subscriptions, neither are the miseries
so great which His Commission met with at his first making use of it as those
which his so sinful an engagement shall bring on hereafter, for the judgment
He pretends to prevent by joining with Malignants against Sectaries, will prove
but Physic of no value to this poor Land, and will involve them in sadder
judgments then any they could have apprehended from both the former, if they
had continued constant opposers equally of both and joined with neither. Shall
he prosper that does these things, or shall He break the Covenant and be
delivered? The faithful man swears to his own hurt and changes not.

For this cause, as the Ambassadors of Christ, We beseech our people in his
steed, not to join hands with such a course, or to meddle with them who are
given to change: And part^cularly We charge all who hes renewed the Covenant,
and hes entered into the Declaration of the Army and Country not to join in
executing of such a Commission by taking charge in the Army under the present
command or serving them, either as Officers or Soldiers, else We foretell
them in the name of the God of Truth, that the quarrel of the Covenant shall
pursue them, and they shall wring out the dregs of the cup, which Malignants
hes been drinking these many years by past. Yea, their judgment shall be
enlarged far above the former, because both they have seen the others plagues,
and hes of late renewed the Covenant which Malignants oppose.

We do also in the name of Jesus Christ, warn the people of our charge to keep
themselves free from all compliance with their ungodly course, either by
speaking favorably of them, acknowledging the Authority of the present command
under the Marquess of Ormond and the Lord of Airds, by imposing of Cesse upon
others for maintaining their unlawful Power, or by constant obeying their
Orders, in paying Cesse unto their Army, which is nothing else but a
submission unto their Authority, a strengthening of their hands, and an
upholding of them who maintain a quarrel destructive to the Covenant, all
which is sinful compliance and a breach of Covenant als well as to fight in
their quarrel, for it is a promoving of their course, tho not by Arms, yet by
supplying that which is the sinews of War, Money and Victuals. Neither can any
necessity be an excuse to it, for We ought to choose affliction rather then
sin, to help the ungodly and to strengthen the hands of the wicked, is an
evil worse then any suffering.

The Lord who suffered this Land to make defection when they were called to
action against this party, is now calling them for a time to suffering rather
then compliance, so to try more narrowly the fidelity of his People, and their
love to his Truth more then their Goods or Lives, otherwise the sudden
destruction which shall come on the Malignants here shall likewise overtake the
Land, and make their sufferings then far greater with an evil conscience, then
they shall now endure for well doing, and the God of Truth shall fulfill his
promise to his people, that those who endure cheerfully the spoiling of their
Goods, shall have in heaven a better and more enduring substance, yea, shall
have an hundredth fold here, and in the end life everlasting.

There are none in this land who formerly suffered for righteousness sake who
needs this day to repent it, and for whom the Lord provided not abundantly in
their greatest want: and therefore we do again exhort them to stand fast to the
Covenant, that neither persuasion nor terror may withdraw them from the Truth
which is now opposed, but that they lament for former sins which brings on
these calamities, turn in to the Lord and embrace the Gospel, and to rejoice
in the cross of Christ, and when the times of refreshing shall come from the
presence of the Lord, their sins shall be blotted out, and the Lord shall
return their captivity like the streams of the South.

FINIS.

