THE DECLARATION OF DIVERSE WELL-AFFECTED INhabitants of the Cities of London
and Westminster, Borrough of Southwark, Tower Hamblets, and parts adjacent.

SHOWING THEIR RESOLVTIONS TO join with the Army under the Command of his
Excellency Thomas Lord Fairfax; for the establishing of a safe and
Well-grounded Peace, with the just Rights and Privileges of the Subject.

printer's or publisher's device

December: 18 LONDON, Printed for R. Baliffe, near Temple Bar. 1648.

THE DECLARATION OF DIVERSE WELL-AFFECTED INHAbitants of the Cities of London
and Westminster, Borrough of Southward, Tower Hamblets, and parts adjacent.
THe apprehension of the sadness of these times (we conceive) may justly put us
upon doing something for our own and Posterities happiness hereafter:
especially considering that they who should have been the means of our welfare
were the chief instruments of our woe.

The Parliament at their first sitting promised us fair, and therefore it was
that we aided them to keep their power so long as they did: but now to our
sorrows we find fair promises to be but their ladder to climb to greatness
with. We all know, they are but the public servants, employed by the People
(their Masters) for the regulation of such abuses as by the age of Time are
crept into the Common wealth; and yet instead thereof they have rather sought
to bring in new Corruptions, than expel old ones: And that they might the
better effect it, they Voted and kept a Treaty with the King, that thereby
themselves might have sat in an everlasting warm feat, and having had C. R.
to their Papers, would the better have bound the Peoples hands behind them,
that so they might have been wholly incapable of acting any thing contrary to
their greatness.

But yet lest this design should not take if the present Army on foot kept up,
They Voted the Armies disbanding, before they had done the work that they
raised them for: But the Army being more wise, and seeing their Plot, refused
disbanding till things were better settled, and themselves in a capacity of
freedom and safety for what they have done, and (as they justly may) stand upon
the bargain they made with the Parliament, viz. Not only to indempnifie them
for what they have done, or granting an Act of Oblivion; but also to settle the
Kingdom and People in a well grounded Peace for present, and establish a way
for their defense, against all Tyrants and Tyranny for future.

It is easy to be believed that if the King had prevailed he would have made
good his promises to his Cavileers; for experience tells us how his Soldiers
when they got the upper hand over any place, crammed their Snap-sacks with
plunder, and put good clothes on their backs, (though contrary to Articles of
Surrender.) When as our Party when they have conquered, have not been suffered
to speak the Truth concerning the Kings illegal proceedings, without venturing
their lives to the Oath of a single Cavileer: the Laws of the Land, and
malignancy of the Judges, frequently taking place against them, in such cases.

These things we see, and considering the heavy burden the Kingdom lies under,
by Excise, Taxes, Tithes, Free Quarter, etc. We cannot but declare,

1. To join with the Army in their just proceedings against all unjust persons
whatsoever, who have betrayed the trust reposed in them, and invited in the
Scots, and raised other forces against the Kingdom.

2. That this Parliament be dissolved, before the last day of April next, 1649.
And that a constant succession of Parliaments be settled, to be chosen of course
by the people, at a fixed day every year or two as shall be thought fit: and
they be made accomptable of their Stewardship, to the next succeeding
Parliament.

3. That all Statutes, Laws, and Acts of Parliament run only in the Name of the
Commons of England assembled in Parliament.

4. That no person that has had a hand in the first or second war, be chosen,
or have a Voice in the choice of any Parliament Member, or other Officer of the
State whatsoever.

5. That no Parliament Magistrate, or other person whatsoever, have power to
make or execute any compulsive Law, touching matters of Conscience and
Religion; but that all civil people subject themselves to the Laws of the
Common wealth, though of several opinions, (not being destructive to the State)
be protected from all violence and injury.

6. That none be forced to pay Tithes; but that a more conscionable
maintenance for the public Ministry be provided.

7. That Excise upon all Inland commodity be taken off; and that no Taxes or
Cesments be levied upon the People, but by the old way of Subsidies.

8. That all Monopolies yet remaining, be forthwith abolished.

9. That all Parliament Members, Committees, Excise men, Sequestrators etc. be
called to account for the moneys of the State.

10. That all destitute Widows, and poor Orphans, which have lost their
Husbands and Parents,, and all Soldiers that have lost their limbs in the
Parliaments service, be comfortably relieved, by way of constant stipend, and
the children put to Trades.

11. That public workhouses be erected, for prevention of beggars, vagabonds,
and idle persons.

12. That a Trade of fishing upon the English coasts be settled by the State,
for the good of the Common wealth.

13. That encouragement and protection be given to such as shall prosecute any
Lawful Charge or Impeachment of Treason or other Crime against any Member in
Parliament; and that the Members in Parliament, without respect of Persons, be
dis-robed of their Protection, and left liable to the Law.

14. That the cruelties and extortion of Goalers be severely provided against;
and that for future no fees be exacted from Prisoners: but that fitting
accommodateon both for lodging and diet for them, and a sufficient competency
of livelihood for Goalers at the public cost be provided.

15. That no man be kept in Prison above a month; but in that space to be
brought to a Trial, by a lawful Jury of his equals; or else to be discharged
of course.

16. That no man be impressed to serve in the Wars.

17. That our Laws be few and plain, free from all ambiguous meanings, and all
in the English Tongue; and to be digested and Printed in a Vollume; and one to
be provided to be kept in every Church throughout the Land; and to be read
over at several appointed Times and Seasons, in open Congregation.

18. That all persons stand alike liable to the Laws of the Land, in all
cases, both criminal and civil: and that all protections by any pretended
Privilege or Prerogative whatsoever, be declared Void, and of none effect.

We having considered these things, cannot conceive our selves in safety
unless these or such like Laws be established, for a certain unalterable
Government, for the Nation to be regulated by. And therefore we do resolve with
our utmost vigor and force to oppose all such persons whatsoever that shall go
about to hinder these our just undertakings; they being so reasonable that (we
know) no rational man (that has but one drop of English blood running in his
veins) will be against them.

FINIS.

