DAYS For ever Memorable, AND WORKS OF GOD, In the Year Past. 1645. OR A
Catalogue of the Cities, Castles, Towns, and Forts, that have been taken by
the Parliaments Forces since January Last unto this present.

At the End whereof, is set down some helps and directions how we may render
unto the Lord according to all his benefits.

Imprimator, Joseph Caryl.

London, Printed for J. Bartlett. 1646.

Memorable Days and Works of God in the Year past 1645.
January the 10th
ARch- Bishop Laud be headed that Arch-Traytor to Church and State: the
Arch-enemy of Godly Ministers, and Godly people: and Arch-Incendiary of the
three kingdoms, since whose Execution (whatever the Cabinet Papers
Prognosticated) it has pleased God wonderfully to prosper our Armies.

January the 11th

Victory at Culham, near Abingdon, against Prince Rupert, S. Henry Gage slain
(the then Governor of Oxford) and many others of note. A good Check to their
new General.

U^ctory over Gerard in Pembrooke-shire: 900 slain and taken, beaten again,
at the end of this month.

January the 21th
Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX Voted our chief Commander. In the Cabinet Papers
reproached as a Brutish General, but raised and assisted of God to bring down
the wise, and mighty things. A terror to the enemy, and Object or envy to our
own, who are carnal.

Strensham House taken: and made our Garrison.

February the 22th
Partshall House taken: two Jesuits: Gentlemen.

Shrowsbury Surprised: eight Knights taken, many Officers, 15 Ordnances, 2000
Arms. A Beautiful Town, and of great consequence, to hinder the enemies
Recruits out of Wales and otherwise.

Feb. 28
Weymouth wholly retaken: 180 slain, 38 Ordnance tataken, 40 Ships, After three
weeks labor, and conflicts.

March the 12
Sir James Long taken, and his whole Regiment, four hundred horses.

Col, Holborne takes horses from Goring several times.

Likewise Sir William Waller at the Devises.

Great actions of Sir William Brereton at Chester: and Major General Brown at
Oxford.

April 14. Rebellion in Kent quickly suppressed.

Refractary-troopers there, and elsewhere, quietly and safely reduced to
obedience. A great mercy

24 Blechendon. House taken, 70 Horses 2 or 300 muskets.

Item the Queens Colors, 400 Horses, 200 prisoners 200 slain.

26 Col. Conquest taken, Major Bamfield, 3 Captains.

At Whitney 3 Colors taken, 120 Horses, 10 Officers, 27 At Bampton bush, Col.
Sir Henry Vaughan taken, 2 Li.ev Colonels, Major Lee, 5 Captains, 8 Lieut. 8.
Ensigns r3 Sergeants.

May 11.
A Plot against the lle of Ely, happily prevented.

Taunton in extremity releived, by the flight of the enemy.

A wonderful mercy, to brave people: great wealth saved. 19 Evesham stormed,
and taken: 120 Horses, 500 arms. Gaunt house taken, and made our Garrison.

June 10.
Greenhough house taken: with all the Ordnance and Ammunition.

Hougham house taken: 60 Horses: 100 Arms three Captains.

14 The Glorious Victory at Naisby: When the Lord magnified his servant
Fairfax, and gave an earnest of furher mercies. Arms taken 9000. Horses 2000:
Prisoners 4540. 12 Ordnance, Letters for discovery.

Sundry Knights, and Colonels, brought in afterward

18 Leicester regained, 14 Ordnance, 30 Colors, 2000. Arms. 500 Horses. 50
Barrels of Powder.

A great mercy. As the loss was unexpressible.

23 Castles in Shrop-shire rendered: Cause, Stoke, and Shr^warden.

28 Carlisle rendered: 20 Ordnance. 1000. Arms.

Highworth Garrison taken: 100 Arms.

Horses in diverse parts taken: 100, 60, 50, 45, 60. or 70,

July 4.
Taunton again mightily, releived.

9 Victory at Lang^art. against Goring.

10 More: Sundry Colonels taken: 2000 Prisoners: 2000 Horses: 4000 Arms:
Colors of Horse 35: of Foot 21. two great Ordnance, thirty of their Regiments
broken. A wide door of hope hereby opened, for recovering the West.

14 Buroughs Garrison taken, and other.

21. 22. Bridg-water stormed, and taken, A MightyPiece Pontefract Castle
yielded to the Parliament.

Froome Cannon taken by storm: of the Scotts.

Three small Garrisons Garrisons near Bridg-water, quitted.

23 Raby Castle surrendered to the Parliament.

Chadwick house taken by the Lyme-men, 25 Scarborough-Castle Surrendered to the
Parliament.

28 Bathe Yielded up to the Parliament 6 Ordnance. Eighty Horse of the Kings
Lifeguard taken.

Aug 3. Clubmen, Leaders taken at Shaftsbury. 51.

4 Club-men routed, 2000 Arms taken. 300 men, Uictory over Gerard. and
Haverford west taken.

Youghall releived. A great mercy. Sligo taken, 150 Horses Sundry Castles.

15 Sherlorne Castle stormed, taken and demolished, In it 16 Ordnance taken,
many Officers.

28 Portshead point taken, 6 Ordnance 200 Arms.

Sep. Carew and Mamar^y Castles taken. Nunny Castle taken.

11. Bristoll Stormed, and surrendered to the Parl. Think how great Strength,
and Wealth, and what a mercy not easily dived into. O love the Lord etc.

13 Montros Routed, and Scotland revived. A Wonder! Let the Kingdoms study
thankfulness.

23 Devizes Castle taken. 300 arms. Ordnance. And Lacock house.

Cardiffe Castle taken. 16 Ordnance. 400 arms.

And Picton Castle.

Wales begins now to awake, and grow regular.

24 The Caveliers routed at Rowtou heath. 11 Colonels taken. with other
Officers: 2000 Horses 1500: Prisoners.

26 Barkly Castle stormed, and surrendered to the Parl. And Farley Castle in
Sommersetshire.

Oct. Sandall Castle yielded to the Parl.

6 Winchester Castle yielded to the Parliament: with great provisions 7
Ordnance 700 Arms.

14 Bazing house taken by storm: with great riches and provisions The
Rendivouz of popery and wickedness.

Chepstow and its Castle taken: 17 Ordnance:

Digby and Langdale rowted at Sherboru in Yorkshire:

600 Horses taken: 5 Colonels, 3 L. Colonels, 7 Captains 18 Lankford house
delivered to the Parl.

19 Tiverton taken by storm, and strange providence: 4 ordnance 4 Majors 7
Captains: 7 Lievetenans: Carmarthen delivered to the Parl, with ordnance,
Arms, Digby and Langdale again rowted: at Carlisle sands.

24 Monmouth, and its Castle delivered to the Parliament 7 Ordnance: 300. arms:

Novem. Victory at Denbigh^ 5 or 600 Horses taken: 400 prisoners:

6 Boulton Castle delivered to the Parliamet: welbeck house flighted,

10 Werton house delivered to the Parl.

16 Beeston Castle delivered to the Parl.

Dec.7. Lathom ho se delivered to the Parl.

Dec. Fulford house in the West taken.

18 Hereford taken and in it a 11 Piece of Ordnance 200 barrels of powder and
the L. Brudenell. 14. Knights, 26. Gent.

4 Levit. Col. 1 Major, 3 Captains. Taken in from the enemy an other, Garrison
lying West of Exeter Called Callantine-house and therein 30 or 40 horse and as
many prisoners.

Taken in Skypton Castle 7 piece of ordnance 300 arms 100 horse and 4 Barrells
of powder.

December. 23-Taken from the enemy before Plymouth Canterbury work, and have also
taken St. Beudeux Churchyard that was fortified and the Church, in it 92
prisoners 2 Majors 4 Captains besides Lieutenants and Ensigns, 55 horse,
powder arms, match, and bullets good store.

Sir Charles Coote set on a party of the Irish that were coming against Slego
flew three hundred of them on the place took many prisoners, taken 13 Forts
and Castles from the enemy

Sir T. Fairfaxes forces fell on the enemies quarters in the West have taken
400 horse, 160 prisoners, and 5 colors

With many other, which time would fail to observe and illustrate. Oh for a
complete history, which would set forth Gods glory, and these Kingdoms
happiness.

And now England, what does the Lord thy God require of thee but to fear tht
Lord thy God, to walk in all his waves, and to love him, and to serve the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul- Dent. 10.12.

Means to render to the Lord according to all his benefits

I Be a receiver in the maine: by making Christ sure to thy soul so to get a
full and right title to these inferior mercyes: And this will sweeten every
benefit, and lift it up high in thy thoughts, seeing it al comes from so
heavenly a spring of love, when a soul can be thankful for Christ first, and
for other favors in him: when it sees salvation. wrought, and applied, and
so takes the cup of salvation The heart hereby is marveilously warmed and
enlarged unto thankfulness and a small mercy elevated, as a pledge of greater.
Is it not received in Christ, who is the heir of all thing ^s? Do hit not come
swimming to us in his blood? And the want hereof is one chief cause of the
great unthankfulness We see in these times: some dead and heartlesse, others
grosely p^ophaine, the love of Christ would ^ave constrained them, and been
stronger then death, to ^oe and suffer for him to the uttermost: 2 Cor. 5. r4
and Cant. 8.6.7.

2 In deep thoughts set together Gods greatness and by vileness. That such a
God should do such things for so wretched and unworthy a creature as thou
art. Man would not do so for a stranger, especially for an enemy: Only he
that is infinitely good, and free in all he does, one ^^at works for his own
sake, because mercy pleases him yea, he works with delight to do his people
good, Ps. 35.27. ^e has pleasure in the prosperity of his servants, Thus many
became so thankful, Luke 1.48. considering the Lord to be mighty, and her
self in a low estate, a heart spiritually humble is ever a thankful heart, As
man's worth goes down so Gods goodness goes up.

3 Prize and remember the mercies thou receivest, It is not the having of
mercies that makes one thankful but the esteeming and magnifying of them as
they are, many mercies grow stale by the commonnesse of them: as the Sun that
shines daily, and the Gospel which is preached plentifully, victories, and
deliverances are now adays ordinary matters herefore not duly regarded, He
that slights my kindness will scarce thank me for it, or he that forgets it,
so of God and his people, Psalm.105.5. and. 106.13.

4 Put case ye wanted such and such mercyes, which for most part are best
seen in the want of the: What mischeife would it have been, if the enemy had
prevailed at Naisby, and other places? If they had entered into so many of our
strong places, which were left? If an arbitrary Government had been erected
and thereby a perfect slavery? If popery bad been introduced, and the Gospel
banished? Sit down and think what a sad face of things would have now
appeared: remember all the way which the Lord thy God has le^ thee in these
heavy times as Deuteronomy. 8.2.

5 Pray to be able and willing to render, As thou prayest for the increase of
other graces, so pray also to be acting and exciting this gracc of
thankfulness, God, if entreated will enlarge thy heart to run the way of his
Commandments.

6 To prayer add thine own endeavor, Strive and strain to do this duty? as
David. 103.1. Bless the Lord, O my soul and all that is within more, Bless
his holy Name Bless the Lord O my soul, and forget not all his benefits.
Water comes not up without pumping: and we have dry hearts, there needs an
holy violence to be used, as Mat. 11.12.

7 There needs some thought-taking: as David, What shall I render to the Lord
for all his benefits toward me? Psalm. 116.12 God studies, to do us good and
waits to be gracious: and that by a counsel from all eternity has thoughts of
peace toward his Church, thoughts of supply of deliverance, of turning all to
good.

Finis.

