A DECLARATION FROM The several Respective Regiments in the Army, to all
Freeborn Commons within the Realm of ENGLAND.

Wherein is set forth, The Grounds and Reasons of their present Design and
Engagement; Together with their candid intentions, and real resolutions
therein, both toward King, Parliament, and Kingdom.

AS ALSO, Their Message to the Freeborn People of this Nation, concerning
their present proceedings, with their most humble desires touching the same.

APpointed to be printed and published, and sent to every respective County
within the Realm of England; By the Agents of the aforesaid Regimenss, whose
names are hereunto annexed.

London, Printed for H. E. November 5. 1647.

A Declaration from the Army, concerning a present settlement of the peace of
the Kingdom.
HAving by our late lobours and hazards made it appear to the world at how high
a rate we value our just freedom, and God having so far owned our cause, as to
deliver the Enemies thereof into our hands: We do now hold our selves bound in
mutual duty to each other, to take the best care we can for the future, to
avuid both the danger of returning into a slavish condition, and the chargeable
remedy of another war: for as it cannot be imagined that so many of our
Countrymen would have opposed us in this quarrel, if they had understood their
own good, so may we safely promise to our selves, that when our Common Rights
and liberties shall be declared, their endeavors will be disappointed, that
seek to make themselves our Masters since therefore our former oppressions, and
scarce yet ended troubles have been occasi^n^d either by want of frequent
National meeting (...) Council, or by rendering those meetings ineffectuall:
We are ^bly agreed and resolved, to provide that hereafter our Representativ be
neither le^t to an uncertainty for the time, nor made useless to the ends for
which they are intended: In order whereunto we declare,

1. That the people of England being all this day very unequally distributed by
Counties, Cities, and Burrouges for the election of their Deputies in
Parliament* ougot to be more indifferently proportioned, according to the
number of the Inhabitant^s the circumstances whereof, for number, place, and
manner, are to be set down before the end of this present Parliament.

2. That to prevent the many inconveniences apparently arising, from the long
continuance of the same persons in authority, this present Parliament be
dissolved upon the last day of September, which shall be in the year of our
Lord, 1648.

3. That the People do of course choose themselves a Parliament once in two
years, viz. upon the first Thursday in every 2d. March, after the manner as
shall be prescribed before the end of this Parliament, to begin to sit upon the
first Toursday in April following at Westminster, or such other place as shall
be appointed from time to time by the preceding Represen^atives; and to
continue till the last of September, then n xt ensuing, rnd no longer.

4. That the power of this, and all future Representatives of this Nation, is
inferior only to theirs who choose them, and does extend, withoht the consent
or concurrence of any other person or persons; to the enacting a tering, and
repealing of Laws, to the erecting and abolishing of Offices and Courts, to
the appointing, removing, and calling to account Magistrates, and Officers, of
all degrees; to the making War and peace, to the treating with foreign
States: And generally, to whatsoever is not expressly, or implyedly reserved by
the represented to themselves.

Which are as follows;

1. THat matters of Religion, and the ways of Gods Worcester, ship, are not at all
entrusted by us to any humane power-because therein we cannot remit or exceed a
tittle of what our Consciences dictate to be the mind of God, without wilful
sin: nevertheless the public way of instructing the Nation (so it be not
compulsive) is referred to their di^cretion.

2. That the matter of impre^ting and constraining any of us to serve in the
wars, is against our freedom; and therefore we do not allow it in our
Representatives; the rather, because money (the sinews of war) being always at
their disposal, they can never want numbers of men apt enough to engage in any
just cause.

3. That after the dissolution of present Parliament, no person be at any time
questioned f r any thing said or done, in reference to the late public
differences, otherwise then in execution of the Judgments of the present
Representatives, or House of Commons.

4. That in all Laws made, or to be made, every person may be bound alike, and
that no Tenure, Estate, Charter Degree, Birth, or place, do confer any
exemption from the ordinary Course of Legal proceedings, whereunto others are
subjected.

THese things we declare to be our native Rights, and therefore are agreed and
resolved to maintain t^em with our utmost possibillities, against all
opposition whatsoever, being compelled thereunto not only by the examples of
our Ancestors, whose blood was often spent in vain for the recovery of their
Freedoms, suffering themselves, through fraudulent Accommodations* to be still
d^luded of the fruit of their Victories, but also by our own woeful experience,
who having long expected, and dearly earned the establishment of these certain
rules of Government are yet made to depend for the settlement of our Peace and
freedom, upon him that intended our bondage, and crought a cruel War upon
us.

For the noble and highly honored the Freeborn People of England, in their
respective Counties and Divisions, these.
Dear Countrymen, and fellow-Commoners,
FOr your sakes, our friends, estates and lives, have not been dear to us; for
your safety and freedom we have cheerfully endured hard Labors and run most
desperate hazards, and in comparison to your peace and freedom we neither do
nor ever shall value our dearest blood and we profess, our bowels are and have
been troubled and our hearts pained within us, in seeing and considering that
you have been so long bereaved of these fruits and ends of all our labors and
hazards, we cannot but sympathize with you in your miseries and oppressions.
It Is grief and vexation of heart to us to receive your meat or moneys, whilst
you have no advantage nor yet the fouddations of your peace and freedom surely
laid: and therefore upon most serious considerations that your principal
right most essential to your wel-being is the clearness certa nty suffic^ency
and freed^m of your power in your representative in Parliament and considering
that the original of most of your oppressions and miseries has been either
from the ob^cur^ty ou^ dou^tfulnesse of the power you have committed to your
representatives in your elections, or from the want of c^u^age in those whom
you have betrusted to claim and exerci^e their power, which might propably
proceed from their uncertainty of your assistance and maintenance of their
power, and minding that for this right of yours and ours we engaged our lives,
for the King ra^sed the war against you and your Parliament, upon this ground,
that he would not suffer your representatives to provide for your peace, safety
and freedom that were then in danger, by disposing of the Militia and
otherwise, according to their trust; and for the maintenance and defense of
that power and right of yours, we hazarded all that was dear to us, and God
has born witness to the justice of our Cause. And further minding that the
only effectual means to settle a just and lasting peace, to obtain remedy for
all your grievances, and to prevent future oppressions, is the making clear and
secure the power that you betrust to your representatives in Parliament, that
they may know their trust in the faithful execution whereof you will assist
them. Upon all these grounds, we propound your joining with us in the agreement
herewith sent unto you; that by virtue thereof, we may have Parliaments
certainly called, and have the time of their sitting and ending certain, and
their power or trust clear and unquestionable, that hereafter they may remove
your burdens, and secure your rights without oppositions or instructions, and
that the foundations of your peace may be so free from uncertainty, that there
may be no grounds for future quarrels, or contentions to occasion war and
bloodshed; and we desire you would consider, that as these things wherein we
offer to agree with you are the fruits and ends of the Victories which God has
given us; so the settlement of these are the most absolute means to preserve
you and your posterity, from slavery, oppression, distraction, and trouble; by
this, those whom your selves shall choose, shall have power to restore you to,
and secure you in all your rights, and they shall be in a capacity to taste of
subjection, as well as rule, and so shall be equally concerned with your
selves, in all they do. For they must equally suffer with you under any common
burdens and partake with you in any freedoms; and by this they shall be
dis-inabled to defraud or wrong you, when the laws shall bind all alike,
without privilege or exemption; and by this your consciences shall be free
from tyranny and oppression, and those occasions of endless strifes, and
bloody wars, shall be in this Agreement, all your particular and common
grievances will be redressed forthwith without delay; the Parliament must then
make your relief and common good their only study.

Now because we are earnestly desirous of the peace and good of all our
Countrymen, even of those that have opposed us, and would to our utmost
possibility provide for perfect peace and freedom, and prevent all snites,
debates, and contentions that may happen amongst you, in relation to the late
war: we have therefore inserted it into this Agreement, that no person shall be
questionable for any thing done, in relation to the late public differences,
after the dissolution of this present Parliament, further then in execution of
their judgment; that thereby all may be secure from all sufferings ^or what
they have done, and not liable hereafter to be troubled or punished by the
judgmene of another Parliament, which may be to t^^ir ruin, unless this
Agreement be joined in, whereby any acts of indemp^ito or oblivion shall be
made unalterable, and you and your posterities be secure.

But if any shall inquire why we should desire to join in an Agreement with the
People, to declare these to be our native Rights, and not rather petition to
the Parliament for them; the reason is ^vident: No Act of Parliament is or can
he unalterable, and so cannot be sufficient security to save pou or us
harmless, from what another Parliament may determine of it should be
corrupted; and besides Parliaments are to receive the extent of their power,
and trust from those that betrust them; and therefore the people are to declare
what their power and trust is, whic is the intent of this Agreement; and its to
be observd, that though there has formerly been many Acts of Parliament, for
the calling of Parliaments every year yet you have been deprived of them and
inslaved through want of them; and therefore both necessity for your security
in these freedoms, that are assentiall to your well-being and woeful
experience of the maenifold miseries and distractions that have been lengthened
out, since the wars ended, through want of such a settlement, tequires this
Agreement, and when you and we shall be joined together therein, we shall
readily join with you, to petition the Parliament, as they are our
fellow-Commoners equally concerned, to join with us.

And if any shall inquire, why we undertake to offer this Agreement we must
profess, we are sensible that you have been so often deceived with
Declarations and Remonstrances, and fed with vain hopes that you have
fufficient reason to abandon ^ll confidence in any persons whatsoever, from
whom you have no other security of their intending your freedom, then bare
Declarations.

And therefore, as our consciences witness, that in simplicity and integrity
of heart, we have proposed lately in the Case of the Army stated, your freedom
and deliverance from slavery, oppression, and all burdens: so we desire to give
you satisfying assurance thereof by this Agreement whereby the foundations of
your freedoms provided in the Case, etc. shall be settled unalterably, and we
shall as faithfully proceed to, and all other most vigorous actings for your
good that God shall direct and enable us unto; And though the malice of our
enemies, and such as they delude, would blast us by scandals, aspersing us with
the designs of Anarchy, and community; yet we hope the righteous God will not
only by this our desire of settling an equal just Government, but also by
directing us unto all righteous undertakings, simply for public good; make our
uprightness and faithfulness to the interest of all our Countrymen, shine
forth so clearly that malice it self shall be silenced, and confounded. We
question not, but the longing expectation of a firm peace, will incite you to
the most speedy joining in this Agreement: in the prosecution whereof, or of
any thing that you shall desire for public good; you may be confident, you
shall never want the assistance of

Your most faithful fellow-Commoners, now in Arms for your service. Lieut.
Genesis Regiment. Edmond Bear Robert Everard
Com. Genesis Regiment. George Garret Thomas Beverley
Col. Fleetwoods Regimnet. William Pryor William Bryan
Col. Whalies Regiment. Matthew Weal William Russell
Col. Riches Regiment. John Dover William Hudson. Col. Riches Regiment.



This Declaration is assented to, and agreed upon by the several Respective
Regiments in the Army.



FINIS.

