THE DECLARATION AND Propositions of the Lord Mayor of London to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty and and both Houses of Parliament, concerning a Treaty for
Peace. Together with the House of Commons Answer to the said Declaration. Also
a true Information of 800. Danes landing in Lincolnshire, December. 20. And how
the Trained-Bands of rhat County gave them Battle near the Town of Lee, and
obtained a happy victory over them. Together with the Resolution of the house of
Commons concerning the Danee. Also a second Victory obtaind by Sergeant Major
Skipton and Col, Brown at Chichester December. 22. against the Kings Forces that
lie there,

December. 24. Printed for Henry Liech.

THE LORD MAJOR OF LONDON His Propositions to the Kings most excellent Majesty
at Oxford, December. 22.
THE Lord Major of London, together with diverse Citisens, having seriously
weighed and considered the present Estate and condition of this Distressed
Kingdom, occasioned by those wicked and Malignant Spirits, that are enemies to
the Commonwealth, and Adversaries to the public good, having agreed upon
certain propositions to be presented to His Majesty for a reconciliation of
these differencies between his Majesty and both Houses of Parliament, upon
Tuesday last the said Lord Mayor accompanied with diverse of the Aldermen and
Citizens went up to the House of Commons and propounded these following
propositions in the name of themselves and the whole City, it being directed to
the Lords and Commons, which propositions were to this effect:

1. They gave the Parliament hearty thanks for their unwearied pain and care
to settle the present distractions of this Kingdomc, and their several
addresses to His Majesty for the same, desiring His Majesty to come and ioyn
with his Parliament for the establishing and settling of firm peace.

Then seeing His Majesty has often declared, that he could not with safety
return to the Parliament, by reason of the tumults raised in the City, they
have drawn up a petition to his Majesty expressing their loyalty and obedience
toward him, to be as great as any of their predecessors, and they were ready
to give His Majesty all further assurance of the same if His Majesty would be
graciously pleased to come to His Parliament, etc. Which petition they also
presented to the Commons, desiring them to consider of a way how the same might
be sent unto his Majesty.

Upon Wednesday last Letrers came to the House of Commons from Lincolnshire,
intimating, That on Sunday last there was 500. Danes landed in that County;
But the Trained Bands there immediately arose, and being in number about 400.
they marched toward them, and gave them Baitell near the Town of Lee, where
they slew about 50. of them. The House of Commons have Ordered, that some good
Commanders shall be speedily sent down to oppose the said Danes.

The Parliaments Answer to the foresaid Propositions.
THese Propositions being read, the Sheriffs and Aldermen were called into the
House, who returned them great thanks for their Petitions, and then their
Petitions being communicated to the Lords, they also gave them thanks, and
promised to join with the Commons concerning the same.

The Parliaments Propositions to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty.
IT being often debated in the Lords House, concerning the framing of certain
Propositions for an Accommodation of Peace to be presented to His Majesty,
their Lordships at last having drawn up the same, desired a Conference with
the Commons, at which Conference the said propositions were read, and the
Commons desired to consider of the same; and the said propositions were to this
effect:

1. That His Majesty would be pleased to give his Royal consent to such Bills
as have already been agreed upon by both Houses of Parliam. amongst which is
the Bill for taking away all Innovations out of the Church, a Bill against
scandalous Ministers, a Bill against Pluralities a Bill for the Assembly of the
Clergy, for settling of Church Government, the Bill against Bishops, Deanes, and
Chapters, etc.

2 That His Majesty would pass a Bill for the better establishing of the
Rights, and privileges of Parliament, and the liberty of the Subject.

3 That Delinquents might be delivevered up, or left to receive such punishment
as is agreeable to the Laws of the Land, amongst which are nominated the Lord
Digby, Wilmot, and others.

4 That His Majesty would pass a (...) for the clearing of the Lord Kimbolton
a^^ the 5. Members that were accused of the House of Commons.

5 That all Ministers of State, Judg^^ and other Officers that have been
received since the difference between His Majesty and the parliament, may be
restored.

Col. Brown having sent his prisoner which he took at Winchester to Portsmouth
he and Sir W. Waller marched with these Forces to Chichester, where they met
with a great party of the Kings Army, and drawing their men into a great Field,
they began to charg each other, where they fought for the space of seven hours
very courageously, and at the last. Ser. Maj. Skipton came with 11. Troops of
Horse and fell on so courageously, that the Kings Army was put to flight, taking
prisoners and killing about 200 men with the loss of 40, And after the Fight
they possessed themselves of Arundel; and took Sir Rich. Rochford, and Mr.
Rochford prisoners.

FINIS.

