A DECLARATION From the City of LONDON WITH Instructions from the Court of
Common Council.

For the defense of the Parliament and City, against the Complotters that are
Rising, Listing, and Arming themselves by a bloody Confederacy to plunder and
massacre the famous City of LONDON.

ALSO A Message concerning Prince Charles, Read in the House of Lords; from Sir
Thomas Dishington.

And Propositions for Vindication of his Majesty, and the honor of the
Kingdom.

May. 27.1648.
Imprimatur,

Gilb. Mabbott.



Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson, in Smithfield, near the Queenes-head
Tavern, 1648.

To the Right Honorable the Earl of Manchester, Speaker of the House of
Peers, pro tempore.
My Lord,
SAturday last, the Mayor of Dover hearing that the Prince was at Sandwich,
sent an Express to the Mayor of Sandwich to know the truth: At four in the
afternoon the Message came back and (from the Mayor of Sandwich) assured him
that it was the Prince of England as he called him. The Mayor and Jurats of
Dover were very earnest with me to go to Sandwich to see the truth: I told them
it could not be, having the day before received Letters from France, that the
Prince was then still at St. Jermans, yet they pressed me so that I went, where
when I came, I found him whom they will have to be Prince. A little man, flaxen
hair, shorter then the Prince by the head, a little bowed in his Shoulders,
with hands like to a Butchers boys hands, with a narrow blew ribband about his
neck, without a George. I told the Mayor, that he was an Impostor, and a
villain: And required the Mayor (as he would be answerable to King and
Parliament,) that they would make him sure, and forth coming, for which the
Mayor (being accompanied with 20 or 30 Mariners,) came to me, the Mayor himself
seized on my sword, with their assistance took it from me, and presently
committed me to the common Jail. One Mr. Richards who knew me, offering to be
bound body for body for me, could not be heard; so to Jail I went, where I
remained till Sunday at night. On Sunday many of Dover where I am well known,
came to Sandwich to me, while yet I was in prison, and likewise out of
Cauterbury, hearing of it that morning. They went to the Mayor, and told him
what I was, and how I belonged to the Court: And they knew what I had done for
the State since the beginning of these woeful troubles, and moved them to
release me while this day. And took my word to be this day again at Sandwich:
Then I did give them 13 Queries to ask of the Impostor, which I knew, and did
know that he knew not, to let them see he was but a Frixon: Which Queries I
send to your Lordships, with the copy of their Answer, and leave the
consideration to your Lordships wisdom.

This day when I was in Sandwich, the women, and Mariners would have stoned me
in the streets, for not confessing that Rogue to be the Prince: when we got to
our Horses, they refused to let us out at Dover gate, and beat us back with
Halberts, we were forced to take us to Canterbury gate, where with much ado,
we got out.

My Lord, I do not write this at so much length to trouble your Lordship for
any particular that may concern my self, as that you may know the truth; and
have a speedy care to cause to send for this Impostor from thence, or else
doubtless it will make some miserable combustion in these quarters.

My Lord, I doubt not but in its time, that your noble house of Peers will do
me justice, and right me of the affronts and injuries that I have received, in
maintaining the unparalleled blood of our Sovereign, and the Kingdoms honor
in it.

This day I did show to the Mayor, and Jurats, some Letters that I had from
France, of the 17 of May, that the Prince was then still at St. Jermans; But it
could not prevail with the Sandwichers: Hoping that your Lordships will take
in good part the zealous affections to serve this Kingdom: And in it to show
my self,

My Lord, Your most humble and affectionate servant, Thomas Dishington.
Dov^r 22 May. 1648.
May 22. 1648.
The Queries of Sir Thomas Dishington, delivered to the Mayor of Sandwich to
be propounded to the Impostor that calls himself Prince Charles.
1 WHether ever he saw this ancient Gentlemen, when, where, and what his name?
2. When, where and what you last spoke with him, and what the last discourses
were betwixt you? 3. Whether ever he received any favor from you, where, when
and what it was? 4. What was the form of your and his last parting? 5. What
Lords you left, behind you? 6. What are the names of your bedchamber? 7. What
are the names of your querries? 8. What are the names of your footmen. 9. What
are the names of the grooms of four stable. 10. What are the names of them that
keep your Arms? 11. What were your last actions at the Court of France? 12.
When you were a hunting where did you use to eat? 13. Who is the master of
your Hounds.
Sandwich May 22. 1648
It was humbly desired by the Mayor and Jurats of Sandwich, that the Gentleman
which does now declare himself to be Prince Charles (for the clearing of all
doubts and scruples) would return his Answer: To which queries be did
absolutely refuse to give any Answer, unless it was to the fifth query. To
which he answered, that be left the Lord Hopton, but refused to name any
other, or to give further answer to any of the said queries.

A Declaration from the Court of Common Council of the City of London.
FOrasmuch as to the Court of Common Counsel of the City of London this day
assembled, as well upon the information of the Committee for the Militia of the
said City, upon examinations of diverse persons brought before them, openly read
in the said Court, (as otherwise) it did plainly and evidently appear, that
the Parliament and City is in great and imminent danger by a desperate Plot and
Design, intended and carried on by evil disposed persons against the same, in
a secret and underhand Listing of Apprentices and other persons within the
said City, and Liberties thereof, under Oath of a Covenant and Secrecy; A copy
of which Oath and Covenant (being found in the hand of some the Actors) was
there also openly read: The which persons so Listed (as was expressed in the
Examinations) were many Thousands, deluded and drawn in under specious
pretenses, and were to be under the command of several persons, who have been
Commanders and actors in the Kings Army against the Parliament; with an intent
to join with several disaffected persons in several Counties near this City,
who are by the said Plotters expected suddenly to approach in great multitudes,
and to seize the Bridge and Tower of London, and thereby to make the City their
own, and to work their wills thereupon: And to that purpose do buy up many
pocket Pistols, and Daggers, and other Arms and Ammunition for Horse and Foot.
And at the meeting of diverse Irish Papists, several Daggers were laid upon the
Altar, and by the Priest demanded if they were sharp, and by him were
sprinkled with holy Water; with an intimation, That many others would be ready
for the same purpose. All which, and many other the like dangerous Passages
(made known unto said Common Council) do threaten the like massacre as was in
Ireland, and the utter ruin and destruction of the Parliament and City, if not
timely and speedily prevented: And to the intent that the Inhabitants of this
City may have knowledge of the dangers, they are in, and be more sensible
thereof, then yet they are; And that my self, the Aldermen, and
Common-councell-men may discharge our respective duties herein; and every one
in their several places and conditions may add their endeavors for the
prevention of the said wicked Design: These are by the direction of the said
Court of Common Council to will and require you, That presently upon sight
hereof, you cause the Deputy and Common-councell-men of your Ward, with the
Constables thereof, forthwith to repair into their several Precincts, and
make known the Contents hereof unto the several Inhabitants within the same;
And to desire them to suffer their Sons, Servants, and other persons (fit to
bear Arms) not Listed in the Trained Bands, to be Listed in the Auxiliaries,
under such faithful and honest Commanders, as are and shall be appointed for
that purpose by the said Committee for the Militia, according to their late
Warrant, and to be in a readiness for the defense of themselves, the parl. and
the City, against all Tumults, Invasions, and Insurrections that may happen
within, or against the same: And for that purpose, to follow such Directions as
by the said Committee, and their several Commanders shall be given and
required; with this intimation, That every person that shall not willingly
further the said Service, will thereby give just occasion of suspicion to be
engaged in the said horrid Design: And that you certify unto Me, or some
other of the Justices of the Peace, or Committee of the Militia, the Names of
such persons as shall either oppose, or not act in the furthering of the said
Service.

And that you do cause a strict charge and command to be given to every
Inhabitant within your Ward, That they do carefully examine all their Sons and
Servants, or any other under their command, whether themselves, or any others
(to their knowledge) are within the said Design and Plot, Covenant, Listing,
and Oath of Secrecy; or what they know or have heard concerning the same: and
do make diligent search for any Weapons or Papers that may be found in the
custody of any of them touching the Premises. And that what shall be herein
discovered, be certified from time to time either to my Self, or some of the
Justices of the Peace, or unto the said Committee of the Militia. And further,
That every Householder be commanded so to order and dispose of their Sons
Servants, and others under their charge and command, as that they be not found
to be any Actors in the said desperate Design, nor so far (as shall be in
their power, by persuasion, or otherwise) any consenters thereunto, or
concealers thereof. And that you cause diligent search to be made in all Places
(whereof you shall have notice, or that you have cause to suspect) for all such
Weapons, and other Ammunition of War, and persons that you shall find, that may
discover any such Intention or Design, as is before declared: And to seize the
things, and secure the persons, and speedily to acquaint Me, the said Justices,
or the said Committee of the Milita therewith, that such order therein may be
taken, as shall be fit. And lastly, That according to former Precepts, you take
special care, that your Deputy, and Common-councell-men, and Constables do
with all diligence take care, and use their best endeavor, That all persons
within your Ward of the Trained Bands, do speedily upon the beat of the Drum
repair to their Colors: And also, That the double Watch and Ward in every
Precinct be carefully observed, and duly set and continued; and the Gates,
Chains, and Landing-places, maintained and kept from time to time, until you
receive order from Me to the contrary. And that all other things be done with
care, faithfulness, and diligence, that may conduce to the safety and
preservation of the Paliament and City; and to the preventing of this present
dangerous and horrid Plot and Design, and other dangers that are threatened and
intended against the same. And hereof fail you not, as you tender the welfare
of the Parliament and City, and will answer the contrary at your peril:

This four twentieth of May. 1648: MICHEL.

FINIS.

