A Protestants Resolution: Showing his REASONS Why He Will not be a PAPIST.

Digested into so plain a Method of Question and Answer, that an ordinary
Capacity may be able to defend the Protestant Religion, against the most
Cunning Jesuit, or Popish Priest.

Useful for these Times.

-- Be ready to render a reason of the hope that is in you, etc. 1 Pet. 3.15.
LONDON, Printed for D. Newman at the Kings Arms in the Poultrey, 1679.

A Protestants Resolution
Question.
HOw many Religions are there the World?

Ans. Principally four.

Quest. Which are they?

Ans. Pagan, Jewish, Mohammedan, Christian.


Quest. Of which of these Religions are you?

Ans. Of the Christian Religion.

Quest. How many parties lay claim to the Christian Religion?

Ans. Two principally.

(...) Which be they, and how are they (...)

(...) The Papist and the Protestant.

(...). Of which of these parties are (...)

(...) Of the Protestant.

^^est. What understand you by a Pro^^^^^^t?

Ans. One who takes part with those ^ho formerly protested against the Errors
and Corruptions of the Church of Rome.

Quest. What are those Errors?

Ans. They are very many: I am ready to give an account of some of their
principal ones.

Quest. What is the First Error?

Ans. In that they forbid the Bible to be read in the vulgar Tongue.

Quest. What is your opinion in this thing concerning the Scriptures?

Ans. The Scriptures were written for the use of the common people, and
therefore should be translated into known Tognues.

Quest. To what end?

Ans. That they may be heard, read, and understood of all.

Quest. How prove you that?

Ans. Because the Lord frequently commands the reading of the Scriptures by the
people, and solemnly charges the reading of them to the people.

Quest. Where is the Command?

Ans. Deuteronomy. 31.11. Thou shall read this law before all Israel in their hearing.
Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life.
Act. 15.21, Moses has in every city them that preach him, being read in the
Synagogue every Sabbath Day. Ephesians. 3.4, Whereby when ye read, ye may understand
my knowledge in the mystery of Christ. Col. 4.16, When this Epistle is read
among you, cause it, that it be read also in the Church of the Laodiceans, and
that ye also read the Epistle from Laodicea. 1 These. 5.27, I charge you by the
Lord that this Epistle be read unto all the holy brethren. Rev. 1.3, Blessed is
he that reads, and they that hear the words of this prophecy.

Quest. What is a Second Error of the Papists?

Ans. Their receiving unwritten Traditions, with equal respect and reverence,
as we receive the Holy Scriptures.

Quest. Wherein lies the evil of this opinion?

Ans. In this, namely, in making Traditions of men equal in dignity and
authority with the express Revelation of God.

Quest. What is your opinion in this matter?

Ans. That the Scriptures in themselves are a full, sufficient, and perfect
rule.

Quest. How prove you that?

Ans. Because it contains all things that are necessary for men to believe,
and do in order to eternal life, Isa. 8.20. To the law, and to the testimony;
if they speak not according to this world, it is because there is no light in
them. Joh. 20.31. These are written, that ye may believe, that Jesus is the
Christ the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life through his Name.
Gal. 1.8, Though we or an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel, than that
which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. Ephesians. 2.20. Built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself, being the chief
cornerstone. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17, From a child thou have known the holy
Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith,
which is in Christ Jesus: That the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished (marg. perfected) unto all good works.

Quest. What is a Third Error of the Papists?

Ans. That we are to believe the Scriptures upon the sole Authority of the
Church.

Quest. Wherein lies the evil of this opinion?

Ans. It lies in this, namely, that men being liable to mistakes, may lead me
into to errors; so that I can never be sure, that what I take as my rule, is
indeed that right one of Gods prescribing: therefore the testimony of the
Church cannot be the only or chief reason of our believing the Scripture to be
the Word of God. Ephesians. 2.20. Built upon the foundation of the prophets and
apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the chief cornerstone. 1 These. 2.13. For
this cause thank we God without ceasing, because when ye received the word of
God, which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the word of men, but (as it is
in truth) the word of God, which effectually works also in you that believe.

Quest. What then is the chief reason of our belief of the Scriptures?

Ans. The testimony of the Spirit of God, in the word it self, witnessing it to
be of God. Psalm. 119.105. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my
path. Prove. 6.23. Commandment is a lamp, and the law is light. Heb. 4.12. The
word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword;
piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the Joints and
marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. 2 Pet.
1.19, We have also a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto you do well that ye
take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawn,
and the day star arise in your hearts.

Quest. What is a fourth Error of the Papists?

Ans. In asserting the infallibility of their Pope and Church, and that every
man must submit his faith and conscience to them.

Quest. Do the Papists any where assert this?

Ans. Yes: and Bellarmine in particular lays down this position, That if the
Pope command the practice of vice, and forbid virtuous actions, the Church is
bound to believe vices to be good, and virtues to be bad, Bell. de Pontif. Romans
li. 4. cap. 5.

Quest. What is the Protestant belief in this matter?

Ans. That there is no human supreme infallible Judge in the Church of God, to
whom all Christians are obliged to submit their faith and conscience in all
matters of Religion.

Quest. How prove you that?

Ans. From three Reasons:

1. Because it is a greater authority than the Apostles did ever claim. 2 Cor.
1.24, Not, for that we have dominion over your faith, but are helpers of your
joy; for by faith ye stand.

2. Because it is contrary to Christ's command, concerning trial of Doctrine, 1
Pet. 3.15, Be ready always to give an answer to every man that asks you a
reason of the hope that is in you, 1 John 4.1, Believe not every spirit, but
try the spirits whether they are of God.

3. Because as to matter of fact, guides and teachers have caused the people to
sin in following them, Exodus 32.5, 31, When Aaron saw it, he built an Altar
before it, and Aaron made proclamation and said, To morrow is a feast to the
Lord. v. 31. And Moses returned unto the Lord, and said, Oh, this people have
sinned a great sin, and have made them gods of gold* Isa. 3.12. Oh my people,
they which lead thee, cause thee to err, and destroy the way of thy paths. Mat.
23.3. Do not ye after their works, for they say and do not.

Quest. What is a Fifth Error of the Papists?

Ans. That the Pope is Universal Head of the Church.

Quest. What is the Protestant belief in this matter?

Ans. We deny that there is any such visible Head, therefore the Pope cannot be
so.

Quest. How prove you that?

Ans. Because neither our Creed, nor the sacred Scriptures has revealed any
such thing to us.

Quest. Whom then do the Protestants affirm to be universal Head of the Church?

Ans. Jesus Christ and him only.

Quest. How prove you that?

Ans. Because the Scriptures reveal it. Psalm. 2.6, I have set my King upon my
holy hill of Sion. Ephesians. 1.22. And has put all things under his feet, and
gave him to be the head over all things to the Church.

Quest. What is a sixth Error of the Papists?

Ans. That Kings and Emperors, with their respective subjects, are at the Popes
disposal in general, and particularly that the persons and estates of the
Clergy are not under the power of the Civil Magistrate.

Quest. What is the Protestants belief?

Ans. 1. That Kings and Emperors are not properly Subjects to the Pope, nor
has the Pope any power to absolve any of their Subjects from their Allegiance.

2. That even the Clergy are subject to secular Princes, and their bodies and
estates under their government.

Quest. How prove you that?

Ans. Because they are in the number of those on whom the Scripture charge
subjection, Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. Tit.
3.1. Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers, to obey
magistrates. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 15. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man
for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as supreme, or unto governors,
as unto them that are sent by him, for the punishment of evildoers, and for
the praise of them that do well: For so is the will of God, that with
well-doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men.

Quest. What is the seventh Error of the Papists?

Ans. That the Pope of Rome is next under Christ.

Quest. What say the Protestants?

Ans. That he is Antichrist, because none have more the marks of Antichrist
than he.

Quest. How prove you that?

Ans. Because no Antichrist can do worse things than he, 2 These. 2.3, 4, 9, 10.
That day shall not come, except there come a falling away first, and that man
of sin be revealed, that son of perdition, who opposes and exalts himself
above all that is called God, or is worshipped; so that he, as God, sits in
the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God: v. 9. Even him whose coming
is after the working of Satan with all power, and signs, and lying wonders: v.
10. And with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish. Rev.
13. throughout.

Quest. What is an Eighth Error of the Papists?

Ans. That the Protestants are Heretics for separating from them.

Quest. What say the Protestants to this?

Ans. They say, that it being granted, that the Protestants did separate from
the Church of Rome, yet that they did it upon just grounds.

Quest. How do you prove that?

Ans. Because they did it for the sake of Christ, and the Purity of Religion,
for which reason they are commanded so to do, 2 Cor. 6.15, 16, 17, 18. What
concord has Christ with Belial? or what part has he that believes with an
Infidel? What agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? ye are the Temple of
the living God. Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, says
the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, and will be
a father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord
Almighty.

Quest. What was there in the Romish Religion that occasioned their separation?

Ans. In that it was a Superstitious Religion. Idolatrous Religion. Damnable
Religion. Bloody Religion. Traitorous Religion. Blind Religion. Blasphemous
Religion.


Quest. But why do yo you say their separation being granted? Do they not grant
their separation?

Ans. They need not; for the Church of Rome more properly separated from them,
than they from the Church of Rome, in that they broke off from the foundation
of the Apostles Doctrine, which the Protestants retain still, holding the head,
the Papists having separated them from their company, and cast them out for the
son of man's sake, Luke 6.22.

Quest. What is a Ninth Error of the Papists?

Ans. That the Church of Rome is the only true Church.

Quest. What say the Protestants to this?

Ans. We deny it.

Quest. Why?

Ans. Because the Roman Church agrees not with the definition of a true Church.

Quest. What is the true Church?

Ans. The true Church is an Universal Congregation, or fellowship of Gods
faithful elect people, built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets,
Jesus Christ being the chief cornerstone.

Quest. What are the marks of a true Church?

Ans. Such as these: Pure and sound Doctrine preached, the Sacraments
administered according to Christ's institution, the right use of Ecclesiastical
Discipline. John 10.4, The sheep follow him, for they know his voice. Ephesians.
5.26, -- he might sanctify, and cleanse it with the washing of water by the
word.

Quest. What is a Tenth Error of the Papists?

Ans. Their praying to Saints and Angels.

Quest. What is the Protestants opinion in this matter?

Ans. That praying to Saints and Angels, is a dangerous corrupting of holy
Worship, and abominable in the sight of God.

Quest. How prove you that?

Ans. 1. It is absurd and ridiculous.

1. They being not (...) to hear our prayers: (...) ^^^^rant of us, Is^ (...)

2. In that they cannot be sure they are all real Saints to whom they pray;
nay, we know the Pope has canonized many wicked men.

2. It has no warrant from the Word of God, but forbidden. Mat. 4.10, Him only
shall thou serve.

3. It is Idolatrous.

4. It is injurious to the Mediatory-office of Christ. 1 Timothy 2.5, There is one
God, and one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus. 1 John 2.1, If
any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.

5. Angels refuse it. Rev. 22.9. See thou do it not, for I am thy
fellow servants.

Quest. What is an Eleventh Error of the Papists?

Ans. Their Doctrine of Purgatory.

Quest. What do you understand by Purgatory?

Ans. A place wherein Saints are purged after th^^ (...) were not fully purged
(...) ^hey may enter purer into Heaven. Bellarm. de Purgat. lib. 2. cap. 6.

Quest. What is the Protestants belief concerning Purgatory?

Ans. That as there is no such place, so the belief of it is dangerous and
groundless.

Quest. How prove you that there is no such place?

Ans. From Rev. 14.13, Blessed are the dead, for they rest from their labors,
from henceforth, that dye in the Lord.

Quest. Why is it dangerous and groundless?

Ans. 1. Because there is no ground for it in Scripture.

2. Because they that belong to God can be no where afflicted, but he is
afflicted with them, Isa. 63.9, In all their affliction, he was afflicted.

3. Because it denies the fullness of Christ's satisfaction.

4. Because hereby the horrid nature of sin is lessened.

5. Because the Saints confidence and comfort is hereby impaired; the desire
that St. Paul has to be dissolved, is, that he may be with Christ, Phil. 1.23.

Quest. What is a Twelfth Error of the Papists?

Ans. That some sins are venial.

Quest. What is the Protestants belief in this point?

Ans. That no sin is in its own nature venial, but every sin is deadly, and
deserves eternal damnation, Deuteronomy. 27.26, Cursed is every one that continues
not in all things written in this law to do them. Ezekiel. 18.4, The soul that
sins, it shall die. Romans 6.23, The wages of sin is death. Jam. 2.10,
Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and offend in one point, is guilty of all.

Quest. What is a Thirteenth Error of the Papists?

Ans. Their Doctrine of Merit.

Quest. What is the Protestants opinion in this thing?

Ans. That the reward of good works is not deserved by them that receive it.

Quest. How prove you that?

Ans. 1. Because good works are rewarded merely out of mercy and grace. Psalm.
62.12, Unto thee, O Lord, belongs mercy; for thou rendrest to every man
according to his work. Romans 11.6, If by grace, then is it no more of works,
otherwise grace is no more grace: but if it be of works, then is it no more
grace, otherwise work is no more work. Tit. 3.5, Not by works of righteousness
which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us. 1 Pet. 1.13, Hope
to the end for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of
Jesus Christ.

2. Because eternal life is the gift of God. Luke 12.32, It is your Fathers
good pleasure to give you the kingdom. Romans 6.23, The gift of God is eternal
life.

3. Because Believers owe all to God, therefore can merit nothing from him.
Luke 17.10, When ye have done all that you can, say that ye are unprofitable
servants: we have done that which was our duty to do. 1 Cor. 4.7, What have
thou that thou did not receive? Now if thou did receive it, why do thou
glory as if thou had not received it? 1 Cor. 6.19, Ye are not your own. Phil.
2.13, It is God that works in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure.

Quest. What is a Fourteenth Error of the Papists?

Ans. Their works of Supererogation.

Quest. What say the Protestants to this?

Ans. That they who in their obedience attain the greatest degree, fall short
of much which in duty they are bound to do, much less can they do more, or have
any oil to spare wherewith to help others. Mat. 25.9, The wise answered, Not
so, lest there be not enough for us and you.

Quest. What is every man bound to do?

Ans. To full conformity in the whole man to the righteous law of God.

Quest. Is not this to be under the law, and not under grace?

Ans. Believers are not under the law as a Covenant of works, but as a rule of
life. Mat. 17. Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I
am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. Romans 7.12, 22, The law is holy, and
just, and good: v. 22. I delight in the law of God after the inward man.

Quest. May not Saints do more good than they have need of for themselves?

Ans. No; when you have done all that is commanded, say you are unprofitable
servants, Luke 7.10.

Quest. What is a Fifteenth Error of the Papists?

Ans. Their corrupting the Doctrine of Justification.

Quest. Wherein do they corrupt it?

Ans. They tell us we must be justified by our own righteousness, and that a
perfect righteousness within us.

Quest. What mean they by a perfect righteousness within?

Ans. Any degree of charity is their righteousness in perfection.

Quest. What is the Protestant Doctrine concerning Justification?

Ans. That Believers are justified freely by the grace of God, whereby he
accepts them as righteous only for the righteousness of Christ imputed to
them.

Quest. How prove you that?

Ans. By these Scriptures, Romans 3.24, Being justified freely by his grace
through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ. Chap. 5.8, 9. God commends
his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us:
Much more then now being justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath
through him. Chap. 10.3, They being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going
about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto
the righteousness of God. Ephesians. 1.6, 7, To the praise of the glory of his
grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the beloved: In whom we have
redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins according to the riches
of his grace.

Quest. What is a Sixteenth Error of the Papists?

Ans. Their worshipping of Images.

Quest. What is the Protestants belief?

Ans. That it is not lawful to make Images of God, nor to direct our worship to
an Image, or by the help of an Image, or to give religious worship to any
creature. Mat. 4.10, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall
thou serve. Rev. 19.10, See thou do it not, I am thy fellow servants, and of thy
brethren.

Quest. What is a Seventeenth Error of the Papists?

Ans. Their preaching and praying in an unknown tongue.

Quest. What says the Protestant?

Ans. That public prayer is not to be made in an unknown tongue, but in such a
language as is understood by the common people.

Quest. What mean you by prayer?

Ans. Confession of sin, Petition for grace, Intercession for others, and
Giving of thanks.

Quest. Why must we not pray in an unknown tongue?

Ans. Because it cannot be to edification. 1 Cor. 14.26, Let all things be done
to edifying. Ver. 16, How shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned,
say Amen at thy giving of thanks, seeing he understands not what thou say?

Quest. Why may we not preach in an unknown tongue?

Ans. 1. For the same reason, viz. because it is not to edification, and so
plainly against the word of God, 1 Cor. 14. at the beginning.

2. Because it is against the custom of the Primitive Church, to have public
Prayer, or Preaching, or Administration of the Sacraments in a tongue not
understood by the people.

3. Because the Original Tongues are not known to all the people who have right
unto, and interest in the Scriptures, and are commanded in the fear of God to
read and search them.

Quest. What is an Eighteenth Error of the Papists?

Ans. Their Doctrine of Indulgences.

Quest. What do the Papists mean by their Indulgences?

Ans. An absolution from the guilt of punishment, by the satisfactions which
are contained in the Church-treasury.

Quest. What is the Protestants belief in this matter?

Ans. That Papal Indulgences are the worst of cheats, and abominable injuries
to Christ and Christians.

Quest. How prove you that?

Ans. 1. Because there is no pardon of sin, but by the mercy of God, through
the blood of Christ. Romans 5.1, Being justified by faith, we have peace with God
through our Lord Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 1.7, In whom we have redemption through his
blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace.

2. Because there is no such thing in Scripture, that the merits of one Saint
should be able to make satisfaction for the sins of another.

3. It is most injurious to Christ, who needs not any Merits of Saints to be
added to his satisfaction; For by one offering he has perfected for ever them
that be sanctified, Heb. 10.14.

Quest. What is a Nineteenth Error of the Papists?

Ans. Their forbidding Priests to Marry.

Quest. What do they speak of marriage it self?

Ans. They do not forbid all marriage, but speak disgracefully and
contemptuously of it.

Quest. What say the Protestants in this matter?

Ans. That the Popish Doctrine forbidding to Marry, is devilish and wicked
Doctrine.

Quest. How prove you that?

Ans. 1. Because it is that which God not only allows, but in some cases
commands, making no exception of the Clergy from others. Mat. 19.11, All men
cannot receive this saying, save they to whom it is given. 1 Cor. 7.2, To avoid
fornication, let every man have his own wife. Chap. 9.5. Have we not power to
lead about a Sister, a Wife, as well as other Apostles, and as the brethren of
the Lord, and Cephas? 1 Timothy 3.2, A Bishop must be blameless, the husband of
one wife. Tit. 1.6, If any be blameless, the husband of one wife, having
faithful children. Heb. 13.4, Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed
undefiled: but whoremongers and adulterers God will judge.

2. Because it leads to much leudness and villainy, as Fornication, Adultery,
Incest, Sodomy, Murder, etc.

3. Because this Doctrine is a badg of Antichrist, 1 Timothy 4.1, 3, The spirit
speaks expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith,
giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of Devils. Ver. 3. Forbidding to
marry.

Quest. What is a Twentieth Error of the Papists?

Ans. Denying the Doctrine of Assurance.

Quest. What says the Papists of it?

Ans. That a Believers assurance of the pardon of his sin is a vain and ungodly
confidence.

Quest. What is the Protestants belief in this matter?

Ans. That it is not only our privilege that we may, but our duty to labor
after assurance that our sins are pardoned. 2 Pet. 1.10, Give diligence to make
your calling and election sure; for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall.

Quest. How does it appear to be our duty?

Ans. 1. From the nature, use, and end of the holy Scriptures, which are a good
foundation of assurance. Romans 15.4, Whatsoever things were written aforetime,
were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the
Scr^^tures might have hope.

2. From the nature of conscien^^ and its power. 1 John 3.19, 20, ^^ Hereby we
know that we are of the trut^ and shall assure our hearts before him: For if
our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart, and knows all things: If
our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God.

3. Because it has been attained by others, as Job, David, Paul, etc.

4. Because God has appointed Ordinances, that believers may have assurance.

Quest. What is an One and Twentieth Error of the Papists?

Ans. Their Doctrine of Seven Sacraments.

Quest. What is a Sacrament?

Ans. A Sacrament is an Ordinance of Christ, consisting of visible signs,
representing, sealing, and applying Christ, and the benefits of the New
Covenant to Believers.

Quest. How many Sacraments are there the New Testament?

Ans. Only two, viz. Baptism and the ^^rds Supper.

Quest. Which be those other five which ^^e Papists have added.

Ans. 1. Confirmation. 2. Extreme Unction. 3. Matrimony. 4. Holy Orders. 5.
Penance.

Quest. Why may not these five be Sacramental as well as the other two?

1. Because there are not sufficient parts in any of them to make a Sacrament.
Prove. 30.6, Add thou not unto his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be
found a liar.

2. Because there are no parts of a Sacrament in any of these, but what is
included in Baptism and the Lords Supper.

Quest. What is a Two and Twentieth Error of the Papists?

Ans. Their Doctrine of Transubstantiation.

Quest. What do they understand by Transubstantiation?

Ans. That by the Consecration of the Bread and Wine, there is made a
Conversion of the whole substance of the bread into the substance of the body
of Christ, and of the Wine into the substance of the blood of Christ.

Quest. What Scripture do they alledg for this?

Ans. Joh. 6.51, 53, 54, 55, 56.

Quest. What say the Protestants to this assertion?

Ans. 1. That Christ blessed Bread and Wine, therefore did not destroy them.

2. That it is bread and wine in the Sacrament, which Christ has commanded his
Ministers to administer, and his people to receive.

3. That the Apostle himself does no less than three times call it bread and
wine after Consecration, 1 Cor. 11.26, 27, 28.

Quest. What other reasons do the Protestants give against Transubstantiation?

Ans. 1. It takes away the great evidence of the first witnesses to
Christianity. 1 John 1, That which we have heard, which we have seen with our
eyes, which we have looked upon, etc.

2. It makes void the whole institution. 1 Cor. 11.23, 24, I have received of
the Lord, that which also I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus the same
night in which he was betrayed, took bread; and when he had given thanks, he
brake it, and said, Take eat, this is my body which is broken for you: this do
in remembrance of me.

3. It will not allow men the privilege of beasts; to judge by their senses, as
seeing, smelling, tasting, etc.

Quest. What is a Twenty-third Error of the Papists?

Ans. Their denying the use of the Cup to the people in the Sacrament.

Quest. What is the Protestants belief in this matter?

Ans. That every Communicant has an undeniable right to the blessed Cup in the
Lords Supper.

Quest. How prove you that?

Ans. 1. From the institution of this Sacrament, and our Saviors command
annexed thereunto, Matthew. 26.27, He took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it
to them, saying, Drink ye all of it.

2. From the example and appointment of the Apostles. Mark 14.23, And they all
drank of it.

3. Because without the Cup a man cannot answer the end of this Sacrament: As
often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lords death till
he come, 1 Cor. 11.26.

4. Because the same right we have to Christ's blood, we have to the Cup. Mat.
26.27, 28, He took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, drink
ye all of it: For this is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many
for the remission of sins. Luke 22.20, This cup is the New Testament in my
blood, which is shed for you. 1 Cor. 10.16, The cup of blessing which we bless,
is it not the communion of the blood of Christ?

Quest. What is the twenty-fourth Error of the Papists?

Ans. Their Doctrine of the Mass.

Quest. What do they understand by the Mass?

Ans. That which the Protestants (according to the Scripture) call the Lords
Supper, Papists call the Mass, whereby the Sacrament is made a Sacrifice, and
offered up to God, Bellar. lib. 1. de missa. cap. 1.

Quest. What say the Protestants of the Mass?

Ans. That it is a vain and Idolatrous thing, as used by them.

Quest. Why vain?

Ans. Because by Christ's Sacrifice God is sufficiently satisfied, and the
repenting-sinner fully secured. Heb. 10.12. This man after he had offered one
sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God.

Quest. Why Idolatrous?

Ans. Because they make it a mere Idol, not only worshipping it as God, but
trusting therein for salvation, as in Christ himself.

Quest. How prove you that the Mass is not the very same sacrifice with that of
Christ crucified on the Cross?

Ans. 1. God appointed Christ for a Sacrifice, but never the Mass.

2. The Mass is not of the same sort or kind with that of Christ crucified.

Quest. Wherein lies the difference?

Ans. 1. It was the sacrifice of the very body born of a Virgin, but the Mass
of a piece of bread.

2. There was shedding of blood, but the Mass is an unbloody sacrifice.

3. It had the due proportion of a man, but the Mass is a wafer.

Quest. Are there no more Errors of the Papists?

Ans. Yes, many: but these are sufficient to make the Protestant abhor their
Church and Doctrine.

Quest. Where was the Protestants Religion before Luther?

Ans. In the Bible Doctrinally, and in its fruits in the hearts and lives of
all good men.

Quest. Where were the Disciples first called Christians?

Ans. At Antioch the Disciples were first called Christians. Act. 11.26.

Quest. Then the name of Christian had not its rise from Rome?

Ans. No.

Quest. What does the name Christian put us in mind of?

Ans. It puts us in mind of what Christ has done for us, and the many
benefits we obtain from his life, death, resurrection and intercession.

Quest. What more?

Ans. It is a remembrance unto us what we should do for Christ, in gratitude of
what he has done for us.

Quest. Do not Popish Priests, Jesuits, and others that dye for Treasons and
Murders, dye like Christians?

Ans. No: True Christians at their death will give Glory to God.

Quest. Do not they give glory to God?

Ans. No: if they did, they would confess their just deserts that brings them
to that punishment.

Quest. Why do they not confess their Treasons, Murder, etc. when they come to
dye for them?

Ans. Because their Church forbids them to confess to Protestants, which they
call Heretics.

Quest. How does that appear?

Ans. In that they receive their Absolution, upon condition that they dye
concealing the Crime for which they dye.

Quest. Upon what Principle do they proceed in this?

Ans. Upon this principle, namely, That no man owes his ememy Truth.

Quest. Why so?

Ans. Because then he owes him what may be a means for his preservation.

Quest. What use do they make of this Principle?

Ans. That the Protestants being Adversaries to the Church of Rome, her Sons
owe them nothing but ruin and destruction; and the vilest of means they can use
for that end, are meritorious and glorious.

I Have not inserted the Quotations under the Five last Questions, in regard
the Authors are so numerous; if the Papists shall deny it, let the Reader
peruse what the Protestant Authors have quoted out of the Romanists own books,
and he will find that they do not only make this kind of Perjury blameless, but
necessary; breach of Oaths is no less with them than a virtue, or a necessary
duty in many cases, especially when any thing of moment is to be opposed, which
is against the Laws of the Roman Church, against that particularly of the
General Council of Lateran, under Pope Innocent the Third, which forbids all
favor to be showed to Heretics under the sorest penalties and decrees: That
favorers of Heretics are under Excommunication, if they will not break their
Oaths made in favor of Heretics; and that by the Sacred Decree of their
Church, he must be forsworn if he will not be excommunicated, and thereby
exposed to the violence of every hand (as Sir Edmondbury Godfrey was) yea one
that has taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, according to their
Doctrine, sins mortally, and puts himself into the state of damnation; not if
he takes those Oaths, (for that their Priests may dispense with) but if he
keeps them. So Pope Martin the Fifth declared in writing to Alexander Duke of
Lithuania, Know (says he) that thou sinnest mortally, if thou keep thy Oaths
with Heretics, Apud. Cochlaeum, l. 5. Hist. Hussitarium.

Hereby it appears, that no Papists can possibly give any security which may be
trusted, that Protestants shall enjoy any thing which is in their power to
deprive them of; for the greatest securities that can be given in this case,
are engagements of Faith and Truth; God being invocated for Confirmation in
solemn Oaths; but their Religion has laid such strong bonds upon them, to
break all bonds that may favor the Protestants, that it leaves no hope of
salvation to them who will not at their deaths take it upon their salvation,
the greatest untruth, if the Catholic Cause may be helped by it; for another
General Council, that of Constance, has determined, that no Faith is to be
kept with Heretics, in the 19th Session of that Assembly: that no safe Conduct
given by Emperor, King, or Secular Prince to Heretics, or any defamed for
Heretics, though with a design to reduce them, by what engagements soever they
have obliged themselves, shall hinder those Heretics from being destroyed,
though they come to the place of Judgment, relying upon such security; as in
John Husse's case by Pope John the 22d. Hereby Protestants may understand what
reason they have to trust to nothing among Papists, but what will keep them out
of their power, seeing the principles of that Religion (not private men's
opinions, but the determination of Councils) bind them to observe no Faith, or
Truth, or common honesty with those whom they account Heretics; no, not when
life is concerned, rather than a Protestant shall be safe in any of his
concerns where they can reach them: It is a virtue, a duty in their Religion,
to snap asunder all security (by which the world has hitherto been preserved)
to ruin a Heretic.

They who would see more of this at large, may read the Jesuits Morals, the
Practical Divinity of the Papists, and Mystery of Jesuitism, besides the late
instances which they have given at their Deaths, who have been executed for
Treason and Murders, denying the things for which they suffered, though proved
upon them as clear as the Sun at noonday; occasioned by the awe their Priests
have upon them; being so far led away with them, that the obedience of the
dying Proselyte is prevalent, even above his Considerations for a future estate.

This will be more apparent, if we consider, that hundreds of Irish Papists are
executed in the Kingdom of Ireland every year for Murders, Thefts, etc. and
though taken in the very fact, yet when they come to dye, usually take it upon
their Deaths, and as they must appear before the great Judge that knows all
things, that they are as innocent from the fact for which they dye, as the
Child unborn. For they having discharged their Consciences, by confessing it to
the Priests, and received his absolution, it would bring an odium on their
Religion, and would be a strengthening the hands of the Protestants, if the
Priests should suffer it. Whereas on the other side, could they persuade the
simple people to believe they dyed innocent, they hope it may lay a stain upon
that Religion which they call so often by the name of Heresy. And though those
Priests have always that regard to their Church, as to impose upon the
Prisoner, to let the world know he dies a Roman Catholic; yet he has also
much care of the Man, that he must not desire the Prayers of any but Papists.

These things being so usual among them, any considerate man will easily judge,
without breach of charity, upon what ground such men are seduced to commit a
sin, and then outface the truth of the matter of fact, even in the face of
Death.

BEcause the Papists shall not say, the charge I give their Religion under the
Eighth Error is groundless, I shall instance in particular; And,

1. I say it is a Superstitious Religion.

It were innumerable to account the many vain fopperies in their Devotions,
which they place Religion in: as the Tooth of St. Christopher. The Hair of St.
Peter's Beard. The shift that came off the back of the Virgin Mary; and the Dust
and Vermin which they keep of some Saints. Valla a great person of Learning
and Eminency among them, says, There are ten thousand such things in Rome; if
the Host fall to the ground, it must be licked up, the ground is to be scraped,
and the scrapings reduced to ashes, is to have place among their Relics.

Add to this their Holy Water, their salt, their spittle, their Holy Oil, their
Beads, Whippings, Fish-days, Pilgrimages, Nunneries, Crossing themselves,
Baptizing of Bells, Fonts, etc. So that the great Erasmus in his Annotations,
approved by Pope Leo the Tenth, says, Their whole Religion is almost brought
to their superstitious treatment of Relics, through the covetousness of
Priests, and the Hypocrisy of Monks, fed by the foolishness of the people.

2. It Is an Idolatrous Religion.

In invocating Saints, adoring the Host, and worshipping Images: Their
worshipping of Relics, giving Religious Worship to such things as they do but
fancy to be Relics; and not only when they are whole and sound, but when they
are corrupted, and reduced to dust, or nothing else left of them, but the
Vermin bred in them. Henricus, one of the School Doctors concludes, That the
Relics in the form of dust and ashes, may and ought to be adored, but not
under the form of Vermin, and gives some reason for it. But their great Vasquez
rejects this scruple, and the ground of it as vain and frivolous, and concludes
they may be worshipped, as well when they are Vermin, as when they are ashes.
Besides their Angel-worship, Image Worship, and Saint-worship,

3. It Is a Damnable Religion.

In that it overthrows the very foundation of Christianity; their Doctrine of
Transubstantiation overthrows the Truth of Christ's humane Nature; their proper
Sacrifice, his only Sacrifice for sin offered once for all; their Doctrine of
Merits, for his Merits; the multitude of Mediators among them, deny that only
Mediator betwixt God and Man, the man Jesus Christ: Their Sacrificing-Priests
overthrow Christ's Priestly office; Their villifying the Scriptures, and setting
up their unwritten Traditions to be received with equal reverence with them,
overthrows Christ's Prophetical office.

The great Article of forgiveness of sins and free justification through the
Grace of God in Jesus Christ, is overthrown by their Doctrine of Merit,
Pardons, Indulgences, etc.

4. It Is a Bloody Religion, wherein Papal- Rome exceeds Heathen- Rome.

Witness the horrid Murders and Massacres of the poor Waldenses, who have been
persecuted with Fire and Sword, Armies and Inquisitions, and very many
Thousands (nay infinite numbers) of them have been inhumanely murdered.

That Barbarous and prodigious Villainy, and great Massacre of Protestants in
France, Anno 1572, where about 30 or 40000 innocent Protestants in Paris, and
other parts of France, were suddenly and inhumanely murdered by Papists.

Witness Spains Invincible Armada, in Anno 1588, when Romes force threatened to
swallow us up. Witness the Gunpowder Treason, a black and unparalled
villainy, worthy Rome and a Jesuit; the blowing up of a whole Parliament, King,
Lords and Commons, the murdering a Kingdom in its Representatives, and this in
a moment!

After that, their bloody Rebellion in Ireland, where they murdered a Hundred
thousand Protestants in cold blood, without any provocation given, but to kill
Heretics.

Add to this their bloody Traitorous design of late against His Majesty Person,
the Government, and the Protestant Religion; a Conspiracy, had it taken, might
have turned England into an Aceldama, a Field of Blood, or Shambles of Popish
Butchers. -- These things considered, I hope no man will be so mad to kiss the
Popes Toe, until his Nails be pared, so as he will not scratch, and make the
blood run about the mouths of Christendom.

5. It Is a Traitorous Religion.

For they teach, that the Pope may depose the Emperor, or a King not subject to
the Emperor; that the Pope may lawfully absolve subjects from their Oath of
Allegiance.

That subjects, if they have the Popes consent (which they are sure to have, if
it makes for his interest), may depose their Kings. That if the King be a
manifest Heretic, (as all Protestants are, with them) then the Church may
depose him.

Nor have they been wanting to put this their principle into practice, so often
as they could find occasion: as their attempts on Queen Elizabeth, by poison,
Pistol, Dagger: on King James, by Powder Treason: on King Charles the First;
and on our King, to whom God grant a long and happy Reign.

Nor have we only instances at home, but abroad; the Murder of Henry the 4th of
France, and many others; but above all, the unparalled Murder of that
Emperor, whom they poisoned with the Sacrament; I call it unparalled, having
never met with a Religion before that would poison their God to kill their
Emperor.

6. It Is a Blind Religion.

It leads men out of the way of salvation; it hides the danger of damnation (to
all who have not their hearts thoroughly changed from the love of sin, to the
love of God and Holiness), from their eyes; it covers the pit (whose descent is
into that which is bottomless,) with Spiders webs, and persuades them it is
firm-ground; it leaves them no sense no^ notice of many sins, no conscience of
the most, no fear of any, no, not of the worst, such as themselves call deadly
crimes; it gives as much security to such wickedness, as a heart that has sold
it self to it, need wish for: it keeps the Bible, the Law of the Lord, which
good men make a light to their feet, a lanthorn to their paths, away from them;
it will not suffer men to believe their senses, or act their reason, nor bottom
their faith upon the Scriptures. That, as that General first blinded the men,
then led them into the Enemies quarters, so do they; and all the answer you
shall have from the common sort among them, is this, They believe as the Priest
bids them; and if he deceive them, the Devil take him.

And as their faith is, such is their Devotion; the matter of their Prayers is
locked up from them, and they as little concerned to know what becomes of them;
sure, if the blind lead the blind, they must both fall into the ditch.

Lastly, It Is a Blasphemous Religion.

In ascribing the peculiar Excellencies of the Divine Majesty, and the
Prerogatives of our Lord Jesus Christ, to the blessed Virgin, and other
creatures, and to their Popes (though diverse of them, as themselves acknowledge,
were Monsters and Incarnate Devils.)

When one Phocas took the Emperor Maurice and his family, Prisoners, who was
his lawful Sovereign, and having slain his Wife and Children before his eyes,
not sparing the little Innocent which hung at the Breasts, did afterward cause
his Master's Throat to be cut likewise; a Proceduce so black and barbarous,
that Historians cannot mention it without horror.

Yet Pope Gregory congratulates this bloody Treason with abominable
Blasphemies, and begins his Address to this Phocas in his 36 Epistle, with
Gloria in Excelsis, the Song of the Angels at the Nativity of our Savior,
Glory be to God on high; and then proceeds, Let the Heavens send forth
acclamations, the Earth leap for joy, and let all the people be glad thereof.

The Jesuits frequently teach, that Jesus Christ might have sinned, might have
been subject unto vices, might have fallen into error and folly; and that it is
no more repugnant to him to err, or to speak a thing false in it self by the
nature he has assumed, than to be tormented and dye in the same nature: so
Amicus, so Vasquez, and many more of them.

No other sort of Heretics, (not excepting Turk, Jew, nor Pagan, no, not those
of Calcute, who adore the Devil), did ever maintain by the Grounds of their
Religion, that it was lawful, or rather meritorious (as the Romish Catholics
calls it) to murder Princes or people for the quarrel of Religion; and
although particular men of all professions of Religion have been, some Thieves,
some Murderers, some Traitors; yet ever when they came to their end and just
punishment, they confessed their fault to be in their nature, and not in their
profession. But these persons cleave to it at their deaths as zealously, as if
all they had been doing were the immediate guidance of the blessed Spirit. Such
is their blasphemy!

A Protestant Fathers Letter of Advice to his Son, in danger of being seduced
to Popery.
SON,
BY a Letter last Week from your Uncle, I am to my grief informed, that you
have lately fallen into the unhappy Acquaintance of some Popish Emissaries, and
are in danger of being inveigled by them, to revolt from the Protestant Church,
to that of Rome. I confess the news much surpised me, and I cannot but esteem
it an essential part of my Fatherly care to admonish and warn you, both of the
unreasonableness and danger of such a change. I do not much admire, that those
that have been always conversant in darkness, should find their eyes offended
with the Light; which makes me extend very charitable thoughts to poor Souls
trained up in Papal ignorance, laboring under the almost invincible prejudices
of corrupted Education and Erroneous Principles; but that you, born and brought
up in a Gospel- Meridian, and (as I well hoped) understandingly grounded in the
Protestant Doctrine, should now stagger in those important Truths, and be
gulled and cheated out of the Religion sealed with the Blood of your Martyred
Ancestors, and hazard your Soul by a Relaps to that long since exploded
Faction, and their slavish as well as ridiculous superstitions, is matter of no
less wonder than trouble to me; the rather, for that I am satisfied, your
circumstances admit not of any temptations of profit or honor to engage you to
their party; and without those allurements, I profess you are the first that my
experience can remember in danger of such a shameful Apostasy.

I shall not swell this Paper with a particular Examen of all the Romish
Errors; that task has been sufficiently and unanswerably performed by
multitudes of our Learned Writers, to whom I refer you, and charge you to weigh
their Arguments seriously, before you suffer your Judgment to be debauched to a
contrary persuasion; but because I have some hopes your duty and filial respect
may oblige you to a more near and sensible regard of what is said (though
briefly and weakly) by my self, (that can have no design but the good of your
Soul) than to the abler reasonings of others more remote; I shall offer some
general Considerations, which methinks should deter you from casting away your
self in their communion.

First then, I do affirm to you, That to body of the Popish Religion (so far as
it differs from the Protestant) is composed (notwithstanding all their
pretenses to Antiquity) of strange Doctrines, Innovations and Abuses, never
instituted by Christ, nor warrantable by Holy Scripture, nor known nor
practiced in the Primitive Church, but introduced at several times in latter
Ages, merely to serve the pride, or the vanity, the covetousness, or the
sensuality of the Inventors.

2. That their Doctrines interfere with, and infringe the Greatness and
Sovereignty of God, and tend to the diminishing the honor and service due to
him; witness their dividing adoration betwixt him and Images, Invocation
betwixt him and Saints, and absolute obedience betwixt him and the Church, etc.
Now what gross and horrible sacrilege is this? What is it less than to divest
him of his Royalty, and give his glory to another?

3. Their Doctrines tend to the dethroning of Christ, the disparaging his
performances, and lessening the Glory and Praise belonging to him; witness
their dividing the Sovereignty and Headship betwixt him and the Pope;
Satisfaction betwixt his Sufferings and their own Merits; and Intercession
betwixt him and Saints.

4. Their Doctrines are against the power of Godliness, and rob God of his
prime Sacrifice, the Heart; witness their Tenets, that the Opus operatum is
enough, their prayers in an unknown tongue, and their assigning to God chiefly
external superficial Service, consisting in a rabble of empty childish Rites,
and gaudy Ceremonies, thereby taking from him the nobler part of his Creature,
without which the Services or Emasserations of the body, how splendid or severe
soever, are no more pleasing to him than the noisome evaporations of a Putrid
Carcass to us.

5. Their Doctrines tend not only thus to formality and lukewarmness, but to
open profaneness and dissolute living; witness their notion of Venial sins,
their Pardons, Absolutions, Indulgences, Dispensations, etc. It being
observable, that the most ignorant and careless, or the most wicked and
debauched, make up the greatest part of their Proselytes; nor is it strange,
since false Principles and bad Lives (like Ice and Water) mutually begat each
other.

6. Their Doctrines are absurd.

1. Witness their fancy of the Popes Infallibility; you can scarce cast your
eye on any story where the Villainy of Popes is not at large discovered; and who
can believe that the pure Spirit of God should endow with Infallibility of
judgment, Monsters so visibly fulsome and abominable! We find that the Holy
Ghost did under the Law hate and forbid all Impurities, though in mere outward
Circumstances; how then should he under the brighter light of the Gospel suffer
himself to be poured out of one unclean vessel into another, beginning again
with a Conjurer, where he left with a Sodomite.

2. Witness likewise the Prayer for the dead; a practice (if I may use so light
a comparison) altogether as vain and impertinent as that of Bowlers,
strenuously crying out rub or fly, after they have delivered their Cast.

3. Witness too their Darling whimsie of the corporal Presence, attended with a
numerous train of contradictions and incongruities; they say it is a Sacrament
(or sign), and can it be at once both the sign and thing signified? If it be
Christ's body really, how is it sacramentally? If sacramentally, how really and
corporally? They say there is no real and corporal Presence till the Priest
repeat the words; and if so, then the creature (and oftentimes a sad one) makes
his Creator; and in receiving the Creator is comprehended by the Creature;
absurdities nothing short of Blasphemy; when our Savior instituted the Supper,
and said, Take eat, etc. was the Bread and Wine, both the giver and the gift,
the body blessing, and the body blessed? did the same body hold the same body in
its own Fingers? Was it eaten in pieces by every one of the Disciples, and yet
then all whole without them all? Mysteries of Religion may be above, but never
so directly against reason; and seriously I admire any man of sense can be a
Papist, when the chief demonstration of his Religion must be his not
understanding it.

4. Their Doctrines are dangerous to the Temporal estate and just rights of
Princes; witness their Usurpations over (not to say Assassinations of) Kings,
disposing of Crowns, absolving subjects from their Allegiance, etc. For in
short, the whole Romish Hierarchy is so far from being suited within the order
of the Gospel, that the main design of their Popes, Cardinals, Jesuits and
Friars of many sorts (esteemed of the Religious Tribe) is but to advance
themselves above all that is called God, and to gratify their base lusts,
instead of pleasing of him.

Directions how you may keep your self from being a Papist.
1. STudy to have right notions and due apprehensions of the matter, import,
and chief design of the Gospel: be not a stranger to the knowledge of God in
Jesus Christ, and the blessed Spirit. Acquaint your self with the mystery of
the Gospel, as it lies in the Person, Natures, Offices, Life and Death of the
Lord Redeemer. Let the Scriptures be your constant Counselor; without knowledge
the heart cannot be good; and a bad heart is prepared to suck in bad
Principles: It Is not for nothing the Papists make Ignorance the Mother of their
Devotion; they that have truly learnt Christ and the Gospel, will hardly be
taught by Romes Schoolmasters.

2. Study a sound and through Conversion: I never yet knew any man blessed with a
broken and contrite heart (that is, a heart broken for sin, and a heart broken
off from sin) that ever was taken with their Relligion.

3. Get a faithful and a tender conscience; I say faithful, for then it will
not be satisfied with dross instead of Gold, with paint instead of true and
sound Piety. A faithful conscience will inform you, that God is a Spirit; and
the more spiritual we are in our Devotions, the more we please him: that it is
not a pompous, but a pure worship that he is delighted in: And as to expiation
of our guilt, nothing but the blood of Christ can take away sin; that it is not
their blind penances, pilgrimages, crossings, cringings, will answer the great
end of our Redemption; but a heart devoted to his fear and love, and a mind
fully set upon him.

4. Be well acquainted with the plague of your own heart, the nature of
Original sin, how it has defiled and weakened all the powers of the soul. This
will let you see the necessity there is for the blessed Spirit to heal and help
those spiritual distempers; that without him ye can do nothing; that it is he
that works in you both to will and to do.

5. Look upon Superstition as a fruit of the flesh; and that nothing is more
grateful to flesh and blood, than Idolatry and formality; they that know what
proneness there is in the nature of man to a carnal, sensual, vain Religion,
will not think it strange that the Papists have foisted in so many fulsome
things into their Worship, to comply with the carnal humors of men.

6. Be much in the duty of Mortification, and that will acquaint you with the
way, means, and manner of it; it is through the Spirit Believers come to mortify
the deeds of the Flesh; at best the Popish Penances, can but pen up sin, but
the next temptation will break the hedge: Whereas the blessed Spirit lays his
strong hand upon the irritating power of indwelling sin, and thereby subjects
the heart unto himself; he heals the pollution of our nature, renews us in the
spirit of our minds, cleanses our affections, and thereby causes us who
formerly delighted in flesh pleasing vanities, to delight our selves in him,
his word, will, way, etc.

7. Know the mischief of Idolatry. The setting your self against heart-Idols,
will keep you from Idol-worship; you know who tells us expressly, I will not
give my praise to graven Images. Remember how smartly the Jews suffered for
this sin, and yet had not such a spiritual dispensation as we that are under
the Gospel; if it be so dangerous to shape Idea's of God in our Fancies and
Imaginations, though never so much raised in our invention, how dangerous must
it be to be in a place where such Images are found in Wood and Cloth.

Lastly, Allow your self in no known sin. It Is the conscience being made
deceitful through such deceitful works, that makes people forward to cover
themselves with those figments of Popery; whereas the man that makes it his due
care and conscience to keep himself unspotted from allowed evil, is the
likeliest man to save himself from such an untoward generation of men, as would
put such a yoke on us, as we nor our Fathers were not able to bear.

Your careful Father L. D.

FINIS.
The two following Books are ne^^^ Printed for, and Sold by Do^^^^^ Newman at
the Kings A^^^^ (...) the Poultrey.
LIfe in Gods favor: A (...) discourse in Death-Th^^^ (...) times: being the
substance (...) Sermons upon Psalm 30.5. In (...) is Life. By O. Heywood,
Minis^^^ (...) Gospel.

Twenty Sermons Preached (...) ^^veral Texts, by that late Reve^^^^ (...) ^^ous
and painful Preacher, Mr. (...) Nalton, Minister of St. Leonard (...) lane, in
the City of London.

Published for public good.


