THE DECLARATION AND RESOLUTION OF The Irish Army under the Conduct and Command
OF General Oneale, Concerning Lieut General CRUMWEL,

AND The Forces which are to be sent over from England; Sent by an Express
from the City of Dublin, to the English Merchants.

WITH Prince Ruperts imperious Message, concerning the Prince, and the Crown of
England. And the Lord Inchiquins Resolution touching the same.

London Printed for R. W. and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill, April 16. 1649.

THE RESOLUTION Of the Irish Army concerning Lieut. Genesis CROMWELL
Touching His advance into that Kingdom: Sent by an Express from the City of
Dublin, to several Merchants within the City of London.
BY an Express from the City of Dublin to several Merchants residing here, it
is advertized; That the Marquess of Ormond, General Preston, the Earl of
Clanaickerd, and the rest of the Irish confederates; have no considerable field
army, and the several Factions break out into high Differences; by reason of
the falling off of the Lord Inchiquin, and General Owen Roe, who are resolved
not to fight against Lieut*, General Crumwell, and the English army, which
has occasioned Prince Rupert to represent a letter to the said Lord Inchiquin,
which was to this effect, viz.

That He desires him to use his utmost endeavors, for the propagating of the
present work in hand, in relation to the investing of his sac^ed Majesty (as he
is pleased to call the young titular King, Charles the second) in all on his
English, Irish, and Scottish Throne, and to endeavor the restoration of him
to its just Rights and Dignities, etc.

But his Lordship returned this answer, That he was resolved to desist from any
further engagement against the parliament of England, or to be any ways
isntrumental, for the involving of bleeding England and Ireland, in another
bloody and domestique War; and that for the more apparent acquitting himself of
that inhuman crime he declared that he was res^lved to sacrifice both life and
fortunes, against all opposition whatsoever, that should endeavor the
obstruction of the peace and tranquillity of that Nation.

Insomuch, that the difference between prince Rupert and his Lordship
increases, and the breach is like to grow wider before there can be any
composure or reconciliation. For Genesis Owen Roe is likewise fallen into a
discontented against the Marq. of Ormond, who upon mature deliberation, in
reference to his proceedings, and of the English Forces to be sent over, under
the conduct and command of Lieut. General Crumwell, the said Owen Roe called a
Council of Officers, and after some time spent in debate of the present
transaction of affairs, it was resolved by the Council, That two Letter
should be forthwith drawn up, the one to be communicated to the parliament of
England, the other to Colonel Jones, intimating. That if they will not molest,
or cause to be molested, any of the Forces under his immediate command, in
their quarters during the time prefixed for their residence in that kingdom,
that then he will not iagage against any of their Forces, neither will he give
any assistance to the Marquess of Ormond, Preston, or any other parties who
shall engage against them, provided, that they will not any ways trouble his
quarters, upon the advance of the English Army over, during the time of his
residence as aforesaid.

2 That he may have safe passage into Spain with such forces as shall be
designed for that Kingdom, etc.

By which means and revolt, diverse begin to decline from engagement, and to
desert the prince; so that it is hoped that Nation will soon be reduced to the
power and obedience of parliament, and a period put to her languishing ane
bleeding condition. Ormond is in a very sad condition, and dare not take the
field, his men moulter away apace.

The Expedition, the Tiger, and another of the Parliaments ships are got to
Ayrs point within a few leagus of Leverpool, to secure the Coast of Ireland on
that side. We hear of some action at Sea, between the two Navies, which speaks
the parliament Victors, and that they have sunk and taken 9 of the princes
ships: for the further particulars whereof, I shall refer you to my next.

Bristol 9 April 1649.
SIR,
SInce my last of the sevent of this instant, we have received certain
information of the further proceedings of the Princes Fleet, and that they have
divided the Navy into three Squadrons; the first commanded by Prince Rupert,
who is to guard the Irish Seas and to attend the motion of Col. Jores Governor
of the City of Dublin for the Parliament of England; the second, by Prince
Maurice, who with 20 Sail is to attend the motion of Captain Moulton in the
Western Riding; the third by Captain Jerden, designed for the Lands-End, to
attend the motion and coming out of the parliaments Summers Fleet; all which,
bough numerous in shipping, yet weakly manned, and dare not engage, unless with
great advantage, the Seamon begin to moulter in their affections, and show a
great dislike of the proceedings of their Officers; for diverse who have escaped
at their coming into Creekes, do declare, That they begin to languish for their
late perfidious Revolt* and would fain make a recantation* and that if once
they could have the opportunity to come ashore, are unanimously resolved to
desert the princes service: however if they cannot purchase their liberty one
way, they are resolved to saciliate it another and that upon a near Engagement
with the Parliaments Fleet, it is believed they will take the same resolution
as the Land Soldiers have formerly done and (upon good articles and
conditions) deliver up their Officers to mercy, etc.

Some action has lately happened between diverse Merchants* and prince Maurice
his ships, and much hurt done on both sides; but after some dispute, and
several boardings, the Victory fell to the Merchant Men of War, who sunk two
of the revolted ships, wherein was 50 piece of Ordnance, and chased the rest
above seven Leagues, but by reason of a storm* they were forced to desist from
further pursuit, and to leave them to the mercy of the raging Billows.

These ships are said to be bound for London, Ly^ and Yarmouth, who hold
conjunction together for the safety and preservation of their Marchan^ize.

Since which time we have received other joyful intelligence from the
Mauri^ian Fleet; and it is likewise confirmed by two men of War who last ^ight
cast anchor in this Harbor: they purport, that upon their crossing the Western
Channel, they w^^^ set upon by six of the princes ships, who gave them (...)
broad sides, but were answered again with another Volley from the Sons of Mars,
and after a hot conflict, (...) came vict^orious, killing many of their men
^ing the rest, some taking their pursuit without a Mast others without a stern,
and their Sayls (...). But by reason of the distempers of the Sea, and the
dangerous breaches they had received from the Enemies round shot, were forced
to strike in here for refuge, for the repairing and new rigging of their ships.
Those who have been in action with them, report them to be as cowardly an
Enemy, as ever engaged upon the Neptune Seas, and that 30 of the parliaments
ships well manned, will (in all probability) soon expel the fury of 60 of theirs.

We hear that Capt. Moulton is in a defensive posture, and that he sails
sometimes within sight of the princes Fleet, but declines engagement at present.

We likewise hear of a great insurrection arising in prince Ruperts Squadron,
the manner thus: two Seaman speaking some words touching the unjustnesse of
their cause, and the unlawfulness of their engagement, being over heard, were
brought before the prince, and (according to Martial Law) were adjudged to die*
and to be hanged up at the main Mast, but the Seamen hearing thereof,
unanimously rescued him from the power of the Marshal; other Captains were
summoned, to see the princes tyranny performed, but their Mariners likewise
jointly resolved not to execute the same.

Bristoll 7. April, 1949. Major Genesis Laughorn, Col. Poyer and Powell, are
adludged by a Council of War to die, and have received Sentence to be shot to
death. Whereupon Mrs. Laughorn, wife to Major Genesis Laughorn, presented a
petition to the Court Marshal, imploring their mercy to her husband, and that
this one unadvised act of his might not cause all his former eminent services
to be forgotten; and being the last that engaged in this unfortunate action, it
is supposed, that if the Sentence of any be remitted, he will be spared.



Imprimatur,

THEO: JENNINGS.

FINIS.

