A DECLARATION Against A late dangerous and seditious BAND, under the name of
An humble Remonstrance, etc.

Wherein The Plots and Projects of the Contrivers Tending to the Violating and
subversion of our Covenants; Raising and fomenting of Jealousies, within this,
and between both Kingdoms; Prolonging of the unnatural Wars; And, Impeding the
intended Uniformity in RELIGION, Are discovered, By the Commission of the
General Assembly.

Printed at Edinburgh by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. 1646.

Edinb. Penult. Martii 1646.
THe Commissioners of the General Assembly Do Ordain this Declaration to be
forthwith Printed and published, and sent to Presbyteries with all diligence:
Requiring each Presbytery immediately after the receipt thereof, to take speedy
course for the reading of it in every congregation within their bounds upon the
Lords day after the Forenoon Sermon and before the Blessing; And that they
report account of their diligence herein with the first conveniencie.

A. Ker.

Edinb. Penult. Martii 1646. A DECLARATION against a late dangerous and
seditious Band, under the name of An humble Remonstrance, etc.
WHen we consider the usual way of Gods wise dispensation toward his people,
in exercising them with one trouble after another, and call to mind the
inveterate malice of Satan and his instruments, and their incessant practices
to pervert the straight ways of the Lord; We do not think it strange, while we
are still wrestling with former difficulties, and under hope of prevailing by
the mighty help of Gods right hand, that we are infested with new assaults,
from which he who has delivered us from so great troubles, and does deliver
us, in him we trust that he will deliver us: Yet perceiving by a Paper come to
our hands, carrying the Title of An humble Remonstrance, etc. the endeavors of
some to deceive the simple, and to insinuate wicked counsels and courses under
the cover of specious pretenses, We judge our selves obliged, out of
conscience of the trust committed unto us, according to the constant and
commendable practice of the Commissioners of the General Assembly in the like
exigences, To unmask the face of disguised impiety, to discover the mystery of
Iniquity, and to bring to light the hidden things of dishonesty, that they who
through ignorance or inadvertencie have been drawn away into the error of the
wicked, may be reduced, the simple preserved from seduction, the weak
strengthened, the strong confirmed, and the wicked, if possible, made ashamed
of their ways.

It is ordinary in the Title of Remonstrances, to design the persons to whom
they are directed, but this does altogether abstain from all designation of
that kind, though the Remonstrants knew that there were Judicatories both Civil
and Ecclesiastical appointed by Parliament and General Assembly, to whose
consideration belonged matters of such public concernment for Kirk and State;
whereby they evidence their neglect and contempt of these, and their wariness
to offend them who are in open Rebellion, unto whom it is likely they labor to
apply themselves; since there is nothing in the whole Paper excluding them, but
by the contrary clear insinuations of their desire and design to have them
partakers of the public Peace.

The flourish of the fair description they arrogate to themselves, as being
such who wish Religion to flourish, etc. is not sufficient to free them from
the society of those who by their barbarous and bloody courses have bin
subverting Religion, and the Kings lawful authority, destroying the Subjects
and their lawful Liberties, and fomenting the unhappy differences between the
King and his people; for James Grahame himself is a pretender to all these as
well as they: And we know that some, who are prime Leaders in the business,
had not only their hand at that Band which did make the first breach upon the
Unity made by our National Covenant, and was condemned as unlawful by the
General Assembly holden at Edinburgh 1641. Sess. 17. But also after the
forfeiture and Excommunication of the before-named Traitor, did in the year
1645 subscribe a Band of Union with him and others, as his Majesty's faithful
Subjects, without mention of, or relation to any of the Covenants, whether
National, or of the three Kingdoms; wherein the power and Commission granted
to the said James Grahame, there designed James Marquess of Montrose, his
Majesty's Lieutenant-Generall, is acknowledged and approven; and the public
resolutions of Kirk and Kingdom are blasphemed, as the horrid courses of a
Rebellious faction raging within this Kingdom, as most wicked and Traitorous,
unjust and unnatural, and as of a perverse faction of desperate Rebels, in
fury against the King; Oblieging themselves to use all their best and most
vigorous opposition against the Actors and Instruments thereof, as of
abominable and monstrous crimes, and mutually to assist one another, as they
shall be desired, or the occasion require. Which are enough to render their
by-ways hateful to the well-affected, though they be strawed with the
pretenses of Piety and public good.

Because the National Assembly has found and declared, that the Band
forementioned, and all Bands of that and the like nature, may not lawfully be
made: And the Estates of Parliament Parl. 3. of King Charles, Act 4. finds
that persons guilty of taking up Arms against the Kingdom and Estates of the
Country, are punishable by forfeiture of Life, lands, goods, or any other
censure the Parliament shall please to inflict. These Remonstrants, lest people
should be scarred from accession to their combination, by the authority of
Parliament and General Assembly, have labored to cover the nature of this
Paper, under the name of An humble Remonstrance; which nevertheles is so
transparent, that every ordinary eye may see it in the end, a Band oblieging
them each to others, and that by an Oath, To hazard Lives and Fortunes against
all deadly for performing all the contents; whereby the Subscribers thereof
become liable to the censures and punishments which the Kirk and State may
inflict upon them for unlawful Banding and raising Arms against the Kingdom.

Although they mention the National Covenant, and declare their resolution of
paying the debt they owe to the individuals (which we conceive to be the
particulars, or several Articles) therein contained; yet we cannot but
affirm, that their charity is too too common who believe at all their
deceitful profession, since the whole strain of their Remonstrance is an
evident Demonstration of their monstrous defection. For, 1. Their altering of
the words of the Covenant, argues their purpose to swerve from the true meaning
of it. The Covenant binds to the defense of the Doctrine and Discipline of
this Kirk; they say they purpose to do what may most tend for the propagation
of the Protestant Religion in purity, a phrase used in the Kings Declarations,
wherein he professes the maintenance of Episcopacie: The Covenant speaks of
the defense of the Kings Majesty's person and authority, in the defense and
preservation of the true Religion, Liberties, and Laws of this Kingdom; they,
of the defense of the Kings Majesty's just Right and Property, and that simply
and absolutely, without any such relation to Religion, Liberties, and Laws; The
Covenant, of the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom; they, of the lawful
proper Freedoms and Liberties of the Subjects. 2. Among other Individuals of
the Covenant, this is one, That neither directly nor indirectly shall we suffer
our selves to be divided or withdrawn, by whatsoever suggestion, combination,
allurement, or terror, from that blessed and loyal conjunction: But they have
directly divided and withdrawn themselves from that blessed and loyal
conjunction, wherein the Kirk and Kingdom continue constant, by a clear
combination in writ under their hands. 3. Another particular in the Covenant
is, That we shall not cast in any let or impediment, that may stay or hinder
any such resolution as by common consent shall be found to conduce for ^o good
ends: But they obliege themselves to hinder resolutions found by common consent
of the Estates of Parliament, to conduce for the ends mentioned in the
Covenant, such as the keeping on foot Armies at home and abroad, and all means
for their necessary maintenance.

The solemn League and Covenant, unanimously approven by the General
Assemblies of this Kirk, ratified by the authority of the Parliament of this
Kingdom, and universally sworn and subscribed through the Kirks of this
Kingdom, is not so much as once remembered in this Remonstrance; yea clearly
enough to a perceiving beholder, though warily and closely they exclude the
same, while they call the National Covenant Approven, as if the other were not
approven, and while they deny a desire of dissolving the link of fraternity
betwixt us and our Brethren of England, insinuating their disavowing of a
League and Covenant of fraternity; Otherwise they would not have shunned the
mention of the League and Covenant, when they had so fair an occasion offered
of expressing their approbation thereof, as a tie of our unity with our
Brethren in England: So that the subscription of this Band brings with it a
fearful breach of the League and Covenant.

Unity and Uniformitie in Religion and Kirk government, so much pressed by our
Commissioners, as a special means for conserving the Peace betwixt the two
Kingdoms, upon the grounds and reasons contained in their Paper of the 10. of
March 1641. and given in to the Treaty and Parliament of England; so much
promoved by the continued labors of the following General Assemblies, and
their Commissioners from time to time, both at home, and at London; to the
endeavoring whereof we are so strongly engaged by the League and Covenant of
the Kingdom, and which is so far advanced in the Directory for Worship, agreed
upon by the Assemblies, and ratified by the Parliaments in both Kingdoms, is
utterly neglected, and not so much as mentioned in this seditious Band.

What is here offered by them to the view of the world, if it be looked upon
with the eye of any, but such as have given themselves to a detestable
indifferency and neutralitie in this cause, wherein the Kirk and Kingdom are
engaged, shall be found fraughted with the Characters, set down in the solemn
and seasonable Warning of the General Assembly, holden at Edinburgh 1645.
whereby secret Malignants and dis-covenanters may be known, such are, Their
slighting and censuring of the Public Resolutions of this Kirk and State Art.
3. and 4. Their laboring to raise jealousies and divisions, to retard or
hinder the execution of what is ordered by public Judicatories, Art. 5. Their
censuring and slandering these whom GOD has honored as his chief Instruments
in this Work, Art. 2. and 3. Their drawing of Parties and Factions, to the
weakening of the Common Union in their conclusion; Their endeavors,
Informations, and Solicitations, tending to weaken the hearts and hands of
others, and to make them withold their assistance from this Work, which is
the very scope of their 6. Article.

The Article of Inviting the Kings Majesty into this his Native Kingdom,
though it seem plausible a^ the first hearing, and for that cause first placed:
Yet let it be pondered by second thoughts (which are the wisest) in the scales
of reason, and the prejudice thereof shall clearly appear. For 1. he who
considers that much innocent blood of his Majesty's good Subjects has been
shed by his Majesty's Commands and Commissions, Irish Rebels have been brought
over into both Kingdoms, and endeavors to bring over more; as also Forces
from foreign parts; That his Majesty is in open hostility against the
Parliament of England, Forces on foot by his Majesty's Commission, against the
Kingdom of Scotland, under the leading of that accursed and forfaulted
Traitor, and the War in Ireland fomented and prolonged by his Majesty;
whereby the three Kingdoms are brought near to utter ruin and destruction,
Shall perceive, that until satisfaction and security be first given to both
Kingdoms, his Majesty's coming hither cannot be convenient, nor called for.
Upon which ground, the Parliament of England, and the Commissioners of the
Parliament of Scotland, in their Letter to his Majesty; January 13. 1646.
refuse the personal Treaty desired by his Majesty, and declare, That
Propositions from both Kingdoms are to be sent to his Majesty, which they
conceive (far otherwise, and upon surer ground then these Banders do) to be
the only way for attaining a happy and wel-grounded Peace. 2. Such an
invitation for making Peace, may not proceed from this Kingdom, without the
advice and consent of our neighbor Kingdom, with which we are entered in League
and Covenant (far less from a few private persons, banded in this
Remonstrance) unless we will directly break the 8. Article of the Treaty,
ratified in the 3. Parl. of King Charles, Act 5. wherein it is agreed and
concluded, That no cessation, nor pacification, or agreement for Peace
whatsomever, shall be made by either Kingdom, or the Armies of either
Kingdoms, without the mutual advice and consent of both Kingdoms, or their
Committees in that behalf appointed, who are to have full power for the same,
in case the Parliament or Convention of the Estates of Scotland, or the Houses
of Parliament of England shall not sit. 3. This Invitation and incoming of the
Kings Majesty, while he is still in terms of Hostility against his Parliament
of England, is so far from settling a solid Peace (as they confidently conceive)
that it will undoubtedly prolong these unnatural Wars, and draw upon this
Land the heaviest weight, and deepest dint of them.

These Judicatories, the re-establishment whereof is desired by their third
Article, have neither been altogether silent, For some of them have sit and
kept their diets of meeting; Neither yet have bin silenced by men (as they do
insinuate) but have been necessarily interrupted through the Invasion of the
barbarous Irishes, and Insurrection of dis-natured Countrymen, and through the
spreading and raging of the fearful Plague of Pestilence, and now by ordinance
of Parliament they are to meet again at the ordinary times, if the like causes
do not necessitate an unexpected vacation. In the mean time it is to be
remembered, that Judicatories authorized by Parliament with such power as the
condition of affairs, and the necessity of these present times required, were
not silent, though some of these Remonstrants would not hearken to them; Or
else they had been more active against the public Enemies, which had made a
fairer way for opening the Ordinary Judicatories, than the strengthening of the
bloody hands of the Rebels unto the works of violence, by contriving a Band.

The danger of weakening the Kingdom, and rendering it a prey to forraigners
represented in the third Article, is increased by this course which they have
taken; The Kingdom being thereby made the more unable, not only to resist
foreign Invasion, but also to suppress the Intestine Rebellion, while it
does not only want their assistance, but finds their resistance. The best
way of strengthening and securing the Kingdom, is, To join unanimously and
actively, in pursuit of the Rebels within the same, whose garments have been
dyed in the blood of the People of GOD; To entertain a firm Peace and Union
between the two Kingdoms, for prosecuting the ends of our League and Covenant;
But above all, To turn every man from his evil ways, and to return unto him
that has smitten us, who can heal us, and humble our Adversaries, and turn
his hand against our Enemies: Our help is in the Name of the Lord, who made the
heaven and the earth, With whom it is nothing to help with many, or with them
that have no power; through him we shall do valiantly, and he shall tread down
our enemies: Which are the precious words of GOD, and not the specious phrases
of men.

The fourth Article. 1. Labors by reproachful expressions, To make odious
unto the people the best ways and means that the Estates of Parliament and
Committees thereof could think upon, for the necessary maintenance of War
against the wicked Rebels; Whereby they cast in a let and impediment to hinder
public Resolutions (though some of these have of all others least cause to
complain) and disclaim the necessity of maintaining an Army against James
Grahame, which will afford him and his accomplices leave to gather strength; For
the Enemy cannot be suppressed without a competent number of Forces, and Forces
cannot be kept together without maintenance, and maintenance cannot be had
without such public burdens. 2. Mentions the exacting of great Fines and
Intromissions with men's Fortunes and Rents, whereby they evidence their favor
to, and endeavor to conciliat the favor and following of such as have been so
dealt with by the Estates, for being accessory, less or more, unto the
unnatural and bloody Rebellion: And, 3. Makes a lie against the Estates, as
if they had received great sums of money from other Kingdoms or Commonwealths
than England.

If these who have been most active in this Combination had been present in
Parliament, they would have been witnesses of the care taken by the Estates to
give full satisfaction to every one who desired to be informed of the public
expenses and disbursments, by appointing a particular Committee for examination
of the public Compts, and thereafter causing keep the Book of Accounts in a
public Chamber, with intimation of free access to all that pleased: But they
are willingly if not wilfully ignorant, and bewray their disaffection, by
apprehending all probable appearance to raise and foment Jealousies between the
Parliament and the Country and Soldiers, which is the drift of the 5. Article.

The large laying forth of the distressed condition of this Kingdom, insisted
upon in the 6. Article, aims at the discouraging and weakening of the hearts
and hands of the well-affected, and tends to persuade the disbanding our Forces
employed against the Rebels, which exposes what is reserved from the fury of
the Enemy, to be preyed upon by them without opposition: But if they, as
becomes Covenanters and Countrymen, had considered that the most of those
calamities have been caused by the cruelty of the Irish crew, and the rest of
that Traitorous Company, and by the lukewarmnesse, temporizing, and double
dealing of hollow-hearted men, they would have resolved against all
difficulties to cleave unto the Kingdom, in the pursuit and suppressing of
these children of Belial, as a compendious way to the removal of distresses.
Shall they have Lives and Fortunes to hazard against all deadly, for rescuing
these Rebels from their deserved punishment? And is there nothing left unto
the Kingdom to hazard for its own defense, and bringing Malignants unto their
due censure, according to our League and Covenant? And if the condition of our
affairs crave assistance from our Brethren in England, we are confident they
will be mindful of our mutual engagements, though these Banders like bad
husbandmen, labor to sow the seeds of Jealousies amongst us.

In the 7. they covertly calumniate the prime managers of affairs, as men
indisposed to Peace, who have abundantly evidenced their earnest desire of
Peace, by Supplications, Remonstrances, Declarations, Treaties for Peace,
Propositions of Peace. And we further declare and profess, in the sight of him
who searches the heart, That nothing is more in the desire of us all, then
that Reformed Religion may be enjoyed, with a happy and well-grounded Peace,
through all his Majesty's Dominions: And from the beginning of these troubles,
we have been clothed with, and yet will not put off a resolution to use (as we
have been ever using) all possible and lawful means to procure the same. And
for this effect we beseech all men, who love the Cause of God, and their
Countries good, to divest themselves of private quarrels and particular
interests, that with the greater unanimitie and hope of success, they may
pursue the troublers of our Peace. But we do ingenuously acknowledge, That our
souls abhor to enter into the secret, and our glory to be joined with the
assembly of them who sue for such a Peace as comprehends the prime authors of
all our troubles, and would suffer these who have shed the blood of War in
Peace to go in peace into the grave.

As in the entry, so toward the end, that the hook of the Band may the better
take with well-meaning men, they busk it with great variety of fair colors;
and like the harlot, they deck the bed with coverings of tapistry, carved
works, and fine linen; they perfume it with myrrh and cynamon, and with
impudent face, they speak of Peace Offerings and paying their Vows; that with
much fair speech they may cause the simple ones to yield, and with the
flatterings of their lips, force them: But he that has understanding will
discern that this their Profession is contrary to their intent formerly
discovered, will learn not to be credulous unto them, who speak lies in
hypocrisy, and not suffer his heart to decline to their ways, and go astray
in their paths which go down to the chambers of death; The repetition of their
intention here, gives them not one grain weight of truth and realitie more
than they had before.

These Banders are not all of the same kind and disposition of heart: Some of
them have joined in actual and open Rebellion, and embrued their hands in the
blood of their Countrymen: These if they had truly forsaken that unhappy
conjunction, would have ere now, or will now at length forsaking this
combination apply themselves to Kirk and State for reconciliation; which if
they do not speedily go about, they manifest to the world, that they still
persist in their former Rebellion, and prosecute the same wicked practices.
Some there be, who have by some acts, and by some omissions of action when
opportunity was offered, brought themselves under the suspicion of
Malignancie: And these if they continue in this b^nded course make it evident,
that they have been lying in wait for the season when they might vent their
malignant designs, and do involve themselves under the displeasure of God, and
censures of the Kirk. Others there are, who have joined in this Remonstrance
(to judge charitably) not out of a mind to oppose the Cause of GOD, having
done and suffered so much, and hazarded all for the same: But partly out of
their respect to their friends, to whom they have natural and particular ties;
partly pressed with the apprehension of some present peril, or greater evil
conceived to ensue upon refusal; and partly deceived by the specious pretenses
in the Remonstrance, not considering the bad intentions of the Contrivers, nor
the dangerous importance and consequence of it in it self. These, we expect,
when they consider the condition of the Work (laid forth before them in this
our Declaration) and the quality of the Company with whom they join, lest they
wrong themselves and the Work of GOD, contrary to their desires, and more than
they are aware of, will without longer deliberation or delay, renounce that
banding Remonstrance, and with all convenient diligence, acquaint the Kirk and
State with their sense of that escape, and with their resolution not to suffer
themselves hereafter to be divided or withdrawn, by whatsomever suggestion,
combination, persuasion, or terror, from the National Covenant, and from the
solemn League and Covenant of the three Kingdoms; Which will bring peace to
their own minds, and joy to the hearts of the Godly, and restore them to the
place which they have had in the esteem of all that love the welfare of Zion.

Having thus declared our thoughts concerning that divisive Band, and these who
are joined together in it, We exhort and warn all the people of God in this
Land, and these especially who have it in Commission to reveal his arm to this
generation, To observe them who cause divisions and offenses, and to avoid
them; To keep themselves free from approving of, or adhering to this
Remonstrance, the wickedness whereof is now so plainly pointed forth; and as
one man, with one mind, according to both our Covenants, unto the utmost of
their power to oppose the spreading of it, and the endeavors of such as
pertinaciously persist therein. Let us all follow on to seek the Lord, and let
the Watchmen of Israel rouse up themselves and others, and strive to get their
own, and their Peoples hearts deeply affected under the feeling of the great
burden both of the Sins of the Land, and of the wrath upon it. Let every one
turn from the evil of his ways, and crying mightily to GOD, give him no
rest, till he repent of the evil, smell a savor of rest, and say, It is
enough. And we are confident in him, who has done all our Works for us, That
no such courses or counsel shall prosper, as tend directly or indirectly to
the breach of both, or either Covenants, to the stopping of the course of the
Gospel, to the strengthening of the hands of the Wicked, or to the suppression
of Religion and Reformation; And that GOD all-sufficient, against all
impediments, shall carry forward and perfect the blessed and glorious Work
which he has begun, to the glory of his great Name, to the advancement of the
Kingdom of his Son JESUS CHRIST, to the destruction of Antichrist, to the
confusion of all desperate and irrecoverable Malignants, and to the firm Peace
and happy Union in Religion of all the Dominions of his Majesty; For whom we
shall still continue our Prayers, That GOD would graciously incline his heart
to the counsels of Truth and Peace, that we may live under him a peaceable and
quiet life, in all godliness and honesty.

A. Ker.

FINIS.

