History and Policy RE-VIEWED, In The Heroic Transactions of his Most Serene
Highness, OLIVER, Late LORD PROTECTOR; From his CRADLE, to his TOMB: Declaring
his steps to Princely Perfection; as they are drawn in lively Parallels to the
Ascents of the Great Patriarch Moses, in thirty Degrees, to the Height of
Honor. By H. D. Esquire.

Claud. de Theodos. Solus meruit regnare rogatus. LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel
Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill. 1659.

To the Most Serene HIGHNESS, OF RICHARD By the Grace of God, LORD PROTECTOR,
Of England, Scotland, and Ireland, etc. Chara Dei soboles, magnum Jovis
Incrementum.
PArdon, Great Sir, the compellation; for though it be a piece of an Aenead
(some will think of flattery) yet it is very manifestly, your most Serene
Highness his Birthright, and plain prophetic truth, Third Transcend. Ascent,
p. 271.
as is made more clearly to appear in one of those Parallels, that treat of
your happy Promotion and Succession to the Throne, where you now sit.

As for the imputation of flattery, it is known, that I have ever so much
abhorred from all that, and those subtle Artists of Fortune, who make a Trade
of it, that whilst I have been conversant in the Courts of some great Princes,
and particularly known to many of their persons, I have been always most
severely taxt, of too much of the other extreme: much less should I dare to
offer any thing of that now, to your most Serene Highness, who are known to
hold so much of the virtue, of your most Renowned Father in you, as to be
better pleased to meet with an enemy, in open field, than a flattering friend
in your Privy Chamber. Insomuch, that I am afraid to tell your Highness, some
notorious truths; how all we your people, look upon you, as our second Joshua,
in the place of our second Moses, as full of the spirit of Wisdom, Courage, and
Piety, as he was, and that we cannot at all doubt, but your successes will be
likewise most proportionable to his; how Walls, and Cities, shall fall before
you, Giants wax pale, Rivers retire back, the Sun it self stand still, and as
many Kings will undergo your yoke.

I am afraid to tell you Sir, how we, that are your people, are all of us
employed, in planting more Bays, and Laurel in our Gardens, to en-garland your
Victorious brows, before you come to a Battle. In fine, I am afraid to tell
you, how all our hearts, like Roses, withered upon the death of your glorious
Father, now begin again to bloom afresh, and newly to open our selves, at the
benign, gentle, and glorious, Princely Aspect, of your most Serene Highness:
No, I know to tell your goodness any thing of this, would be but to offend it,
and to commit a sacrilege upon your most precious time: So I Will forbear, and
only prosecute my petitions for more pardons still; and Princes upon their
first inaugurations, seldom deny any, whose crimes carry not some
extraordinary atrocity with them; much less can I doubt of indulgence, from
your most Serene Highness, who are a Person so composed of Grace, and Clemency
it self.

Your pardon therefore gracious Sir again, that I presume to address these poor
unpolisht papers, to so great a Patronage as yours. Indeed, mighty Sir, if that
the transcendency of the Subject, treated on in these Discourses, had not given
me great encouragement, I should never have dared to offer this Piece to your
view, much less to your protection: but it being conscious to it self, that it
contains nothing, but mere Commentaries upon your glorious Fathers Words and
Actions, it humbly conceives, that your Highness has so great a propriety in
it, and that it has so near a Relation to your Highness, that it boldly begins
to challenge, your most Serene Candor, and particular Protection: and would
argue me of an extreme insolence, to go about to seek for its Birth, under any
other favor. For may it please your Highness to take it as a little History,
of your most Renowned Father; who should it come to for License, Approbation,
Countenance, and Privilege, but your Sacred self, who are the Compendium of
his incomparable Life, and the living Epitome of all his Perfections, and are
growing up very speedily, to be as great a Volume.

May it please your Highness, to take it as a piece of Architecture, or
Mosaic Work (as it is) erected upon the Memory of your deceased Father; whom
should it have recourse to, for its Pillar, and support, but only your
Highness, who are the moving Model of all his Great Actions? And may your
Highness please to take it, as a Table or Picture, of your Princely Father;
Who is more concerned in it, than your Gracious self, that are as much the
lively Image of his Virtues, as of the Majesty of his Person.

Thus then, for the scope and business of the Book, I dare affirm it to be
without exception, great and good, and so I dare present it boldly to your most
Serene Highness, and avouch it equal to any Kings Cabinet whatsoever in the
World; though truly for the rusticity of its dress, which is merely my fault,
it may not be, for ought I know, admitted by the overcurious. The plain truth
is, and I am not ashamed to acknowledge it to your Highness, that I have been
so intent upon the maine matter, that it may be I have neglected something of
the form, or to give it the due dress and ornament of Language; and to word it
truly as it should have been, would have required no less than the pen of a
Seraphim: but my comfort is, that your Highness, like your great Father, in
that as well as all his other Excellencies, has been ever a most declared enemy
to that kind of pitiful ostentation of words, as well as clothes, and knows
how to make a value of a pure Oriental Pearl, though covered with a course
shell, and how to accept of a precious sweet Perfume, though shut up within an
abject Box. So I hope it shall not offend your Highness, and that will suffice
me, not to have imitated those that preserve Oranges and Limons, who neglecting
the rich juice, and inside of the fruit, do candy and preserve the mere Rine,
and outside only.

But yet I have another pardon to beg of your most Serene Highness, which must
be granted, after all this, or I am eternally ruined, and that is, for dareing
to undertake, or touch with my rude hands, this most curious piece of Mosaic
Work, which should serve for a Monument upon your immortal Fathers Memory, well
knowing, that no tongue which has not expressions equal to his Expeditions, or
a pen that cannot parallel his Sword, is capable to deliver any just Character
of him.

What Language, Pen, or Pensil, can possibly delineate, that most invincible
Spirit of his, that encountered Men and Devils, and associating the Kingdom of
his Virtues, to the force of his Arms, broke through all obstacles, to Crown
his inspired purposes? how he in the hurry of War, and glory of Peace, bearing
thunder and olive branches, throughout these Kingdoms, now blessed under your
most Gracious Protection, has happily rendered himself amiable at one time, and
terrible at another, and yet ever prosperous, and aweful in both?

No, it is impossible for any Mortal to do it, His own Acts only can speak for
him, and for ever will do more, than all the Panegyricks in the World can: For
the Rose we know, is sufficiently beautified with its leaves, and the Sun with
its Rays, and no more can our praises arrive at his perfections, than humane
Arts can reach those of Nature.

But this piece of infinite insolence, I stand now guilty of before your
Highness, and unless your Gracious Serenity be pleased to pardon me, I must
perish, even in the Haven of Hope.

And Mighty Sir, to make some satisfaction, for my present audacious attempt, I
will hereafter strive, better to resemble those devout adorers of the Sun, who
not being able to affixe Crowns, and Garlands, upon the head of his Statue,
burnt Flowers always in sacrifice to it, to make their odor mount to the
Heavens: So, since I can never be able to Crown his deceased Highness his
Merits, with my weak humane praises, I will humbly offer up to Heaven my
prayers and vows, for your eternal prosperities, who preserve still, the Idaea
of his late Highness his Authority, and Majesty, as well as that of his Sacred
Person, here amongst us; and that I Will do constantly, with all submission, due
to your most Serene Highness his most Heroic, Sublime, and true Princely
Qualities, as becomes,

Most Gracious Sir, Your Highness his most devoted, obedient, faithful, and
loyal subject, H. Dawbeny.

THE EPISTLE To the several sorts of READERS.
REaders, if you are Persons any way pre-ingaged, or tied to any present
Factions, or Parties of the Times, I am bold to tell you beforehand, that I
will neither ask nor expect a kindness from you, no not so much as ordinary
candor: and I pray you pardon me, that I salute you so plurally; for I
presume, there will be whole Junto 's, and Cabales of you, soon bundled
together, to sit in Judgment upon, censure, and condemn, this little Infant,
upon its first peeping into the World; And this I cannot but conclude, from the
over-forwardnesse of some of you, to asperse its innocence, when lying in its
first bed, and loose sheets in the Print-house; nay, while some part of it,
remained yet in the womb of the Press, so could not be swadled up into a
Volume.

Howsoever, I shall now advise you, (for your own good, more than mine) for
take it how you please, I am indifferent) to suspend at least, so much of your
partiality, as may otherwise offer violence to your reason, till you have heard
all the Evidence read, which this little Book will exhibit in its own behalf,
and that you have found the Warpe, and the Woof, then censure on, and pass
your judgments how you please.

In the mean time give me leave, as most concerned, to advocate in my own
Child's behalf; to obviate some, of your objections, that you have bolted out
already.

And the first is from you, O you envenomed Party, that shoot out your Arrows,
even bitter words, against the precious Memory of his late Mosaical Highness,
and striveing to trample on his ashes, are pleased to think too much of
Panegyric said of him, in the very Title Page.

I shall not now stain paper, with any of your impure language: but refer you
for your further confutation, to the process of our Parallels, where you will
find him to be a Person as much above your malice, as he has ever esteemed
you, below his anger.

It shall suffice me to consider, that if men will be now adays so curious as
to vaunt to see spots in the Moon, where will they not find a fault? and if
base envy will go about to shave an egg, what will it not do in a Meadow? It is
notorious, that the Almighty handiwork, the Creation it self, could not escape
the carping of a ridiculous Momus, who would needs undertake to correct the
Divine Artifice, and persuade the World, that the All-wise Creator, was very
much overseen, in planting the horns of the savage Bull, and other Beasts so
armed, over their eyes, and that it had been much more accommodation for those
Creatures, if their eyes had been set over their horns. I should desire
likewise, that these our venomous Momus's, would set their horns for
spectacles under their eyes, and try whether they can better spy out their
exceptions against our Mosaic Parallels.

The next sort of enemies that I hear this little Infant has encountered, are
indeed something more modest, but as I take it, they are, too, a little more
nice than wise, (as our Proverb has it) the very method forsooth, of this
Discourse, giving great scandal to their tender consciences, and they are so
deeply offended at it, that they cry out upon it, phy, a Parallel, or
Comparison with Moses? O abominable profanation! Truly, I should be very
unwilling to scandalize any weak Brother, and more troubled, not to be able to
satisfy his scruple, if he please to be satisfied: and certainly, this Piece
is not the first that has gone that way, we have very sufficient presidents,
and authority too, to warrant us. Have we not seen a complete Parallel,
between Elias and Dr. Luther, even to the Chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen
thereof? and another betwixt his Successor Elisha, and Mr. Calvin, to the
double portion of his spirit, and many of our Modern Doctors, put in scale with
some of the Apostles themselves? Nor has this way of comparison, been taken up
only by Divines, in honor of their own Function; but many Parallels we find
in Print, between some of our late Kings, how well deserving, I say not; and
some of those holy Princes, and Prophets of Gods own people, as David, Solomon,
Josiah, Hezekiah, etc. and one very express Parallel, between Queen Elizabeth
of famous Memory, and that great Princess and Prophetess Deborah. Then why
should not our late incomparable Prince, and Protector stand as well placed in
line Parallel, with that glorious Patriarch Moses?

But now I hear of a third expedition prepared against us, another body of
enemies, much more numerous, but less dangerous far, than the former, and yet
they march furiously, and come to storm our little Work for a mere
counterscarp of flattery; but they will find it by their approaches, to be a
solid Brestwork of truth, able to endure all their battery, and that too so
well lined with virtues truly flankerd, and well furnished with regular
redoubts, and redoubted truths, that they must be beaten of with loss of
honor, if not of themselves.

There is no man sure lives, that dare deny the groundwork of all our Mosaical
Ascents, and Stairs to Princely perfections, to be the indubitable dictate of
the Spirit of God himself: and that all the foundations of our present
Parallels, are most unquestionable truths, we have as much certainty, as any
humane authority, experimental knowledge, or ocular evidence, can possibly make
out. Now I would fain know, how two such mortal enemies, as truth and flattery
are, can possibly squat in the same Form? Besides, it is certain, that no
beatified thing, as our second Moses is now without dispute, can be a subject
capable of flattery; but let his late Highness be reduced again, to his humane
condition, and consider his due deservings, then tell me, whether all our
grateful acknowledgements, and most extended Panegyricks, can possibly reach
his, transcendent merits? Much less then sure can any man overreach so far,
as to have his commendations reputed flattery, unless he should fall into
profanation, or flat blasphemy, which I hope the most malicious eyes in the
World, shall never be able to find out upon us here.

He was indeed more truly that, which Pliny said of his Emperor, Vir hoc
saeculo major, and dignus fabulantium miraculis vatum, qui tantum super omnes
posterioris aevi Principes emine bat, quantum a privatis caeteri principes
recesserunt: He was so much above the present pitch of men, that nothing but
Romance can reach his Actions; and he as far surpassed all other princes of
this later Age as any of those Princes, have out-stript private persons. What
panegyric then, can be too great for such a prince? what humane praise can
ever amount to flattery? I must in the mean time acknowledge something of
obligation to this sort of enemies, who are pleased to think my poor pen so
capable to reach that, as to overreach it so, which is a Subject only fit for
the pens of Angels, and whose praises, ought truly to be written with a style
of fire, or point of Adamant, and so engraven upon the gates of the Temple of
Eternity.

Now though I have pretty well, as I hope, got my self clear of a possibility
of flattery, yet I am now cast upon another exception of my nearest friends,
whose kind pity treats me more rigourously, than all the enemies cruelty, and I
must cry out with the Poet, Pol me occidistis amici, indeed at once they both
pity and persecute me, for undertaking so difficult, if not impossible a task,
as to carve such an Illiad in a Nut-shell, or to go about to bind up in such
little skins, so voluminous an Argument as to give the World an account of this
incomparable person, from his Cradle, to his Grave, a thing more equal to large
History, than a Paneygerical one, and of which, as the Evangelist tells us, of
our Saviors Words and Works, that the whole World would not be able to contain
the Books, that might be written.

Indeed Gentlemen, it will not be denied by any (shall be more confessed by me,
though parcel guilty of the same crime) that he who shall take presumptious pen
in hand, or dare any other way undertake, to give the World an exact Survey, of
all the particular great dispensations, and Divine indulgencies, vouchsafed to
this high Favorite of Heaven, will quickly find himself overset in a Sea of
Bliss. It is not therefore my Design at present, to sail in, much less to
fathom, that Abyss, or delineate the whole Series of the Almighty providence,
over his most precious Person, in every particular circumstance, from the first
span that Nature measured out to him, to that immensity, which he afterward so
happily arrived at: it being no less than impossible, as the curious in that
Art inform us, to polish so much as the nails of pieces of so great a
Perfection. Nor indeed is it more impossible than impertinent, to go about to
prove, that there is, and has been ever, from the first minute to the last of
his life, a most gracious and indulgent providence, over his late most Serene
Highness, his person, and proceedings, by all the singular footsteps of it;
it being to light a Candle to the Sun, to dilucidate that which is already more
clear to all that do not wilfully shut their eyes, than if it had been written
with the Rays of it. I shall therefore satisfy my self, and I hope all
ingenuous Readers, at present, to pick up some of the most remarkable
particulars, that we may best moralize to our own instruction, and all impudent
gainsayers, greater confusion: and that we may learn to make this use of it
above all uses, that is to march out of all our old animosities, and submit our
selves to the gracious power that is now over us, and acknowledge it to be the
clear resplendent Ray, reflected upon us, from the infallible foundations of
the eternal Law.

This is the uttermost of my design at present, and so I will be bold to begin
at the foot of the Mosaic Mount, and show you his late most Serene Highness
tracing the steps of the great Patriarch Moses, to the sacred summity of the
Mount it self, and highest pitch of all princely perfection; and make good the
parallel from their very Births, to their Triumphant entries into their blessed
Tabernacle of Repose, and there to the happy expiration of their purified Souls
upon the top of Pisgah, from thence to their glorious Graves, and from thence
to the Magnificent Memorials, and Eternal Monuments, which they have erected in
the hearts of all men: The Ascents which these two great Personages stand
parallel in, amounting in all to thirty Degrees of Glory.

So friends farewell, and enemies much good do it you, if you please, fall to
and welcome, if you like it not you may leave it; and though you curse me for
my cookery, yet I shall continue, with the Apostle to pray for you, That the
Lord would give you understanding in all things, and me his grace, in
whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content; and that we may all meet, in
the unity of the Spirit, and bond of perfectness; which holy conspiracy that
we may all happily agree in, we must all resolve to lay by all spleens and
distasts whatsoever, and let them pass away with the old year, and think upon
nothing now, but to take up new thoughts and better affections, with this new
one coming in: we must forget all old grudges against, and ungrateful
misprisions of our old departed Prince, and good Protector, (who though he was
an incomparable Person, yet no wonder if he could not please all men; for that
is more (they say) than God himself can do, raining, or shining) and dispose
our selves to the cordial and sincere service of this our gracious new one, who
is now set over us by God, and his own Divine virtues, and has nothing in him
but celestial sweetness, and is truly to be called, if ever Mortal was, the
Delight of all Mankind; which Great and Gracious New-Years-Gift, that we may
all receive, from the bountiful hands of Heaven, shall be the constant, as it
is the instant prayer of,

Your humble servant, H. Dawbeny.

The First ASCENT.
MOses was Nobly Born, Exodus 2.1.
extracted from an extraordinary Race, the most sacred Tribe, and Principal
Family in Israel, Exodus ^
the House of Levi. A most Noble House indeed, of which the Lord himself had so
high and honorable an esteem, Deuteronomy. 18.2 Exodus 28.
that he made it as it were, his own Impropriation and Inheritance; entailing
upon it, all his own Menial Attendancies. Levit. 8.
O most unvalueable Privileges, and Prerogatives of a Family! Number. 4.
Number. 8.
not only to be made the sole Household servants of the Living God; but to be
set apart, Levit. 29.
to eat at his own Table, feed on his proper Sacrifices, and to have, as it
were, Number. 18. Number. 3. Number. 1.50, 51.
the Monopoly of Altars, and all holy things. O thrice happy honors of a
House! not only to be (as it were) of the Lord of Hosts own Lifeguard, Deuteronomy.
10.8
and have the sole charge of the sacred Arc of the Covenant committed to them;
Number. 3.
Number. 18.
but also to be adopted into the very Cabinet-counsells of Heaven, by the
judgment of Vrim and Thummim, Exodus 28.30.
and to be alone permitted to have a free and frequent ingresse, into the
Sanctum Sanctorum it self. This was in short, the sacred Family, selected by
the Almighty Jehovah himself, to be, as it were, his Princes, Peers, and only
Familiars, here below, the only Grandees and Favorites of his most Magnificent
Court upon Earth, which was to be established in his most holy, glorious, and
costly Temple at Jerusalem: as is to be seen more at large in the whole course
of sacred Scripture; to which holy leaves, I humbly refer every ingenuous
Reader, for a further satisfaction in all these Particulars.

The Parallel.
Indeed, when we shall have duly considered, the great care, and holy caution,
the sacred Scripture it self has taken throughout, in the recommendation of
the Nobility of diverse persons, we may very well conclude with the Heathen
Orator, (what may be too as good Divinity as Philosophy) Deorum Immortalium
munus, Plin. in Paneg. Constantin.
and primum videri and maximum, in lucem statim foelicem venire. Nobility of
birth, is the first and greatest gift of God. I say, the first and greatest
temporal dispensation of Heaven, is, to be born Noble, and so soon to be within
the lists of felicity, as of nature; why else should we find such an exact
account of the Nobility of this our great Prototype Moses, of the three valiant
Children, held in the Captivity of Babylon, and that of the most valiant and
renowned Eleazar, and diverse other persons since the universal Deluge? which
particulars are now too long to be insisted on. Nay, that Nobility of blood was
in the like esteem both with God and man too; before the Flood, in the very
first Age and Infancy of the World, will be quickly made appear, by the
delineation of the Genealogy of Noe, Genes. 5.
which the holy Spirit is pleased to deliver to us, as if it intended, as it
were, to act the part of a Herald, in giving to us the large Series of all his
Generations: it seeming not only to make way through all the Patriarchs, from
whom he was descended; but to give a punctual rehearsal to us of all their
Titles, and Signiories, of all their singular Acts and Achievements, and then
concludes in the next Chapter, Hae sunt generationes Noe, Genes. 6.
vir justus erat atque perfectus: This is the Genealogy of Noe, he was a just
man and a perfect. If then Nobility of birth be a blessing so considerable in
the eyes of the Lord, and inferred by his holy Spirit, to be of no little avail
to us in the way of virtue, and an apparent step to Piety and Sanctity it self;
It will not be, I hope, thought incongruous, to bring our glorious second
Moses, to encounter the first, upon this his first Ascent; and, as in all the
rest, we shall find them sweetly kissing and embracing each the other. And yet
I cannot say, his late Highness was extracted from so Priestly a Family, but
altogether as Princely, being lineally descended from the loins of our most
Ancient British Princes, and tied in near alliances to the blood of our later
Kings, as by that thrice Noble Family of the Barringtons, and diverse others;
which to make a Petigree of, would take up more paper, than we intend for our
Volume, and make me appear more a Herald, than an Historian. Nay, indeed,
should I but go about to prove, his Highness most illustrious House Noble, I
should commit a sacrilege in the Temple of Honor, and only violate his most
glorious Family, with a more solemn infamy.

His Highness is unquestionably known to have descended from such a stem of
Princely Antecessors, that whole Ages, which wast Rocks, and wear out Elements,
have never altered to lessen, but rather advance the honor of his great House.
He was derived from such a Family, that we may better say of it, than what was
of the other, ex qua nescit aliquid Mediocre nasci, from whence nothing
ordinary can proceed; as is likewise made notoriously evident, in those other
mosteminent persons of Honor, now living, who are blessed with a share of his
incomparable blood: who have spread their glory abroad, so well as at home, and
built themselves such Trophies, in the hearts of their very enemies, that
eternity it self must celebrate; so no time can ever be able to demolish, or
reduce into oblivion.

And that I may not be thought to flatter so great a truth, I will be bold to
hasten, and abruptly conclude this first point of our Mosaical Parallel; with
saying only, that this sublime Person, his late most Serene Highness, our
second, as the first great Moses, came into the World, like a Princely Pearl,
and made it appear, by the quality of his Orient, that if Nature pleased to
equal his birth, to the best of Noblemen upon Earth, he would equal his
virtues to his extraction; as we shall see more plainly, when we mount a little
higher, upon our Mosaical Ascents, and Parallels.

The second Ascent.
MOses was from his Cradle blessed with a very beautiful body, Exodus 2.2.
for which he was most remarkable, in his infancy, so the sacred text tells us,
that he was a fair and goodly child. Now, that bodily beauty is an indubitable
blessing, and a Ray of the Divinity it self; none sure but a monstrous
Thersites, or a Mopsus will dispute, and none, but an errant Apostate from
Christianity, a mere perfidious and profane Manichee, dare deny. Does not the
Lord himself proclaim, as he is the God of Nature, that beauty and graceful
comeliness of body is entirely his gift? Nay, has he not often employed this
his own glorious dispensation, to be an instrument of his mighty wonders, a
lightning flash of his power, and as a resplendent Torch of his greatest
Victories? which his All-Wise Providence would never have done, did he not only
approve the nature of, but intend to give the greatest honor to, Ibid.
that his own dispensation. Thus was the Lord pleased, to make the beauty of
our little Moses the cause of his miraculous preservation, by affecting the
heart of Pharaoh's daughter. And therefore we find it to be expressly said of
Judith likewise; Dominus hanc in illam pulchritudinem ampliavit, Judge. 10.4
ut incomparabili decore omnium oculis appareret, The Lord so amplified her
beauty, that she should appear incomparable lovely, and allure the eyes of all
that should behold her: So God, purposing to stay the violent streams of
Holofernes his arms, though he could with his omnipotent hand, have buried that
vast Army, in the bowels of the earth, as he did Corah and his Accomplices, or
have called out, from the center it self, millions of armed men in Cadmean
equipage (equal to the Poets fancy) to have destroyed them, Chron 2.2
or might have (by an expedition of Angels) dispatched the business again, as
he once did upon the host of Senacherib, under the command of insolent
Rabsheketh, their proud Captain General: Yet he was pleased, without stretching
of his hand forth, to any other miracle, to raise the beauty only of a
gracious widow, to triumph over all those dreadful Legions, and to wage war
with the most puissant Monarch of the world. Nay, it is expressly said, that God
himself added a certain air, mine, or garb of attractive parts in Judith, to
surprise the Citadel, the heart, of that barbarous Commander; that he, being
made more drunk with love, then with wine, might be more easily taken in the
snare of her eyes, and sacrifice his unhallowed head, to her fair hands. Nay,
Esther 8.
the Lord fought with the self-same weapon again, and raised only the same
arms against, the proud and imperious Haman, to confound him with that lovely
Engine only. For when he was upon the point to command, the throats of infinite
numbers to be cut, of Gods own people, as sheep marked out for the slaughter:
The omnipotent then, only opposed a poor frail female beauty against him,
which tumbled him from the top of Fortunes wheel, and made him to swing under
an elevated gibbet; God so turning in an instant, by the power of an excellent
beauty only, the heart of a savage, Prince, from a Lion to a Lamb; and making
Assuerus, clean contrary to his great Favorites design, to preserve the lives,
and confirm the safety and liberty of his people: Nor is this high verity
remarkable, only in feminine, but also masculine beauty, 1 Samuel 10.23, 24.
which, besides the instance of our Moses, God himself seems to confirm in his
election of Saul, to the government of his own people, of whom the greatest
commendation we find written, is, that he was a very proper man, and when he
stood amongst the people, he was higher then any other, from the shoulders
upwards, and that there was none like him, for beauty of person, amongst all
the people. I could be infinite in particulars, to dilucidate this divine
dispensation, and tell you, how the All-wise God thought fit to confer that
extraordinary favor, on all his principal servants, as David, Solomon, with
all the rest of the Princes and Prophets of his people, not any one of which do
we find marked out with any deformity, a thing in it self so unpleasing to
God, that he has, by positive Law, banished all such persons, not only from
serving at his holy, Altars, Deuteronomy. 23.
but from a capacity to bear any civil charge: But I must hasten to our beloved
Parallel, so shall conclude this Ascent with some remarks upon the person of
our blessed Savior himself, whom all antiquity has delivered to us, to have
had a most excellent humane beauty; and that doctrine of theirs, is not only
grounded upon those many mystical, and indeed incomparable, beauties attributed
to him in the Canticles, but more positively and clearly collected, out of that
most remarkable passage of the Psalmist, Speciosus forma prae filiis hominum,
Psalm. 45.
Thou art fairer then the children of men, from whence, I say, all the ancient
Doctors of the Church, do unanimously conclude and assure us, that our blessed
Lord and Savior, expressly selected for himself, a most excellent beauty of
body, and an extraordinary supreme grace of speech. Nay, Niceph. l. 1.
Nicephorus goes about to describe to us certain lineaments of his body, his
exact stature, color, and perfect proportion of parts, which he pretends to
draw out of all antiquity, and delivers them in all to be most gracious,
lovely, and specious: from whence we may draw this most excellent use, to teach
us [that since the Lord was pleased voluntarily to dispoil himself of all
Honors, Riches, and worldly greatness, to give us an example of his high
humility: yet would, notwithstanding, consecrate this thing called Beauty, in
his own most illustrious person, and that of his blessed Mother] what value we
ought to set upon so heavenly a gift, and how careful we should be, never to
profane it; So I pass to the Parallel.

The Parallel.
We have seen in our Ascent the beauty of our Moses, and diverse other persons,
besides that of our Saviors, celebrated in holy Scripture; and truly, I must
be bold to add; not without a great deal of reason; for, the more admirable
sure the piece of workmanship is, when it duly examines and contemplates it
self, ought more to incite a man, and raise him to a higher love, and greater
praise of the workman, which is (if the word may be pardoned) God himself, and
he that has the fairest preparation, in his bodily Fabric or Structure; reason
justly requires of him, that he should order his manners proportionably, and,
according to the perfection of his soul, endeavor to make her appear more
fair, being lodged in so complete and well-proportion'd a body: And they that
shall abuse this fair and inestimable gift of Heaven, to any impious, fond,
carnal profanation, by devoting that, and themselves to any sensual, sordid,
brutish life, do plainly drag the gift of heaven, and Divinity it self in the
dust. Nay, they are guilty of a more barbarous ingratitude, than they that
steal Silver and Gold from the Tabernacle, to make Altars to Baal or Ashteroth;
or, that light their Lamps at the Altar-fire of the Omnipotent, to make pillage
afterward of his Temple; or, that take bread from the Master of the house with
one hand, and stabb him with the other.

Well then, it may be granted, that a beautiful and well proportioned body, is
an indubitable gift of God, and that the Lord confers it ordinarily, upon his
dearest Saints and Servants. And I hope it will no more be doubted, whether the
same All-wise Providence, has dealt less graciously, in favor of his deceased
Highness, our second Moses, than he has done with the former, and other his
dear favorites upon Earth. Indeed but barely to question it, were not only to
argue a simple or malicious blindness in the Asker, but would convince him
guilty of a perilous profanation, in the neglect of so much divinity instamped
upon his sacred Person; nay would make him appear, impiously to traduce the
Almighty Providence it self, to have been less careful, of our glorious
departed Protectors most incomparable soul, than it should have been, in not
preparing for it, an equal body to lodge in, who, with his body, and his soul,
was pre-ordained, to serve, as an instrument of Divine wonders, equally with
his Grand Archetype Moses, that Prince of Patriarchs.

Now, that we may the better accomplish our happy Parallel, in this beautiful
Ascent, it would not be amiss to exmine, what kind of beauty, the old Rabbis,
and more ancient paintings, do deliver of that great Moses, and what is agreed
upon all sides to be a beauty, most proportionable to a Prince. As to the
former, we find by many ancient Pens, as well as Pensils, Moses drawn forth to
us, with a goodly, large, and illustrious countenance, a cheerful, fair, and
exporrected forehead, (such a one, as Justinian wished his greatest Judges and
Generals to have) a severe, but graceful Aspect; a gallant, no gigantick
stature, a robustious, yet well proportioned body, and in the carriage, as well
as shape, of every limb, a gracious and most becoming Majesty.

Now I appeal again to all but blind men, or malicious, whether this, be not
his late Highness Picture too? As for the next Quaere, what is the most
amiable beauty in a Prince, I shall extract it, out of a most excellent Modern
Author. Fred. de Marsel.
Forma Principis, non tam venustas est muliebris, quam dignitas, quae in obtutu
gestibusque consistit, and, quemadmodum Tyrius ait, occulto and potenti
introitu, hominum animis illabitur, and Majestas nuncupatur, consistit autem,
in decorae magnitudine, in proportione membrorum, in line amentis aptis, in
color and succo, etc. Deformat hanc spectei dignitatem, quicquid nimis
exquisitum est, de Pixide aut speculo comptum, and infrae virum. A Princely
form, says he, carries nothing of effeminate beauty in it, but a prerogative
planted in the forehead, which consists in looks and gestures, and (as Maxim.
Tyrius tells us) with a close and powerful entry, surprizeth men's souls, and is
called Majesty. And this again consists in a comely largeness, in proportion
of members, in apt lineaments, in color, moisture, etc. This dignity of
Princely beauty, is deformed, by any over-curiosity of tricking, or taking any
thing out of the box, or borrowing too much from Barber or Looking-glass, all
that, is below a man.

Let any, again, but his Highnesse's most malicious enemies, say, whether this
was not the late Protectors very Picture, and Character too? With this true
Masculine beauty it was, that the great Marius, though proscribed, struck him
to the heart, that was employed to have stabbed him: and made him flee from him,
that with so much trouble and difficulty, had hunted and sought out for him.
With this glorious perstringent aspect it was, that Octavianus Caesar,
assaulted the Asassinate, and with the vigor (almost celestial) of his
Majestic eyes, thunder-strook the villain, that was otherwise resolved, to
have tumbled him down from some Alpine Precipice. This is the true, virile,
Princely beauty, which our second Moses had, in its perfection, equal to the
former Moses, or either of those great Romans, by which he has frequently,
confounded Traitors, dashed all asassinates, dissolved conspiracies, and
rendered himself the wonder of the Age. Idem.
Adeo tanquam cum virtute ipsa, certamen haberet, haec naturae, sive dignitas,
sive majestas, etiam ab iis, honoris, obsequiique tributa exprimit, qui
adversus virtutem ipsam conspirasse videntur, says the same Modern Author; So
as if this same Majesty of Princely beauty, would claim priority of virtue it
self, exacting the tribute of honor and obedience, from the very haters
themselves of, and conspirators against, virtue. I shall close up all this,
with what a brave Orator, in a Panegyric, said to Constantine the Great, our
Countryman, Plin. in Panegyr. Con.
and one of the goodliest, brave Princes that ever lived upon Earth. Te cum
milites vident, admirantur and diligunt, sequuntur oculis, animo tenent: Deo se
obsequi putant, cujus tam pulchra forma est, quam certa divinitas: that Nature
was sent, on purpose, by God, as a gallant Harbinger, to compose a body for
him, suitable to his great spirit, as a stately house for a beautiful Lady to
live in, and that only this exterior form of his, made him to be beloved and
esteemed of all the World, as a certain divinity, or God descended from Heaven.

This I am sure, (though malice it may be will not) ought every one of this
Nation with as much justice and reason, say, of his late most Serene Highness,
our second Moses, and Lord Protector, who, as the former, was, from his Cradle,
known to be a most goodly Child, and during those his first, sweet, and tender
years, kept still a very gallant Stature, tall, and straight, as a Palm Tree,
and radiant, as a Star; and, as the excellent Cassiodorus well expresses it,
Cassiod.
he was in all things so accomplished, ut ne de aspectu Principis possit errari.
Every man might read a Prince in his Countenance.

Thus beauty of body, we see, is not a little desirable in a Prince; but if
the house answer not to the Frontispiece, what may we else say, but that Nature
has built up a goodly glorious Mansion, to lodge therein a great, though
handsome Beast? It shall be, therefore, our endeavor in our succeeding higher
Ascents, to make the internal Moses, in him, appear equal to the external, that
so, foul-faced malice it self, may not have power to deny, the Parallel to be
most Complete.

The third Ascent.
MOses was a high Favorite of Heaven, from his very Infancy, being then
miraculously delivered, from the danger of the waters, upon which he was
exposed (as Scripture teaches us) in an Arc of Bulrushes. O the inscrutable
paths of the Almighty! Exodus 2.3.
O the Heights! O the Depths of Divine Providence! Here we must pause a little,
and consider the great Salvations of the Lord, before we can proceed to
accomplish our Parallel.

Lo, here we find a little Infant, our great Moses, exposed to the mercy of
Nilus, in a strange bottom, a boat made of Bulrushes, Ibid.
or floating Cradle of Reeds. The poor tender Mother is wholly become
heartlesse, and abandoneth her Child to death, to save him from the Savage
cruelty of men, set on work, to destroy innocents, by the direful rigor of a
stern Tyrant. The Aunt, not altogether so hopeless, but a little bolder,
dares to follow the forlorn Infant, at some distance, so as to keep it within
the compass of her eye, endeavoring to see (if she could) what would become
of the Child; but her weakness, alas, could do nothing to warrant him from the
imminent danger: Almighty God, in the mean space, is pleased to become the
Pilot of this little Bark; he bears it upon the waves, and conducts it
without Sails, without Rudder, without Oars, or any other help, of stream or
tide, besides that, of his own eternal, and immense goodness, and so makes it
arrive, beyond all humane expectation, in a most happy Haven, and there to
discharge its lading in the arms of a Princess, with safety and comfort: A
Royal Harbor for such a poor weather-beaten boat, after so perilous a passage.

Now the little Infant is drawn forth by the pity of the Tyrants Daughter, and
he who was exposed as a victim to Pharaohs cruelty, must be thus, by the
Tyrants own Daughter, (his own flesh and blood) preserved to be a God of
Pharaohs, and to live to bury them, or their posterity, in the bottom of the
Red Sea, Exodus 4.16.
who would have drowned him in his infancy, in the River Nilus.

The Parallel.
I take it for a verity unquestionable, that great spirits set apart and
pre-ordained by Divine Providence, for the performance of future wonders, have
most particular tutelar Angels assigned to them for their protection, from
their very infancy; and those very persons, from their Cradles, are frequently
pointed out to us, by the finger of God himself, in their most miraculous
preservations. So we see in Histories, how the little King Mithridates, (that
was to prove one of the greatest, and most puissant Monarchs of the whole
Earth) being involved in lightning flashes, whilst he innocently slept in his
infant-cradle, the flames consuming his very swadling-cloaths and linnens, yet
he remained untoucht in his body.

In like manner, we find another Prodigy of Divine providence, so loudly
proclaimed in the Greek Anthology, how a father and an innocent son, were
equally surprised with a sad shipwreck, which took away the life of the father,
and gave the son leave to arrive in a safe Harbor, having no other vessel or
plank to carry him ashore, but the very corpse of his deceased father, who so
afforded him a second life by his death: and this very child thus wonderfully
delivered, grew up to be one of the bravest men in Greece.

I cannot pass by one other effect of Divine providence, no less stupendous
than the former, that fell out not long since in the Country of Apulia, where
happened an Earthquake, the last day of July 1627. and so prodigious a one,
that (as I have heard, and seen written) in the City of St. Severin alone, more
than ten thousand souls, were taken out of the World; and yet in the horror of
such infinite ruins, and sepulcher of so many mortals, a great Bell fell so
fitly over a little child, that it not only did him no hurt, but miraculously
enclosing him, made it self a Bulwark and defense for him against the danger of
all the other ruins: and this Child is now grown up (as I am informed) to be
one of the most considerable persons in all Italy.

Thus little Romulus, like our Infant Moses, being exposed to the same
merciless element, was most strangely preserved to be the Founder of the
greatest City, Monarchy, State, and Empire, of the universal World. I should be
infinite if I should run through the whole Series of sacred Providence, in the
particular miraculous preservations, that have been showed upon such principal
persons, from their very infancies. Yet, truly, if there were no other
instances of Divine providence left us, but only these two, of our first and
second Moses, we needed not allege more arguments to prove the singular care,
the Lord takes over the persons of good Princes.

We have seen on the one side, a little Infant floating on the waters of Nilus,
in a cradle built of Bulrushes, and lying just like a worm hidden in straw, and
whose afflicted friends, measured his Tomb with their eyes, in every billow of
that faithless element; yet was preserved at length from danger, by the very
blood of Pharaoh, to turn his Diadem into dust, and to bury him and his whole
army, in the dreadful gulf of the Red Sea.

They that have seen his late Highness, our sacred second Moses, in the like
former imminent perils, and the great actions he has since, most gloriously
arrived at, can best make a Parallel of the Providence. No Nurse or tender
Mother whatsoever, could be half so careful to drive a fly from the face of
her little Infant, whilst it slept, as the Providence of our gracious Lord, has
ever showed its self affectionate, in the conservation of his Highness his
most elevated soul: and, though I cannot say he was exposed upon, yet, as I
have heard, he has been in equal dangers, by, the water, as his first Matter
Moses was: and a great deal more by fire; tumbling from Precipices, falls from
Coaches, Horses, and Houses too, and what not? insomuch that it is said, the
imminency of those his Infant dangers, has struck the very hearts, and chil'd
the blood, in the veins, of all beholders.

Thus then we see a very parallel providence, over these two great persons,
their very Cradles kissing, and, as it were, conspiring to rock each other: and
truly, not without a great deal of reason, that they should run parallel in
their childhood-deliverances, (as we have seen) who were in their riper years,
to serve equally, as inspired instruments of Divine wonders: and all the World,
methinkes, if it had not been wilfully blind, must needs have discerned, in his
Highness his Infancy, that he was then, pointed out, by the Almighty
Providence, to be the same person, which he has since, so gloriously approved
himself to be. Those who had the honor to know his Highness, in those days,
can tell us, how he was born, a Thaumaturgus, and like another Hercules
Alexicacus, filled his cradle with no less wonder, than he has done the field
since, and afterward the Throne. Those his early wonders, yet, were but as the
flashing streakes of a Cloud, to be so instantly turned into lightning; as we
shall see more at large, in his diligent, and faithful imitation of his great
Master, and Prototype Moses, in all his higher Ascents.

The fourth Ascent.
MOses was very liberally bred, and had all the advantages of a Noble and
Princely education; being brought up, as the Text tells us, in all the learning
of the Egyptians. Thus the All-wise God, Acts 7, 12.
having selected him, to be Conductor, and Captain General of a hundred and six
thousand men at arms, to have, as it were, a Regency over the very Elements,
and a power to replenish the whole World with Prodigies; provided likewise a
breeding, equal to so high a Calling, to frame and fit him, for so supereminent
a condition, and to accomplish him with all heroic virtues. He suffered him
not to be trained up, as other Hebrew children were, in fear, and bondage,
which often overwhelm the bravest dispositions; but brought him to the Court of
Pharaoh, caused him to be nourished in all the exercises of Nobility, and to
swallow all the learning of the Egyptians, who then had the reputation of the
wisest, and the knowingest men of the whole World.

How simple, in the mean time, absurd, and and contrary to express Scripture,
is that opinion of some, which say, that Moses had no Egyptian learning at all,
nor more letters, than what he received from Abraham and Enoch, or, what he
heard from the mouth of God, by Oracles daily delivered to him?

To confute this folly, though Scripture it self were sufficient, I shall
produce further evidence. Philo de vita Moses.
First Philo the Jew, in his Book of the Life of Moses, gives us the exact
History of his education, and assures us, that he learned of Egyptian Masters,
Arithmetic, Geometry, Music, both Theorical, and Practick; together, with all
sorts of Philosophy, and the Secrets of Hieroglyphics. In all which pieces of
learning, he grew to such perfection, that he was acknowledged for a Master, by
the very Egyptians themselves: insomuch, that when Pythagoras and Plato, came
to learn the Sciences in Egypt, Pythagoras. Plato.
they would first of all, study the Doctrine of Moses: whose name, in those
times, as we find by them, was in great admiration through all Egypt: and it is
more than probable, that from his Books, they did conceive all that Divinity,
which they have delivered, and the reason of God, which they declare, under the
notion of the first cause.

After them Numenius, the famous Pythagorean, wrote many things, concerning
Mosaical Doctrine, as Basil the great restifies; Basil.
and Numenius adds, that Plato himself, was no other, then Moses speaking in
Greek. Nay, Clemens Alexandrinus, and Eusebius, both say, Clem. Alex. Eusebius.
that the Gentiles received all the very mysteries of their Religion, from the
Books of Moses; though enfolding them, in some odd fables; and Orpheus himself,
confesses, Orpheus.
that he learned diverse things from the Doctrine of Moses; especially, in the
Book which he made of the Sacred Word, that he says himself, he took out of
the Mosaical Tables: as also, that which he sang concerning God, known to the
only Chaldean Moses; which Verses of his, Fran. George in lib. de haerm Mund.
one Francis George, has reduced into Latin, in his Book of the Harmony of the
World. Nemo illum nisi Chaldaeo de sanguine quidam Progenitus vidit. Now, some
have been of opinion, that Orpheus meant by this Chaldean, Noath, and others
Enoch, and the Platonists took him for Zoroastres, who was the son of Cham; but
the following words convince, it could be no body else, but Moses. Priscorum
nos haec docuerunt omnia voces, Quae binis tabulis, Deus olim tradidit illis;
Now, to none of them, were the Tables of the Commandments given, but to Moses
only. Thus we see, he was not only a perfectly well bred Scholar, but the
very Fountain of all our Learning. A most excellent Natural Philosopher, he
must needs be; for that learning then flourisht most there: and besides, sure
he must needs know, the true causes of all things, that was so well acquainted
with all the Almighties Counsels of Creation: then for his skill in Moral and
Politic Philosophy, it must be altogether as undeniable, being entrusted with
the supreme, Civil, and Military power, over Gods own people, for so many
years, and holding forth to us still, such Moral and Political Laws, and
Constitutions, that will never be matched, by any Legislator in the World. Then,
for his Divinity, there need be sure as little doubt, who had the constant
conversation with God himself, and did by particular direction from him, couch,
all the sacred Mysteries of Religion, Exodus Number. Levit. Deuteronomy.
in the several joints and pieces of the Tabernacle, and the very hems of
Aarons garments; as may appear more at large, in his last four Books.

The Parallel.
We have hitherto convers't, in the Mosaical outworks only, and seen these
two high Favorites of Heaven, our first and second Moses, marching hand in hand
together, in most amicable Parallel, through some remarkable Ascents of their
Infancy: We are now happily entering into the Inner Moses, and to reflect
something upon the dispositions of their Adolescency, which there is no doubt,
but we shall find, very agreeable to their Births. And, indeed, one of the
greatest benefits, which youth can receive at the hands of God, is the
favorable blessing of a good education; it is that, which polisheth and
purifieth humane Nature, as one would do a precious Stone, obscured with earth,
or base ordure; it is that, which as a late Doctor tells us, makes of men, (as
it were) Angels: and, without it, doubtless the goodliest, and most precious
natures, would perpetually dwell in a sad brutishness: But above all others,
Princes ought to have an extraordinary advantage of Learning; for it is highly
necessary, sure, that their souls should be fullest of lights, and flames,
which are to serve others, for so great guides, and to be most exquisitly
adorned with good letters, who know (as doubtless our second Moses did, from
his Cradle) that they are to be set aloft upon pinacles, to change their words
into Laws, and lives into examples. And he that was to be Supreme Magistrate of
so many Nations, ought, sure, with incessant study, read, unite, and
incorperate in his sole self, the virtues, and faculties of many others. And so
our glorious second Moses did, who was no less remarkable, for his true
Liberal, Noble, and Princely education, than the former. And, truly, for this
we must acknowledge eternal obligations to his Highness, his most honorable
Parents, who had a principal care, to perfect the natural endowments of their
Child, with those of Art; to the shame of many fathers, and mothers, at this
day, who too much resemble Ostriches, who lay their eggs in the open way,
without hatching them, abandoning their children to become a prey to misery,
ignorance, and impiety: But his Highness, most illustrious Parents, desirous
to live in the honor, of their incomparable Child, and to give him a breeding
equal to his Nobility, Beauty, and Ingeny, and to those miraculous
preservations, by which he was pointed out by Providence, to be a future
Instrument of Divine wonders, as the former Moses was, would give him an
education equal to his. And it is notorious, that he sucked in, a very great
proportion of Philosophy, with the first milk, that he drew from his Mother
University; as also, he devoured many other Pieces of profane learning, which,
may be, were supererrogatory in a Prince; yet, by that means, he merited to be
then as much thought the glory of the Gown, as he has since, proved himself the
honor of the Sword; for, he attained to so stupendous a pitch of Learning, in
so few years, that all that knew him then, thought it rather came, (which was
suspected upon the former Moses too) by inspiration, than acquisition: and who
could then but admire, those fair blossoms, of which we have seen since, such
excellent fruits, Nor can there be less doubt of his perfection in Political
knowledge, made by any man, that will but look upon his most Serene Highness,
his Government, either Civil, or Military, over us, or the Laws that he has
established, for the eternal safety, and comfort, of these Nations. And, as for
Divinity, I mean, that of the heart, that Grand Cardinal Piece, and most
principal part of Royal Learning, we all know, that was bred and born with him:
a Divinity, I say, not lodged in the Schools, that is too knotty sure for
Princes heads; but that which is reposed in godly hearts, and that is the true
fear of the Lord, which is acknowledged by Scripture it self, to be the
beginning of all Wisdom: and, though we dare not assert, for it is unknown,
what personal discourses he has had with the Almighty, yet we may affirm, that
all his inspirations were Divine; and his conversation was ever so celestical,
as if he lay, in the very bosom of the Deity. Upon the whole, then, as his
first Master Moses, was bred up in all the Learning of the Egyptians, so was
his most Serene Highness, disposed to consecrate his hopeful youth, to the
study of the Arts, in one of our Universities; wherein he came to so much
perfection, that he was pleased do descend to a degree, by which he made that,
more than himself, Laureat, for so he was without it. Then, that the other most
famous Sister, should not be dejected, he was pleased to crown her, with the
acceptance of her highest degree of Honor, and to lay a further obligation
upon her, and the whole Commonwealth of Learning, he has been pleased since to
own himself, her Patron, Chancellor, and most particular Protector; and since
his Highness his greater occasions, have hindered his attendance on that
Charge, he has yet added to her obligations, by bequeathing that care, to his
most excellent son, and Princely Successor, his now most Serene Highness, whom
we may so justly entitle to be, Chara Dei soboles, magnum Jovis Incrementum:
and can no more doubt that he will trace the steps of his renowned father, than
he, our second, has showed himself to be a perfect imitator of his great Master
the first Moses; as we shall still find his Highness, mounting after him, in
the succeeding Ascents.

The fifth Ascent.
MOses lived a long retired life in his youth, contemning the pomp and
greatness, of Pharaohs Court, and all the World besides: choosing rather to
pass as a private Shepherd in a Desert, and to keep his father in Law Jethro's
Flocks, Exodus 3.
than to be made a Companion of Kings. Now, here I must be bold to assert, that
none but high bred, as well as high born, souls, are capable of understanding,
much less of undergoing, such a blessed solitude, as this our old Master Moses
did. In this he showed himself, to have attained to the very highest pitch of
Philosophy, and all Learning, in so discreet a contempt of all the profits,
pleasures, glories, and vanities, of the World.

Here, then, behold, and admire, (all you pitiful plaistered Puppits of the
World) this grand Master of Honor, and Learning, Moses; who, though enriched,
with all the fair perfections of mind, and body, requisite to the
accomplishment of a Courtier, could not be brought, by all the powerful
allurements of Pharaohs Daughter; no, nor yet by the solicitations, of his poor
brethren, then in bondage, who stood in no little need, (God knows) of such a
helper, lying then, under a most Tyrannical oppression: or, could be persuaded,
to accept the charge, of any public employments; but, chose rather for a great
while, to retire himself, and to live a free, and harmless Shephered, in a
Desert, than to embroil his celestial soul, in any mundane matters, or to
idolize his sinful captivity, in a Court.

This is the highest point of Philosophy in the World, for a man, especially in
his youth, to know how to make himself his own, to set light by, and trample
under-foot, all that is without him; to look on all the pomps, and pleasures,
of this World, as the old Egyptians did, upon those dangerous thieves, whom
they then termed Philistas, that were wont to tickle, fawn upon, and embrace,
whom they had a purpose to strangle. And truly, if the headache, should seize
upon us, before drunkenness, we should all beware of too much drinking; but
sordid sensuality, the better to entrap us, makes her apparent pleasures, to
march still before us, and hides perpetualy, her too rugged, and repentant
track from us. If we can arrive at so happy a knowledge, as to see into those
miserable consequences beforehand, it must be only, by the pure help of
Philosophy, or the immediate grace of God. And this was that, which our
Patriarch Moses did see, and accordingly practice; not making, neither, such a
sad, and valedictory retreat, as some Princes, and great Persons have done, to
quit, and forsake the World, when either they have been weary of it, or that
has been of them: but a true Mosaical retreat, a retreat of improvement, a
retreat, to bring us on afterward (as at a jump) with greater advantage, a
retreat to cultivate, and enrich a soul: This was that, I say, our Moses did,
who, when he had devoured all the learning of the Egyptians, he would retire
himself a while, to digest it in the Land of Midian: when he had sucked in all
the seeds of good literature from the Schools, he withdrew a while, to improve
the growth of them in the fields; so avoiding all commixture of weeds, which
many times, does strangle the best and most sublime parts in men: And, to
conclude all this, our great Master Moses, chose to avoid all those
pestilences, that usually attend upon Courts, and most Companies, to go to
fructify in the Desert.

The Parallel.
Now, as we have seen our first Moses, making his rich retreat, and preferring
it before all the delicacies of Pharaohs Court; so we shall see our glorious
second, making have after him, whose inspired wisdom, knew full well, even in
those his youthful years, how to set a just value, upon all those empty
nothings, pomps, pleasures, and glories, of the World, and look upon the Court
then, no otherwise, than as his grand Master Moses before him had done, as the
nest of envy, and ambition; and as a late Writer* most excellently extracts out
of diverse ancient Authors, that it was a mere den of darkness, where the
heavens and stars, are scarcely to be seen, but through a little crevis: As a
Mill, always skreaking with perpetual clatter, where men inchained like beasts
of labor, are condemned to turn the stones: As a prison of slaves, who are all
tied in the golden gyves of a specious servitude; yet, in all that glitter,
suffer themselves to be gnawed upon, by the vermin of base abominable passions.
As a list, where all the Combatants are stark mad, that enter, their arms
nothing but fury, their prize smoke, their career glass, or ice, and utmost
bounds, but precipices. As the house of Circe, where reasonable creatures, are
transformed into savage beasts, where Bulls gore, Lions roar, Dogs bark, and
worry one another; Vipers hiss, and Basilisks carry death in their looks. To
conclude, as the House of winds, a perpetual tempest on the firm land,
shipwreck without water, where vessels are split, even in the haven of hope: In
fine, as a most miserable place, where vice reigns by nature, misery by
necessity; and if any virtue be found there, it must be by miracle: Greg. in
Job. 20.
So that we may fitly apply to those old Courtiers, that passage in Job, so
much insisted on, by the great Gregory; Gigantes gemunt sub aquis, the Giants
or great Men of the Earth, do groan under the waters, that is, being drawn into
a little disgrace, by a furious torrent of envy, they sigh and mourn, as
overwhelmed in an ocean of calamities. One frown of their Prince, is more
formidable to them, than the look of a Basilisk, and more terrible than the
crack of Canon, or thunder it self. Besides, what more base, abject, servil
sort of men, is there in the World? they will bend, and bow, like a fishers
angle, they must stoop, turn, and wheel about, to all purposes, that they may
arrive, at their pretensions? They buy all their honor, at the price of
pitiful submissions, their Scarlet, at the rate of sordid ambition, and glory,
with the coin of slavery, as is most excellently illustrated by eloquent
Cyprian thus, Cyprian ad Donatum.
Qui amictu clariore conspicuus, fulgere sibi videtur in Purpura, etc. Quibus
hic sordibus emit ut fulgeat? quot arrogantium fastus prius pertulit? quas
superbas fores matutinus salutator obsedit? quot tumentium contumeliosa
vestigia ante praecessit, un ipsum etiam salutantium comes postmodum turba
praecederet? This silly Courtier, says he, gazeth upon himself in Scarlet, but
how many base submissions has the luster of those cloths cost him? how many
scorns, contempts, and repulses, has he swallowed from some more arrogant than
himself? how many proud gates has he besieged every day, to perform his
complements? and how many times has he made himself a stirrup-holder, or
footboy, for the service of some disdainful Prince, to gain this train, that
now attends upon himself.

Indeed, such a condition, is more to be pitied, than envyed; so it was well
answered of an old Courtier, when asked, How he could continue so long in Court?
Injurias accipiendo, says he, and gratias agendo, by receiving injuries
thankfully. Thus some men will fatten with affronts, and disgraces, as slavish
dogs with bastenado's. My Lords High Mosaic prudence, in the mean time, more
feared, than envyed, that course of life, and chose rather to lie hidden for
many years, in his little privacy of a safe and sweet retreat, and a learned
solitude, like a true Princely Pearl, under the waves, then to be worn about
the necks of Monarchs.

Marc. Aur. Ant. de vit. sua, l. 4.
One of the greatest wits, as well as Princes, and the most virtuous man of a
Pagan, that ever was under heaven, the Emperor Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, in
his Book, that he writ of his own Life, so much commends this kind of
retirement, which a wise man makes within himself; that he assures us, that in
all the Palaces, Gardens, Orchards, and Delicacies, of all the Kings of the
World, there is nothing so delightful as it. In which kind of life it is, that
a virtuous and knowing soul, involves it self, in its little shell, and
withdrawing it self out of the saltwaters of the World, lives purely with the
dew of heaven. There it is where the soul, which is scattered in an
overwhelming multitude of affairs, foldes it self within it self: there it is,
where it begins truly to suck in its own sap: there it is, where it
accommodates, and prepares its hive, like a busy Be, and endeavors to gather
its honey, to communicate to all the World. There it is, and only there, where
it enters into a new world, an intelligible world, a peaceable world, a world
smiling with sweet serenity of air, and radiant lights, as becomes such a
blessed solititude, a true Temple of repose. This was the Noble rich
retirement, that our glorious second Moses chose to place his soul in, winding
himself up in his private recesses, as within his own bottom, after the example
of his great Prototype; nor could he ever fear to faint, or droop, through any
ted^ous mind-tiring idleness, (the consequent of most solitarinesses) having
such a stock of soul to improve, as he had, his Highness knew as well as that
Scipio, nunquam minus solus esse quam cum solus: and, ut in solis sit sibi
turba locis, never to be less alone, then when he was alone, and to supply
himself with company of himself, as we shall see by the great profit he reaped,
by his learned solitude; which will more clearly appear, in the process of our
following Parallels.

The sixth Ascent.
MOses was most miraculously called by God from his retirement, to undertake
the deliverance, care, and conduct, of his people, the Lord appearing to him in
a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush. This Ascent, Exodus 3.1.
truly, of our great Patriarch, and Prototype Moses, is so Prodigious, and
purely Divine, that I cannot pass it, without rendering a relation of the
particular circumstances. As our retired Moses was in the midst of his beloved
solitude, in the innocent society of his father-in-laws sheep; Ibid. v. 2.
and as he was leading his flock to the back side of the Desert, and came to
the mountain of God, V. 3.
even to Horeb. The Angel of the Lord appeared unto him, in a flame of fire,
out of the midst of a bush, and he looked, V. 4.
and behold the bush burnt with fire, V. 5.
and was not consumed, And Moses said, I will now turn aside, and see this
great fight, V. 6.
why the bush is not burnt; And when the Lord saw that he turned aside to see,
God called unto him out of the midst of the Bush, and said, Moses, Moses, and
he said, Here am I* and he said, Draw not nigh hither, put off the shoes from
off thy feet, for the place whereon thou stand, is holy ground. Moreover he
said, etc.

The Parallel.
Out of this miraculous Call, and Commission given to our first Moses, we may
clearly collect, as a most remarkable Corollary, that the Lord Amighty, has not
only a most particular providence over the estates and governments of Princes;
but also a most extraordinary respect unto their persons, vouchsafeing them
frequently, the favor, and familiarity, of his own discourses: and that either
by his own personal calling upon them, as hear to our first Moses, young
Samuel, and diverse others, as stupendous Stories; or by the mission of Angels,
as to Abraham, Loath, and diverse other Princes, and Prophets of his people; or
else by dreams and visions, as to Abimelech, King of Gerar, to forwarn him of
Abraham's wife, and the like: So, not only the present text of our Ascent; but
the whole current of Scripture, is consenting to our Corollary. Nay, this
Divine favor, was not only wont to be conferred, upon the Princes of Gods own
people only, but to mere stranger Kings, and sometimes Infidels.

As first, to a former Pharaoh, God sent a dream, (which Joseph afterward
interpreted) by which the King prevented his own ruin, and the destruction of
his people, by a dismal dearth. So was the like favor vouchsafed to Alexander
the Great, as Quintus Curtius tells us, whilst that victorious Prince
maintained the siege of the City of Tire; by which means, he was made soon
Master of the place, which but some few hours before, he despaired of, and
resolved to rise from before it.

We find likewise in Roman Story, that Calphurnia, wife to the adopted father
of Julius Caesar, gave him timely notice of a dream of hers, concerning him,
which he despising, and going fearlesse to the Senate House, found her dream to
sort to a woeful effect: But his wise Successor, Augustus, who was to be
Revenger of his blood, upon the Conspirators, made better use of another
dream, that was Antonius his Physician; advising him, though he was sick, yet
he should not fail to be present in the Battle, which was the next day to be
given, by Brutus and Cassius, and by no means to stay in his Tent, which he
would have done, had not Antonius used his most pressing persuasions to the
contrary, which was the saying of his life; for the enemy won the Tents, and
would have undoubtedly destroyed him, had they found him there. So by this
means, he won the day, and the world together, and became the sole peaceable
Monarch of the Roman Empire; that under his Reign, our Prince of Peace, and
Glorious Redeemer, should be born, as he was.

Now, God forbid, that we should think the Almighty Providence less
solicitous, over the persons of Christian Princes, and their pious proceedings:
no, he has, abundantly showed, that no Mother, or Nurse, had so much tender
affection, and care over their sucklings, as his goodness has showed it self
careful in their pre-cautions and admonitions of dangers, and most frequent
conservations, which all Christian Histories are full of: But indeed, we need
go no further, than to the Histories of the holy War, written by Paulus
Aemilius, and Gulielmus Tyrius, how often he has vouchsafed missions of Angels,
and also holy Dreams, and Visions, to direct those pious Princes. Nay, the Lord
kept the very birds of the air, in pay under Godfry of Bouillon; for who can be
but astonished, to hear it told, how, when he besieged Jerusalem, the Sultan
having taught pigeons, to carry messages, dispatched one of them with a Letter,
which she bore under her wings, to give some advice to the besieged; but
Providence would have it, that a Hawk seizing on her, just over the Christian
Army, took her, and made her bring her information to the Christians, touching
the enemies design. But as for Dreams, the three last Harry's of France, are
undoubtedly the greatest examples, who all were divinely admonisht of their
approaching danger of death, by their Queens, and other Princes of their blood;
but they with over-confidence would run on heedlesse, and headlong, to their
own destruction. Nay, the middlemost of the three, besides the admonitions, he
received from the Dreams of others, saw himself, in a Dream, how all his Royal
ornaments, viz. his Linen Vesture, Sandalls, Dalmatian Robe, Mantle of Azure
Satin, the great and lesser Crowns, Scepter, and hand of Justice, Sword, and
Guilt-Spurs, all bloody, and fouled with peoples feet, and that he himself was
very angry with the Sexton of St. Denis, about it; and though he wanted not
good counsel, according to the danger of his Dream, to stand securely upon his
guard, and make use of the fair pre-monition of heaven; yet would, forsooth,
out of his gallantry, expose his person to the malice of those, who kept a
fatal blow in store for him.

I cannot stand here to dispute with the learned Volaterranus, whether all men
in general, going to Bed, not cloyed with bad affections, nor any superfluities
of meat or drink, but being throughout virtuously and healthfully disposed,
their souls in sleeping, may not foresee things to come: for I must hasten to
accomplish our Parallel: and it is indeed, as much as concerns our present
purpose, to say, that we are very certainly sure, of so much, (as by some
instances has been showed already, and might be by many more) that the Dreams
of Kings, and Princes, Prophets, Generals of Armies, Magistrates, and all
Public Persons, that hold any Eminent Degree, either in Church, or State, are
commonly prophetical, and monitory, of things to come, or to be done: This I
say, by grace especial and Divine, not Natural, as may more plainly appear in
this our precious Parallel. And indeed, to say, that our most gracious Lord,
had not an equal care, of his late sacred Highness, our second Moses, as he
had of the former, of an Alexander, a Julius, or Augustus Caesar (who was to be
as glorious in his Victories, and a greater Instrument of Divine wonders, than
any, except this his happy Parallel,) would be an infidelity greater as theirs,
that oppugn Divine Providence it self.

I dare not yet boldly affirm, that our second Moses in his retirement, met
with any flaming Bush, and the Lord speaking to him out of it; or that he has
had any such personal discourses, with the Almighty: if his late Highness has
had any of those, they were only then known, as I believe, to the Lord, and to
his own sacred self. But this I have most certainly been informed, that his
Highness had many Revelations, and Divine Dreams, to the same purpose,
admonishing him, what he should do, and foretelling him what he should arrive
at: which that I may not prejudice, by my rude relation, I hold better to pass
by with silence, till some that his most Serene Highness was pleased to make
knowing of them, shall do the World the favor, as to make the discovery. But
so much is notorious to all these Nations, that as our second Moses was retired
like the former, and near the backside of the Desert too, but still near the
Mountain of God: the Lord found him out there, and called him; for who can
hide, what the Lord will bring to light? Sed quis te Cyllarus, aut Arion posset
cripere, quem sequebatur imperium? as was most excellently said by Eumenius.
What Horse or Dolphin is so swift, that can steal from mortal eyes, a person
whom the Providence of God pursues with Empire in hand? A burning, and a
speaking Bush, must call the first Moses from his retirement, to deliver and
conduct his brethren out of bondage; and no less, I am sure, than three
Kingdoms all in a flame, with the united cries of so many millions, and in them
too, the voice of God, for so is vox populi, could move our incomparable late
Protector, to ingulph himself, in the Ocean of Public employment. We have
seen, that extraordinary Persons, must have extraordinary Calls, and our second
Moses his first Call, from his dear, divine solitude, was a public
Parliamentary Call, and there too, when he was most violently persuaded to
appear; how long was it, before he could induce his most settled and serene
Soul, to be capable of the sollicitudes of State? but for diverse years sat in
Parliament, and Committees, upon all the Commonwealths occasions, as the Birds
of Baruch, upon white thorns, and as the Giants of holy Job, before spoken of,
which mourned under the waters: and this we shall see more plainly appear, in
the process of our succeeding Ascents, and Parallels.

The seventh Ascent.
MOses being in his own judgment, and in all outward appearance, unfit for so
great a Charge, was very unwillingly persuaded by God, to undertake it;
insomuch, Exodus 3.11.
as it came to a very high expostulation between them. Was there ever such a
dispute with the Almighty? Or was there ever seen such a difficulty in man, to
be persuaded to so high a point of preferment? Behold what arguments he raises
against the Lord, and his own self. And his first refusal seems to proceed,
from a vice of over-modesty; for the sacred Text tells us, That Moses said unto
God, Who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh, Ibid v. 12.
and that I should bring the children of Israel out of Egypt? which the Lord
was pleased graciously to answer, and satisfy with an assurance, that he world
be with him, etc. Then he proceeds to something of a double diffidence; first
objecting, Behold when I come unto the children of Israel, and shall say unto
them, V. 13.
the God of your fathers has sent me unto you, and they shall say unto me,
What is his name? What shall I say unto them? To which the Lord was pleased to
reply, by condescending to give him his Name, V. 14.
I am that I am, and commanded him to say, to the children of Israel, that I am
had sent him unto them, and so furnished him with a large Commission, and
instructions. But yet our Moses will be doubtful still of the force and effect
of his Almighty Commission; for he answered and said, But behold they will not
believe me, nor hearken unto my voice; Exodus 4.1.
for they will say, The Lord has not appeared unto thee. Now this redoubled
doubt, and diffidence of poor Moses, the most gracious Lord pleased to reform
with two stupendous miracles, and so to frighten him into a better obedience:
V. 2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.
First with his own Rod turned into a Serpent, and returned into a Rod again;
and then with his own hand, made Leprous, and whole again, all in a moment; so
drawing, as it were, its contagion, and cure from his own bosom. Nay, further,
to fortify his faith, and credit his Commission, with the children of Israel,
the Lord assures him, that he shall have the power to turn the water of the
River into blood upon the dry Land.

Now after all this, was it possible that there should be any more evasion
found out, by our too modest Moses? Yes surely, and to something savouring of a
very high infidelity: For Moses replied unto the Lord, O my Lord, I am not
eloquent, V. 10.
neither heretofore, nor since thou have spoken unto thy servant; but I am slow
of speech, and of an impedited tongue: But yet behold the benignity of our
gracious God, who is pleased still to confute him, without any taking of
offense: only asking him the question, V. 11.12.
Who made man's mouth, or who makes the dumb or the deaf, or the seeing, or the
blind? Have not I the Lord? then assuring him, that he will be with his mouth,
and teach him what he shall say. What could be expected after this, but a ready
assent? yet instead of that, behold he flies out to a flat denial; to all this
over-modesty, diffidence, and almost infidelity, he will yet add obstinacy,
and a dismal disobedience, as ever was heard of, and plainly bid the Lord send
whom he would. 13.
Then the anger of the Lord was kindled against Moses; yet so mercifully, as to
be pleased to reconcile himself to him instantly again, and by further
assurances of his Almighty favors, with the promised assistencie of his
brother Aaron, so to convince his doubting servant, 14.
and to convert him to a more resolute faith, and active obedience.

Thus then, the business now stands agreed on, our poor, modest, diffident,
and fearful, Moses, is now become a faithful, and a stout one; and the Lord who
full well knew before, his capacities to discharge, is now pleased to pardon
his long unwillingnesse to perform, his so great, and weighty Commands.

The Parallel.
Now truly our second Moses, cannot appear less Parallel to the first, in this
his unwillingnesse to accept of all public Charges, than he has done in all
his accomplishments of parts, or any of the past Ascents. And yet this
unwillingness of his, never proceeded from any diffidence of, or disobedience
to, any Divine Commands, which was indeed, the fault of our former Moses: but
partly from his own humility, over-modesty, and high contempt of all earthly
things. His sanctified spirit looked upon all those flattering flourishes, of
this worlds greatness, no otherwise, than as the true gardens of Adonis, which
in the beginning make a fair show of some si^ly flowers, but in conclusion,
afford nothing but thorns. He always reckoned, that the Careers of the
greatest honors here below, were but of ice, and most commonly bounded with
headlong ruins. He found in his younger judgment, as we have seen, (though
certainly it was an inspired piece of prudence) that all the pitiful felicities
of this life, were only floating Islands, which recoil backwards, when a man
thinks for to touch them, with his fingers; or as the Feasts of Heliogabalus,
where were fair invitations, many reverences, and many services; but in the
end, nothing but a Table appears, set out with a Banquet made of wax, which
melts before the fire, and from whence a man must return, more hungry than he
came: Or yet, more like the enchanted egg of Oromazes, wherein the impudent
Magician, boasted to have enclosed all the happiness of the Universe; but when
it was opened, there was found, nothing but wind.

These were the solitary considerations that moved his late most Serene
Highness, to his so long and close concealment of himself. And indeed, the
heavenly Providence over this great Person, (if we look well throughout him)
can never be otherwise read, then (as letters written with the juice of Limon)
by the help of fire, or flame of a burning Bush, as before, which must not
only flame neither, but must consume even to his own door, may be ready to
involve all in a general conflagration, before he would at all think himself to
be concerned, or busily bestirre himself to quench it: or before he would
undertake (the unhappy necessities of State then requiring a war) any part of
his incomparable Mosaical conduct. So that we may at last affirm, and conclude
of him, as Claudian does of his brave Emperor Theodosius, that Solus meruit
regnare rogatus, there is none worthy of a Crown, but he that must be
importuned to it.

Now some we know there have been, that have had an most enraged desire to
Empire, and yet would feign themselves to have all the aversions in the world
against it; and so have caused themselves, to be carried to their Thrones, like
unwilling beasts to the slaughter. The truth of it is, the heart of man, as the
Scripture tells us, is inscrutable above all things, and more especially so, in
point of ambition; and I have often considered those three difficult questions
which the Angel proposed to Esdras, to weigh the fire, to measure the wind, and
to number the veins of the Abyss, and really I find, the intricacy of an
exorbitant ambition, to be all that. Ambition is a devouring fire, who can
poise it? It is a most robustious violent wind, who can hold, or fathom it? It
is a bottomless Abyss, who can count the issues, and the sources of it? The
middle of the Earth, has been found, the depth of the Sea has been sounded,
the height of the Alps, and Riphaean Hills, themselves has be taken, and
measured, the remotest limits of the hollow caverns of Caucasus, have been
dived into; the head-spring of Nilus it self, has not escaped the discovery:
only, in the hearts of men, we cannot find the bounds of desire of commanding.

This (I say) is too true, in the community of men; but his Mosaical Highness,
has ever given such visible and apparent proofs, of his divine self-denying
spirit, and such irrefragable arguments, of his real reluctancies, against all
offers whatsoever, of wordly greatness, that malice it self, cannot object,
the least spot of ambition to have possessed his inspired bosom. For first, we
have seen, how long he was pleased to conceal himself, like his dear Master
Moses, in the backside of the Desert, near to the Mountain of God, where he
could have no conversation, but with him, and his own soul; and we all know how
unwilling he was, to forsake that his beloved humble retreat, which sure he had
never done, if he had not studied most thoroughly the best of Poets, so often
repeated, Sic vos, non vobis: and been more divinely taught, that all which is
most excellent in creatures, is not for the creatures, which possess it; as
light is not in the Sun, for the Sun it self, nor waters are in the Ocean, for
the Ocean it self. The great God of the Universe, who gave Brightness to the
one, and Rivers to the other, would, that both should tend to the public
commodity of men, and has thereby ordained them, to pass on to the glory of
the Sovereign Being.

His inspired Highness, full well knew, that Kingdoms were not made so much
for Kings, as Kings for their Kingdoms; for they are made so, and set over
them, to this end only, to do them, not themselves, good, and to protect them,
and preserve them, as the goods of God himself. His Highness likewise
considered, that so soon as a man is born with, and bred up to, fair and worthy
parts, he is to employ himself, and them, for the public good; and he who
would retain to himself, what Divine Providence gave in common, commits a
sacrilege in the great Temple of the God of Nature; and he that perpetually
reflects on himself in all things, and draws, as it were, all to himself, as if
he were so made, only for himself, opposes his Creator, and Judge, and makes
himself corrival with the Sovereign Majesty of Heaven.

Now after that our second Moses, had, upon these Divine considerations, been
drawn to put himself forth upon public Services, we all know, how unwilling he
has been to receive the dues of his own honors, and how desirous he was rather
to wrap himself up, nay, to bury himself, if he could have done it, in his
first colors, than to proceed to higher Commands, which being still enforced
upon him by his own Mosaical merits, we have seen likewise with what humility,
and great candor of spirit, he has ever managed them. And when the pressing
necessities of State required, that one single person should sit at the Helm,
and that he was pointed out, both by God and man, for that purpose; how
unwilling was he to accept the Charge? insomuch, that when the Protector at of
these Nations, was so violently pressed upon him, by the then wearied
Parliament; who knows not, with what sighs, and groans, not to be uttered, and
sad regrets, less to be understood, he was at length pleased to undergo the
Charge? Nay, yet further, Is it not most evident, how to his very last day, he
has with an incomparable constancy, and magnanimity of spirit, refused and
resisted, all those urgent importunities of Parliament, and People, Council,
and Army, pressing the Crown, and the Title of King upon him? And in all this,
has he not most perfectly proved himself, the follower of his pattern, and
great Master Moses? who was not only unwilling to receive the honor of
Captain General over his Brethren, but refused and contemned the whole Court,
and Kingdom of Pharaoh.

Thus our blessed Savior, the Pattern of all patterns, to convince the World,
that he was the Example of all perfection, would appear only great in refusing
of a whole world, which the Devil did, as it were, unfold to him, before his
feet. So, doubtless, it was his Divine will likewise, that the virtue of the
greatest men, should appear clearly in the refusal of the greatest honors,
when as, by his Spirit, the blessed Baptist, refused the greatest of all
Titles, which was to own the high honor, and name of the Messiah. Indeed, it
is a most particular grace, and favor afforded by God; to make a man to open
his eyes upon himself, to know himself as he ought, to measure himself, and to
set limits upon his own desires.

Now this especial grace, we see the Lord has largely bestowed upon these his
two extraordinary Servants, our first and second Moses. And indeed, my Lord
always looked upon those spirits with pity, who outragiously mad after
greatness, pursue it with all manner of toil, and sinister practices, and
never counted them to be otherwise, than as bubbles, that rise on the water in
the time of a Tempest, which both increase, and crack in a moment. That
wretched sordid ambition it was, which made the great Roman Emperors of old,
to sit so slippery upon their Thrones, and to live, indeed, but the age of
flowers, still driving one another out, as nails do; or as the waves that are
still beating one another, to be broken against Rocks. No, our glorious second
Moses, like the first, was ever elevated to so high a pitch of Holy, and Divine
contemplations, that he looked upon all the greedy Great ones of the World, but
as so many pitiful Ants, furiously contending for a poor simple grain of earth:
and truly, the vast distance of his high spirit, from all sublunary things,
made the whole Globe of the World, appear to him no otherwise, than as a little
point, and that almost imperceptible: good reason therefore had his Mosaical
prudence, to be unwilling, to trouble himself at all about it; but enough has
been said as to that, so we will hasten, from the unwillingnesse of these our two
Grand Masters to accept, to celebrate their promptness, fidelity, and
activity, in the glorious execution, of their several Charges: which will
abundantly appear in our after Ascents, and Parallels.

The eighth Ascent.
MOses found the Lord faithful, in the performance of all his promised
assistance to him: by which means, Exodus 7.
he wrought stupendous miracles in Egypt, and by those, so quickly brought to
a confusion, all the Learning, Policy, Sorcery, and Malice, of the Egyptians.
And indeed, to go about to prove, that there is fidelity in the Lord of Heaven
and Earth, toward his servants here below, would be altogether as impertinent,
as to demonstrate water to be in the Sea, or light in the Sun: especially when
he (that is the eternal Truth) has said it, that he is righteous, in all his
ways, and faithful, in all his words and works.

Our Moses is now to meet with men, and devils; but the Lord will enable him,
as he promised, to withstand, and subdue all their malicious and magical
oppositions.

First Pharaoh, upon our Moses his coming to Court, and receiving his first
summons, (instead of being obedient to the Lords commands, and giving the
people their desired liberty to go and serve him) calls his Cabinet-Council
about him, Exodus 5.
and by their politic advices, increases presently the Israelites Taskes, on
purpose to inflame them to a mutiny, and make them murder those that came about
to deliver them. Exodus 6.
But the Lord, who stills the roaring of the waves, and the madness of the
people, is pleased quickly to pacify them, and make them comfortably to
submit, to their barbarous burdens, and peaceably and patiently to expect the
day of their desired Redemption.

When this subtle piece of king-craft, would not serve proud Pharaohs turn,
and all his politic Junto, were at a stand, the Devil must be presently
employed, and all the Magicians of the Land, sent for, that they, forsooth, may
beard this great Ambassador of God, and vye with their diabolical
enchantments, Exodus 7.
divine Miracles: So Moses could no sooner cast his Rod down upon the ground,
to become a Serpent; but those devilish Sorceres, would do as much, though all
theirs, were to be devoured by the Divine Rod. Nay, Rivers turned into blood,
and producing of innumerable Frogs, could not outdo their cheating
enchantments. But when the sacred Rod was to be stretched forth again, and the
dust of the earth smitten into lice, Exodus 8.
then, Ars tua Typhe jacet, the Magicians are all at a gaze, there their
Sorcery is quite confounded, and they are constrained to confess, that the
Devil, their good Lord and Master, has a power limited; for silly lice, of
which man is naturally a creator, are Ibid v. 19.
enough to confound these great Negromancers, and make them acknowledge, and
adore the finger of God.

Now, after all this, when malice, and Magic, could do no more, yet the Tyrant
will be stiff still, till his Court and Kingdom too be infested, and invaded,
with huge Armies of flies, whose grievous swarms, boldly stormed the Royal
Chamber of Pharaoh; then he begun to be inclined to let the children of Israel
go: but he had no sooner got from under the Rod, but he relapseth into his old
disobedience, obstinacy, and hardness of heart, neither would he let the
people go. Then followed the miraculous Murrain upon beasts, Exodus 9.
with the plague of boiles, and blaines, upon the more beastly, and brute men,
with the most stupendous storm of fire, and water, mingled together, that ever
the earth felt before or since, before Pharaoh would be brought to incline, to
our Moses, and his peoples request: But he had no sooner got once more a respit
from those plagues, but he stood at a defiance with God Almighty again, and his
Ambassador too. Then must millions of Locusts be sent for, to make his hard
heart relent, which he did again soon, for a little time, Exodus 10
but returned presently to his insolence, and Tyranny. Then prodigious palpable
darkness must be sent, a darkness thick enough to be felt; yet proud Pharaoh
himself, had no feeling, longer than he remained under the importunity of the
plague: still relapsing into his old obduration of heart, till the Lord was
pleased, at midnight, to smite all the firstborn of the Land of Egypt, from
the firstborn of Pharaoh, that sat on the Throne, to the firstborn of the
captive lying in the dungeon, and all the firstborn of cattle. Then was the
Tyrant thoroughly startled; he rose up in the night, he and all his servants,
and all the Egyptians, and there was a great cry in Egypt, for there was not a
house, where there was not one dead.

This was a blow indeed, that reached to the very heart of Pharaoh, and all his
people; who now, Exodus 12.
with tears in their eyes, are turned from being Tyrants, to be suppliants, and
do humbly beseech their Petitioners, to be masters of their own desires; nor
only so, but offer to accommodate them for their journey, with all
necessaries, lend them all their Jewels of Silver, and Jewels of Gold, and
Raiment, and to give all such things as they required. O wonderful conversion!
but yet Tantae molis erat, etc. So great difficulties had our great Patriarch
Moses to encounter, before he could arrive to be a Captain General. And now he
has begun his most miraculous March, with a Pillar of a Cloud before him, for
his Quita sol by day, and a Pillar of fire for his Torch by night; Exodus 14.
Yet Pharaoh will have another fling at him, and thinks now by force of arms,
to destroy those abroad, whom he could not securely keep at home, in quiet
bondage, by all his arts and policies: But behold the Prodigy of all Prodigies;
The Red Sea is cut into a Royal highway, for the Israelites, and made a
dreadful grave for the Egyptians: Those mighty waters stand all on heaps, and
congeale themselves into walls, as it were of brass, for the defense, and safe
passage, of the people of God; but dissolve themselves into liquid floods, for
the overthrow of Pharaoh, and all his Chariots: who were no sooner entered, than
overwhelmed; and so they sunk down as lead, in those mighty waters; as our
great Moses himself expresses it, in his Song of thanksgiving to God, for that
stupendous Deliverance.

I should be infinite, if I went about to relate, the Myriads of wonders, that
our Moses showed afterward in the Desert, in the conduct of this chosen Army;
which quickly becoming faithless, and mutinous, yet by the prayers, and for
the sake, of our most admirable Moses, was the Almighty pleased never to
forsake them; but to feed them constantly with miracles, showring Quails upon
them for flesh, and the Bread of Heaven for them to eat; and gave them
continual Prodigies to drink, from the very first bitter waters at Marah, which
he turned to be sweet, to the strange tapping of the Rock in Horeb. So happy
are the people, who have the Lord for their God, and so dear and dutiful a
servant of his, for their Leader, as this our first Moses was, and our second
cannot but appear to be.

The Parallel.
I believe, truly, that there is no intelligent Person living, that looks upon
this long Story, of our present Ascent, but would take the particulars of the
children of Isreal's Deliverance, to be throughout Typical of ours, and all the
circumstances of effecting it by the first Moses, as plainly to apply
themselves, to our glorious second. Can any say, that his late Highness has
done less wonders for us, and our Deliverance, or found the Lord less
assistant to him, in his miraculous undertakings, than the former? If any such
there be, we shall very easily convince them.

True it is, we cannot say literally, that his Highness was enforced to bring
so many miraculous plagues upon our Egyptians; but we all, as well the people
of God, as their Taskmasters, lay under the perfect moral of all those
plagues, before he, like another Hercules Alexicacus, did rise up in our
Israel, and undertake, our so great and wonderful Delivery: and so we will now
look upon him, marching in a perfect line Parallel, with all those very actions
and singular circumstances; I say still in the moral, and will dare to equal
him here too, with the former mighty Moses, even in those his most stupendous
passages.

And first we may see, how our second Moses, had no sooner cast his sacred Rod
upon the ground, here in England, that is, did vote in open Parliament, to
undertake so just and honorable a War, as that for the redemption of this
people, out of their Captivity, then more than Egyptian, but the Magicians of
England likewise, that is, the pretended Prelates, and their party, would
endeavor to do the like, and, in effect, did so; for they turned their crooked
Croziers, into frery Serpents too, raising of men, and arms, to resist our
Mosaical Reformation; but the sacred Rod, of our second Moses, as that of the
former, has manifestly devoured all their bloody and serpentine endeavors.
Nay, when rivers of blood, were made to run upon English ground, in our just
defense, they would needs, likewise, by their Negromantick malice, make those
Rivers to overflow with blood too, for the support of their Tyrannical and
usurped power: which that they might the better do too, they would raise their
swarms, and infinities of Frogs to follow them, I mean, those croaking and
skipping Churchmen, that were the truest Trumpets of the War, whose Religion
only was interest, and God their gain, so made it their business, to cover
their pernicious prelatical designs, with the cloak of the Gospel, not careing,
so they might, by preaching, infuse their malice into others, to become
Cast-awayes themselves; as the Apostle forwarns us of them, and our blessed
Savior too, terming them Wolves in Sheeps clothing. But yet, when our
glorious second Moses, was pleased to stretch forth his Divine Rod again, and
smite the dust of the earth into Lice (sit verbo venia) that is, when he raised
from the dust of the earth, those poor, humble, self-denying creatures, that
were as much nothing in their own, as in the worlds eye, I mean those
incomparable Persons, as they have since proved themselves, whom he then new
modeled into an Army; Then those, all the pretended Great ones, were at a
gaze; their malice nor magic could do no more.

But yet further, let us observe, and remember how poor We, suffered under the
moral, of all those other plagues of Egypt too, until our sacred second Moses,
undertook that mighty Work, has Terris and Templis avertere pestes: Were we not
oppressed in like manner, with those innumerable armies of Flies, those insolent
animals, strange swarms of buzzing Courtiers, that were still begging of their
easy Master, some private Boon, or other, to the prejudice of the Public,
putting their fingers in every dish, and picking something out of every man's
pocket, or property; and has not our second Moses delivered us likewise from
all those? Then for the miraculous plague of Boiles and Blaines, had we not
enough of those too, by the malice of our Monopolists, Projectors, and other
Encroachers, upon the poor subjects liberties, and properties, which have been
truly called in all Ages Vlcera Rei Publicae: the Ulcers and Imposthumes of the
Commonwealth? And has not his Highness, our second Moses, his sacred Rod,
that is, his Sword, most happily, and timely, lanced those sores, and given us
a sure and perfect Cure? Then, as for those horrid storms of Hail, Thunder, and
Fire mingled with water, of which the Earth never saw the like, as the Text
tells us; What did they emblematize to us, but those dire ebullitions of
Tyranny, over our Religions, liberties and properties, which went not only
about to destroy our present fruits, but to take away all our Natural, and
Eternal Rights in them? And has not our glorious second Moses, given us a
blessed delivery from all that mischief too? Then for those millions of
Locusts, that invaded the Land of Egypt; what legions of lewd Lawyers had we,
that swarmed amongst us like to Caterpillars indeed, from the unjust Judge, to
the sordid Advocate, and from him, to the meanest Clarke? a sort of men, that
could accommodate their Laws, like a nose of wax, to all intents and purposes
whatsoever, making the sacred Seat of Justice, it self, a stalking-horse to
Tyranny; Law to countenance oppression, and Truth it self to lie? And has not
our second Moses, pretty well delivered us from all those petty-fogging plagues
too? Then was there ever any more prodigious darkness, over the face of a
whole Land? so gross an ignorance of Religion? all Divinity, forsooth, and
saving knowledge, being bound up, and roosting it self in a pitiful, lazy,
luxurious, Bishops Rotchet, as in its only Sanctuary; I am sure the whole
light of the Gospel, was concealed under the ridiculous covering of their
Canonical coats, as they call them, and we kept in more than Egyptian
Darkness, till by the flaming Sword, of our second Moses, we were restored to
that wonderful light, which we lately have, and do still enjoy, under his late
Highness his, and his Princely sons, Government. Then, for the last plague of
all, which was the smiting of the firstborn, what can be more parallel to it,
than the savage cruelty, formerly exercised by the Court of Wards, over the
heirs of all the Principal Houses of England? who were there doubly smitten,
both in their persons, and estates; Their lands pillaged by every poleing
Guardian, and themselves sold like slaves, or horses in a Market, and condemned
to what is commonly worse than death, to a wife of another man's election. From
all these Plagues, and Diabolical enchantments, has not our second Moses most
happily freed us too? and, to crown all his glories, as the former Moses did,
Has he not seen a Pharaoh and his Armies drencht in a Red Sea of their own
blood?

Now, how impossible it is to conceive, that all this could be brought about,
without the miraculous assistance of the Almighty, they can best judge, who
have been the witnesses of his great Actions, and know how remarkable his
proceedings have been, from the very first undertaking of these Nations
Deliverance: For, first he began but with one poor single Troop, which how
instantly grew into a Regiment, and that into an Army, and that Army to give
Laws, as it were, to all the World, no man can believe, that has not seen it,
or else been taught faith enough, to understand the Cloud, that Elias saw no
bigger than a hand, which in a moment, overspread the whole heavens; or that
Fountain of Mardochaeus, which, in the beginning, crept on with little noise,
through the Meadows, and in an instant, turned into a great River, and that
River into Light, and this Light into a Sun, and such a Sun which afforded both
luster, and water, to all the World. The plain truth is, that the accession of
his Highnesses Forces, as his successes, have been so miraculous, that they
appear more like visions, than realities; and, as antiquity can find nothing in
the like kind, (unless this president of our first Moses) for to equal them:
so Posterity will be as much puzzled to believe them, as we shall see more at
large, in our future Ascents, which treat of the invincible Valor, matchless
Prudence, and incomparable Greatness of Military Conduct, in these two our
Mosaical Masters.

The ninth Ascent.
MOses was most miserably disturbed, and injuriously persecuted, with the
frequent misprizions, malicious repinings, and ungrateful murmurings, of the
common people: And, indeed, it is not a little wonderful, to observe, how our
Patriarch, has no sooner escaped from the face of Pharaoh, and malice of his
Magicians, but, he is brought to a terrible trial of his patience, with his own
people: who find themselves, no sooner out of bondage, by his means, but they
must presently set their tongues at liberty, to rail against their glorious
Captain, and Deliverer.

Now, first they begin their game, upon the sight of Pharaohs pursuit of them;
flying upon him thus. Because there were no graves in Egypt, Eod. 14.1.
have thou taken us away to die in the Wilderness? etc. Nor were they sooner
delivered from that danger, being led dry-foot through the middle of the Ocean,
which had swallowed up the fury of Pharaoh, and all his Host: but coming on the
other side of the Sea, they must murmur again, Exodus 15.24.
against poor Moses, because the waters there, were something bitter, and so he
was constrained to deal a double Miracle, the one to sweeten the waters, the
other them; so the people were for the present pacified.

Now their thirst was no sooner quenched, but they must be murmuring again, for
want of bread, and upbraid their Redeemer, for their very Deliverance, telling
him in plain terms, to his face, that he might have done well to have let them
alone, when they sat by the fleshpots of Egypt, and did eat bread to their
full, taxing him of a design, to starve them in the Wilderness. Exodus 16.3.
Then was bread most wonderfully rained down from Heaven, to stop their
mutinous mouths, and yet that most miraculous, and celestial food, could not
content them; for at the very next turn, they must make as fierce an outcry
for a little water. Nay, the Text tells us, that they were so insolent, as to
chide with Moses for it, Exodus 17.2.
and the place was called Massah, and Meribah, because of the chiding of the
children of Israel: Yet the Lord being pleased to appease so perverse a people,
V. 7.
made Moses whom the murmured at, to bestow another miracle upon them, and to
broach a Rock, to afford them drink.

And yet after so many stupendous supplies of their wants, and more miraculous
forbearances, to punish their repining spirits, the Devil of disobedience, and
sedition, will not so be satisfied, but this rebellious people, must be still
grumbling again against Moses, till the fire of Heaven, had almost consumed
them all; Number. 11.
and yet at the importunity of good Moses, that all was no sooner quenched, but
they must nauseat, and loath, the very bread of Heaven; and cry out, forsooth,
for flesh. Nothing we know can satisfy irregular appetites, yet that lust of
theirs must be satiated too, by such a shower of Quails, as never the earth
saw, though there, that meat was made a mortal poison to the mutineers. Nay,
yet, after all these fair warnings, so many miraculous supplies, and so much
long-suffering of the Lords, and his servant Moses with them, they must pick a
quarrel with him still; nay, go about to make a general revolt, and to depose
him from his Charge, and all, forsooth, because they saw before them, the huge
bugbear Giants of the sons of Anack: Number. 14.
for they said unto one another, We are brought hither, to fall by the Sword;
Come let us choose another Captain, and let us return into Egypt.

This was a dismal mutiny indeed, and for that, the Lord would have extirpated
them all, but for the importunate prayer of our injured Moses: Though it was so
contrary to his own interest too; for the Lord offered him, to make of himself
a people, mightier, and a greater Nation, than they were: but the gracious Lord
was so taken off from his vengeance, and our Clement Moses was content to
continue the Charge, and still charitably to conduct so rebellious, and
disobedient a people, though their many after mutinies, and base murmurings,
drew more and more plagues upon them, as that of the terrible fiery Serpents,
and diverse others, too tedious now to relate, being called to hasten to our
precious Parallel.

The Parallel.
No other treatment than this, can all good Princes, Jud. 8.
and Governors expect from the rude Populace, qui ipsam dominationem spernunt,
and majestatem blasphemant, who are always addicted to despise Dominion, and
blaspheme Majesty it self, as the Apostle tells us; They are never better
pleased, then when they can, as Austin well expresses it, in Principes
petulantem ingenii sui libidinem procacitur exercere: August.
spend the lust of their petulant tongues upon their Princes. The same humor
was not amiss remarkt, by the acute Historian in his time, Loquax sane and
ingeniosus, Tacitus.
in contumeliam Praefectorum, populus; inter quos qui vitaverit culpam, non
effugit infamiam: The people, says he, are naturally talkative, and love to
show their little wits, in casting of contumelies against their Governors,
none of whom, can carry themselves so well, as to be clear from blame, though
they are free from fault: and the Philosopher gives some reason for it, Seneca.
Male de illis loquuntur Nequam homines, quia been loqui nesciunt, faciunt non
quod merentur illi, sed quod solent ipsi: wicked people, says he, speak ill of
their Princes, because they know not how to speak well; and so what they do, is
according to their own custom, not the others deserving.

Indeed, we full well know, that this great Beast, the people, is a monster of
many heads, and those heads, have as many horns, to gore, and gall, their
Governors. Since then this mischievous humor has prevailed in all Ages, and
amongst all Nations, and is become now perfectly customary to the mad
multitude, from whom, neither the Crowns of Kings, nor Miters of the greatest
Prelates, can be secure; Why should our second Moses, his late Highness,
trouble himself more about it, than his great Pattern, and Prototype, the
former Moses did? They both knew full well, that such wicked, ill-natured,
depraved, and perverse people, there would be still in the World, and that by
Gods especial permission too, for the exercise of his servants virtues. Vinegar
is said to be very necessary, for the purifying, and polishing of some precious
Stones, which have their fire (as it were) frozen over, and their luster
eclipsed, by some dark substance, or earthy interposition: So great spirits,
ought to have some little touch or taste of Acerbities, to enlighten their
valors, and illustrate all their other virtues: And so I doubt not, but that
we shall without much difficulty, in this particular, accomplish our happy
Parallel.

Has our glorious second Moses been less injured by venomous tongues? less
persecuted with the misprizions, repinings, and malicious murmurings, of these
mutinous Nations, than our first Moses has been, with his stiff-necked
Israelites? Or, has his Highness showed less patience in bearing, or greater
magnanimity in contemning those cursed contumelies, with which some Diabolical
creatures have attempted to asperse his Divine virtues, than that his first
Pattern or Prototype has done? No, his most Serene Highness, could never be
disturbed with those petit clouds of vulgar ignominies, no more, than the
Supreme Sphere of the celestial Bodies, can be moved, by any distempers here
below.

His Sacred Highness, likewise knew, that he had a greater example, than that
of his Master Moses too, to follow, in that grand point of temper, toward his
people, and that is the Almighty Lord of Heaven himself. Who has borne more
injuries from the wicked mouths of men, than his Divine Majesty has done?
insomuch, as old Tertullian tells us, Tertul.
That to bear an injury gallantly, is a true ray of the Divinity it self: and
Cyprian, Cyprian: de patientia.
as elegantly as he, in his Treatise that he composed of patience, confirms to
us, That this brave bearing of injuries, is not only the proper virtue of true
Nobility, but a most glorious property of the Deity. Est nobis (says he) cum
Deo virtus communis, inde patientia incipit, inde Claritas ejus and dignitas
caput sumit; So he is bold to make it not only to be the very Essence of God,
but the Clarity, and Dignity of his Nature. And indeed, when we deeply
consider, the great long-suffering of our good God, for so many Ages, how he
has permitted to stand so many Temples of abominable Idols, that were erected
to the very contempt of his holy Name, and in the defiance of his Power: How he
has been pleased still to suffer days and times to circumvolve, rivers to
glide, winds to blow, the Spring to put on a green, and the Autumn a saffron
Robe, grapes and corn to ripen, the Elements to serve, and hold universal
Nature in breath, to supply a thousand millions of Sacrifices, every day
offered to Hell it self; How he has still continued to cast even flowers from
Heaven, with a bountiful and free hand upon the audacious heads of his most
contumacious enemies, who better deserved to have received so many strokes, of
his angry Thunderbolts.

So, when we consider, the great long animity, and patience, of our ever
blessed Savior, in bearing the cursed contumelies, and insolences of the
perfidious Jews, which were so horrid, that total Nature it self groaned under
them, the Sun could not behold them, but be eclipsed, nor the Stars attend, but
in their sad and mourning weeds, and the whole frame of the Universe, suffer a
most sharp convulsion, both above, and below his Cross; and yet he in the mean
time, as unconcerned in his own sufferings, was pleased to remain upon it
quietly, though bloodily affixt to it, and undisturbed as in a chair of State,
without any the least emotion.

Who would not now suffer himself to be carried away, with the study of this
most glorious virtue, of Magnanimous longanimity, and suffering unworthy
injuries? And sure, next to this un-imitable pattern of the Almighties, which
we have seen, that of our first great Master Moses, is most considerable, whose
steps, in this too, our most pious second, has so clearly traced, that they may
be more truly called the very same, than Parallel: Only here is the difference
remaining,; our first Moses courageously and kindly suffered the reproaches,
frequent murmurings, and mutinous distempers of a company, of poor, wandering
and hunger-starved Jews, in a Desert; and our glorious second, has been ever
graciously pleased to pass by the more malicious railings, and revilings, of
our own too high-fed, pampered, inebriated, brutish people.

I should be infinite, to enumerate the infamous abusive libells, they have
cast out against his goodness, with the particular Calumnies and disgraces,
they have endeavored to asperse his Highnesses Serene Person and Government
withal; and indeed the foulness of them, would stain through the cleanest
language, that I could wrap them in, I shall therefore pass them by without
reciting, as he has done without taking notice of, or revenging them: For he,
just as the Royal Prophet David, did choose to bear those honorable wounds,
which the envenomed tongues of such as Shimei, had thrown upon his reputation,
and so was to mount to the Throne of Saul, by his steps of patience; witnessed
in suffering Saul.

So I will be bold to conclude, that his late Highness, like a perfect true
man of honor, did no more trouble himself with those injurious dealings of the
wicked World, and receiving those ill returns, from his most unfaithful, and
unworthy back-biters, than does the Sun in the firmament, to behold the Clouds,
which he himself had drawn, from the mire and fens of the earth, to make
himself a Skarf of. He knew very well, that he should, as he could not choose,
but for ever have the upper hand of them, and though they might darken his
aspect something, for a time, and maliciously hinder themselves from the
enjoyment of his most excellent virtues; yet they could never deprive him, of
his proper light, or other sober, well-tempered, and more thankful souls, from
receiving the favor of his better influences; as we shall continue to prove in
the process of our succeeding Ascents, and happy Parallels

The tenth Ascent.
MOses was most malignantly looked upon likewise, Number. 16. Number. 12.
by some of the Elders themselves, and a dangerous head of Rebellion was made
against him, by some of the Princes of the people; nay, he was assaulted nearer
home, with an unnatural sedition in his own Family. So true it is, as the
Psalmist tells us, Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord will
deliver him out of all. Now is our Moses come to the Test, indeed; for, all
that was said before, was but a mere flea-biting to this fiery trial.

The plague of popular tongues, is indeed something tolerable; but the unkind
conspiracies of Princes, and such as should be persons of honor, and have
better understanding of their obligations, cannot but cut to the heart of any
Captain General: yet this very sad disaster, befell our glorious Patriarch, in
the Rebellion of Corah, Dathan, and Abyram, Number. 16.
who rose up before Moses, with two hundred and fifty more Princes of the
Assembly, famous in the Congregation, and men of Renown; and they gathered
themselves together against Moses, and against Aaron, and said unto them; V. 2.
V. 3.
Ye take too much upon you, seeing that all of the Congregation are holy, every
one of them, and the Lord is also amongst them; wherefore then do you lift up
your selves, above the Congregation of the Lord? This, when our dear Moses
heard, he fell on his face, to show his great humility, and replied only, You
take too much upon you, you sons of Levi; speaking only then to Korah, and his
company; but when Dathan and Abiram were sent for, they tell him plainly, V.
12. V. 13.
that they will not come up to him, and expostulate the matter thus by message
with him, Is it a small thing, that thou have brought us up out of a Land, that
flows with milk and honey, to kill us in the Wilderness? but thou must
altogether make thy self a Prince over us? Then Moses, to show his magnanimity,
the Text says, was very wroth, and said unto the Lord, Respect not thou their
offerings, etc. Here it is to be observed, that Korah was of the same Tribe
with Moses too. Nay, Number. 12.
yet the Lord would bring a nearer trial to his dear servant Moses, and permit
his own right hand, and only helper appointed to him by God, and one Brother
in blood, to revolt against him, and join himself with a silly woman, to raise
a sedition against him, in his own Family; but that business was quickly
quasht by Moses his most Clement proceedings with them: by whose powerful
intercessions to the Lord, Aaron escaped only with a bare rebuke, and Miriam
was chastised with a Leprosy, for seven days. These must of necessity be very
heartbreaking blows, to our poor Patriarch; but he that had an assured safe
retreat in his own heart, and the sweet repose of a clear and a quiet
conscience, is no more moved with those unkindnesses of kindred, and
unfaithfulnesses of friends, than the firmament it self, and serene Empyrean
heaven, used to be, with all the clatter, and combustion, fury, and confusion
of the inferior Orbs.

The Parallel.
Of all the cruel unkindnesses in the World, there are none that pierce so to
the quick, or are so deeply sensible to a Noble nature, as those which it
receives from persons whom it has obliged.

Indeed, we find that those ungrateful returns of injuries, for favors
received, do bring astonishment even to the gates of Heaven it self; which
caused the Almighty Father, to sigh out those lamentable complaints, by the
mouth of the Prophet Hieremy: Hieremy.
How comes it to pass, that my beloved has committed so many outrages, so
many misdemeanors in my house? as much as to say, Have I then, O my beloved,
lodged thee in my Temple, have I nourished and bred thee up from thy Cradle,
with my Fatherly hand, and cherisht thee in my bosom; now to betray my honor,
and thus to defile the glory of my Altars? David.
So the Royal Prophet tells us, that he could have born any thing from an
enemy, or a stranger; but from one that he trusted, or from an intimate
familiar, and bosom-friend, to receive an injury, or unworthy return, was
beyond his power to bear with patience: and the truth is, it were enough to
stagger the greatest Saint: Yet this was our first Moses his miserable
condition, as we have seen, and shall find it fully paralleled in our second.

Now it is manifest, that it is our Heavenly Fathers constant course, to put
his children to the full proof and exercise of their virtues, to instruct them
to the highest pitch, to be as near imitators, as they may be, of his own
Divine virtues; who does nothing but good to ungrateful man, and receives
nothing but ill from him; as we showed at large in our last Ascent. And such
trials as those, are questionless very necessary for his servants; for it is
undoubted, that his most practiced servants, a very Moses himself, would
putrify in long prosperities, as in a dead Sea, which produces nothing: so
that the All-wise God, out of great kindness, to his most dear servants, does
sometimes strike such blows as these, that they, as Jonathan, may have their
eyes still open, and suck in honey from the very end of the Rod, that scourges
them, and in the severe chastisement of a father, find the consolation of true
children. O what a goodly Theater, is a good conscience! and what a beautiful
Arcenal it is, to have the Arms of virtue still in a readiness, as our first
and second Moses have had against all essays? whom no unkindnesse of
unthankful friends, or conspiracies of ungracious enemies, could ever startle
from their sweet, and serene repose.

Now, that we may make good our Parallel, we must reflect a little upon the
barbarous ingratitude, that his late Highness has met withal, from Persons of
other obligations, and Princes too of our Assembly. And truly, who would not
have thought, after so many wonderful Deliverances, by the hand of our second
Moses, as we have seen, and the beating down of all open oppositions, to the
destruction of the common enemy; but that our miseries should have had an end,
and our glorious Captain General some rest? But yet I must say, with a sigh,
and to the eternal exprobration of some persons, late in power, that we found
no other, but aliud ex alio malum, one mischief to follow upon the very heels
of another. How many malignant parties of our own have gone about to disturb
that happy peace, purchased with the price of so much blood? and no stone left
unstirred, to throw us into a second, and a third, and (may be) into more
confusions, and greater than the former, and that by some of our Elders too, as
I have said, and Princes of the Assembly? Nay, our religious brethren of
Scotland too, must be set on foot again by them, to make their Covenant a
stalking-horse for Rebellion, and to renew a war in all probability, more
cruentous and dangerous, than the former: But our most Renowned second Moses,
being born upon the wings of that Providence, which never failed him, made a
most happy, and quick dispatch, of that work; putting an end to all those Kirk
enchantments, both here, and there, for the present, and I hope for ever. And
yet after all this, that by the gracious providence of God, and his Highnesses
great care and prudence, all means of making head, and imbodying themselves
again, was taken from them: I should be infinite to tell, how often those of
that leven, have showed their venomous teeth, against his Highness, his happy,
and most godly designs, to disturb him again, and our peace. Nay, some of
those, that have had the greatest share in his Highness his Successes, I mean,
some of those Elders, and Princes, of the Assembly, most ungrateful, undutiful
persons, that durst with the Atlantes of old, shute their malicious arrows
against the Sun, and cast stones at him, that gave them bread: nay, some of
them too, when they could not bow Heaven to their purposes, would endeavor to
stir up Hell against him, confound elements, and mingle stars with the dust of
the earth, to come to the end of their most exorbitant pretensions: But the
Lord, who always took him to his most especial care, set him so far above
theirs, and the Devils malice, that hurt him they could not, though themselves
they might, like the Basilisk, with the repercussion of their own poison: The
faggot smoaks only when it begins to burn, but when the flame has once got the
upper hand, there will be then no smoke at all.

Natural Philosophy informs us, that the Rainbow in the Heavens, is not
easily to be formed at Noon, in the heats of Summer; because the Sun being then
vigorus in his altitude, dissipates and wastes those Clouds: So our second
Moses, being mounted, as he was, to the highest pitch of Heroic virtue,
dispelled all opposition. Malice it self could neither find Bow nor Arrow to
reach him; but burst it self with its own venomous intention: so did all
calumny crack it self before the truth of his virtue, which darted resplendent
flashes into all eyes. We know it is said of old, that felicitatis umbra
invidia, There are no shadows without light, nor is there any envy without some
gift of God. No man thinks it strange that Cantharides should fix themselves
upon Roses; it is certain, that vermin will not be satisfied, but with the
fairest and the sweetest flowers. But that which seems most strange to me, and
truly it is not a little admirable, that men heretofore so honored for wisdom,
and good affections to the Public, should run so stark mad with malice, as to
go about so extravagant a business, as to swim against the stream with the
silly frog, hoping to stop the flood, and constant current of the Rhodanus or
Danubius; or with the foolish fly, soar up to Heaven, to fix her feet upon,
and stay the course of the primum mobile: but by this time, I believe, they are
all more amazed than bridled geese, and look as ghastly as dead men, four days
after their Funerals, taken from their graves: and indeed, our second Moses,
never made more reckoning of such as those, than of so many angry hens, that
have indeed the eyes of dogs, but the hearts of hares. It would be an endless
piece of work, to enumerate the infinite plots, conspiracies, treasons, and
asassinats, contrived and practiced upon his sacred Person; but he securely
slept in the arms of the ever-waking providence, and could not but be confident
in spite of all the malice of men and Devils, but he that had so raised him to,
would still preserve him in, his most illustrious state and condition.

I shall only take leave to expostulate a little with those persons, and so
conclude this Parallel. Are you not ashamed yet of your ingratitude, you
children of the Scottish Belial? Had you had one drop of true English blood in
your bodies, you would have been readier to spend that for him, than to take
his from him. What, you would be all Kings? we remember indeed, too lately,
that you were so; and you would have a perpetual seat in Parliament too, as you
once thought you had got? and truly, it is great pity, but it were so again,
especially being so good Patriots as you have been? I wonder truly, that then
you did not vote your selves to be immortal too. Let any temperate and knowing
man in England now be Judge, whether when you sat so, with all your power and
splendour about you, so loudly proclaiming your selves such Magnifical members,
you did not stink in the nostrils of all the people? Who generally looked upon
you then, but as busy Apes upon a house top? and as a smoke in the socket of a
greasy candlestick? Bern. lib. 1. de Consid. cap. 7.
for such (as the Learned Bernard tells us) are all dignified persons without
merit: and so accordingly, his Highness sacred wisdom, spied you out, and
amongst the rest of his most incomparable Heroic Actions, which he has
engraven with a Pen of Adamant, to consecrate to all Posterity, he then sent
you out in your own snuff, the stench whereof, is not yet, nor will be, I
believe, in the next Age, extinguished.

Thus we see, the Moon may seem for a time to darken the Sun, when it is
eclipsed; but yet she daily renders the tribute of her light: So all the malice
in the World, that has made a show to darken his Highness for some time,
cannot at all obscure, but must increase his praises, by its slanders, as it
did advance his repose by its oppositions, and augment his Crowns by his
humiliation. Nay, my Lord being of nothing so ambitious, as to be like his
Great Master Moses, has traced the steps of that his great Archetype, to the
very height of all charity, toward these his most violent, and undeserved
adversaries, and all their Accomplices. Have we not seen him, like that his first
Master, frequently prostrating himself at the foot of the Tabernacle, praying,
and almost binding up the hands of God, to stay the course of his vengeance,
against those that persecuted him even to the Tabernacle; nay, would take into
himself likewise, a piece of Reverend Aaron for his Pattern, standing in the
Majesty of his Priestly habit, with the Incensory and Sacrifice in hand, to
appease the anger of God against his persecutors, when Heaven was all on fire
over their heads, and the Earth became a devouring gulf under their feet, to
swallow them up. Our most Renowned Lord Protector, could never be less than a
Moses to them, though they did continue never so much to be a Corah, Dathan,
and Abiram, unto him: So we shall proceed from those wretched injuries, he
received from ungrateful men, to those Noble, Princely, and high exaltations,
that he always found within his Mosaic self.

The eleventh Ascent.
MOses was a Person of a very high courage, himself, and every way accomplished
with parts requisite to a good Soldier; and he was no less curious in the
choice of those whom he was to receive to serve under him as soldiers. Exodus
2.11, 12.
For his own personal Courage it sufficiently appeared in his minority, when he
slew an Egyptian, that was abusing of an Hebrew, one of his brethren: which was
improved highly in his maturity, and was most visible, in his embracing so many
difficulties; as his frequent confrontings of Pharaoh, and all the fury of the
Egyptians, and over-passing all the perverse oppositions of his own people. He
was no less choice in the election, and approbation, of such as were to be
made soldiers; as is to be seen in the rule that he gave for those which were
to go to war: ordering, that those which were to go out with the Host against
the enemy, Deuteronomy. 23.9.
should keep themselves clear from all wickedness, nor so much as be stained
with any uncleanness, etc.

The Parallel.
Nor less doubt can there be sure of the personal Valor, of our second Moses,
who though he slew no man, that ever I could hear of, in any private quarrel,
yet was known to be always ready to draw his Sword upon a good occasion.

His Highness was never of the temper of those spirits, that upon the
misconstruction of a word, or a cold countenance, must presently desire to see
a man with his sword in his hand, and swear that they will evict reparation
from him, sealed with his blood. No, it cannot be but an argument of a base
spirit, and of ignoble extraction, to seek out occasions of quarrelling, and
Duelling; for by that sure, they must have some design, to blot out some
ignominy of their births, or other unworthiness. Heretofore truly, none but
slaves, lackies, butchers, gladiators, or such kind of fellows, did use that
trade of Duells; but now forsooth, the opinion of some fools, will make it fit
for Gentlemen: But our first, and second Moses, ever had such pitiful Hectors
in extreme contempt, who go about by that means, to purchase glory out of vice,
gain hell by their execrable carriage, and but acquire on earth, the qualities
of a Clown. They have taught us, that we are not to make our selves like
Fierabras, nor the Knight of the burning-sword, in matter of valor: and I dare
aver, that if there were a hundred such like Rodomonts, brayed, and stamped to
powder in a Mortar, they would not be able to make up one half ounce of true
fortitude. Nay, I have seen some of those most importunate fellows, to fight
Duells, when they come to bear arms in a good cause, where they ought to show
true valor, and an undaunted resolution, they have been the first that have
most desperately run away; they have passed over hills, without being sensible
of the ascents, through woods, without seeing of a tree before them, and
measured many miles without casting one look behind them; nay, sometime whole
flocks of them together, that will run away like sheep, with the very appresion
of a fear, that the noise of their own feet gives them.

Our first and second Moses, were as little given to make discourses of their
own Valor; Those who brave it most in words, are most commonly found most
failing in performance. When Homer makes his bravest Captains to march, he
gives them always silence for a guide; contrariwise, he makes cowards to
babble, and chatter like Cranes. The first pass along like great Rivers,
letting their streams glide softly with a silent majesty; but the second keep a
murmuring, and bubling, like little Brooks: Indeed, the world is too full of
these Rodomonts, now called Hectors, who are transported with od, arrogant, and
sudden furies, like Rabsheketh in Scripture, and yet will tremble at the Lancet
of a Surgeon, and cry out for a little pain, more than a woman in Labor: in
short, the true sign of not being valiant, is to strive to seem to be so.

Our second Moses was known to be none of all this Swash-buckler brood, sprung
from the race of Cadmus, derived from the teeth of Serpents; and yet never more
ready to eat, than to fight, upon a good occasion, nay, a Duel out too, if
there were a cause for it; that is, either in the Head of an Army, by public
consent, against some Goliath, to defend the honor of his Nation, and so to end
some notable War, and stay a greater effusion of blood: or else, if justly
called to it, in his own, or any dear friends vindication; not upon some silly
Chymera of spirit, upon the interpretation of some ambiguous words, or, which
is worse, for the love of some unchaste woman, who will not be otherwise
propitiated, but with the sacrifice of humane blood. No, this is no part of our
Mosaical courage: The men of this make, were always those that his Highness
fought against, and proved upon them in the end, that, to be a true complete
Christian Soldier, was not to become a braving Cyclop, without any feeling of
God, or sense of Religion, but such a one as his Master Moses would have him to
be, that goes into the field; that is, clear from all wickedness, and
uncleanness: and so accordingly did our second Moses, always make his sacred
choice of men. His inspired wisdom, knew full well, that none are fitter to go
to War, than those, who had made their peace with God, nor can there be any
more valourous, than he that has a true fear of the Lord before him: for first,
such a man's soul is a Fort impregnable, which cannot be scaled with ladders,
for it reaches up to Heaven, nor be broken with batteries, for it is walled
with brass, nor undermined by Pioneers, for he is founded upon a rock, nor
betrayed by treason, for faith it self has the keeping of it, nor be burnt with
granado's, for that can quench the fiery darts of the Devil, nor yet be forced
by famine, for a good conscience is a continual feast.

It was not for nothing then, that these two great souls of honor, our first
and second Moses, would not only be so provided themselves, but have all that
followed them, be so likewise, and to carry about them, the whole armor of St.
Paul; for undoubtedly there is nothing so strong, nothing so invincible, and
triumphant, as a valor, which marches bravely under the Rules of true
Christian Religion: Whatsoever Mr. Machiavel would persuade us, that Devotion
and Piety, are the greatest weakners of courage, and warlike dispositions, and
that honesty and virtue, do but expose a Prince to dangers; the truth of it is,
of a Prince as he has proposed him, he has made little better, than a wild
beast, and yet would persuade us, it is a man, and none I presume, will believe
it, but such as carry their eyes in their heels.

The brave Belizarius, sure was of another opinion, who was one of the most
excellent Captains in the World, being to put some lewd soldiers to death, for
some military crimes, declared his mind so freely to his Army, in these Terms,
Procop. lib. 1. de Bello Vandal.
that Procopius recites: Know ye (says he) that I am come to fight with the
arms of Religion, and Justice, without which, we can expect neither Victory nor
Happiness; I desire my Soldiers should have their hands clean to kill an
enemy. Never will I suffer any man in my Army, that has fingers crooked or
bloody, were he in arms as terrible, as lightning: force is of no worth, if it
have not equity and conscience for companions. This now, methinks, was spoken
like a Soldier indeed, like the very spirit of our Moses.

And this is most certain, that no man can loose his courage, but he that never
had it, and no man can have it, if that he beg it not of the true Lord of
Hosts. Where is light to be sought for, but from the Sun? or water, but in
Rivers? and heat, but in Fire? and where think you to find true Strength, but
in the God of the strong? I mean, not that strength of body, that Milo had to
carry a heavy beast, but the strength of soul and courage, to carry a man
through all extremities; which has its root in reason, its increase in piety,
and its Crown in true glory: and this courage our second Moses had to the full,
and that I hope, there is no man but will grant, is so far from being lessened,
that it is only heightened by Religion, and godliness. His sacred Highness
therefore chose for his Companions in arms, none of those roaring, ranting
fellows, that think there is no way to be esteemed valiant, but to dare to be
impious, to make the pillars of heaven, to tremble with their blasphemies, and
have nothing of soldiers in them, but to pill, and ravage, in their Quarters,
like Harpyes, and to feed themselves with humane blood; and in a word, have but
this one shame left to them, that is, not to be shameless. What a ridiculous
thing is it, in the mean time, for people to live like Cyclopes, that they may
be accounted valiant, and act the part of Turks, to gain the reputation of good
Christian soldiers? But here his Highness his pious wisdom, most eminently,
after the example of his Great Master Moses, has ever showed it self, and made
us to know such persons well enough: his inspired judgment, could never be
subject to so much fallacy, as to take chaff for Gold, hemlock for Parsley, or
an Ape for a Man; and he has plainly taught, and proved to us, that all their
pretended courage, is nothing else but despair and rage, boiling in their
passionate breasts, and counterfeiting virtue. So I hope we shall have no more
such false spectacles clapped over our eyes, by that spirit of lies forged in the
shop of Hell, to make us take that glass for Diamond, and those Kestrells for
Faulcons; indeed, fitter for Stallions, than War-horses; all their courage is
nothing but a boiling fury in their hearts, like to that of some Lunaticks, or
possessed with an evil spirit, which makes very children, and women, to be
sometimes stronger, than many men; But such as these, were none of our second
Moses his election; for he being to go on God Almighties errand, would have no
associats, but such as the Lord should approve of, and were free from all
manner of uncleanness, as that Great Master of War, and his incomparable
President, both prescribed, and practiced.

The twelfth Ascent.
MOses was well entered into years, but retained a strong sense still and
understanding, before he was called out upon Public Employment; he was a most
vigilant, faithful, and skilful Officer in the field: For his age, we find it
was not overgreat, considering how men lived about that time, but his vigor
was very extraordinary; for the Text tells us, that he was a hundred and twenty
years old when he died, Deuteronomy. 34.7.
yet his eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated. Now by all the
computations of Chronologers, he was above fourscore years old, when he was
called out upon this great Action, of Delivering the Lords own people out of
bondage, and by consequence, he must have been then, of a much more vigorous
constitution, than afterward: For his vigilance, there is none sure will
doubt, Exodus Levit.
that pleases to peruse the sacred Text, where he is to be found always
watching, and praying for his people, and either pleading something for them to
God, or for God to them; for his care and fidelity, the Lords own
acknowledgement likewise may serve turn, who has expressly testified of him,
Number. 12.7.
that he was faithful in all his house.

The Parallel.
By equal calculation of our Modern Naturalists, as well as Chronologers, we do
find, that God indulged double the life to men, before the Flood, to that he
has done since the very next Age after; and yet to them too, vouchsafed twice
so much time of living, as he has done to us: So that if those great
Secretaries of Nature, and Antiquity do not deceive us, our second Moses, his
forty years and upwards, may appear parallel to the former's fourscore, at, or
about, which times, they both were pressed forth into Public employment. By
which we may observe, How the Lord is pleased to honor a well-seasoned age;
for, as the late Learned Philosopher tells us, Fred. de Marsel.
Prudentiae matter, and adjutrix est experientia, quam aetate provectiores,
multorum observato curriculo temporum, negotiorum, exemplorum, comprobatam
magis habere possunt: quippe quam dies dat, qui ut posterior prioris fit
discipulus, and seris venit usus ab annis. The Mother and Nurse of Prudence, is
experience, which the more ancient, by the observation of a larger course of
times, practices of businesses, and presidents, must of necessity, have in a
greater proportion; This skill, days, are commonly the Donors of; for we find
the following day is still the Scholar of the former, and as the Poet tells
us, True experience is not got without process of time. Thus we find the best
incense always comes from old Trees, and Torches, made of Aromatic wood, cast
out their best, and most odoriferous exhalations, when they are almost wasted.
O that I had never said that word, my tongue falters to speak, my pen is
palsie-strook to write, and my heart trembles to think, that our second Moses,
his days were so soon to have an end; for we had no temporal good thing more
to pray for, in order to the State, or our selves, but that the blessedness we
enjoyed under his late Highness, might be eternal, and that we might
perpetually live and flourish under the comfortable and pleasant shadow of his
Palms; but we have too lately seen, that he, as a Moses, is gone as he came,
and left us nothing, but our own peace, and his precious memory behind him. But
I must pass by this passion, lest it make me guilty of too great a digression,
it being a discourse more proper for the close of our Parallels. And indeed,
however we find our second Moses Parallel to the first for number of years,
That I cannot so certainly determine, as I can for the vigor of his soul, and
acuteness of his sense, no one of which, to the very last Scene of his life,
was any whit dulled or diminished, more than the eye of his Great Master Moses
was; an extraordinary blessing doubtless, vouchsafed by the Divine goodness,
to his dear servants, to get youth by years, and beauty it self by time; as we
have seen perfectly proved, in the person of his late most Serene Highness,
our second Moses, as has been recorded of that our first Great Patriarch his
Prototype.

Then for his great diligence, fidelity, care, and skill, in discharging all
Trusts committed to his Charge, no man can at all dispute, that has either
seen, or heard, of the indefatigable labors of his Life. His Highness knew
that idleness was a mere moth of Noble minds, and iron it self sure, if it
had the reason to discourse, understanding to choose its one commodity, would
cry out to us, that it better loved to be kept in constant use, and exercise,
than to lie rusting, and consuming in the corner of a horse: Wherefore we see,
that God does not ordinarily entertain great souls, in the pleasures of an idle
life, but in the rigid exercises of virtue; for we know that there are many
most excellent fishes that will die in standing waters, and are delighted in
the most bubbling sluices, and turbulent seas, and rivers; and the best birds,
will always be abroad in the most troubled air. Our glorious Eagle therefore,
was always seeking out for action, and never to be found lazing, or beating of
his wings in the lower Regiment of the air, but soaring always aloft, amongst
the furies of Lightnings, Tempests, and Whirle-winds, playing with Thunderclaps
and ever having his eye, where the day was to break. His painful vigilancies
were so great in Court, as well as Camp, City, and Field, that we may say of
him, as was once of the Great Constantine, Plin.
Tam assiduus in action sua constitit, ut vel labor refici ac reparari
videretur, He was so conversant in action, that it seemed to be nothing, but
his continual recreation, Gaudent siquidem, says the same Author, divina
perpetuo motu, and jugi agitatione se vegetat aeternitas, His constitution was
so strenuous, that it must needs have been akin, to those celestial bodies,
that refresh themselves with their own motion, and perpetual agitation. So true
it is, Seneca.
what Seneca tells us, Contempta res est home, nisi supra humana se erexit; A
man is a very pitiful, vile, and contemptible thing, unless he be ambitious to
raise himself above all the ordinary courses of the World: but that saying is
to be verified in no sort of men so much, as the Noble Soldier, whose honor
depending upon the most superlative degree of virtue, must seek out, and
pursue, ways beyond all equality: and such a person, is sure of attaining his
end; for Polyaenus has assured him, Polyaenus.
that Voluntas ad laborem propensa cuncta vincere and superare consuevit, A
propense will, or a soul prone to labor, has been ever wont to conquer, and
overcome all difficulties. And Appian gives the like encouragement, Appian. de
bell. Hispan.
when he proclaims, Nihil tam arduum quod industria and animi fortitudine
superari non possit; Nothing so high, or hard, but is to be compassed and
overcome by industry, and a willing valiant mind: What these, and all the
Philosophers, Poets, Orators, or Historians, have said, or could prescribe, his
late most Serene Highness, has always fully understood, and most perfectly
practiced, as no one of the Army that has served under him, but must bear him
witness; how present he would be upon all Guards and Watches, as if he were
ubiquitary; how incessant in all his Actions, and Labors, as if he were
impassible; how always taking order for, and moving about his body, as if he
were immortal. Indeed, this laborious virtue, which is no small one in an
officer, his Highness was more Master of, than any that I ever heard, or read
of: If any Work were to be raised, his hand must be in it first, if any duty to
be done, his president must be still the foremost; so by rare skill mingling
the Captain, and the common Soldier together, he did both intend the diligence
of others, from whom he might, though not so effectually, have exacted it; and
ease the burden of their labor, by making himself a companion and partaker of
their pains and travel: But of this, and his other great pieces of Conduct, we
shall say more in our next Ascent, where we shall represent him a most complete
Captain General.

The thirteenth Ascent.
WE have found our Moses a most valiant and virtuous Soldier, and a most
vigilant, skilful, and careful Officer; but that he might be all, and yet not
fit to command in Chief, and a shepherd, is not very likely to make a great
General; fitter he must be sure in the opinion of most, to lead his flocks,
than to conduct an Army of men: Yes, we shall find him a most glorious and
accomplished Captain General, Exodus 3. etc. Levit. Number. ^eut. Number. 11.12.
otherwise he would never have been selected sure by the Divine Wisdom, to
conduct, and command, so great and troublesome a body, as that of the most
mutinous, perverse, and rebellious people in the World, and to carry them in
his bosom, as a Nurse bears her sucking child; or if there could be yet any
danger of doubt in any of this, I would refer that doubting person, to the
whole current of holy Scripture, where he shall find by the exact discipline
observed in his Army, the ordering of his several Marchings, and Encampings;
the Election of his ablest Officers, as well as Soldiers, and the fighting of
his Battles, his extraordinary and incomparable skill in Military Conduct.

The Parallel.
Good Soldiers get honor to their Captains and Officers, and all together
being gallant men, must of necessity, make a glorious General. It highly
concerns him therefore, who is to Command in Chief, to let his prime and
principal care be placed in the Election of his inferior officers, as our
first and second Moses have so exemplarily done; for this is the first step of
all Military Conduct, wherein I am sure, he has outdone all the Generals that
ever were before him, unless this, to which he is so parallel. Is it not
plain, that his Highness found such horrid abuses in all the former Armies,
that he was feign to new model this, to bring about those his great, and
mighty works, that he has done? And what sort of Officers were they that he
chose, and instruments that his inspired wisdom picked out, and fitted for his
purpose? even such as his Soldiers were, before spoken of, men of clean hands,
and purer hearts, that were to fight the Lords Battles. He rejected ever those
gay gaudy outsides of the world, those petit spirits of the Abyss, before
spoken of, sprung from the race of Cadmus; I mean those silly fencing fellows,
swaggering swashbucklers, and Hectors aforesaid, who appear like Comets of fire
and blood, to bring murder, pestilence, and poison, into houses; who (as I
said) make the Pillars of Heaven to tremble with their blasphemies, and have
nothing else of soldiers in them, but to pill and ravage in their Quarters
like Harpies, and feed themselves with humane blood, who are ever readier to
show their valor, for a cold countenance, an extravagant word, or a Caprichio
of spirit, than they would either be, for God, their Country, or the whole
World. A most wretched and abominable sort of men, that never think of, or look
up to Heaven, but to blaspheme it; indeed, more like Centaurs, than men, and
have their hearts all spotted over like the skin of a Panther. No, these were
the pitiful things, as we have said before, that his Highness always fought
against, and proved in the end, that to be a true complete Christian Captain,
or Soldier was not to become a mere Cyplop, without any feeling of God, or
sense of Religion, and that the Lord who has pulled down the mighty from their
Seats, and does exalt the humble and meek, will always bless the endeavors
of such as those. Poverty therefore may be said to resemble the Isle of Ithaca,
which (as Archesilas tells us, though rough and bushy, failed not to breed the
bravest men of Greece; and has not our great Ulysses proved the same in
England? and herein his Highness has not only showed, an especial piece of
his incomparable Conduct; but proved himself to be likewise full of the Divine
wisdom, which hides always its most precious Treasures under the bark, and
mantle of persons, base, and abject in appearance, as we read in Scripture,
Quae stulta sunt mundi elegit Deus, God chose the foolish things of the world
to confound the wise: 1 Cor. 1.
For simple Fishermen, almost as dumb and mute as the very fishes themselves,
are set apart, and chosen to catch in their Nets Philosophers, Kings, Cities,
Provinces, and Empires: and thus in the old Law, the Master Statesman, and
Captain of the World, our Patriarch Moses, being but a poor stammering Shepherd
in show, is chosen out to carry the Word, to a most puissant Monarch, to shake
and to overturn with a poor wand, the Pillars of his Empire, to divide Seas, to
calm Billows, to open the bowels of Rocks, to command all the Elements, and
fill the World with wonders. So did he make a like Election of his Officers,
and Soldiers, and do the works of Giants, with the reputed Pygmies of the
world: I hope I have not hitherto undeservedly brought him for my late Lord
Protectors pattern,d Indeed, this is the ordinary custom of Almighty God, to
keep his richest Pearls in shells, and most precious perfumes in poor boxes.

Men of this World, we know, do quite contrary, as we saw manifestly proved by
the other party, where moved the old Magadepies of the Church, and Butter-flies
of the Court, with some other great things, called Lords, who because they had
(it may be) a gallant valiant man forsooth, for the Grandfather, thought that
they might, very securely, be Cowards, so spending still upon the stock of
their great Antecessors (though to be doubted, whether they were lawfully
begot, or not) ruined their own selves. These pretty gaudy things, lived in the
world just like Snailes, keeping their glorious houses over their heads, and in
their grave Majestic courses, (almost as slow as theirs too) made very fine
long silver traces, but were nothing else indeed within, but mere froth. They
had always their backs like Cushions, covered with Velvet, Satin, and what
not, but their inwards we see, were nothing but hay, or straw. They made a
glorious ostent of leaves to the World, and a fair verdure, like an overgrown
wood; but are within replenisht with nothing but Serpents.

These persons sure, having nothing at all praiseworthy in them, would
dignifie their persons with apparel, showing us plainly, that they had like
Peacocks, little heads, less brains, beautiful feathers, and a long tail;
which yet it seems, by their strutting about the streets, are non clypt short
enough, with some of them, though in good time, I doubt not but they will be.
So I pass from these pitiful nothings, (whom his Highness, inspired prudence,
and skilful conduct, would never admit to serve under his Ensigns) to some
other more worthy piece of his Mosaical Conduct, and the next shall be the
exact Discipline our second Moses always observed, which is indeed, the very
soul of an Army, and without which, they would march, as the Historian tells
us, Multi homines, pauci viri, Many bodies, but a few men, or indeed, more like
Salvages, than Christians. From the neglect of this it is, that we have seen in
time of War, so many Caniballs in arms, that cast nothing but fire, and blood
from their throats, Menaces always marching before them into Quarters, and
ruin and desolation bringing up the Rear: Barbarous villains, that think
because they have a sword by their side, they are therefore to be Masters of
the lives, and estates of other men. It is most certain, great courage is
necessary to make a true Martial Discipline be observed; but yet it is to be
done, as we see in this very Army of our late Lord Protector, that he has left
behind him, to be in truth, a mirror of Armies, and never yet was equalled, no
not by that which Alexander Severus commanded, as Lampridius relates, Lamprid.
all whose soldiers, marched to the Persian War like Senators, and the Country
Peasants loved them as their Brothers, and honored their Emperor, as a god:
Marcus Scaurus.
Nor yet by that which Marcus Scaurus writes of, whose Regiments encamped round
about a great Tree laden with fruit, and yet the soldiers were kept in such
order, as not to dare, though they were to depart the next morning, to take one
apple from the Master of the place. In this very manner, did our glorious
second Moses always conduct his men, Vopisc. in Aurel.
giving them that Admirable Lesson, which the most pious Emperor Aurelian gave
to some of his Officers: My friends, said he, if you will be Captains, nay, if
you will live, contain your soldiers in their duties: I will not that a
Peasant so much as complain, that he has been wronged in the value of a
chicken, nor that any has taken a grape from his Vine, without his permission.
I will have an account of every grain of salt, or drop of oil, unjustly
exacted. I desire my soldiers should grow rich with the spoils of enemies,
and not by the tears of my Subjects. I would have them carry their riches on
their swords, not into their Hutts, or Cabbins. I would have them chaste in the
houses of their Hosts, and not any the least quarrel or disorder heard of
amongst them, etc. If Heathens could teach us such Lessons of civil deportment
in arms, what a shame is it then for some Christians, to march as we see them
do, more like Scythians and Arabians? and that men who are made we know, for
the support of men, and who are not strong, but for the defense of the feeble,
should be more pernicious one to another, than Wolves and Bears, nay, than
fire, hail, serpents, inundations, and famins? By this means it is, that
warfare, otherwise a most honorable profession, is made a detestable trade,
and the Commanders of those unruly Armies, are likely the first that suffer by
them, themselves, and all the countenancers of such debaucht doings, must find
the cup of Divine anger mingled with gall, and the poison, of Dragons poured
forth upon their guilty heads.

All this his late most Serene Highness, always abhorred, and prevented; for
which reason it was sure, that all the hearts of the poor people, of this
Nation, which so much sighed under the former miscarriages of our Civil War,
being indeed reduced, to almost a perishing condition, by the ill conduct of
former Captains, freely bloomed, and newly opened themselves, as Roses, at the
benign, gentle, and yet severe brave aspect, of this incomparable person, our
second Moses, when he came into general Command; for which reason it was sure,
that God so blessed him in all his Battles* Assault, and warlike Enterprises,
that he was successeful in them all; for Plunderers we know, never fight well,
and besides, it is certain, that the just God ties a secret virtue to those
Standards which march for his glory, and are not besmeared with the blood of
innocents.

Cic pro leg. Manil.
But I must hasten to accomplish our Captain General, and, as Tully tells us, In
summo Imperatore quatuor hae virtutes inesse debent, scientia rei militaris,
virtus, Authoritas, and felicitas, There are requisite to a General, these four
qualities, To have knowledge of the soldiers trade, To be valiant, To have his
Army in good awe, And to be always followed with good success; of the three
first requisites, we have sufficiently discourst already, so the last only
remains to be produced, for the accomplishment of our second Moses, in his
glorious Captain-General-ship: or else if we look upon the four most remarkable
properties in Julius Caesar, who was the Phoenix of all warlike Princes in
those Ages, we shall find them all improved to the highest pitch, in this our
late Great Protector: Labor in negotio, fortitudo in periculo, industria in
agendo, celeritas in conficiendo, Labor about business, invincible valor in
point of danger, a thorough industry in all actions, and a quick dispatch in
all expeditions: there remains none but the last of these four Caesarean
properties, unapplyed to our happy Parallel; So I shall endeavor to celebrate
those his glorious dispatches, and successes, in our next most sublime Ascent
and Parallel, that may concern his Highness, in any of his warlike Relations.

The fourteenth Ascent.
MOses was by the extraordinary indulgence and favor of Heaven, attended with
a glorious felicity, in all his undertakings. All his Actions were Crowned with
success, and his Battles with Victory: All which is sufficently cleared, by
the sacred Text, Exodus 14.
in his miraculous Deliverance of the Israelites, and overthrow of the
Egyptians, the discomfiting of the Amalekits, Number. 21.
and defeating of King Arad, and his Canaanits, with Sihon King of the Amorits,
Deuteronomy. 2. and 3.
and Og the King of Bashan, and Conquering in one pitched Battle, five Kings of
Midian. Number. 31.
So true likewise is that piece of Apocrypha, which tells us: And Moses the
beloved of God and men, brought he forth, Eccles. 45.1, 2, 3.
whose remembrance is blessed; he made him like to the glorious Saints, and
magnified him by the fear of his enemies; by his words he caused the wonders to
cease, and he made him glorious in the sight of Kings, etc.

The Parallel.
Though it be very true, Dio. Halicar. lib. 1.
what Dionysius Halicarnasseus tells us, that Virtus est felicitatis mensura,
non fortuna, Virtue is the ell by which we are to measure felicity, not
fortune: and what Paterculus affirms of Mithridates, that he was Vir virtute
eximius, aliquando fortuna, Patere.
semper animo maximus: So every virtuous and valiant spirit, though not always
great by the favor of fortune, yet must be so in his own courage; for to judge
things only by event, is to turn the wrong end of the book upwards. Yet it is
as true, what the judicious Orator assures us, Plin.
that Exercituum Imperatores, nisi prospero, and Martiali quodam astro nati,
frrustra fortes strenuique sunt, frustra virtute bellica instructi; Generals of
Armies, if not born under some happy, and martial Constellation, do exercise
their virtue and skill in Military matters, to little or no purpose; Et de
unius fato ducis, militum victoria persaepe pendet; The Valor and Victory of
Soldiers, is sometimes lost by an unlucky Captain.

It has been therefore the practice of most Princes, to adopt into their
chiefest Commands, only such as have been successful Captains, and have
received no foil at all from fortune. Now the greatest favourit of fortune, or
properly speaking, the dearest Darling of Divine Providence, that ever the
Christian World produced, was this most excellent person, his late most Serene
Highness. His successes were so constant, that we may say, he had struck a
nail in Fortunes wheel, that she should never be able to turn it again. He
has not only that Lady for his Guide, as some have boasted to have her, or his
companion, as others; but the Lord made for him a footstool of Fortune, and
gave him Victory for his Handmaid: and as the same Orator says of Constantine
the Great, Nusquam pedem suum extulit, quin ubique eum gloria quasi umbra
comitata, sit; He never set his foot forth of doors, but glory attended him as
his shadow; and what was said of the Great Alexander, likewise might more truly
be verified in him, Quod plures prope victoriam reportarit quam pugnas inierit,
plures urbes ceperit, quam obsederit, plures hosts fuderit, quam noverit: He
gained more Victories than he fought Battles, he reduced more Cities, than he
beleagured, and routed more enemies, than he ever met withal. But now here,
before I proceed any further, I must be bold to make a stand, and sadly
intermix the water of my eyes, with my sorrowful ink, and with a mourning pen,
deplore the madness of those men, who engaged us in our late unnatural Wars.
Ah poor England, Paradise of the Earth, Eye of the World, Pearl of all
Beauties, How many times by the means of those infernal spirits, have thou seen
thy fruitful bosom, heretofore Crowned with ears of Corn, and Gilded with
Harvests, all bristled over with Batalias? How many times have thou seen, thy
land covered with Swords, and thy Seas with Ships? How may times have thou felt
the arms of thy children encountering within thy proper entrails? How many
times have thou seen flames of brothers hostility flying through thy fat and
fragrant fields? when have thou not sweat in all the parts of thy beautiful
body? when have not rivers of blood been drawn from thy veins, and such blood
as would have cimented the best Bullwarkes for thy defense against all foreign
enemies whatsoever, and if well employed, had made the great Enemy of
Christendom, the Turk, ere this to tremble at thy Standards, and have
re-planted again, the plains of Palestine? But all has been sacrificed to
Furies: But I forbear, least that I lose my self in my provoked Passion; and
indeed, I would willingly pass over this discourse with silence, as over
coals covered with ashes, were it not, that as it was fit to expose massacred
bodies to view, thereby to cure the madness of the Milesian Maids, so we are
bound to discover the bloody effects of this unnatural war, to raise a horror
in all good souls, against the unhappy causes of it. And yet truly, we have no
little reason to rejoice in those very sufferings, and congratulate with our
selves, the bloodshed it self of those barbarous Wars, if we could at no
cheaper rate, have aquired the enjoyment of those most inestimable blessings,
and benefits, which we have since received; and above all the rest, the
sovereign influence of that most precious person, our late Lord Protector, and
second Moses.

Thrice blessed England, in such a purchase, though with so much cost and
pains. O happy voice of Thunder, which made this Hind bring forth so glorious
a birth, after so many terrible throws, and such direful agitations of many
years. And for the happy close of all this, we may again remarke another piece
of Heavens especial Providence, and quiet all the distempers of our souls, with
an humble acknowledgement of that mercy, and submission to the Divine Justice,
which in short, amounts to this. When the Lord is pleased to purge a Kingdom,
or Nation, defiled with sin, he chooses always a people more righteous and
religious than they were, it being forever most just, and reasonable, that they
should enjoy their goods, who will have no share in their vices. So our Moses,
and his Israelites, pillaged and overthrew the wicked Egyptians; So Arbaces
vanquished the debauched Sardanapalus; Salvian.
So Alexander conquered the effeminate Persians; And so the Goths gained the
Empire of Rome, as holy Salvian, more at large illustrates: So to return to our
late great Generals successes, and dispatches, which as it is notorious, have
been so stupendous, that the present spectators of them, did take them, as
aforesaid, more for visions, than realities. The celerity of his Expeditions
was so great, a virtue so much commended in Julius Caesar, that he always as
far out-went his veni, vidi, vici, as ever he did, the Cunctator Fabius. Jebu,
a man of an active spirit, was employed against the house of Ahab, to bring it
to a quick confusion; for God Almighty, when he means to shave clear, always
chooses a Razor with a sharp edge, and never sends a slug upon a message that
requires have; So our great Oliver, we see when he came into General command,
dispatched more work in one year, than all the Armies of England, had done in
three, or four, before.

This it was to have one of the Lords own election to command over us, and so
much according to his own heart, that we see he has constantly tied, as
aforesaid, a secret virtue to his Standards, making winds and tempests, to
fight under his Ensigns, opening for him lands inaccessible, calming stormy
Seas, making him with petit handfuls of men, to discomfit huge Royal Armies,
to take in Towns impregnable, cleave Rocks, and hew through Mountains; nay, to
do the works of Giants, as aforesaid, with the reputed Pigmies of the World,
and find facility in all that humane reason conceived impossible; So that we
may count more Victories of his, than Encounters, his Palms being perpetually
verdant as well in the frozen ice of Winter, as in the scorching heats of
Summer. Nor was England alone the Scene of his great Actions, but the very
mists and foggs of Scotland, as well as the woods and boggs of Ireland, will
all come in to attest his glories; for the barrenness of the one, nor the
barbarism of the other, could set a period to his proceedings, or give a foil
to his fortune.

Now to sum up all his Souldier-like Excellencies; (for I must hasten out of
this large Field, least I be lost in it) if we may by the most eminent qualities
of inferior creatures, be capable to conceive his matchless perfections. The
most exquisite character of a complete Captain, or Man at Arms, is by several
Authors delivered to us thus; That is one, who has the assault of the wild
Bull, the defense of the wild Boar, the flight of the Wolf, the courage of a
Lion, and the craft of a Fox: This strange composition, his Highness had to
its highest perfection, as he has been sufficiently seen in all postures; but
above all, what a spectacle it was, sometimes to behold him in his Lion-like
posture, and almost covered over with blood and dust, amongst the ranks of his
afrighted men, and performing both the office of a great Captain, and most
Courageous Soldier, and so by that means, restoring a Day in danger to be
lost. Then sometimes again, to see him, leading his well Disciplined Army, into
enemies Quarters, and by his mere Conduct, conquering vast Armies, and reducing
their strongst Garrisons, without one drop of blood; and such dry Victories,
were always his dearest delight: as indeed they are always most honorable.
Ingens victoriae decus, citra domesticum sanguinem bellanti, says Tacitus, The
greatest glory of a Victory, is that which a Captain gains by the least
expense of homebred blood: And this was his Highness his constant study to
do; nay, his endeavor likewise was, to save as much as he could of his very
enemies blood. He never sought to purchase fame, by such a cruel vanity, as
Pompey the Great did, who building a Temple to Minerva, caused to be engraven
over the Gate of it, how he had taken, routed, and slain, two millions one
hundred fourscore and three thousand men; pillaged, and sunk, eight hundred
forty six Ships: made desolate one thousand five hundred thirty eight Cities,
and Towns. If this be the way to glory, his late Highness sure has steered a
clean contrary course; for he has written, and engraven by his Actions, on the
Gate of the Temple of Eternity, the Men, Ships, Cities, and Towns, that he has
preserved. Haec divina potentia est, gregatim, and public servare, Senec. de
Clem. l. 1. c. 26.
says the most excellent Seneca; It is a piece of Divine power, to save
publicly, and by Troops. By the other way, it may be, his Highness might have
rendered himself more remarkable and terrible, like a dreadful Comet, by the
ruin of the World; but our glorious Protector, knew, nothing could be so
honorable as to save: So we never saw his Highness put up his sword, but his
anger too, ever holding with Nicetus, Nicetus.
that Naturae injuriam facit, and humanitatis legem violat, qui ultra
victoriam, iracundiae indulget: He offers an injury to nature, and violates a
law of common humanity, that can continue his anger after a Victory: Nay, I Will
be bold to add, that it is a most unpolitick proceeding likewise; for which his
Highness only may be sufficient witness, who after his most bloody Battles,
always Conquered as much with sweetness, as he had done before with the
Sword: which has been, under God, the most happy cause, that after so fierce
and quick a War, we have not scarce a foot-steep to be seen of it, not a Town
fired, and very hardly now, a man mist: our cattle as plentiful as ever, our
fields no less fertile, and fragrant; nor yet our hillocks are less filled
with ears of corn, all which we must needs attribute, to his Highness his
pious preservation, in whose power it was, for our ingratitude, to have thrown
all into a deserved desolation: by which means, he has built himself a Monument
in the hearts of all honest people, in which he will live more honorable a
thousand times, and so be represented to after-ages, than all the greatest
Monarchs of Egypt, in their rich Marbles, Pyramids, and Obelisks. Thus craving
pardon for our too long insisting upon these Military excellencies, of our two
great Generals, our first and second Moses, I shall hasten in our succeeding
discourse to give the World some taste likewise of their most extraordinary
State perfections.

The fifteenth Ascent.
MOses was a most absolute great Statesman, a perfect Master of the Politic
Science; which, though it may be sufficiently argued, by all the advantages
which he had of breeding within the Tropicks of Pharaohs Court; Exodus 2.
so must of necessity have sucked in the very quintessence of all State
influencies, as also being trained up in all the Learning of the Egyptians,
Acts 7.12.
then the most knowing people in the World, as we have already seen: Yet, is
made more clear, by the Lords own designation of him, to the Civil, Exodus
Levit. Number. Deuteronomy.
as well as Military Government, of his people, by his prudent managery of
Affairs, and by the most excellent Laws and Ordinances that he made for their
Government, in peace as well as war; which proves irrefragably, that he
understood how to command Towns, as well as Armies, and to conduct Citizens, as
well as Soldiers; but above all, he appeared a most perfect Politician, in
sticking close to the intrests of God, not swerving in the least from his
Divine Will; and for that we have the Lords own attestation, Number. 12.7.
that he was faithful in all his house, and that must of necessity be the
highest point of Policy.

The Parallel.
Xenoph. l. 1. de instit. Cypri.
Ingens sane, and arduum opus est, recte imperare, says Xenophon, It is the
highest, and the hardest thing in the World, to command well, who, as he gave
us, Effigiem justi imperii, as Cicero describes him, the Portraiture of a just
Empire, under the name of Cyrus, must of necessity mean, that of the Civil, as
well as Martial Government. And doubtless this Politic virtue, which is to
constitute a true, and excellent Statesman, is the most rare, and sublimated
Piece, and as it were, the very cream, and most purified part of humane
wisdom, and of which, great and Noble spirits, are only capable. Tit. Live.
lib. 2. Dec.
And therefore, Titus Livius, tells us, that Ars qua civem regant, (That art of
Policy, or good Government, was ever more as honorable, if not more, than
that) Qua hostem superent, the art of War it self: and the same Livius gives
the reason in another place, Parare and quaerere arduum, lib. 37.
tueri vero difficilius; from whence the Poet seems to have borrowed, O faciles
dare summa Deos, eademque tueri, Difficiles; Lucan.
It is much easier to attain the ends of high desires, than to keep them being
got; and better is the assurance of seeking, than of possessing any thing. For
to be great, and of a large proportion, does not at all take away the
casualties of inconveniences, nor can any greatness give privilege to free
things from distemperature; Tall men, we see, are as subject to Fevers, as
others of less stature; and great Empires are as easily disturbed, as the
States of petit Princes. Besides, an excellent Author tells us, Tueri quaesita,
difficilius est quam acquirere, quoniam in acquirendo, ignavia possidentis
saepe plus confert, quam propria virtus, tueri autem quaesita, sine propria
virtute nemo potest. It is harder to hold, than to Conquer; for the sloth and
negligence of the Possessor, may more conduce to the acquiring of any thing,
than the virtue of the Conqueror; but hold what is so acquired, none can, but
by especial virtue.

Now both these pieces of incomparable Prudence, had our most Renowned Lord
Protector, our second Moses; and I dare say, in equal proportion with the
former, he governed the War it self, like a complete Statesman, and managed
peace, like a prudent Captain. He knew as well as Caesar did, Caesar Comment.
6. belli gall.
that Non minus est Imperatoris, consilio superare, quam gladio, A good General
will Conquer more by his Counsel, than Sword: And as applicable to his
Highness, was that which King Antigonus said of himself, That his warfare, was
rather of times and seasons, than of Arms, and no less did we see made good
by his Highness upon all occasions, what Polybius tells us, that the least
things which are done in war, are those which are handled with sword and
violence; but the most eminent of all, are executed by the knowledge, how fitly
to manage an opportunity. If this piece of warlike, as well as State prudence,
were ever verified in any Person, it has been most remarkably made good in all
our second Moses his State dispatches, as well as Warlike Expeditions: for had
he not in the very nick of time, crushed several eggs, of cursed Cockatrices,
that had been laid against him, he must have hatched them in his own bosom,
that would have destroyed both him, and us.

Are you not yet ashamed of your ingratitude, you viperous brood of Rebels?
that have so often endeavored to eat through the heart, and bowels of him,
that has given you so often a life? Do you not know, that when one Star rises,
the opposite must fall? Be no longer like ungrateful Prentises, who usually
when they are at liberty, spurn at their Guides, and are not only content to
set up Shops for themselves; but seek by all means they can, to discredit their
Masters.

By this time, methinks, you should be sensible, that you have too long opposed
your selves, against his late Highness, most pious, and prudent intentions,
who with sword in one hand, and trowel in the other, that is, arms, and
policy, as a Statesman, and a Soldier, at once did defend, and build the walls
of our Jerusalem.

It is time for you sure to give over busying your selves about your Babylon,
and its building, which when you have done all you can, will appear to be but
like a City, which I have seen in ancient painting, built upon ruins, in a
land of Quicksilver, cimented with blood, and overthrown with frequent
Earthquakes, and outrageous winds: You see by your own sad experience, if you
please to make use of it, that if the arm of the Lord sustain not an Affair,
the more advancement it receives, the deeper ruins it finds; and that all
Maxims of State, that depend not on the Maxims of God, are but the mere effects
of carnal prudence, and so must consequently end in flesh, and fail like it:
And all Councils of State whatsoever, that depend not, and rest themselves upon
him, who with three fingers supporteth the Globe of the Universe, rather pursue
the way of precipice, than path of exaltation; Give over, I say, in time your
Antichristian contentions, lest you be found to fight against God. Imitate, now
at last, this blessed and most worthy Piece of our Mosaical wisdom, which our
Great Prototype, and his Typified Parallel, have so closely pursued, that is,
in the first place to seek the interests of God, and then all other things will
be added, as we have seen proved upon both them, a constant success attending
all their undertakings. On the other side, we find whatsoever Machiavel may
object to the contrary, that God Almighty is pleased, sometimes, to stupifie
the most practiced Statists in the world, that are the greatest professors too
of Policy, and Knowledge, and make them so drink of the cup of error, that we
coming afterward, to discourse upon their judgments, find they have committed
some grosser faults, in the governments of Kingdoms, and Commonwealths, than
the simplest, and most illiterate Peasants would have done, in the direction of
their own houses; all which we have seen most particularly made good upon the
late King and his Counselors, and to be foretold likewise by the Spirit of
God himself, dictating to the person of the Prophet Isaiah, who speaking of the
wicked Counselors of Pharaoh, Isa. 19.
says, The Princes of Tanais, are become fools, the Princes of Memphis are
withered away, they have deceived Egypt with all the strength, and beauty of
her people: God has sent amongst them, the spirit of giddiness, and made them
reel up and down, in all their actions, like drunken men. Job. 12.
No less does holy Job tell us, in these terms; God suffers the wise
Counselors to fall into the hazards of senseless men; God makes the Judges
stupid, takes away the sword and belt from Kings, to engird their reins with a
cord; God makes the Priests to appear infamous, supplanteth the principal of
the people, changes the lips of truth speakers, takes away the doctrine of old
men, and pours out contempt upon Princes, etc.

There is no man, that has either been Actor, or Spectator, in our troubles,
but will take, I presume, those Scriptures, to be directly pointed at our
times, and to be an exact prophecy, of part of our late Wars: so will neither
require any more comment, application, or parallel. It is a most certain truth,
and that his late Highness knew full well, and as frequently declared, that no
wisdom or policy, merely humane, can be perfect: such as forsake God, in the
curiosities of their Counsels, shall be forsaken by him, and shall find each
where, a long web of perplexities, and a rolling wheel of immortal troubles.

When a man goes on in the right way, he is probable to find an end, but if he
wander acrosse the fields, he makes steps without number, runs into errors
without measure, and falls into miseries without remedy. Let all the
Politicians of the World take example by our second Moses, and take into their
serious consideration, as his Highness did, that the greatness of a
Statesman, consists not in treasuring up the Commonwealth of Plato, and
Xenophon, in his imagination, nor in amassing together a huge heap of politic
Precepts, nor in being acquainted with all the Cabales, and Mysteries of the
World, nor in the profession of great subtilties, and stratagems; for we have
seen by the experience of all Ages, that in affairs, there is a certain stroke
of the Divine Providence, which dazleth all the worldly wise, disarmes the
strong, and blinds all the most Politic, with their own lights: for swimming
up and down, as they do, in the vast Ocean of business, and the infinities of
reasons of their proper inventions, they resemble bodies overcharged with
abundance of blood, who through that great and extravagant excess, find
death, in the very treasure of life. Then seeking to withdraw themselves, from
the road of common understandings, they figure to themselves strange
subtilties, and chymera's, which are but as the Towers of the Lamiae, that
Tertullian speaks of, which no wise man did ever really believe, or will;
which is the true cause that their spirits floating still in such a great tide
of thoughts, seldom meet with a happy dispatch of affairs. Not unlike the Sun,
that sometimes draws up such a great quantity of vapors, that he cannot
dissipate; so these undertaking Politicians, do but lay up together, a vast
lump of business in their brains, which their judgments can never dissolve
into any successeful expedition.

He that will take the pains to read the lives of Otho, Vitellius, Galba, Piso,
Balbinus, Florianus, Basilius, Silvianus, Tacitus, Quintilius, Maximus, and
Michael Colophates: or behold the falls of Parmenio, under Alexander, Sejanus
under Tiberius, Cleander under Commodus, Ablavius under Constantine, Eutropius
under Arcadius, Vignius under Frederick, Brocas under Philip, Cabreca under
Peter, and others of the like kind, must find, or be wholly insensible, that to
raise a State, and build Fortune, as well as to conserve it, we are to proceed,
as his late Highness did, securely therein, with a principal eye upon the
Maxims of Faith, Religion, and Honesty, unless that we will expect, in the
course of an uncertain life, a most certain ruin.

It will manifestly, I say, appear, out of all Histories, as well sacred as
profane, how (contrary to Machiavillian doctrine) all they, who disunited from
the Eternal Wisdom, thought to play the Politics and prosper in Governments,
Honors, and worldly Affairs, have proved but as so many Icarus's, that
counterfeit birds, with waxen wings, with which they may soar aloft indeed,
for some little time; but the least ray proceeding from the Throne of the Lamb,
will sure dissolve them to nothing, and make their heights, which they so
foolishly fly at, serve them for no other use, but to render their falls, the
more remarkable.

I shall now only add, for the further confusion of all Machiavillians, and
satisfaction of good men, one excellent observation, out of Paulus Orosius,
who, in his Book of History, Paulus Orosius, lib. 1. cap. 18.
dedicated to the great Augustine, remarkes, that the very tracks of our proud
and politic Pharaohs Chariots, after his most detestable death, and the
destruction of his whole Army, remained a long time, on the sands of the Red
Sea, to be a preaching example to all Posterity, to inform them, how dangerous
a thing it is, to go about, as he did, by any State-tricks, and devilish
subtilties, to fight against God. Let then our Master Machiavillians, march on
still, if they think fit, amongst so many shelves, and precipices, not so much
as once opening their eyes to behold the Abyss, they have under their feet: So
many heads crushed in pieces, under the Dvine vengeance, which lie like broken
masts, and shivers of a shipwreck, advanced upon the promontories of Rocks, to
give notice of their deplorable events, whose steps they still pursue. Let them
look on still, I say, with arms acrosse, and dally with those dangers, like
wanton Victims, that leap and skip, between the ax and the knife, whilst we
the happy people of England, and all good Christians, shall fully satisfy our
selves, in following the examples of our two Mosaical Masters, who used no
other line of Policy, but such as they derived from Heaven, always managing
their great Charges, and Government of others, by their own duties, and
obedience to Almighty God: and that is the highest point of State-Wisdom, which
our second Moses had in its perfection: As we shall see more in the 21. Ascent.

The sixteenth Ascent.
MOses was most faithful, and careful, in providing able and honest Officers
for the Civil Government, Exodus 18.14.
as well Ministers of State, as Justice. For his father-in law Jethro, coming
to see him, and finding him to sit alone, to Judge the people, which stood
about him from the morning until evening, was much troubled at it, and gave him
a true fatherly counsel indeed; which was to divide the burden of the
Government, between some sufficient persons, amongst the people, Ver. 19.
that were accomplished for so great a work: So Moses chose out Men of Courage,
fearing God, men dealing truly, hating covetousness, Ver. 22.
and appointed them to be Rulers over Thousands, and over Hundreds, and over
Fifties, and over Tens. Then upon those whom he appointed Judges, he presses
the point of incorruption, thus; Wrest not the Law, nor respect any person,
neither take reward; Deuteronomy. 16.19.
for reward blinds the eyes of the wise, and perverteth the words of the
just: That which is just and right shall thou follow, that thou may live, and
possess the Land, which the Lord thy God gives thee. So our Moses cannot but
be acknowledged as careful a Father of his people, as he was a faithful
Deliverer, and glorious Conductor, or Captain General.

The Parallel.
This was a Noble Ascent indeed, and not only becoming a man of State, but so
highly necessary, that our Master Moses himself, stood in need of an Admonitor
to it, and probably had not mounted it, but by the sage advice of his good
father-in-law Jethro, as we have seen in the Ascent: which as in all the rest,
our second Moses, his late Highness, has so exactly pattern'd, that he is to
be drawn into example by all succeeding Princes, and his prudence to be adored
by all Posterity, as well as the present Age,

There is none, I believe, will doubt, but that it is a Sovereign and Supreme
Piece of Politic virtue, to make diligent search, and inquiry into the
abilities, and integrities, of all such as are to be employed, as Ministers of
State, or Justice; and this, I say, concerns not only the Chief, but all
inferior Magistrates; for let the person in government be never so great, and
absolute a Master in all State matters himself, if he be disserved by those,
whom he does employ, his virtues will be but betrayed by the crimes of others,
and expose the people to multiplied injuries. This point therefore of Politic
prudence, in a Prince, is much beyond any other personal perfections, Tho.
Aquin. 2.2. q. 58.
that may be called accomplishments in a Statesman, as the Learned Aquinas
tells us, and gives the reason, Quia bonum commune praeeminet omni bono
singulari; This politic virtue exceeds all others, as much as the public good
surpasses any particular; for he that it contented to draw himself within the
guard of his own virtues only, and neglect the looking into the manners of
others, that are to be his instruments of State, will of necessity be ensnared
in his own goodness, and will signify no more to the public benefit, than
those foolish Musicians, that made all their harmony within themselves, and
were content to see all the World besides out of Tune.

This horrid negligence, has made many good Kings odious to their Subjects, and
though excellent persons in themselves, yet tamely suffering themselves to be
lead by their Favorites, have fallen not only into the reputation, but ruin
of Tyrants, and stink still in the nostrils of the people. Some great
Secretaries of Nature, as Theophrastus de Plantis, and that excellent
Naturalist, Joannes Roellus, Theoph. de Plantis. Jo. Roellins.
assure us, That there is a very goodly, and profitable Plant, called Affodil,
or Scepter-Royal, which breeds very bad little worms about it, that gnaw out
the very heart, and perish the whole, substance of it, hiding themselves under
the leaves, and shadow of it, till such time, that getting wing, they become a
kind of Butter-flie, all speckled over with gay flowers, and brave it over men
in the air, whom they durst hardly not long before, behold upon the earth. Just
so, do careless Kings and Princes, like this pitiful, though Rbyal Plant,
cover under their fair verdure, creatures which gnaw like worms in the
beginning, upon the substance of their Master, and afterward frame themselves
wings, all enameled with glory, at the charge of the Public, to take their
flights over the heads of so many Mortals, whom they look upon as scornfully as
if they had forgot the earth that bore them; but sometime, they meet with a
fall, proportionable to their flight, and their Royal Masters and Makers, are
always involved in inevitable ruin.

Our first, and second Moses, we see, full-well understood that danger, and
have taken course accordingly, to prevent it, by employing none in Public
Charges, but men of piety, as well as parts, known integrity, as well as
ability; knowing nothing to be so perilous to Princely greatness, as wicked
Ministers, and that good Officers, must make great Statesmen, as well as
Captain-Generals. Has not, I say, our second Moses, made out his Parallel in
this, to its perfection? Was there ever such a choice, since that of the first
Moses, as he has made of men of Courage, fearing God, dealing truly, and hating
covetousness, whom he has adopted into all the Offices about his Person,
Estate, Army, or Justice? Look back upon his Highness sitting in his Family,
and then, how can you but fancy, the beautiful Rose surrounded with the fair
attendance of its elegant leaves, all in a Livery? Consider him in his Council,
what can you say less of him, than that he was a Princely Palm, encompast
with most stately Cedars, and but reflect upon him, in his warlike equipage,
and with his Martial men about him; he will then shine forth like the Sun, when
glorified with his most illustrious rays. And last of all, if we but look upon
him in his power representative, and Courts of Judicature, there is not a Poet
sure, but would say, that his Highness had Courted, Reconciled, and Reduced,
Astraea to the earth again. Philostratus tells us, in Vita Herodis Attici,
Philost. in vita Herod. At.
how that Athenian Herod, appointed four and twenty Pages for his son, every
one of whom, bore the Title of a Greek letter, which was written on their
breasts, that so he might soon learn his Alphabet, by only calling of his
servants. But our Princely Protector, and second Moses, would have all his
Officers, and Instruments about him, to appear to his people, like those
ancient Statues of Polycletes, Phydias, and Sisippus, of which there was not a
Lineament, but was said to speak. But I am too general in the application of
this Parallel, and may be pardoned, I hope, if I shall reduce it nearer home,
by particulars: though I am sure to incur the censure of flattery, for it
amongst fools: And I Will begin, with his chief Minister, or Secretary of State,
the intelligence of his Counsels, and as it were, the Angel-Guardian of his
Government, who was so present with his great Master, our second Moses, in all
his actions, counsels, interests, and designs, as certain flowers are said to
wait on the Sun, and penetrated to the very Center of his great Soul; so could
not but contract many of his most Mosaical perfections: He is certainly known
to be, what his name renders him by Anagramm, a True Holy one, that is, a
Statesman after Moses his manner: viz. fearing God, and dealing truly, etc. a
person of most incomparable piety and parts; Prudent as a Serpent, and yet pure
as a Seraphim, virtues so rare in a Statesman, that we may justly call him, the
true holy Phoenix Politician of the Age.

I have not time, nor paper to insist so particularly, upon every one of his
Highness most honorable Privy Council; but this I can affirm, that never was
a more complete body of Council, or more exquisite composition, of so many
excellent Tempers together in the World; insomuch, that we see notoriously in
every days dispatches, how they are that perfectly, what the old Historian
Velleius says of Sejanus flatteringly, That he was, Actu otiosis simillimus,
(in earnest, a most excellent character, howsoever of a Statesman) that he
seemed in the midst of his greatst employments, as if he were idle. My Lords
likewise of his Highness Council, are so exactly knowing in affairs, that it
was never heard, that any of those six common obstacles, did ever obstruct
their dispatches, which are, disorder, confusion, passion, solicitude,
irresolution, and precipitation, so they have done all things warily, fully,
and peaceably, without showing the least anxiety. They have by their great
piety and prudence, kept this State so well united within the bands of concord,
and charity, that it cannot but appear to foreigners themselves, as it were a
little Temple of Peace, though in the very heat and hurry of War, embracing all
affairs, and governing them, with that sweet temper, and equality of spirit,
that they resemble those active spirits, which move the whole Heavens, not
using in themselves, the least agitation.

Ambergris is nothing so sweet, in it self, as when it is compounded with
other things, so these Godly, Wise, Courageous, and, every way, Excellent
Counselors: improve themselves by the communication of their counsels
together, and do, (even as Flintstones, which by their proximity, do make their
sparkles to fly) by a holy emulation which they use, in the pursuit of God,
not only enlighten others, but enkindle in each others hearts, a more
sensible, and pious apprehension of God, and all good things, by a mutual
reverberation: But I must hasten; for when I have said all, that can Be said,
it will fall short of their most Mosaical merits; So I shall conclude with
them, in saying only, that they are all persons, composed according to
Jethro's character, and that when our second Moses adopted them into his secret
counsels, we could none of us deny, nor can yet, but that it seemed his late
Highness had drawn so many Angels from Heaven, to fix them at the stern of his
Estate; for they are all of them, as unlike their Predecessors, as all the
World can wish them. Then, if we but consider a little, the excellent choice,
his Highness has made of Commissioners, and Keepers of his Great Seal, we
cannot but acknowledge that they are persons, without any exception, fitted,
for so great a work, that carry a constant Court of Chancery engraven in their
breasts, and bear, jus aequum and bonum, written in their very foreheads.

For the Lords Commissioners of his Highness Treasury, they cannot be
questioned to be of as exact a choice, and equal disposition for the great
Trust, still men of our Mosaical temper, fearing God, and dealing-truly; and so
we may safely affirm, that our second Moses, selected Persons for that
employment, as well as other, to whom he might as safely have reposed his
conscience, as he did his purse: Men all as honorable in their breedings, as
Noble by their births, of as profound Learning, and ability in the Laws, as of
sublime honesty and fidelity to their Country; and of a most unspotted
integrity, both toward God, and his Highness, their late Mosaical Master.

I should be infinite, to insist upon all the particular men of Honor,
employed by his Highness: So I shall speak only something to our Parallel of
Mosaical Judges, to which our present Ascent naturally leads us, and leave the
rest, to be made out, by ingenuous Readers themselves.

And first, for that incomparable pair of my Lords the Chief Justices, with the
several Sets of ingenious and godly Judges, Attorney, and Solicitor-General, all
his Highnesse's Council at Law, with other Officers, and Appendices, to each
Court: They are all such select and eminent Persons, and indeed, the plurality
of Lawyers, from the Purple, to the Sable Robe, of this present Age, so
accompplisht with piety, and parts, that the Divine Themis her self, will not
be ashamed to call her self a prostitute in former Ages, and acknowledge this
production of hers, to be only genuin, and their generation only own to be
Legitimate; and all this we must attribute to his late Highness his most
Mosaical influence. Their Lordships, I mean, those excellent persons in supreme
Judicature, are known to live the Laws, as well as to see them put in
execution: Evecti in excelsum, inde magis vitia despiciunt, as the wise
Cassiodorus well expresses it: They know that God, and his Highness, Cassiod.
have set them on high, for no other cause, but to behold vices beneath them,
which whosoever does exalt, will find himself quickly trampled underfoot, by
them, and made to drink the greatest part of the poison, which he mingles for
others, and he that breaks down the hedge, Eccles. 10.8.
as the Scripture threatens, the Snake shall sting him first. Their Lordships,
I say, have given sufficient evidence to the World, that they know all this,
and practice the contrary course; They know themselves to be looked upon, as
Stars in the firmament; and Philosophy tells us, that the more light a body
has, the more it ought to have of participation, and favorable influences, for
objects, that are in a lower degree than it. Nihil vile, Cass.
nihil cupidum, judices decet, claras suas maculas reddunt, si illi ad quos
multi recipient, aliqua reprehensione sordescant, says the same excellent
Cassiodorus, Nothing vile or covetous, becomes Judges; the spots of persons in
power, are quickly spyed; for they being aloft, every eye dwells upon them. We
have seen in foreign parts, and heretofore here in England, Judges enough
neglectful of their duty, and Courts of Justice resembling rather old Cyclopean
Cavernes, than Temples of peace; for which we have seen the very fields
themselves weeping; nay, filled with large pools, and standing waters, gathered
together from the tears of Orphans, and Widows, and an infinity of other
persons, under oppression; and this by the wickedness of some, who take
delight to stretch out suites of Law with their tongues, as Shooe-makers do
their leather, with their teeth; which made holy Cyprian cry out, Cyprian.
Epist. ad Donatum.
Inter leges ipsas delinquitur, inter jura peccatur. Innocence is seldom so ill
treated any where, as in those places, where profession is most made to defend
it: The Serpents of the Desert, have less gall and spleen, than such Serpents
that make the house of Justice to echo with their clamours, loud as the waves,
which are heard to roar, upon the shore of the Aegean Sea, and flourish in the
World, as Cato tells us, Cato.
like Princely Theives, Fures privatorum furtorunt in compendibus, Publici in
auro vitam agunt, says he, Gibbits, nay Wheels and Racks, are prepared for
some miserable Criminals, because they were yet but little Theives, who had
they grown to be greater, it may be their Crimes had rather been Crowned, than
chastised.

Plutarch very aptly compares those Courts, Plut. de Curiosit.
and Cities, where these raging injustices are committed, to the (...), those
nefast and fatal Portals, ill boading Doors, whereof Histories make mention,
that were never opened, but to pass away bodies of condemned persons, all
villainy, carrion, and stinking ordure. How much are we indebted in the mean
time, to his late Highness his pious care, and Princely provision for us, to
advance only to his Tribunals, such glorious Judges, who are themselves,
speaking Laws, and do more right to the Public, by their words, and examples,
that all the written Labells in the World could propagate? Men so much of Moses
his make, Courageous, fearing God, dealing truly, and hating covetousness, not
wresting the Law, nor respecting persons, neither taking reward; that we may
boldly affirm, that they have already put on incorruption, bearing always in
their minds, That great Dignities are oblgations of conscience, binding more
than the chains of Medea to give a perfect luster of Divinity: Happy are the
people who have the Lord for their God, and such Judges and Governors set over
them: and this happiness we owe to his late Highness, his most Mosaical care
over us, placing over us such persons in power, that he might as well answer
for, to God, as for himself; by which means we must needs be sensible how he
has left us a government so sweetly still established, that we can compare it
more properly to nothing, than to the Halcyons nest, which calmes the browe of
Heaven.

I shall conclude this Parallel therefore, with an exclamation of a most
ingenuous Scotchman, Parcl. Arg.
against a sort of Kings, meaning, it may be, some of his own Country: 0
strange and silly providence of Princes, says he, to keep then but a few
Hawks, to have their stables full of Capreoling Horses, as in an army of
Sybarits, or not speedily to repair the loss of a Hound, if a wild Boar happen
to kill one of them! These things, I say, not more for the use, and pleasure of
Princes, than for mere ostentation and show of Majesty, they hold a sin to be
omitted; nay, they can waste their Gold, and spend their whole Treasure, upon
pitiful and base fellows: But O, it is too too chargeable, to have a choice of
brave minds about them, here their Parsimony is remembered, here their
Exchecquer fails: and so very judiciously proceeds to show, what choice of
brave men should be about the Person of a Prince, and indeed very congruous to
our Mosaical character, which our great second Moses has so strictly observed,
in those brave spirits, which he has picked out, and preferred to have power
over us; that we may safely say, he has by that, as by any other of his
glorious Actions, outgone the condition of mortal men; by that, he sees himself
alive still, and in health, much better than by perfumes, and an Eagle escaping
from his Funeral Pile, does he see himself likewise to be deified: By this, he
shall triumph over time, with the applause of all men; These Persons likewise
shall be his Pageants to all eternity; these his rich spoils of Nations, of
whose flowers, as it were, he has so made himself a glorious Garland.

The seventeenth Ascent.
MOses was not only curious in the choice of his Officers; but continued still
his own constant care over his people, and above all things, rendered himself
most remarkable, by the clemency, and mildness, of his Government, tempering
always his severity with sweetness, and carrying his people, (like an
indulgent father) as sucking children in his arms, Number. 11.12.
and bosom, not trampling them like slaves, under his feet, and interposing
frequently between the wrath of God, and them, to save them from destruction.
Nay to the height of that, he offered himself to be blotted out of the Book of
Life, to save them,

The Parallel.
We have already seen in our former Ascents, the first Moses his promptness to
pardon all private injuries, and offenses, how great soever against himself:
nor shall we find his great goodness less unwilling to proceed to punishment
of public transgressions themselves; insomuch, that we find him frequently
desiring himself to suffer for his subjects faults: always carrying them in
his bosom, like children, and never imposing any hard tax or burden on them,
etc.

A most pious clement Prince he was indeed, and no less vigorously followed in
this, than in his other Sovereign virtues, by our glorious second Moses. Did
ever any Prince in the World go more obliging ways in his Government; than his
late most Serene Highness has done? Has he not ever showed a greater affection
to sway the Scepter over us, than to brandish the Sword? and to govern us more
by Laws, than Arms? Nay, when the Laws themselves (as in many things they are
most cruel) were likely to bring a legal injury, and a ruin upon any man; how
has he always endeavored to sweeten the rigor of them? and that not only to
do good to the innocent, but by pardoning the culpable themselves; for very
little indeed, is that Clemency to be esteemed, which does only abstain to
strike those who give no offense: No, my Lord did ever consider, that mercy was
made only for the miserable, and knew that in punishing or revenging injuries,
he could only do like the men of the earth, but by gracious clemency, and
practice of pardoning, he was to share in glory with the great Monarch of
Heaven, who daily makes his Sun to shine on criminal heads, as well as the most
innocent. Nay, his eminent mercy was used to extend it self, not only to
common Malefactors, but to his most malicious enemies themselves, as we have
fully seen: and indeed, a most precious goodly sight it is, and as the holy
Father calls it, the most glorious spectacle in the World, Ambros.
and able to attract Angels to the Gates of Heaven to behold: It is not
Theaters, nor Amphi-Theaters, Pyramids, or the like great worldly wonders, but
such a man, as knows how to do well, and bear ill, and to vindicate himself
from ill, by doing well. This very Angelical spectacle, must my Lord be
acknowledged to have been, by all that knew him. So thoroughly has his Highness
practiced that true, and Princely, though very ticklish rule of the good Father
Augustine, ^ugustin.
Disce diligere inimicum, si vis cavere inimicum, The means to preserve from
enemies, is to love them, which agrees with the Poets policy too, who cries, Vt
ameris, ama, It is only love, that makes to be beloved; and that our second
Moses has ever taken for the surest guard of his Princely greatness: Nor was
that the course of his Civil, and peaceable proceedings only; but of his very
Martial.

How often have we seen him, even in the very hurry of a Victory, and heat of
execution, sounding a retreat to himself, and sheathing his sword in clemency,
which drawn, threatened nothing but destruction, and a whole deluge of blood.
His well complexioned soul, could never understand the temper of that Tyrant,
Dio. Halic. l. 5.
of whom the Historian complains; Cum victor extiterit, lictor protinus evasit,
After his Victory made himself, as it were, a Hangman, but always supported
the opinion aforesaid, quoted out of Nicetus, that naturae injuriam facit,
Nicetus.
and humanitatis legem violat, qui ultra victoriam iracundiae indulget: He is a
violater of all humanity, and injurious to very Nature it self, that can be
angry beyond his Victory: but upon this we have enlarged already, so I shall
pass over it now, with saying only, that as the gracious Lord of Heaven, was
pleased to establish his Highness his Throne in mercy, so he always guarded
it secure to himself, by his Clemency; for by that, he commanded hearts, which
he knew to be of much more force, than to be a Master of men. Omnia vicit qui
animum expugnavit; To conquer affections, is the greatest piece of victory, and
that can never be obtained, but by the arms of love and sweetness; and by
those arms likewise we see offenders are oftener reformed, than by all the
violence, and severity of rigor: Monendo certius quam minando, cedendo quam
caedendo scelera interdum coercentur, and this accorded so well, with that old
piece of Aristotelian Policy, Praestat mill nocentes absolvere, quam
innocentem opprimere vel unum, Better let a thousand guilty persons pass
unpunisht, than to injure one only innocent; that his Highness has always
taken it for the surest groundwork of his happy government: and for this, he
had not only the example of his Master Moses, but the very precept, and
practice of God himself: for did not he command our first Moses to carry the
people in his bosom, and is it not his common practice to govern the World by
his mercy? of which if any should be of so reprobate a judgment as to doubt,
let him consult the Prophet, who tells us, that God measures the waters with
his fist, and poiseth the heavens in the palm of his hand; which signifies,
(according to the best Interpreters) that the Lord goes with a close shut and
contracted hand to punishments, intimated by waters, but proceeds with the
whole extent of his goodness to reward, that is represented by the heavens.

The Rainbow, which the Lord has taken for the symbol of his reconciliation
with man, and environeth the Throne of the Almighty, as we find in the
Apocalypse, it is Arcus carens sagitta, as holy Ambrose observes, Qui terrere
magis vult, quam ferire, A bow without arrows, that is bent, more to terrify,
than to strike. Nay, the Lord makes it so great a matter to pardon an offender,
that he will rather permit his whole Essence to be touched, than his Clemency to
be so much as questioned: his very Title of Godhead to be invaded, rather than
his glory of pardon. And yet our bold-faced Florentine, will go about to teach
his Prince, Match. Princ. cap. 17.
to establish himself by cruelty; as if no government should be, or could
possibly be made secure, that was not built on the bloodshed of subjects; and
this he goes about to prove, by the examples of Caesar Borgia, and the stern
Emperor Severus, etc. And then he proceeds to affirm it, for a fundamental
Maxim of State; That it is better for a Prince to be feared, than loved; for
men, says this wise Secretary, do love as it pleases them, but do fear as it
pleases the Prince; and therefore infers, that a wise Prince, will found
himself sooner, and rely surer on that way, which depends on himself, than upon
that which depends upon another.

A very subtle inference indeed, if it were possible for a Prince to keep his
people, so perpetually under still, as to make them always stoop to kiss the
yoke for fear: but experience plainly proves the contrary, that no Tyrant in
the World, be he never so terrible, could, or can, so keep his people under the
lash, but they will sometimes get loose, and unyoking themselves, make the
effects of their forced fear, felt by the Authors of it. And this is apparent
by the issues, that most Tyrants have found of their cruelties; as Nero,
Caligula, Otho, Vitellius, and Domitian: as also Julianus, Heliogabalus,
Gallienus, Maxentius, Philippus, Pocas, Carinus, Zeno, and diverse others, who
did all finish their lives, and Empires together, most tragically by the sword.
And truly reason it self, seems clearly to me to prove, it must be so.

Does not Philosophy assure us, that no violence can endure long; but this kind
of cruel government by fear only, is set upon the highest pitch of violence;
therefore impossible to be of any considerable continuance. And truly this
politic Thesis of Nicholas Machiavells, seems so absurd to himself, that
presently after he has asserted it, he begins to recant, and temper it thus; I
grant, says he, that Prince to do best, who can join to be feared, and loved
together; but that being a thing very difficult, if not impossible, to be
compassed, as he says, he counsels to procure fear, rather than love. Just so,
he tells us, in another place, that piety is a thing impossible to be in a wise
Prince: Thus does our Politic Secretary serve us, like a lewd ignorant
Physician, who is pleased to make the sick party to despair of health, because
he cannot tell how to cure him. This mischeivous Maxim of his, he drew
doubtless, from the mouths of two of the greatest monsters of Tyranny that
ever were in the World, Sueton. in. Calig. cap. 30.
and they were Caligula, who, as Suetonius tells us, did frequently usurp that
impious Proverb, Oderint dum metuant, and Tiberius, who would seem to mitigate
the malice of it, by saying, Oderint dum probent, the one saying, Let them
hate, so they fear, the other, Let them hate, so they allow: But I am so much
of Machiavels mind, that the seeming Moderator in this point, is in the
greatest extreme; for certainly, his eyes were never matches, that could see
hatred, and approbation, march in couples together: and I shall willingly grant
so much more to our Machiavillian Politics, that some mixture of fear with
love, does make the most excellent composition in Government: for though the
strongest Citadel, or Castle, that a King can have, be his subjects affection,
and their hearts his best Treasury or Exchecquer: yet it cannot be denied, that
love without fear, quickly turns to scorn, and fear without love, as soon
converts to hatred, both equally dangerous to any Prince his estate.

Now, though Machiavel, and his crew, did never know how to be so good
Apothecaries of State: yet our prudent Patriarch, and his Parallel, our late
Protector, we see understood full well, how to make that admirable mixture; for
though they were great Justicers always, yet never forgot to be most loving
Fathers of their people, and in that sacred composition, rests, not only the
mystery, but the luster of a true Statesman, Greg. in Job. 27.
as the Great Gregory assures us; who says, that in every good Government,
there must be such a mixture made of oil and wine, that the wounds of men, may
be healed in such sort, that their minds may not be ulcerated with too much
severity, nor yet grow too remiss, by an excess or indulgence and lenity; the
rod must be used to touch, and the staff to support, and then they will both be
comfortable to us, as the Psalmist tells us: The scale of Justice must be so
equally carried, that neither love should too much soften, nor overgreat
rigor transport people into a despair.

This right Princely temper, I say, was perfectly understood by our gracious
Patriarch Moses, the first and greatest Statesman in the World, and no less by
our glorious second Moses, his Parallel. Behold them both burning inwardly with
the fire of charity toward their people, and outwardly wholly enkindled with
the flames of the zeal of Justice: as loving Fathers, they have offered their
souls to God, even to the wish To be blotted out of the Book of Life, to save
their people; and as glorious Judges, they took the Sword in hand, and bathed
it in the blood of wicked men. They have showed themselves in all things, such
accomplished Captains, as became courageous Magistrates, and Ambassadors from
God, and admirable Mediators to him; pleading before him, the cause of their
people, with prayers, and before the people, the cause of God, with their
swords: and though there is none which can deny, but our second Moses his zeal
to Justice was very great, a Divine virtue in him; yet we must acknowledge that
his benignity, mansuetude, and clemency were virtues more natural, and
agreeable to him, which he always improved too, both by the pattern of his
Master Moses, and God himself, who as the Scripture tells us, Etiam iratus,
misericordiae recordatur, In his very wroth remembers mercy, and shows his
anger to us more often, by Thunder, Lightning, fiery Comets, blazing Stars,
Storms, and Tempests, and the like, than he makes us to feel it; nor yet sends
them so often as we deserve; which the Pagan Poet could observe, when he told
us, Si quoties peccent homines, etc. If Jupiter should spend his angry
Thunderbolts so often as men deserve them, he would very suddenly disarme
himself; but, Christianly indeed, we may say thus, That if his Divine Majesty
should disarme it self of mercy, we should quickly be reduced to misery; and
therefore it was, that he commanded our Moses, to follow his example, and carry
the people in his bosom, like sucking children, and loudly proclaims in his
Word, that Misericordia and veritas custodiunt Regem, and roboratur clementia
Thronus ejus, Mercy and Truth, are the greatest guard for Kings, and Clemency
is the greatest support of their Thrones. All this, I say, our second Moses has
sufficiently showed himself to know and follow, and yet his Clemency has never
exposed him to those extremes before spoken of, to render his goodness
contemptible; no, he happily arrived at the blessed mixture, and sweet
composition, that we have remarkt in our first Moses; and always ruled us
according to the holy Rule given by an ancient Father, Ea, qui praeest,
mensura, se moderetur, quatenus and arridens timeri, and iratus amari debeat,
He that is set over men to govern them, ought to carry himself with that
moderation, so as to be feared, when he is pleased, and to be amiable in his
very displeasure.

This was the very Mosaical temper of our late precious Lord Protector, who had
so much of that Divine Art of compounding his sweetness with severity, that we
may safely say for truth, though a very prodigious one, that his Justice, and
his Love, (though both they are said to be blind) did yet lend one another
eyes; he so sweetened his Sword with his Love, and so sharpened his Love with
his Sword, that his very severity might seem to proceed from his love, and his
punishments themselves, put on the face of obligations. Castigavit, non quod
odio habuit, sed quod amavit; As he reformed always by his favors, so were
his chastisements still turned into true fatherly corrections.

The eighteenth Ascent.
MOses was not only an accomplished Prince, in all kinds of Pity and Piety,
toward the persons of his People: but he did extend it likewise, toward their
very Purses: restraining frequently, their abundancies of love, in all their
contributions, Exodus 36.6.

Levit. 25.35, 36.


and very liberalities, not only toward himself, but to God. In short, he
kept not the course of common Policy, which renders Princes little better than
Publicans; he exacted nothing, but love from his subjects, nor imposed any
thing upon them, but their own happiness.

The Parallel.
We have seen at large, in our last Ascent, as well by the practice of our two
Mosaical Masters, as diverse other elucent arguments, that singular Axiom made
good, which tells us, That dinturni magister officii metus esse nequit, Fear
alone, can never contain men in a lasting duty: for otherwise the Devils policy
would have more influence upon the hearts of men, than that of God himself. It
is the part of every petit Minister of Justice, to use cruelty and severity,
but the practice of pity and clemency, (though it becomes all men) does most
properly belong to Kings, and Supreme Magistrates. Regia creed mihi res est
succurrere Lapsis, Non alia major quaeritur art Favor, Pity, and Clemency, are
Princes privileges, and parts of their prerogative; Justice it self, can be
but their duty, at most, but the only art of Government consists in the
excellent mixture before spoken of, in our last Ascent: And therefore
Alexander, being asked who was the greatest Prince upon earth? answered, Qui
amicos donis retinet, and inimicos beneficiis amicos facit: He that holds his
friends fast by courtesies, and converts enemies into friends, by benefits: So
dealt Augustus with Cinna, and made of a Traitor, a true Friend: And this has
always been the wisest Kings Royal highway; as most particularly, of our late
great Prince, and Protector, of whose most obliging ways of Government, we
have been all made so sensible, that we may cry out, Bernard.
as holy Bernard did upon the like occasion. O suaves nexus, queis, animi,
obsequiis quasi compedibus illigantur, and tanquam beneficiorum cumulis
insepeliuntur: O sweetest ties of obligations, with which souls are fast bound
as with fetters, and as it were, buried in heaps of benefits. His late most
Serene Highness, like that his most exemplary Master, the former Moses, full
well considered all this, and collected, that if this were the true way to
glory, for all great Ones to go in, to oblige subjects by beneficence, as we
have hitherto seen it is; how ignominious and ugly a thing it must needs be, in
those, that go about to pillage, spoil, and prey, upon their people, with
unjust Taxes, and impositions, as some ill tutored Tyrants have done, who have
been, it may be, contented to spare, nay, to complement the persons of their
people, whilst they have most theevishly picked and oppressed their purses,
serving them, as Prospero Colunna did his Goose, who was still plucking the old
feathers, that the new ones, as he said, might grow the better; and so continue
to milk their people, till they draw blood from their very hearts; for they
have pretty tricks, as they say, when the Cow slacks, to press her nipples
too. And however this was said to be the practice of a very great Politician,
late in France, I must be bold, (according to our Mosaical Rule) to pass my
censure on, and condemn it, as utterly unchristian, and a very unprofitable
policy. Notwithstanding, as I have heard, he was used to boast. That La France
est un beau Pre, qu' on tondoit trois fois la'nnee; France was a very fair
Meadow, and fit to be mowed at least thrice a year. He always laughed at that
pious Principle, which called the peoples hearts, the Kings best Exchecquer;
but reflected oftener on that Maxim, Populus aut humiliter servit, aut superbe
dominatur, The common people either must serve slavishly, or will rule
insolently; and that they were like fire and water, Good Servants, but the
worst Masters; therefore he would take a course to keep them under, by
perpetual impositions, and a pitiful poverty, and so, upon the matter, made
them worse than Asses, to become mere Dromedaries, who not only submit to bear
their heavy burdens, but humbly kneel down, to receive them: yet, by his good
leave, he might have reflected something upon what that grave, learned, Boethius.
and eminent Statesman, Boethius told his Gothic King Theodorick, that the
common people, did participate much of the nature of the herb called Basil,
which renders a good pleasant and wholesome savor, as Naturalists inform us,
if gently handled, but turns to be poisonous and creates Scorpions themselves
when rudely chafed.

Quint. Curt.
Alexander, I am sure, was commended by Quintus Curtius, and all Wise men, that
have written of him, for making his subjects the keepers of his Treasure. Then
Sextus Aurelius Victor, Sext. Aurel Vict.
tells us, that Fiscus est Reipub. lien, quo crescente artus reliqui tabescunt;
The Fisk or Exchecquer is the spleen of the Commonwealth, the over-encrease,
or swelling of which, makes all the other members to consume; Claud.
and Claudian gives the Emperor Honorius this great Elogy, Nec tua privatis
crescunt aeraria damnis, That his coffers did never increase, by any private
man's losses.

Basilius often advised his officers, Basilius.
that the money, which they were to raise for him, should not be at any time
dipped either in the tears, or blood of his subjects: Cic. l. 2. de Offi.
and Cicero in his Offices, wisely premonisheth all Statesmen in those
occasions, Vt omnes intelligant, si salvi esse velint, necessitati esse
parendum: That the peoples private purses, were but so to be opened, as to keep
them shut, and safe from those enemies, that might otherwise-seize upon, and
consume all.

I might be infinite, to sum up all that has been said, by the gravest and
most judicious men of the whole World, upon this point, and to oppose them
against that French Politician, but I am obliged not to digress too far from
our Parallel, whose Mosaical example only, were enough to confute so heretical
a piece of policy. He sufficiently knew all that stuff, to be but a clear chip
of the old block of Machiavel, and certainly in his own pious opinion, did very
much blame, and would as willingly have redrest, if he could, those grievances
of our neighbour-nation, as he did our own; and certainly those counsels are as
unlikely to prove successeful to France, as they have done to other Princes,
and Provinces, where they have been practiced. I am sure, that Kingdom has
smarted for them, pretty well already, and they are in a fair way to be causes
of greater confusions.

His Mosaical Highness, in the mean time, was contented to follow his old
Master Moses, rather than Mr. Machiavel, and frequently has been heard to
honor the judgment of that most excellent Person, and pious Politician,
Boethius, Boethius.
before spoken of, who was used very often, to inculcate to his King
Theodorick, better Principles; and once in a most elegant Oration, after this
manner, That Kings were but Gods Shepherds, and so permitted to sheare their
Flocks; not to stay them. That a body overcharged, could not but sink to the
ground, and that there was no Tribute comparable to the precious commodities,
derived from the love of subjects. That a King was made to reign over men, not
as a man, but as the Law; to bear his subjects in his bosom, and not to
trample them under his feet; to teach by his example, and not constrain by
force; to be a father of Citizens, and not a master of Slaves: That Kings were
given by Heaven, for the use, and benefit of the people, and that they ought
not to have so much regard to the extent of their power, as not to consider the
stint, and measure of their own obligations; and to handle the matter so on all
occasions, that the greatness of their Majesty, should appear in its goodness
only; and then concludes his sanctified counsels, with a most pious and
politic Maxim, That a good Prince, ought to fear nothing so much, as to be too
much feared. And all this, I am sure, was the Mosaical policy of his late
Highness, who never imposed Taxes upon, or drew blood from his people, but
when driven by the greatest necessities in the world, after the pattern of his
Great Prototype, our transcending Patriarch; and that truly, I should humbly
conceive to be enough (without respect to the precepts or practices of any
other, though the godliest, gravest, and wisest, persons, in all Ages, as we
have seen) to convince, any phanatical Florentine, or French Politician
whatsoever, under whose depraved Policies, we find all Cities, and Countries,
that are subjected to them, still pitifully complaining, the rigourous
concussions, that they yet feel, to satisfy with their sweat and blood, the
avarice of some cursed particular Officers, who are notwithstanding as greedy as
fire, and more insatiable than the Abyss, or Hell it self.

But I shall forbear at present, to prosecute this dispute any further; for I
conceive by what is already said, there is no sober Christian, but will
conceive, that Cyclopaean piece of policy, is so far from being Mosaical,
profitable to, or becoming the dignity of, a Christian Prince, that it must be
absolutely contrary, and destructive, both to Prince and people; nay, fitter to
be styled Barbarism, than a Civil Government. So I hope, we may now securely
proceed, to the conclusion of our precious, and happy Parallel. And as for this
great point of Piety, in not pressing upon the peoples purses, or squeezing
their estates, so remarkable in our former Moses, there is no man sure, so
perverse, as to deny our second, to be his perfect Parallel; for though, Bella
sustent antur pecuniarum abundantia, as Dionysius Halicarnassaeus tells us, The
support of all Wars, Dion. Ha^icar. lib. 6. Tacit. Annal. 13.
is from a great treasure, and plenty of money; and what Tacitus observes, is
most certain, that Dissolvitur imperium, si fructus quibus Res-Pub. sustinetur,
diminuantur, There is no State or Kingdom can continue long, without a certain,
and a large revenue; yet his late Mosaical Highness, has been ever so tender
of intrenching upon the particular purses of his people, to supply those
public occasions of State, that he has been almost guilty of transgressing in
the other extreme, by permitting the General good to be neglected, at least, to
suffer some prejudice for want of it. Much less sure, can any such thing as
unjust coveting, or craving of other men's estates for himself, be objected to
him, which most of his malicious adversaries, before mentioned, have been
guilty of, in the highest degree. Their fingers were like Talons, and Claws of
Harpies, to scratch and scrape what they could for themselves: His hand and
heart were always open to do good to others, as appeared by his manifold
charities, in the relief of the poor, especially such as were made so by the
sad distress of War; and I dare say, his expense that way, has been far
greater, than all the sharers of the Church and Kingdoms spoils put together,
have disburst.

There was a notable Inscription upon one Gillias, as Valerius Maximus tells
us. Val. Max. l. 4. c. 8.
Quod Gillias possidebat, omnium quasi commune patrimonium erat, hic ipsius
liberalitatis praecordioe habuit, and domus ejus quasi quaedam munificentiae
officina fuit: What Gillias had, was the possession of all mankind; this man
had his heart, and entrails, composed even of charity it self, his house was a
shop of bounty; and all this sure, was never more applicable to any person,
than to his late Mosaical Highness, whose hands were kissed by millions, when he
was alive, in acknowledgement that they were the gracious distributors of so
many blessings, and his grave, now he is dead, will be sprinkled with as many
flowers, in gratitude for the preservation of so many lives. His bounty, I say,
was a most eminent virtue in him, ever holding with Cassiodorus, Cassiod. l. 1.
Ep. 19. Idem. l. 1. Ep. 16.
that Periculosissima res est in imperante tenuitas, That narrowness of soul,
and griping hands, were the most perilous qualities that could appear in a
Prince; and with the same excellent Writer concluded likewise, that Regnantis
facultas fit ditior, cum remittit, and acquirit nobiles thesauros famae,
neglecta utilitate pecuniae, A Kings Treasure is increased by giving, and
forgiving, and the less money he plucks into his Exchecquer, the more glory he
carries about his Court.

Did his most Serene Highness ever draw any thing from private men, but in
order to their own preservation? He never desired, or studied, any thing more,
than that we should be safe, nor never sought ours, but us. He never accounted
himself rich, but when his people were so, making their hearts, as that great
Alexander did, his best Exchecquer.

In fine, what was once said of Hadrianus Caesar, must be acknowledged to be
his Highness his most especial Character, Sic suum semper gessit Principatum,
ut res sit Populi tota, non sua, Whatsoever he has done in his Government, has
been more for our advantage, than his own; he has not only forborne to burden
us himself, but has most mercifully released us, from many of the heavy Taxes,
that were imposed upon us, by our terrible Taskmasters of the long Parliament,
and like a true Soul of Honor, never sought for any other recompense of his
great Actions, than the glory of doing well, and the private satisfaction of
his own conscience. Thus are hearts gained here, and Crowns of immortality
hereafter. Thus truly is Heaven it self obliged, and Earth made tributary to
virtue: for by that means, he has rendered himself to be truly that, which was
said of Octavianus Caesar, Deliciae humani generis, The love and delight of all
mankind, which cannot but more and more appear to us, as we proceed to mount
higher upon our Mosaical Ascents and Parallels.

The ninteenth Ascent.
MOses was a most exemplary person, in all manner of Piety toward God; a duty
most becoming a great Prince, to be highly zealous for the true honor, and
Divine worship of his Almighty Maker, the Lord of Heaven and Earth. And this
plainly appeared, not only in his frequent spreading of his hands, and
sometimes falling down upon his face before the Lord; Exodus Levit. Number. Deuteronomy.
and prostration we know, is the highest part of Religious worship; but also in
his most indefatigable pains, speedy care, and expedition, in preparing of the
Tabernacle, with all its appertinencies, and providing offerings for it.

Then in his punctual and precise care, Exodus 25.
for the ordering of the particular Ceremonies, Exodus 28.
and Circumstances of Divine Service, to the very Garments of Aaron, the Vrim,
and the Thummim, and the Consecration of Priests. Exodus 29.


Then in the constitution of many most costly and reverent Sacrifices, Lev. 2.
as the continual Burnt-offering, the Meat Offering, Lev. 3.4, 5.
the Peace Offering, the Sin-offering, etc.

Exodus 30.
Then in his erection of the Altar of Incense, his appointment of the course,
for the ransom of Souls, for the making of the holy anointing Oil, the manner
of making, with the ingredients, for the composition, of the holy Perfume.

Then in taking order, for an infinity of other Rights, Ceremonies, and holy
Feasts; as the Feast of Passover, the Feast of Weeks, the Feast of Trumpets,
and the Feast of Tabernacles, etc. Finally, giving the people such a Law, so
solemn, and so strict, in the Service of the Lord, as if they should have
nothing almost else to do, but to render their duty to the Omnipotent, and
spend all their time, Levit. Number. Deuteronomy.
in paying him the honors of a glorious Service, as is to be seen at large,
throughout his Sacred Writings.

The Parallel.
If we look upon the Piety of this our Great Patriarch, or his happy Parallel,
our late Lord Protector, in the largest extent of it, we should find it, as
boundless as the Sea, and our selves swallowed up, in the contemplation of it;
So we have restrained our selves, to the discourse of that part of their piety
only, which has relation to Godward, and a true zeal to his holy Worship: And
first we find our Patriarch so severe and punctual in all his performances,
that he would have the least omission of a puntillo of them, to be a mortal, at
least a capital sin, the offender being to be cut off from the World, or from
communion with the people: and so sumptuous he was in his appointed worship,
that all the World might see, that he thought nothing too costly for a bare
ceremony of Divine Service, and that the people should take notice, that, the
All they had, was from the Lord, to whom they were to pay back so large a
proportion in Sacrifice. A most Royal, Stately, and Magnificent, manner of
Worship it was, Levit. Number. Deuteronomy.
which every man must acknowledge that reads the several solemnities instituted
by him in those blessed Books, and worthy of the spirit of so great a Prince,
Prophet, and Patriarch, as our great Moses was.

Now, has our glorious second Moses, showed less Religious zeal, or true
Princely piety toward God? or less extraordinary care, and pious curiosity,
in providing for the honor, splendor, worship, and service of his Holy Name?
No his Mosaic Highness, full well knew, that if all the mountains of the
World, were amassed into one, and all the woods of the Earth made into one
Libanus, and were set on fire, and all the beasts of a thousand fields and
forests were turned into victims, for his Sacrifices, they would be all as
nothing in value, in respect of his heavenly Majesty: and if all the voices of
men were tuned into one, and that one voice, so musically made, could speak
like Thunder, and be heard loudly to proclaim from Pole to Pole, the glory of
the Almighty, it could not be sufficient so resound his holy praises.

To this purpose it was, that his Highness, was pleased frequently to approve
that worthy and ingenious fancy of Philo that great and Learned Jew, Philo
Judaeus in Planta Noe.
who has a Story, though in it, may be, nothing at all of verity, yet I am
sure, the morality of it, is very excellent.

This great man, in a Book of his called Noe's Plant, relates as a certain
tradition of the Sages of his Nation, from the very beginning of the World;
That God the Creator, after that he had formed this goodly Globe of the
Universe, and composed it as a glorious Scutcheon of his own immense
Greatness, a compendium or contracted table of his chiefest Titles, and a
perfect Mirror, of his Divine Wisdom and Power: demanded of those blessed
Spirits about him, which were the Angels (it may be then in glory) what they
thought, of that great piece of Work? upon which, one amongst the heavenly
throng, after he had very highly commended, the curious Architecture of the
Universe, acknowledging it to be a most complete Fabric in all things, but
one, and that one thing, he said, was wanting to the perfection of so goodly a
Frame, which he required as a noble Seal, to set upon so incomparable a Piece.
What is that, said the Eternal Father? I would desire, replied the holy Spirit,
That there might be a strong, powerful, and penetrating harmonious voice, which
borne upon the wings of the winds, and Coaches of the clouds, and Charioted
thorough the air, might replenish all the parts of the World, with an applause
of so accomplished a Piece of Work, and incessantly to echo forth both night
and day, the glories of God, with praises and thanksgivings for his Divine
Majesty's most inestimable benefits.

This Story truly may pass very well, for a pretty invention at least, and not
unworthy of an Angelical spirit, that was zealous for the honor and glory of
the Lord, his Master and Creator. Yet by the leave of this good spirit, I must
be bold to say, that his exception, if we take it as so, was in something very
frivolous; or his Complement, if we take it as so, was over-officious. For
first, the Almighty had sufficiently provided, against that pretended defect,
in composing the World, in the frame chat we behold, as a fair large Clock; and
then proportionably giving to man the place, which this celestial and critical
spirit seemed to require. Now, that this great Clock of the Universe, should be
always in tune, to his service, and Divine disposition, he has laid his
particular commands and orders upon each wheel, and pin, to do their parts. The
first wheel of this grand Clock, is that primum mobile, which we find in
Philosophy, the continual motion, and the secret influencies of antipathies,
and sympathies, which lie, as it were hidden, in the bowels of Nature. The hand
of this universal Horologe, is that goodly embowed piece of checkerwork, and
frettizing of the heavenly Orbs, which we behold with our eyes. The twelve
Signs in the Zodiac, serve, as it were, for distinctions of the twelve hours
of the day. The Sun it self, exercises the office of the steel, and gnomon, to
point out time to us, and in its absence the Moon: the other Lights and Stars,
contribute thereto, their lustrous brightness. The Sea gives in the azure of
its waves for ornament; as also the Earth produces its varieties of herbs,
flowers, and fruits, for enamel of the outside, and its whole body, for a
perfect counter-poise: its stony Quarries, Metals, and Minerals, for to
exercise the wisest, and learned Naturalists, in the search and knowledge of
this great Creator: The lesser and inferior animals, are the small chimes; and
Man himself, is the great Clock, which is to strike, the several hours, and so
perpetually to render thanks, honor, glory, praise, service, and worship, to
this Almighty Maker.

And the most vocal Clock to celebrate the praises of his Creator, (that these
later Ages have produced) was this Man of men, our most pious late Lord
Protector.

All this, I say, his Highness knew full well, as our great Patriarch, his
Prototype did, and the necessity too, that there was on the peoples parts, to
give the most gracious Lord of Heaven and Earth all adoration due to him;
wherefore we find, how he enjoined such solemn observancies upon them, which
though but barely typical, and ceremonial; yet were hugely necessary to strike
a reverend dread of the Divine Majesty, into so rebellious a people.

Our Princely Patriarch therefore, and his Parallel, our late Lord Protector,
knowing themselves (as all other Rulers, and persons in power are) to be set
upon Pinacles, to change their words into Laws, and lives into Examples, were
the first and foremost always, in the practice of this, and all other piety.
The lives of Princes (they knew) are more read, than their laws, and generally
more practiced; yea, their examples pass altogether as current as their coin,
and what they do, they seem to command to be done; cracks in glasses, though
past mending, are no great matters, but the least flaw in a Diamond, is hugely
considerable; yea, their personal faults, become National injuries. It is held
by the Learned amongst the Ancients, that when the Sun stood still in the
time of Joshua, the very Moon, and all the Stars, did make the like pause; so
all Princes, and Governors, whose spirit is the first wheel, whereunto all the
other are fastened, it is necessary should give a good and godly motion.

Our sacred second Moses, therefore found himself (as his Princely Archetype
before him did) obliged to be exemplary to his people, in all kinds of piety,
proposing no Highness to himself, equal to that, which he enjoyed in his
humiliation before his God: he never found himself well at ease, but when he
was paying those duties of piety, praise, honor, and glory, reverend service,
and worship, to his Divine Majesty. Insomuch, that we may more truly say of
him, that which the Pagan Orator said of his Emperor, Plin.
Sanctiores effecit ipsos Deos, exemplo suae venerationis; He made the gods
themselves more holy, by the example of his pious worship: that is, he gave a
reverence extraordinary to Religion, by his manner of serving it. The verity of
this is evident, for we find that he has so happily inflamed all his people
about him, and such as well studied him, to so high a pitch of piety, by his
most exemplary good words, and works, that we can esteem them no otherwise,
than as Thunderclaps to Hindes, for the powerful production of Salvation.

His Highness was unquestionably one of the greatest patterns of Princely
piety that ever the World produced, since that of our first Moses. He had so
great a fear of the Lord, that he apprehended the least shadow of sin, as
death. Then he had a love so tender toward his God, that his heart was always
as a flaming lamp, that burnt perpetually before the Sanctuary of the living
Lord. His faith had a bosom as large, as that of eternity, his hope was as the
bow of Heaven, ail furnished with Emralds, which can never loose its force, more
than they their luster, and so his piety must of necessity have been an eternal
source of blessings. His care to gather, together so many living-stones, for
the edification of Gods house, (that is to say, so many good, godly, and
religious men) has been more than all theirs, that have heapt together so many
dead ones, in stately piles of Temples. Finally, his whole heart, we know, was
perpetually toward God; his feet were ever walking toward the Church, or his
other devout retirements: his arms were perpetually employed in all manly and
pious exercises, and works of charity; and his whole body, was most dutifully
disposed to the sacrifices and victims of his soul; and both his soul, and
body, with all his faculties, were a constant Holocaust to the Lord: Insomuch,
that neither all the cares and confusions of this World, nor multiplicity of
affairs, that he has been ever involved in, have been at all able to withdraw
any part, or parcel of him, from the course of true piety; but he has always
appeared in the midst of all those encombrances, as those sweet Fountains
(which we read of) that are found in the salt-sea, or those happy fishes, that
do still preserve their plump white substance, fresh and free from the
infection of all the brackish waters that they live in: his pious spirit could
be never so much disturbed, as to be extinguished, or taken off, from the
refreshment of his devotions; as we shall see more at large in our next Ascent,
and happy Parallel.

The twentieth Ascent.
MOses was endowed by God, with a most singular gift, and spirit of prayer, by
which he was extraordinary powerful with the Lord, and prevailed with him,
almost how he pleased. We find in the sacred Text, that he had so great a
familiarity with the Lord, that he was called the friend of God: it is no
wonder then, that he should be endowed with so extraordinary a spirit of
prayer, the only means to communicate with the Almighty, and violently
persuade him to divert his indignation from his people.

Exodus 8. Exodus* 9. Exodus 10.
First let us see, how by the power of our Moses his prayers, and by the
frequent spreading of his hands, before, and crying unto, the Lord, all the
plagues that were inflicted upon hard-hearted Pharaoh himself, and his perverse
people, were graciously removed.

By the same powerful means, does he appease the great anger of the Lord,
kindled against his own rebellious people, for their frequent murmurings and
clamorous repinings against himself, and his servant Moses, imputeing
constantly no less than murder, base ambition, and malicious designs, unto
him: yet for all that, the Lord confers nothing but miracles upon them, at the
importunity of our Moses his prayers. And first, he makes bitter waters sweet,
for such unsavory sinners, Exodus 15. Exodus 16. Exodus 17.
as they were: then he procures bread to fall down from heaven, as from a
replenisht Oven, to fill their rebellious bellies: Then no less than a
stony-rock, yet not so hard as their obdurate hearts, must be set on broach,
and made to afford a River of water, to satisfy their contumacious thirsts. In
short, our Moses prevailed so often with his prayers, to mollify the Lords
displeasure against them, that one would think that reads the Story, there had
been a vy, between mercies, and rebellions, and a sharp contention between the
Lord, and them, whether they should offend, or he forgive oftenest.

Then see the unnatural sedition of his brother Aaron, and his companion
Miriam, Number. 12.
and her leprosy cured by his prayer: But there is one thing yet, that we may
well instance in for all, when the peoples inveteratenesse in sin, had added
idolatry, to all their other disobediences, and made themselves worse than
beasts, in rendering the honors due to God alone, to a pitiful creature of
their own making, a gay Golden Calf forsooth; and the Lord was so highly
offended with them, that he would have utterly destroyed them all for it: then
our Moses betook himself again to this his tried weapon of prayer, and openly
assaults the Lord so with his close arguments, expostulations, Exodus 32.11.
and importunities, as if he had been fencing with him, beseeching him, after
this most earnest, and humble manner, Lord, why does thy wroth wax hot against
thy people, V. 12.
which thou have brought forth of the Land of Egypt with a great power, V. 13.
and with a mighty hand? wherefore should the Egyptians say, for mischief did
he bring them out, V. 14.
to slay them in the mountains, and to consume them from the face of the earth?
Turn thee from thy fierce wroth, and repent thee of this evil against thy
people; Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, thy servants, to whom thou swarest
by thine own self, and said unto them; I will multiply your seed, as the
Stars of Heaven, and all this Land that I have spoken of, will I give unto your
seed, and they shall inherit it forever. Then the Text immediately following,
tells us, That the Lord repented him of the evil, which he thought to do unto
his people.

And when the Lord was angerly resolved at another time utterly to extirpate
the people, for their incessant rebellions, Moses made such another, Number. 14.
though something longer, yet no less effectual, prayer, to the Lord for them,
and the Lord, as if he had been able to deny his Moses nothing, or as if (with
reverence be it spoken) good Moses his word, had been a Law unto him, he
presently replied, I have pardoned them according to thy word: nay, how often
has the Lord desired Moses to let him alone, as if he had been struggling with
him, and tired with the importunity of his prayer. It would make another Book
of Numbers, to recount the particular Deliverances, which that disobedient
people had from the Divine wrath, how often from being consumed by fire, and
eaten up by fiery Serpents, and the like, by our Moses his most powerful, and
importunate prayers: as also their many miraculous Victories over their
enemies; all of which, were obtained, more by his prayers, than their forces:
as particularly in the defeat of the Amalekites, who were visibly more
conquered, by the holding up of his hands, than by their dextrous managery of
arms; our Moses his blessings upon, and prayers for, them, being of more force
against the enemy, and gave them more deadly blows, than all their Cuttleaxes,
and warlike Engines.

The Parallel.
By so much as has been showed in our Ascent, of our Moses his happy power in
prayer, I doubt not, but it does plainly appear, how great a preservation it
was, to that perverse people, to have a Prince and Captain over them, that had
so familiar an address unto God: and I hope it will never more be called in
question, by any knowing Christian, whether that Divine gift of prayer, be a
qualification equal to the dignity, or requisite to the profession of a Prince?
though I know, some of our Modern Politics, have impiously gone about to
dispute that too; whom for shame I shall forbear to name, though I Will be bold
to give the World, the ungodly words of one of the Principal of them. Non
suadeo Principi, stupenda in fanis latitatione, neglectis iis quorum cura eum
maxim solicitum tenere debet, omne otium conterere, aut sanctuli nomen,
gestusve affectare: bonus animus gratissimus Deo cultus est: and optime orat,
qui officio gnaviter functus patriae incolumitatem procur averit, unde tot
hominum salus dependet, etc. Now, not to trouble you with a literal translation
(for I hold the words not worth it) he tells us, That he would not have a
Prince addicted to too much Devotion; nor to affect to be a little Saint: he
says his prayers best (quoth he) that does his business happiliest, etc.

It is in my opinion, a very pitiful, vain, and a false presumption, that this
Gentleman makes, and never indeed can be brought into question, by any
discreet, or sober Christian, whether a Prince should be so addicted to
Devotion, as to intend no other business at all? that were a madness in any
private person, much more then must it be in any man that is concerned in the
public: for besides the inconsistency of such a Devotion, with every man's
particular vocation, (which God has commanded likewise to be followed) it is
altogether in its own self, unacceptable to God: Otherwise we should enter into
Religion, as if we were to be lifted upon a rack, to be tortured; and I say
besides, it is an injury to the Lord himself, to think, there can be no true
piety or devotion in the World, if our bodies be not torn in pieces, and our
spirits quite beaten down. And therefore Gilbertus a great Doctor, writing upon
that sentence of Paul to the Crinthians, Doctor Gilbertus. 1 Cor. 6.
Glorificate and portate Deum in Corpore vestro, Glorify and bear God in your
bodies, makes this most elegant, and remarkable observation: You must bear
Jesus Christ, not drag him, Portari vult Christus non trahi, So he proceeds,
Non est foenum Christus, sed flos campi, and fasciculus mirrhae, inter ubera
sponsae, etc. Now, he plainly drags him, who makes himself surcharged with him,
and who indiscreetly afflicts himself in the service that he rendereth to the
Divine Majesty, not considering that Jesus Christ is the flower of the field,
or the poesy of mirrh, between the breasts of the Spouse, and not a load of
hay, to be drawn, under which we must needs groan, like a wheel ill-greased.

This was so foolish a superstition, and so old a one, that the Philosopher
himself, a Pagan, Senec. Epist. 114.
could not but find fault with, when he said, Superstitio amandos timet, quos
colit, violat. It is a very fond superstition indeed, says this wise Pagan,
and raised by simple people only, which through a gross error, fears, what
it should love by virtue, and very scarcely can have any knowledge of, or
approach to God, but by violating his Clemency (a thing most hateful to him)
through a false presumption of his severity. They must be very silly souls
indeed, and have very little or no feeling of the Divinity, that can apprehend
God (whom we know to be infinitely merciful) to be as terrible as a Minos, or a
Radamanthus, mentioned in poetical Fables, who were always represented in
those fictions, to be most spiteful deities, to come and pry into all humane
actions, to number all men's steps, and taking pleasure to prepare punishments
for them, were wont to raise themselves Trophies, upon poor men's ruins.

It would be a very pretty piece of Christianity, one would think, now to be
preached, That devotion, and all labors in Religion, should be undertaken by
us, without any relaxation, perpetual disturbances undergone by Christians,
without any repose, and miseries without any remedy, or comfort at all. Sure
this must be thought the extreme of all extremes; and yet our Modern Politics
will suppose, so sottish a devotion as this, that they may the better lay their
foundation, of a wretched incuriousnesse in Religion, and profane neglect of
that Divine duty. But I must not make it my business now, to enter the lists
formally, with that sort of people (who we know are accustomed upon all
occasions, to throw dirt in the very face of the Deity it self) for I have
another way to go at present, and so will hasten to our Parallel.

For my part, I am fully satisfied, and so I hope, will be every discreet and
understanding Christian, that the frequent exercise of prayer, is as necessary
to a Prince, Governor, or Statesman, for the well management of all affairs,
as it is for an animal to breath. The spirit of the best man, we know, is no
otherwise than as a Sun-Dial, which is of no use at all, but when the Sun
reflects upon it. Nor can any Prince, or Statesman in like manner expect, that
his understanding should receive any true light or direction for the government
of people, if not enlightened with the true rays of God: and that light is not
to be had, but by the means of prayer: The practice therefore of this holy
duty, has been ever styled, and esteemed by the holy Fathers of the Church, The
Key of Heaven, and the confusion of Hell, the Standard of our Christian
warfare, the conservation of our peace, the bridle of our impatience, the
guardian of our temperance, the seal of chastity, the advocate of offenders,
the consolation of the afflicted, the passe-port of the dying, etc. for the
Just do live and dye in prayer, as the Phoenix in her perfumes. A Christian
doubtless without prayer, is no more than a Be without a sting, which can
neither make honey, nor wax. From the defect of this duty, have proceeded all
the desolations of the earth: from hence are daily derived so many falls, so
many miseries; for that men will not apply themselves to taste the things of
God, in prayer, as our glorious Patriarch, and his Parallel have always done.

No man living can deny sure, but that it was the perpetual preservation of the
children of Israel, that their Moses had that happy faculty to its perfection;
for it is manifest, that they had otherwise been swallowed up, by the Divine
vengeance; and in stead of being brought to the Land of Canaan, they had been
fearfully cut off from the land of the Living.

I hope it is already made as evident, in our past Parallels, that we have
received as great Deliverances, and preservations, by the means of our second
Moses, which could never have been, but by his free, frequent, and powerful,
accesses to God in prayer; as I shall show more at large presently. In the mean
time, I will be bold from these two great patterns of piety, to draw a closing
Corollary, and lay down the whole state of the question (if it may be worthy to
be called one) in one single naked Proposition.

Every good Prince, being a public Person, and charged with so important
affairs, that depend wholly upon Providence, and expect the motion of the
Divine will, ought, after these two grand exemplars of Piety and Policy, to
consider, That he is to hold a great deal of commerce with Heaven, where his
business so much lies; and therefore should resolve, to set apart according to
the proportion of his time, and other occasions, some principal hours, (of
leisure, shall I say, or business* at least) of retirement, to negotiate with
God particularly about his government: in imitation, I say, of these two
greatest Statesmen, our first and second Moses, who had so familiar a recourse
to the Almighty, that as the one was, so the other, for ought I know, may be,
entitled, The friend of God. O matchless Title!

His most incomparable Piety, knew sufficiently, what Gregory Nazianzen tells
us, That if we are to have the Lord in our minds so often as we do breath, How
much more suitable it is, to a Statesman, to be conversant in that holy duty,
having most need to suck in the life-giving spirit, as from the Fountain of the
Word, by the means of prayer. It is not therefore unfitly styled, The spirit of
prayer; for it is the breath of the inward-man. Os meum aperui, says the
Scripture, and attraxi spiritum; I opened my mouth, and drew in the spirit. We
are all ready to be choked with flesh and fat, and to be devoured with flames
of concupiscence, unless we upon all occasions, open our mouths to take in
that gentle air of God.

By this blessed means it was, that our incomparable Pair, our first and
second Moses, have arrived at this great perfection: to whom, the Lord has
vouchsafed so much of his familiarity, as to treat with them as friends, and to
declare himself (as it were) unable to deny them any thing.

As for the first, we have seen enough already in sacred Story, and for our
glorious second Moses, our own manifold observations, and frequent experimental
knowledges, may be sufficient to inform us. For that his late most Serene
Highness had the purity and excellency of this precious spirit, is not only
manifest, to those that have had the happiness to be present at his daily
spreading of his hands, and pouring forth of his spirit, before the Lord, and
to join with him in his Devotions; but to the whole Nation, except the most
stupid, and malicious part of it, that either will not, or cannot, be sensible
of the great benefits, that we have for so long a time received by his powerful
addresses unto God. How many times has the Divine vengeance been diverted from
falling upon our sinful heads, by his importunate intercessions? How many
pestilences, famines, and other plagues, (which our impenitency, hardness of
heart, and ugly ingratitude, had as well deserved, as either the cursed
Egyptians, or murmuring Israelites) have been kept off from us, by his means?
Has he less often than the former Moses, conquered his enemies, more by his
own prayers, than his soldiers arms? Has he not by that means obtained (as we
have seen) a secret virtue, to be fastened to his Standards? making winds and
tempests to fight under his Ensign, that we may almost cry out with the Poet,
Claud.
O nimium dilecte Deo, etc. How often has he opened, as aforesaid, Lands
inaccessible, calmed stormy Seas, taken Towns impregnable, and with petit
handfuls of men, discomfited huge Armies? How often have we seen him (give me
leave to repeat those wonders) cleaving of Rocks, hewing through Mountains,
and to do the works of Giants, with the reputed Pygmes of the World, and find
facility in all that humane reason conceived impossible? And how, I say again,
could all this be, but that the Lord could no more deny any thing to the prayer
of this his dear servant, and favorite, our second, than he could to the
former Moses? His fair soul, was no whit less elevated upon the pitch of
highest contemplations, from his very infancy, than the former great Moses was.
His high soul, was not unlike that Ibis, the stately bird of Egypt, that always
builds her nest in Palms: So it was perpetually conversant in high
contemplations, and had no more impressions of earth, than the supreme Sphere
of celestial Bodies. Or else, more truly yet, resembling the Palm Tree it
self, where that brave Bird builds, which as it is the tallest and streightest
of all trees, so bears its best, and most solid strength on its top: So had
our most gracious Protector, and second Moses, all his vigor always in God,
and for God. His life was a perpetual Sabbath, Sabathum delicatum, a delicious
Sabbath, as the Prophet calls it, nourishing, and reposing his soul, with the
constant draught of this holy spirit of prayer. He made it not only his lock
and key of the day, but his bolt of the night; nor only so, but his very
meals, and recreations; and all that, his Highness did, more in a becoming
silence, than any exterior ostent, resembling those Rivers which run under the
earth, choosing to steal from the eyes of the world, to seek for the sight of
his God only; So his Devotions did ever study solitude and retirements, and
were always best, when shut up within themselves.

Nay, farther yet, after the example of a greater than Moses, that is our
Blessed Savior himself, he used to spend many whole nights in prayer,
pernoctans in oratione, as the Scripture expresses it: and like those best of
Christians, Luc.
in the Primitive times, that were called the Crickets of the night, because at
any time, if some interruption of sleep happened, they ever made it out, with
ejaculatory prayers, and elevations of the heart. Those that love God truly,
will have recourse to him, at all hours, and upon all occasions, not confining
their devotions to time, or place. Jonas, and the three Children, found
sufficient Chapels, in the Whales belly, and the fiery Furnace, because the
love of God, the wisest Architect, had erected them, and the Lord was as near
them, in the intrails of a Fish, or the midst of Flames, as he would have been,
in his own most holy Temple.

In fine, our second Moses has not only reached after the former, as we have
already seen, but he has sum'd up all example, to perfect himself in the
practice of this Divine duty. He ever distributed his fastings, watchings,
prayer, repast, counsel, study, with so prudent an economy, for the service of
his God, and held his life so admirably interlaced, between action, and
contemplation, that he made on earth, a perfect figure of Angels ascending, and
descending, receiving already a taste of those benefits, which he was to hope
for, in the other; insomuch, that he seemed to have his soul in Heaven, whilst
he was on earth, to understand mysteries, and enjoy an antipast of Paradise it
self. O thrice, and four times happy were we, if we could have, known our own
happiness, to have had such a Person set over us, by God, and his own Divine
virtues, that had so clear and free access to the Throne of Grace, and so near
an union to God himself, as a finite was capable of, with an infinite, and
might be styled, as the former Moses was, The familiar friend of God, and was
not only always ready, to stand in the gap, between us, and the Divine
vengeance, as the first Moses did; but was wont to storm Heaven for us, and
pull down blessings by force upon us, though we were a most ungrateful, and
undeserving people; nor so only, but that was always ready to instruct us by
his precept, as well as practice, if we could dare to follow him, in all other
pieces of Piety, and Divine duty; as we have in part seen already, and shall
more at large in the next succeeding Ascents, and Parallels.

The one and twentieth Ascent.
MOses was a most exemplary Person, in all the practical parts of true Piety;
He had always so reverend, and faithful a feeling of the Majesty of God, as
not to serve him, with exterior shows, and semblances only of Religion; but
sincerely, cordially, Sap. 1.
and constantly, Sentiendo de domino in bonitate, as the Book of Wisdom
describes it, always thinking on the Lord, with a true good heart.

This was most eminently visible in the whole current of his thorough Religious
life, but principally remarkable in the denial of himself, and all his own
desires, when any thing that concerned the glory of his God lay at the stake,
or was called into the least question, submitting always all worldly ends, and
humane reluctancies, to the interests of Heaven, and pure Religion. Was not
this, I say, first notorious in him, when he would hazard the disoblidgement of
his wife (a thing that men ordinarily fear, Exodus 4.25.
more than a disobedience to God) nay would incur her displeasure so far, as to
be thought, and called by her, a cruel hard-hearted person, and a bloody
husband, rather than omit the performance of one Tittle of his Almighty Masters
commands. Nay, State Policy it self, which now adays is held to be almost
inconsistent with true Piety, could not hinder his heroic practice of piety.
And this did most manifestly appear, in his refusal of all the favors that
Pharaohs Court, Exodus 2.
or his daughters countenance, could afford him, for the service of his God,
postponing every thing of his own affection and interests, to the zeal for his
Religion, and the quiet of a good conscience. This is, I say, a most remarkable
piece of Princely piety indeed, to hold all the Maxims of State, and proper
interests whatsoever, under the rules of Religion, and Conscience, and to be
disposed, rather to hazard all, than to lose God by one sole sin. This noble
Princely piece of piety, to its perfection, both of profession, and practice,
our great Patriarch showed in the whole course of his life, loudly proclaiming,
and as strictly observing, to love the Lord God, Exodus Number. Levit. Deuteronomy.
with the whole heart, and him only to serve, which no man can do, that mixeth
any thing of humane, with divine obligations; that is but to serve God by
pieces.

The Parallel.
We have alreay gone far in the discourse of our great Patriarchs, and his
happy Parallel's, most Princely and exemplary piety; clearly to be collected
from the visible zeal, they ever bore to Gods glory, and devotions to his
Service; but all this, may be said to be (as indeed it is in most of this Age)
but a mere outside only, the very heart and marrow of Religion consisting in
the interior, which we can make no other judgment of, than by the apparent
practice of piety, true godly and religious lives of men, and a dutiful
submission of all humane interest, to God; and if all this, were ever eminent
in any Persons, it has been in these two great Princes, our first and second
Moses.

Now it is very observable, that all this Princely practice of true piety, is
but an effect, or consequent at least, of that zeal to Gods glory, before
spoken of, and of that precious spirit of prayer; Thom. Aquin. 2* 2. q. 32*
for true Devotion, as the great Aquinas has described it, is nothing but a
prompt will to the service of God; his words are these, Voluntas quaedum
prompta tradendi se ad ea, quae pertinent ad Dei famulatum: a very prompt, and
affectionate vivacity in things, which concern Gods business. Nay we may find
as much said by Porphyry himself a Pagan, and one of the most Atheistical ones,
Porphyrius
that ever lived. Deus, says he, omnium pater, nullius indiget, sed nobis est
been, cum eum adoramus, ipsam vitam, precent ad eum facientes, per
inquisitionem, and imitationem, de ipso: that is, God the Creator, and Father,
of this great Universe, has no need at all of our service, but it is our good
to honor, serve, and adore him, making our life a perpetual prayer to him, by
a diligent inquiry after his perfections, and a holy imitation of his virtues.
All this, holy Augustine, the Oracle of the Latin Church, recites out of that
Heathen, to teach us faith from the Philosophy of the most perfidious, and
Religion, from the writings of the most irreligious man that ever lived: just
as if an honest man, should pull a thing stolen, out of a Thieves coffer. And
it is indeed a most evident truth, that the best life, is the best prayer; and
therefore holy Nazianzen tells us, that (...), Nazian. in Jamb.
is (...), a dumb work, is better than the most eloquent Oration; a golden
tongue, and a leaden heart seldom march together: yet we know, that some there
are, who have appearance enough of the spirit, and will pray like Angels, but
practice like Devils, resembling the Ass in the Fable, that carries to the
Hot-house daily, wherewithal to shift and cleanse others, and yet go themselves
perpetually bemired and slovenly: or yet more truly like the impertinent drone,
they can go buzzing up and down with their empty prayers, and yet neither make
honey, nor wax. To what purpose, in the mean time, is it, to be Vox, and
praeterea nihil? to warble like a Nightingale, or a well-touch'd Lute, and to
be deaf to all harmony? Is it not to be as the Apostle tells us, but as
sounding brass, at best, or as a tinkling symbal? Undoubtedly, all the
devotion of a soul truly Christian, tends to practice, as the line to its
center; and therefore holy Cyprian likewise tells us, Philosophi factis,
Cyprian l. de patientia.
non verbis sumus, nec magna loquimur, sed vivimus. Our Philosophy, and
Christian wisdom, says he, is a prudence of works, not of words, and we are
to live, not talk great things.

We should march in our Christian warfare, like the brave soldiers of Gideon,
with the torch in our hands, as well as the Trumpet on our lips: and therefore
it was said of the great and holy Athanasius, that his voice was a Thunderclap,
and his life a Lightning flash: and truly words, let them be never so good, can
never thunder well, if the living example enlighten not.

All which, our most gracious late Protector, and second Moses, knew full well,
and practiced accordingly, in imitation of his great Master, the first Moses,
our Princely Patriarch, who was not only ready to exercise his holy spirit of
prayer, in the behalf of, and for his people, but also to make practice of his
piety before them, to inflame their lives to holiness and charity, as well as
to preserve their persons in peace, and plenty; to be active in his obedience
to the Almighties will, as well as outwardly zealous for his glory.

Now, by this only it is plain, that our first and second Moses have clearly
been of a quite contrary Religion, to Machiavel, before cited, Match. Princ. c.
2. Decad. c. 12.13.
and all his Crew, who would have a Prince, or Statesman, practice Religion,
only according to the necessity of their affairs, and to learn how they may
sometimes be wicked, that is, to make show of Religion, and honesty, so far
forth as may serve their turns; but in very deed, to be complete knaves.

Every man in power forsooth, must be a Hypocrite, his face always maskt, and
the vizard too, ought to be more lovely, than the visage, he must make his
apparencies better than his substance, and court opinion, more than conscience.
O rare Machiavillian divinty, and very pious policy! But our Patriarch Moses,
(a wiser man sure, than a million of Machiavels) we find, was clean of another
opinion, as well as practice too; he understood sufficiently, how the Lord
Almighty had ever reproved, condemned, and chastised, with a most particular
indignation of his heart, that abominable plaistered kind of life in Princes,
as well as common people; and therefore he ordered in his Law, that the Swan,
and the Ostrich, should never be made use of, in Divine Sacrifices. Levit.
11.18.
Upon which Mosaical ordinance, all the Interpreters of Scripture, are jointly
of opinion, that the Swan was first rejected, notwithstanding the whiteness of
her feathers, and sweetness of note, so much ascribed to her; because under
those pure white plumes, she hides so black a flesh. Then for the Ostrich,
which carries only an ostentuous boast of fair large wings, and very little or
no flight at all, she could never be admitted into the number of Divine
victims: so much the Lord abhors apparencies, fruitless, and effectlesse.

Now, I would very fain know of all those pitiful Politicians, who pursue like
Machiavillian Maxims, with such corrupt hypocritical spirits, as the Florentine
proposes, what they will answer me further upon this Ascent of our Moses, and
his Parallel? For the first, it is clear, that if he had been to choose and
cherish, only a Religion, that suited best with State policy, or temporal
designs, it had been much more prudence in him, to have joined himself with the
Religion of Egypt, and to have been associated with the Magicians themselves,
than to have kept so close to the Commandments of God. And if he had been to
value his private interest, before his honesty, and conscience, sure the
powerful favors of a great Kings Court, and more enticing importunities of a
Princess, would have been greater attractives to his ambition, than a poor,
simple, Shepherds life, in a Desert.

Nay, before we approach our precious Parallel Moses, what can they, I mean the
Disciples of that wise Secretary, say, to another glorious Countryman of ours,
one of the most Christian, and Victorious Princes, that ever swayed a Scepter,
and that was Constantine the Great? First we shall find upon a clear account,
twelve or thirteen great Persons, at that very time, all arguing upon the
Diadem of the Empire with him. Now, if there had been any necessity for him to
dispoile himself of honesty, and innocence, that he might be invested with the
Crown, and Pall imperial, Why did he take the way of the Empire, by that of
sanctity? If use must be made of Religion only as of an Instrument of State,
and that alone to be taken up, which has the greatest vogue, and credit, in
the opinion of the people, be it right, or wrong; Why went he about then to fix
himself upon Christian Religion, and at that very time, when the greatest part
of the World, was ingulpht in Gentilisme?

We see how Maxentius, like a miserable Machiavillian, courted that interest,
and according to the ordinary custom of the people of Rome, caused all the
pretended Books of the Sybylls, to be turned over, consulted with the Augures,
and Aruspices, and accordingly offered sacrifices to his Pagan gods: all this
gave him a reputation of piety, with a people then as Infidel as himself. Why
did not our Constantine pursue the same politic ways? Why did he fix the sign
of the Cross upon his Standards, which was enough too, to disoblige his own
Army, that very figure, being then esteemed most fatal, and of an ill presage,
by the most part of the World? Moreover, what help or succor could he possibly
expect, from the poor Christians at that time? Had he a Design to extract
Treasures from their coffers? they were most wretchedly poor, and dispoiled of
all possession. Was he of opinion, that he might raise huge Armies of them, for
his service? they were so daily cut down, that they were scarce visible at all:
one only month, not long before, saw seventeen thousand heads of them lopt
off, and tumbling upon the ground? How could he persuade himself, that there
was any considerable humane strength in their Religion, when they were all
either massacred, mained, or banished? Could he look for counsel amongst them?
they were men of no esteem at all in the World, and thought utterly void of all
learning and policy. Was it any credit, that he could expect they might confer
upon his Cause? they were most despicable creatures, and trampled underfoot by
every body, like dirt in the streets, reputed mere (...), as the Apostle tells
us, as the dung, and offscouring of the world. Behold here a piece of
State-prudence, fit only for the pens of Angels, whereunto the brains, and
wit, of this pitiful Florentine, could never arrive: his cunning alas could
reach no further, than some petit humane tracts, indeed mere knacks of
Atheistical knavery. This is a light, whereat all the blear'd eyes of those
buzards are dazzled. This is an Abyss wherein all carnal men are quite lost,
and swallowed up: For we find that our Great Constantines prudence, grounded
upon Divine providence, and his own piety, has conducted him to the
Soveraignity of the Empire of the whole World, by degrees, utterly different
from those, which Mr. Machiavel has prepared to lead his Prince in.

On the other side, do but look a little on his son-in-law Julian, coming to
the Empire, and holding it by Machiavillian Rules only, how well did he
prosper in his policies? who merely out of spite to the Christians, not any
affection, to the Jews, indeed to baffle Christianity it self, resolved to
re-edifie the Temple of Jerusalem, and to that purpose issued out a Commission,
to an Infidel like himself, one called Alippius: but mark how his Machiavillian
plot succeeded, Balls of fire were seen to issue out of the very foundations,
as fast as they laid them, which made their design as frivolous, as the place
was inaccessible: after all this observe what became of him, he reigned but one
year, and seven months, and then died struck with a blow from Heaven, which
the Pagans themselves confess to be ignorant, of from whence it came:
howsoever, this is most certain, that he died perfectly phrenetick, which
caused him to fill his hand with his own blood, and cry out, Thou have
overcome, O Galilaean, and so dying, has left a memory so odious behind him,
that it stinkes still, and so for ever will, to all Posterity.

I might be infinite, if I should run over all the examples, that we have before
us, of such impious Politicians, who have made all the interests of God, and
Religion, subservient to their own base ends. Great Volumes might be written of
their miserable mortalities, which make all Theaters at this day to resound,
and Tragedians to deplore. I shall only now therefore produce our Parallel, to
convince all those pitiful Politicians, of the Machiavillian make, and so
conclude this discourse.

Did ever any person so contradict all the Maxims of humane wisdom, and
struggle with, and against, all proper interests, as our second Moses has done?
If it had not been for his obligations to God, true Religion and a pure
conscience, what madness must it needs have appeared in his Highness, to have
still been opposite to all prevalent parties, which in plain humane
probabilities, would have destroyed him, and us?

As first, the late King, and his corrupted Court; Then the Kirk, and all its
Consistorians; Then the violent levelling Parties within his own body, and all
the men of metal, forsooth, that were for the fifth Monarchy; Then the
long-lived (as his Highness himself used to call it) long-reigning, and
indeed, ruining Parliament, with all its appertinencies, and diverse others
since, that, it may be, had the same, or worse designs. Good God, with what
wonder, and amazement am I seized, when I consider the dangerous difficulties,
his most Serene Highness has encountered, for the honor and glory of his God,
the good of this ungrateful people, and the satisfaction of his own conscience,
upon grounds utterly unpolitick, as to humane apprehension, and clearly
contradictory, to his proper interests.

This high towering Eagle, as we have seen, winged only with Piety, and
Religion, from the very first time that he was called forth into action, to
this very day, could never be found (as aforesaid) beating of his wings, in
those lower Regions of the air, conversing with those pitiful humane policies,
but borne, I say always, upon those heavenly wings aforesaid; soared always
amongst lightnings themselves, tempests, and whirlewindes, and ever had his
eye, where the day broke; that was, on God, the Fountain of Light, and his own
conscience, the sure Orient of all his pious actions.

The great Secretaries of Nature, do observe further, of that brave Bird, I
mean the Eagle, that her feathers, are so imperious, that they will not mix,
with the plumage of other Birds, if they are by chance cast in amongst them;
they will strait consume the others, as with a dull file: and can the Lord of
Heaven and Earth, who is an incomparable wisdom, a store of riches
inexhaustible, a purity infinite, be mingled with such feeble pretensions, as
those of humane interests? which can have nothing but phrensy for beginning,
misery for inheritance, and impurity for ornament? Our Mosaical Protector
therefore, was ever seen, to separate himself, from his self, denying his own
desires, disowning his own glories, and adhering only to the interests of God,
and giving the honor of all his actions to him; as we may hear his Highness
yet speaking for himself, in a printed Speech of his, to a late Parliament.

It was, say some, the cunning of the Lord Protector (I take it to my self) it
was the craft of such a man, and his plot that has brought it about. And as
they say, in other Countries: There are five or six cunning men in England,
that have skill, they do all these things: Oh what Blasphemy is this! etc.
Because men that are without God in the world, and walk not with him, and know
not what it is to pray, or believe, and to receive returns from God, and to be
spoken unto by the Spirit of God, who speaks without a written Word sometimes,
yet according to it: God has spoken heretofore in diverse manners, let him
speak as he pleases. Has he not given us liberty? nay, is it not our duty to
go to the Law, and to the Testimonies? and there we shall find, that there have
been impressions in extraordinary cases, as well without the written Word, as
with it, and therefore there is no difference in the thing thus asserted, from
truths generally received, except we will exclude the Spirit, without whose
concurrence, all other Teachings are ineffectual; He does speak to the Hearts
and Consciences of men, and leads them to his Law and Testimonies, and there
he speaks to them, and so gives them double teachings, according to that of
Job, God speaks once, yea twice; and that of David, God has spoken once, yea
twice have I heard this. Those men that live upon their Mumpsimus and
Sumpsimus, their Masses and Service-Books, their dead and carnal Worship, no
marvel if they be strangers to God, and the works of God, and to spiritual
dispensations. And because they say, and believe thus, must we do so too? we in
this Land have been otherwise instructed, even by the Word, and Works, and
Spirit of God. To say that men bring forth these things, when God does them
judge you if God will bear this. I wish that every sober heart, though he has
had temptations upon him of deserting this CAUSE of God, yet may take heed how
he provokes, and falls into the hands of the living God by such blasphemies as
these, according to the tenth of the Hebrews, If we sin wilfully after we have
received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin.
(It was spoken to the Jews, that having professed Christ, apostatized from him)
what then? nothing but a fearful falling into the hands of the Living God.

They that shall attribute to this or that Person, the contrivances and
production of those mighty things God has wrought in the midst of us, and that
they have not been the revolutions of Christ himself, upon whose Shoulders the
GOVERNMENT is laid, they speak against God, and they fall under his hand
without a Mediator, that is, if we deny the Spirit of Jesus Christ, the glory
of all his works in the World, by which he Rules Kingdoms, and does administer,
and is the Rod of his strength, we provoke the Mediator; And he may say, I Will
leave you to God, I Will not intercede for you, let him tear you to pieces, I Will
leave thee to fall into Gods hands, thou deniest me my Sovereignty and Power
committed to me, I Will not intercede nor mediate for thee, thou fallest into the
hands of the Living God. Therefore whatsoever you may judge men, for, and say,
This man is cunning, and politic, and subtle, take heed, again I say, how you
judge of his Revolutions, as the Products of men's inventions.

Then, how much he valued the interests of God, and his influence upon all his
actions, we may see what he says in the same Speech.

-- and were it not that I can make some Dilemma's upon which to resolve some
things of my Conscience, Judgment, and Actions, I should sinck at the very
prospect of my Encounters; some of them are general, some are more special,
supposing this Cause, or this Business, must be carried on, either it is of
God, or of Man, if it be of Man, I would I had never touched it with a finger;
if I had not had a hope fixed in Me that this Cause, and this Business is of
God, I would many years ago have run from it. If it be of God, he will bear it
up. If it be of Man, it will tumble, as every thing that has been of man,
since the World began, has done. And what are all our Histories, and other
Traditions of actions in former times, but God manifesting himself that he has
shaken and tumbled down, and trampled upon, every thing that he has not
planted? and as this is, so the All-wise God deal with it.

If this be of humane Structure, and Invention, and it be an old Plotting and
Contrivance to bring things to this Issue, and that they are not the Births of
Providence, then they will tumble. But if the Lord take pleasure in England,
and if he will do Us good, he is able to bear us up; Let the difficulties be
whatsoever they will, we shall in his Strength be able to encounter with them.
And I bless God I have been inured to Difficulties, and I never found God
failing when I trusted in him; I can laugh and sing in my heart when I speak of
these things to you, or elsewhere.

Here is a piece of Divine Policy indeed, and fetched doubtless from the Gates
of the City of God. Thus was his late Mosaical Highness always pleading, to
acknowledge the truth of that most excellent Maxim, delivered by Augustine,
August. lib. 3. de libero Arbit. c. 24
Cui bonum non est Deus, sibi ipsi vult esse bonum suum, sicut sibi est Deus,
He that holds not God for his greatest good, would be to himself his own good,
as God is to himself: He that thinks to escape from the bands of dependence,
that he has on God, makes himself his own blessing, and his end his God.

His Highness therefore so constantly steered himself, and all his actions; by
his obedience to Divine Commands, that he chose always to perish with a good
conscience, rather than to flourish without one; and though he was from the
very beginning, like a pure Oriental Pearl in the salt-sea, so continually
involved in the cruel acerbities, and confusions of our times, yet he always
kept his Noble luster, in then midst of them, and by his invincible affection
toward, and confidence in, his God, he arose still from them, with more and
more splendor, and made all those his perplexities which threatened him with
many an imminent ruin, but higher ascents and steps to the Temple of glory.
Virtue and Piety, he always compared to, and took for, the Geometrical Cube of
his life, which we know in Mathematics, on what side soever it be cast,
always finds its Basis.

Where are you now, all you, I say, who are the pitiful followers of Nicholas
Machiavells policy, poor tricks of carnal wisdom? What will become now of all
your mighty Maxims of hypocritical knavery?

Let this one example only of our Christian Moses, parallel to that of his
Great Master, the Patriarch, which we have seen in his Ascent, serve now for
all, to inform you, That there are none, but such as are perfectly blind, that
seek after your Principles, and miserable they must be, who find them, the
sottish who will descend to serve them, and the utterly reprobate, and
forlorn, who can stoop to tie themselves unto them: but the wisdom that is of
Heaven, our Mosaical wisdom, is so transcendently sublime, above all your
untrue and trivial inventions, as the light of Stars surpasses all the
sparklings and petit sprey fires of the Earth.

And though such humane interests and designs, may possibly, and will still,
hold the Ascendent in the hearts of some sort of people; yet we find, how my
Lords, high, holy, Mosaical spirit, could no more than that of his Grand
Archetype, condescend to steer his course, or counsels that way; nor yet more,
than those Angels, now standing in glory, follow the example of those
Luciferian spirits, which fell by such Machiavillian counsels, into the pit of
Perdition.

No, our most pious late Protector, and second Moses, could never induce
himself to court any thing, that had not Heaven, and the Stars to give him for
a Reward.

So I hope, we may at length happily conclude, that under the heart of this our
second, as well as we have seen under that of our first Moses, there remained
always prepared, a Temple of true Piety; and our Parallel in this particular
likewise, to be accomplished.

The two and twentieth Ascent.
MOses was not only accomplished in all points of Piety, that were expedient
for so great a Prince, and Patriarch; but he was advanced by God, to the
highest dignity and perfection of a Prophet; and he was endowed with so
extraordinary a spirit of Prophecy, that never any man before, or since him,
had the like.

He was that really, which the old Poets in their fabulous superstitions,
fancied of their god Janus, with his double face, to look both before, and
behind him.

The Great Moses was an inspired Prophet, a part Post, as well as a part
Ante; how could he otherwise have writ the History of the Creation of the
World, the Deluge, Genes.
and of all those things, that happened before his time; of which there could
be no Record, either in writing, or secure Tradition at that time, so his whole
Book of Genesis, must of necessity be extracted, out of the Chronicles of
Heaven only. That he prophesied of futurities of the highest concernment,
Exodus Levit. Number. Deuteronomy.
his other four Books give sufficient evidence, and to all this, the Lord
Almighty himself has set to the seal of his own approbation; first, that he
was faithful in all his house, Number. 12.7, 8.
and that with him, he would speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in
dark speeches, and the similitude of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 34.10.
shall he, behold, etc. Then the Lord is pleased expressly to declare
concerning him, That there arose not a Prophet since in Israel, like unto
Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face. Over and above all this, when
prophesying of the Mystery of Mysteries, a futurity then of the highest
concernment to mankind, Deuteronomy. 18.15.
the incarnation of the Word, the Spirit of God is pleased to resemble Moses to
the Messiah that was to come, saying, The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee,
a Prophet from the midst of thee, Acts 3.22.
of thy Brethren, like unto me; unto him ye shall hearken: which words are
verbatim quoted, for the proof of that Word incarnate, both by the
Proto-Apostle Peter, and the Proto-Martyr Stephen; Acts 7.37.
and sure in reason, some great similitude of God he must needs contract, who
had so free, frequent, and full, conversation with the Deity, face to face.

The Parallel.
That Moses was a great, yea the greatest Prophet of the old Law, I believe is
made abundantly manifest by our Divine Ascent; and that our most pious,
gracious, and glorious, late Lord Protector, and second Moses, was a great
Prophet too, according to his proportion, I hope will be made out by the
process of our precious Parallel.

But now because the name of Prophet here, seems to sound something equivocal,
and is really capable of very various acceptions, it may be worth our pains, to
dilate a little upon, and to fix, it, before we proceed to make up our happy
Parallel.

Indeed, there has been an infinite number of persons, which have past under
the reputation of Prophets, that in very truth, were no better than Wizards
all, or Wiseakers, in our Country Language; that is, in plain English, madmen,
fools, or knaves: but all such phanatical Prophets as those, we shall at
present pass by, as impertinent to our purpose, and not at all worthy of any
share in this discourse; and enter into a cursory debate only concerning
those, who have more justifiable pretensions, according to the most genuin
signification of the word, to that highest and most sacred humane dignity: and
three sorts of men there are, that do, and may lay just challenge and claim, to
that most excellent Title, according to all the judgment of Antiquity, as well
as the present Age.

And the first are those inspired witty Prophets, or Prophets of fancy, which
go under the common name of Poets.

The second sort, are those inspired prudent Prophets, or Prophets of Affairs,
received now under the style of Statesmen.

And the third sort, are those inspired Divine Prophets, or Prophets of
Religion, who though they have the only true, legal, and proper right, to that
Divine honor; yet the others are not quite to be cast out, or rashly
disinherited of that title. The first we may call Aerie or Poetical Prophets;
the second more Earthy and Political; the third all Fiery and Celestial. For
this first sort of Prophets, our Moses was amongst them too, as is sufficiently
to be seen, in the many Hymns, that he composed for the glory of his God, and
the comfort of his people; as also the many Poetical expressions, phrases, and
prosopopiea's, that he uses, rendering God, as it were, coming toward us, in
his glory and Majesty.

This first sort of Pretenders, then have indeed a pretty fair claim, right,
and title, to be taken into this supereminent Degree; and that may first here
appear, from the very name that all good people, in all Ages, ever gave to the
skilful in that heavenly mystery, which was always Vates, or Propheta, as much
as Diviner, Forseer, or Prophet. Then none will deny, but that they had the
only right in times of Gentilisme, being the only Pagan Prophets, and
Conservators of Religion in those days.

Nay, both Clemens Alexandrinus, Clem. Alexand. Eusebius.
and Eusebius, themselves confess, that the ancient Poets, did receive the
mysteries of their Religion, from the Jews, and preserved them still as sacred,
though folding of them up, in some Fables.

As first it is plain, that the History of Deucaleon, was taken out of that of
Noe, and so kept up the remembrance still of that dismal Deluge. The
stupendous Story of the retrogradation, and going back of the Sun, in the time
of Ezekiah, was continued in that famous fiction of Phaeton.

They that would behold the building of that proud Tower of Babel, which was
undertaken by Nimrod, and his Associates, to climb up, as it were, by ladders
into Heaven, and scale its battlements, to see what was done there; shall find
it, though under certain alegories, amply described in Homer, Homer. Odyss. l.
11.
under the fabulous fancy of the Giants Oetus, and Ephialtes, sons to
Iphimedia; where he describes their height, and wonderful vast strength and
bigness, and how they went about to lay the mountain Ossa upon that of
Olympus, and Pelion upon Ossa; all which Story Ovid recites likewise, with
diverse others in his Metamorphosis, Ovid. Metam.
hiding under seeming Fables, many of the most Divine and considerable truths:
but most particularly, he recites the manner of the Beginning, and Creation of
the World, just as our Moses did, and must of necessity have received it from
him. Nay, Homer, Homer. Hesiod. Linus.
Hesiod, and Linus, must undoubtedly have borrowed from his Books, all that
they said of sanctifying the seventh day.

The Golden Age, and Reign of Saturn, was gathered as certainly from the most
happy estate, wherein Adam was before he sinned. Nay, Orpheus yet ancienter
than any of them, confesses, Orpheus.
that he learnt diverse thing, as we have showed before, from the Doctrine of
Moses, mentioning, as we have showed in our Ascent, his very Tables, etc.

Well might they then have the reputation of Prophets amongst the Heathens, who
looked with as much reverence upon the Theogony of Hesiod, as we Christians do
upon the Genealogy of Jesus Christ; they valued Homers Illiads as highly, as we
possibly can the Books of the Gospel, and had as great a respect to the
Apothegm's of Pythagoras, as we can have to the Commandments of God.

Let them pass on then with their reputation of Prophets still, especially
since St. Paul himself, is pleased to afford it to them, saying, (...), Tit.
1.12, 13.
(...), one of themselves, even a Prophet of their own said, The Cretians are
always liars, evil beasts, flow bellies: then asserts their witness to be
true, and that is rare indeed for Poets, one would think.

Well, a most Noble, and inspired faculty, yea Prophecy it self, let Poetry
be; for truly, I think, a man may be born to one, as well as the other: But,
what is this to our late Great Protector, who never dealt in any such trivial
Arts, say some of our Misomusi? No, my Lord never esteemed that honorable, and
illustrious Art full of Divine fury, after that manner, though it may be, his
greater occupations could not permit him the practice of it: he ever had a most
reverent esteem of so Divine a profession, when regulated after the true Divine
way, and was a most magnificent Mecaenas to its professors.

For the Profession, Aristot. Bembus. Scaliger.
he believed with Aristotle, that it was the Treasury of the Grecian Divinity;
and with Bembus, that it was the first bringer in of all Civility, and with
Scaliger, that no Philosophers precepts can so soon make an honest, and a
valiant good man, as the reading of Virgil, etc.

Then for the Professors, Was there ever a more bountiful Benefactor, than he
has been to all the virtuous persons of it? To instance in one for all; What
obliging favors has he cast upon our English Virgil here (I mean Mr. Edm.
Waller) and merely for that, and his other virtues, having in some other
relations, little capacity enough to deserve them. My Lord has sufficiently
showed his own most excellent judgment in Poetry, by his approbation and
election of him, to be the object of his great goodness, who is clearly one of
the ablest, and most flourishing wits, that ever handled a pen, and he does it,
with that natural dexterity and promptness, as if he had begun to write, so
soon as to live; and whosoever confiders the worth of his Writings, cannot but
wonder, how so many graces and beauties, which others labor for, and never
attain to, increase in him, as in a soil natural for wit and eloquence; If he
goes about to translate any thing, the dead Authors themselves are ready to
rise out of their graves, and request him to exchange his Englished Copies, for
their Originals. In all his own things, his conceptions are unimitable, his
language so sweet and polite, that no Ice can be smoother; his sentences are
always full of weight, his arguments of force, and his words glide along like
a river, and bear perpetually in them, some flashes of lightning, at the end of
each period. He perfectly knows how to vary his eloquence upon all occasions,
to be facetious in pleasing arguments, grave in severe, polite in laborious,
and when the subject requires fervor and invective, his mouth can speak
tempests; In short, he is the wonder of Wits, the pattern of Poets, the mirror
of Orators in our Age. All this I say of him, not so much out of design to
applaud him, as to adore the judgment of our great Augustus, who always chose
him out, and crowned him for the Virgil of this Nation; but his favors
likewise were extended most liberally, to all those that did deserve them,
either here, or in either of his Universities: He was a perfect Philomusus, and
why not by that, qualified for a Poetical Prophet? the father having, at least,
or ought to have, an equal portion, with the children of the Prophets.

And so I pass to the second sort of Prophets, that is, of our Prudent and
Political ones, commonly called Statesmen, who indeed must foresee futurities
too, or they can never order their affairs aright; for if they look not into
all casualties of inconvenience, how shall they be ever able to prevent them?
And Seneca very wisely forewarns all Statesmen, Senec. Epist. 24.
of the necessity of this foresight of all futurities, when he tells them, that
they are bound Quicquid fieri potest, quasi futurum cogitare, To conceive, that
all things may, that can come to pass.

And therefore Josephus, that Learned Jew, Joseph de Bell Jud. l. 2.
tells us most judiciously also, that Bonum est, dum adhuc stat navis in portu,
praecavere tempestatem futuram, and non eo tempore, quo in medias irrueris
procellas, trepidare: It is necessary for him that goes to Sea, to foresee a
storm coming, if he can, and not to rush into the fury of the Seas; and tremble
at the tempest afterward; that will a vail little, but for to be rendered
ridiculous for his own rashness.

This holds altogether as true in him, that holds the Helm of a Kingdom, or
Commonwealth, as in any Pilot of a Ship whatsoever. By this it may be
collected, how hugely necessary it is for a Prince, or Supreme Magistrate, to
hold a constant communication with God, without whose Divine assistance, it is
impossible to manage State matters well, as we have partly showed already: by
his Divine inspirations only it must be, that they can prophecy upon affairs,
as they should.

Xenoph. de instit. Cyr.
Therefore that great Statesman Xenophon, who drew so well the portraiture of a
perfect Empire, tells us, that Tam erit arduum prescribere quae facienda sunt,
quam futura omnia praescire, quod solius Dei est, and majus condition mortali:
It is as difficult to prescribe what is to be done in State-businesses, as to
foreknow all futurities, which is proper to God alone, and above the reach of
all Mortals: and yet this, that is so hard a task, is imposed upon Princes: So
that great Statist proceeds, Ecce aliquid Dei, sic Princeps sustinebit, in
ventura scilicet excurrere, qui ut sibi constet, sufficiatque, primum consiliis
and conatibus suis, a Deo fulcrum prudentiae and sapientiae jugiter flagitabit,
nam illa quae capite humano tantum stat, infirma est and incauta quaedam
temeritas, ad nullam autem Provinciam erit inhabilis, ad nullam virtutem
indocilis, qui pietatem didicerit, numinisque cultum. Behold here, says he,
how a Prince must of necessity have more than ordinary of God in him, to have
an insight into the events of things, and to discourse upon futurities; which
true spirit of prophecy, that he may have, that he may be constant to himself,
and stable in his counsels, he is perpetually to seek that capacity, and
support from God; for the greatest wit of man, of it self, will be nothing but
temerity; but he that is a true servant of Gods, and delights in his worship,
shall be so inspired, as to be able to encounter all extremities of State, and
difficulties of affairs whatsoever.

It were now to be wished, that our Christian Kings and Princes, would study and
practice some of these religious Pagans admirable Divinity, though they will
not strive to mount up our Mosaical Ascents, as his late most Serence Highness
has done, by which he has arrived, as we have seen, to the perfection of this
Political spirit of prophecy.

The wise Philosopher assures us, Seneca.
that Sapiens non semper it uno gradu, sed una via: A prudent person, keeps not
always one pace, though still one and the same way, by which way, he must
unquestionably mean, this Divine and prophetic way, this way of dependence
upon God, in all his counsels; for no way else can be one, all humane ways
being various and uncertain, as has been sufficiently showed in our precedent
discourses, together with my Lords, our second Moses his, as the firsts great
relations to the Lord in all their affairs; so I may hold my hand now, from any
further enlargement upon their prophetical Policies: but conclude, that his
late Highness, was a most complete Prophet in this sense also.

So now, we come to the third and last acception of Prophets, and that is the
true one indeed, the Divine Prophets, I mean, immediately illuminated by God,
as our first Moses was, and had free and frequent conversation with the Deity,
even to the enjoyment of him face to face.

Of this sort of Prophets, we find a distinction likewise in Scripture, and
they are termed by the Spirit of God, either Videntes, or Evangelizantes,
Seers, or Preachers: The Seers were those which used to converse with God by
Visions, or Divine Dreams, and to have some miraculous Revelations of things,
and many future Events. This truly is the proper high pitch of prophecy, the
sublimest condition sure, that mortality can arrive at, and that, our first
Moses had in the greatest proportion of any mere man that ever lived, as we
have seen in our Ascent; nor truly dare I venture our second Moses here, to the
perfection of Parallel with him; for, as I have said before, we are yet
unknowing to those particular private dispensations of Heaven to him, though
this we may securely conclude, as the Scripture speaks, that the Secret of the
Lord was with him; and that he had the testimony of Jesus, which to have, is to
have the Spirit of prophecy; for the testimony of Jesus, is the Spirit of
prophecy, Revel. 19.10.
as is expressly delivered to us in the Revelation.

Then for the second sort of Divine Prophets, which are the Evangelizers, or
inspired Preachers, they are such as the Apostle describes at large, in the
twelfth, thirteenth, and fourteenth, Chapters of his first Epistle to the
Corinthians: and exhorts us all, 1 Cor. 12. Ib. 13. ib. 14.
to covet to be, above all things, and to speak unto men, to edification, to
exhortation, and comfort. Now if ever this sublime Piece of Divine prophecy,
was made out to any mortal man, of his condition, it was most eminently
glorious in him: his very life was a perpetual Prophecy, his sanctified
example, was a constant living Sermon, and the words which the Spirit gave him,
when he was pleased to open his inspired lips, were, as we have hinted before,
as thunderclaps to Hindes, for the production of salvation.

His way of prophesying, was not like theirs now adays, that make a trade of
it, and employ their Pulpits more for coin, than conscience, and to pluck the
fruits of the earth from their Parishioners, than to improve the fruits of the
Spirit in them: No, his inspired Highness ever hated that canker of worldly
spirits, so predominate in the most pretended Prophets of this Age, who indeed
more zealously preach themselves, and their own vile interests, than the pure
and saving word of God.

Others forsooth, there are of them, that will preach nothing but placentia,
sow pillows under sinful elbows, and stroke and tickle their Auditors in the
mean time with strange stories, or vain curiosities, and yet this they will
call prophesying; but be it what it will, they care not, so it be for their own
profiting; and they have brought a great part of the people too, to be
satisfied with that kind of stuff; nay, even strangely to delight in it.

The generality now, comes only to hear Preachers, as of old they used to do
to the Athenian Orators, or a curious Lute-player, or a Comedy: but if he that
preaches has no other intention but to please, and they that hear, have no
other purpose, but to sooth their own curiosity, he may weary his lungs in the
mean space, and they hug the itch in their ears; but the time will come, when
he shall have the worm in his heart, to gnaw him, and they the tingling of the
ears for their punishment.

The seller, and the buyer, both shall be paid home with the coin of
reprobation; for whosoever speaks not, and who hears not, to do, and become
better, abuses the gift of prophecy it self, and a word signed with the blood
of Jesus Christ, the account of which, they will find inestimable, and the
loss of the least jot of it, most damnably dangerous.

His inspired Highness, I say, out of his true Prophetic wisdom, 1 Cor. 13.2.
ever hated the courses of all those giddy ungodly Evangelizers, and said with
holy Paul, Though I have the gift of Prophecy, and understand all mysteries,
and all knowledge, and though I have all faith, so as I could remove mountains,
and have no charity, I am nothing: Now this charity tends to that the Apostle
tells us, (as aforesaid) to edification, exhortation, and comfort of others,
which his true Prophetic Spirit always observed, and by that inflamed all his
people about him so, that his Palace always appeared, as a glorious Temple,
and his conversation a very Heaven upon Earth: So I hope this Parallel likewise
will not be denied, to be accomplished: Yet we shall see it more clear in the
following.

The three and twentieth Ascent.
MOses was not only endowed by God, with a most rich and plentiful spirit of
Prophecy himself; but he endeavored to procure it for, and always permitted
the exercise of it in, others: nay, encouraged and cherished it in his people,
to the discontent of diverse about him; for the sacred Text tells us, that when
news was brought to the blessed Patriarch, and holy Prophet, that there
remained two of the men in the Camp, the name of the one was Eldad, Number. 11.26.
and the name of the other Medad, and that the spirit resting upon them, they
continued to prophecy in the Camp, V. 27. V. 28. V. 29.
and he was solicited to forbid them. Then Moses said to him, that would have
had it forbidden, Envyest thou for my sake? would God, that all the Lords
people were Prophets, and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them. So it
plainly appears, that our great Patriarch and Prophet Moses, was absolutely in
his own judgment, inclined to favor a liberty of Prophesying, and that his
judgment too, was seconded by Divine approbation; for what he then spoke, was
from the very mouth, and dictate, of the Spirit of God himself.

The Parallel.
Thus we see, what Philosophers assure us, is very true, that Omne bonum est
sui diffusivum, All good is diffusive of it self; nothing indeed is so proper
to its nature, as to be communicable: much more then must the Spirit of all
goodness be so; that is, this Spirit of God himself, the Holy Spirit of
prophecy; What else made our great and gracious Patriarch, so willing to part
with some of his spirit, as the Text tells us, he did to the seventy, Number.
11.24.
that he set round about the Tabernacle? nor only so, but to endeavor, and
desire, as we have seen in the Ascent, That all Gods people were Prophets too,
and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them.

O words worthy to be written in Letters of Gold, with a Pen of Diamond: And
was not this the very sense, and true Prophetic Spirit of our second Moses
too? Has he not always endeavored, to impart that spirit of his to, and
improve it in, the hearts of all his people, that were capable of it? Has he
not always encouraged the free use, and exercise of it, throughout these
Nations, whilst some cruel, greedy, envious, and exterminating spirits, were
not only striving in private, but enacting in public, to make a monopoly of
this holy Spirit, and engrosse it to themselves? Nor only so, but went about
to extirpate, and root out, all those that desired the free use, and exercise
of it. O Antichristain Tyrany! But this sufficiently argued, that theirs was
not the true spirit of prophecy, neither of, nor from the Lord at all: for
that no spirit whatsoever can have a true union with God, that has not a
commixture of charity, is evident, 1 Cor. 13.
by the drift of the whole Chapter of that Epistle to the Corinthians, cited in
the last Parallel.

From whence then must this spirit of bitterness amongst men proceed, is it
from the more brutal part of man? An ancient Father, Tertull.
in an elegant gradation of his, tells us, no: for Homo homini Lupus, A man is
a Wolf to a man; that will not reach it; for Saevis inter se convenit: No beast
so savage, that will prey upon his own kind. Is it from any devilishnesse that
may possess humane nature? no, Homo homini demon, will not reach it; for
those wicked spirits do agree well enough within themselves; for our Savior
himself, testifies of their union, when he says, That if their house were
divided, it could not stand. From whence then can this spirit of bitterness
amongst men proceed? even from men themselves, Homo homini homo, That alone can
reach this malice; for nothing is so merciless an enemy to man, as man
himself. No creature in the earth, besides Canibal-men, will prey upon their
own speices, nor can any but barbarous Christians think, that the God of all
mercy, delights in humane sacrifices, like those devilish deities of old, and
still in America, that will be propitiated by no other means.

From whence then must this spirit of bitterness amongst Christians proceed?
is it from any principle of faith, or primitive practice? surely no: for the
first children, of the Christian Church, bore neither rod nor stick in their
hands, wherewithal to plant faith in the hearts of men: How comes it to pass
then, that we see some sort of people have published a Religion, all bristled
over with swords and pikes, all sooted with the smoke of musket and canon, all
sprinkled over, and besmeared with the blood of Christians? Must now the
ancient Arms of our Christian forefathers, which were prayers, and tears, be
laid aside, and none but killing weapons taken up? no Schools to decide
controversies between Christians, but bloody Campanias, nor way to save the
souls of men, but by destroying their bodies? Did God refuse to have his Temple
built by David, though a man after his own heart, because only his hands were
bloody; and can he now be contented, to have the very mortar that is to bind up
the stones, and ciment the walls of his Church, be tempered with blood, and her
breaches made up with skulls and carkases? Will he now suffer the stones of his
house, to be all polisht with such strokes, 1 Kings 6.7.
as are smitings of Brethren, who would not endure in that of Solomon's
building, so much as the noise of hammer, ax, or iron, or brass tool?

From whence then can proceed this spirit of bitterness amongst brethren? that
the red Dragon should begin again to play Rex, and that Whore prepare to dye
her Scarlet anew, and the pale Horse of imprisonment and exile, threaten a
range about the streets? till his late most Serene Highness, was pleased to
oppose himself and all his power, against those cruel, and, as I said before,
Antichristian designs. From whence, I say, could arise this root of bitterness
between Brethren? from nothing but a mere Machiavillian trick too, a pretense,
forsooth, of conformity, or uniformity in the Church, which has been, and is
undoubtedly, the greatest cheat, that ever the Devil invented, to make men run
a mading in Religion, and to embroile Christendom in direful wars, perpetual
confusions, and most bloody ruins.

The witchcraft of that Jezebel it was, that so long troubled this our Israel,
and that our great Jehu, as well as second Moses, so furiously marched against,
and, thanks be to God, has pretty well dissolved her enchantments. Her painted
face, he has now likewise discovered in its pure naturals, to all the World,
and pulled off the vizard of all pretenses whatsoever; for let the ends of
these conformity-mongers, be never so plausible, to ciment the State forsooth,
against all division, we find it has been throughout all Europe, the only
mother and nurse, of all disturbances whatsoever in matters of Religion, and
the greatest occasion of civil bloodshed, that ever was in the World; for there
can be no War so passionate, as the War of conscience.

All these horrid inconveniences, and mischiefs, his Highnesse's great Mosaic
prudence, most timely looked into, and prevented amongst us. How often have we
seen the furious Furnace heating by several parties? so could expect no less
than a fiery-trial: But he would neither suffer King, nor his Court, though he
was the pretended head of that pitiful Body, nor yet Bishops, Archdeacons,
Deans, Chancellors, and Officials, with their long-tailed, etc. Nor yet any
Superintendent with his Classes, and pretended Directories, to impose any thing
upon tender consciences; and indeed amongst all the weighty affairs of this
Nation, which he like another Atlas, so happily bore about him, the dear
indulgent care, he always expressed in the favor of such Christians, who
labored under any scruples of conscience, was as glorious and remarkable, as
his undaunted courage to pull down his proud and stiff-necked enemies: and this
is most evident likewise, by what it pleased his most Serene Highness to hold
forth in the same Speech afore-cited in the last Ascent; which most heavenly
words I thought necessary likewise to insert here.

When you were entered upon this GOVERNMENT, raveling into it (you know I took
no notice what you were doing) if you had gone upon that foot of Account, To
have made such good and wholesome Provisions for the good of the People of
these Nations, for the Settling of such matters in things of Religion, as would
have upheld and given Countenance to a Godly Ministry, and yet would have given
a just Liberty to Godly men of different Judgments, men of the same Faith with
them that you call the Orthodox Ministry in England, as it is well known the
Independents are, and many under the Form of Baptism, who are found in the
Faith, only may perhaps be different in Judgment in some lesser matters, yet
as true Christians, both looking at Salvation, only by faith in the blood of
Christ, men professing the fear of God, having recourse to the Name of God, as
to a strong Tower; I say, you might have had Opportunity to have settled Peace
and Quietness amongst all professing Godliness, and might have been
instrumental, if not to have healed the breaches, yet to have kept the Godly of
all Judgments from running one upon another, and by keeping them from being
overrun by a Common Enemy, rendered them and these Nations, both secure, happy,
and well satisfied.

Are these things done? or any thing toward them? Is there not yet upon the
spirits of men a strange itch? nothing will satisfy them, unless they can put
their finger upon their Brethrens Consciences, to pinch them there. To do this,
was no part of the Contest we had with the Common Adversary; for Religion was
not the thing at the first contested for; but God brought it to that issue at
last, and gave it into Us by way of Redundancy, and at last it proved to be
that which was most dear to us; and wherein consisted this, more than in
obtaining that Liberty from the Tyranny of the Bishops, to all Species of
Protestants, to worship God according to their own Light and Consciences? for
want of which, many of our Brethren forsook their Native Countries, to seek
their Bread from Strangers, and to live in Howling Wildernesses; and for which
also, many that remained here, were imprisoned, and otherwise abused, and made
the scorn of the Nation.

Those that were sound in the Faith, how proper was it for them to labor for
Liberty, for a just Liberty, that men should not be trampled upon for their
Consciences? had not they labored but lately under the weight of Persecutions,
and was it fit for them to fit heavy upon others? is it ingenuous to ask
liberty, and not to give it? what greater Hypocrisy, than for those who were
oppressed by the Bishops, to become the greatest Oppressors themselves, so soon
as their yoke was removed? I could wish that they who call for Libery now also,
had not too much of that Spirit, if the power were in their hands.

As for Profane Persons, Blasphemers, such as preach Sedition, the Contentious
Railers; Evil Speakers, who seek by evil words to corrupt good manners, persons
of loose conversations, punishment from the Civil Magistrate ought to meet with
them, because, if these pretend Conscience, yet walking disorderly, and not
according, but contrary to the Gospel, and even to natural light, they are
judged of all, and their Sins being open, make them subjects of the Magistrates
Sword, who ought not to bear it in vain.

O words worthy of the spirit of so great a Prince and Prophet, which I could
dwell upon to admire! but I am called now away from that admiration; Yet, in
the mean time, I must desire leave to wonder at another Prodigy, With what face
these uniformity men, be they King, Court, and Council; Prelate, Dean, and
Chapter; President, Superintendent, and Consistory; be it Convocation, Synod,
or Assembly, could prescribe Rules to other men's faiths, unless they could
make clearly out, that very Junto of theirs, call it what you will, to be the
only true Throne of Christ, and that they could demonstrate all the lineaments
of their Discipline, and Government, to be truly and naturally derived from the
pure Fountain of Gods word: otherwise, methinkes, such tyrannous impositions
should rather affrighten, than satisfy men's consciences, and make them
disclaim such a Religion for a monster, than accept it for a well-shap't child
of the Church.

Is it reason for me to run out of my wits, to satisfy a company of
unreasonable men, met together? and shall I lay the head of my faith upon the
block of any Assembly, to be cut and mangled into what form and fashion they
shall please? God forbid: But yet I hold it much more madness to persecute any
man because he is not of my opinion; I may as well sure quarrel with those that
resemble me not in outward complexion: For since we lost perfection in Adam,
whatever knowledge we attain to now, is either Moral, by the improving of those
natural endowments, God has given us, or else Divine, which comes by an
immediate influence from Heaven upon the soul; therefore when we see any weaker
in judgment than our selves, we should look upon them, rather as objects of
pity, than punishment, rather deplorable, than damnable.

Vain man, what made the difference betwixt thee, and thy weak brother? Was it
not free grace? for what have thou, as the Apostle demands of thee, that thou
did not receive? and that God may reveal to him also, in his due time.

Is it not a barbarous thing, for people to be stripped of their lives and goods,
for difference in opinions only, though our brethren still in Christ? Nay, to
lie under so rigid a persecution, that poor Christians should be made
accountable for the very goods that have been violently pulled from them, and
tributary for the only shipwreck of their poverty. Nor is this course of cruel
proceeding in points of Religion, more against Piety, than common Policy: for
first it is as impossible to root out any Religion by a persecution, as to put
out a fire, with blowing of it, the suffering party always gaining credit to
his cause, if it be a matter of Conscience; and therefore we find the Christian
Church has always fructified by the blood of Martyrs; and indeed, had no other
visible seed-plot, but the places of their executions.

Then it is not a more common, than true Rule, that Malus custos diuturnitatis
metus, and frequens vindicta paucorum odium reprimit, omnium irritat: Fear is
no good Master, and frequent punishments, provoke more ill blood, than they do
suppress. The reason is plain, for men that lie under any oppression,
especially if it be for matter of conscience, though they are at some times
possibly wise and temperate enough, do ordinarily become mad, and usually
trample down all relations, to make way for a deliverance, where they have
least hopes given them of a remedy; and as the condition of men's beings alter,
so they do most commonly vary their interests, and principles.

His Mosaic Highness therefore, would not, (as was said before, of him, that
Cum victor extiterit lictor protinus evasit) appear at all severe upon Brethren
of the same Faith, though differing, it may be, in some Doctrines: he provided
more Doctors, than Executioners for them, knowing that the apprehensions of
God, and true Religion, are to be instilled into the hearts of men, by the true
Spirit of Prophecy, and help of tongues, and not by the dint of swords: he
knew that God had not in these days, refused his wonted appearance in a soft
voice, and chosen to remain in thunder, as our Boanerges's, would have it now:
as also he considered, that to go about to reform any thing in Religion, by
humane strength, is quite contrary to the nature of Reformation it self, and as
extravagant a course, as to attempt, the repair of a Castle-wall with a needle
and thread. He never went about to make decisions of Faith, with the edge of
his sword, or determine controversies in Religion, by his armor of proof; No,
the sword of the Spirit he knew, did never use to make way to the conscience,
by cutting through the flesh; and he that by force of arms, cruelty, and
persecution, goes about to reform, or defend any Religion, does but take such
courses, as are condemned by the same Religion, that he would defend.

His Highness therefore, always took a softer and securer course, like a true
Mosaical Prophet indeed, knowing that the true Spirit of Prophecy, like Amber,
sweetly draws the slightest straw, and like Adamant, will court and attract,
the hardest iron: He had observed likewise, what some Naturalists tell us, That
fountains of troubled water, would be cleansed with a Honeycomb, while violent
stirring of them, would but foul them worse.

He reflected frequently upon the Speech of Abner to Joab, 2 Samuel 2.26.
Number usque ad internecionem hujus macro defaeviet, an ignoras quod periculosa
est desperatio? usque quo non dicis populo, ut omittat persequi fratres suos?
Shall the Sword devour forever? Know thou not, that it is not a little
dangerous to drive men into despairation? How long shall it be then, ere thou
bid the people return from persecuting their Brethren? An excellent piece of
counsel, and as good an example, and was as well followed by his late most
Serene Highness; He ever held those to be best, and most godly Laws, that were
least sanguinary, and yet maintained order: all others he accounted mere
Phalarismes, and leges Draconis.

And though it may be objected, that to give factions the bridle, to entertain
and propagate new opinions, is the highway to scatter contentions, and sow
divisions amongst the people, and as it were, to lend them hand to make a
disturbance of the Public peace, there being no bar or obstacle of Laws, to
hinder their course; yet it may be as well urged, that to give factions that
very bridle, to uphold their opinions, is by that facility and gracious favor,
the ready way to mollify and reform them; at least, to blunt their edge, which
would be otherwise sharpened, by rareness, novelty, and difficulty.

Clemency is a virtue sometimes of as great policy, as piety, as we have showed
in our former Ascents; because it begets love, and love breeds loyalty,
commands the very soul, and lays the body at the feet of the obliger. Mercy
kindles fire and zeal in the hearts of Subjects, pity and pardon, as they
make the obligation of the offenders greater, so it makes them repent, to have
offended him, who has so obliged them, the reason is infallible, fidelem si
putaveris facies; The way to make a faithful friend, is to believe him to be so.

But what has prophesying to do with faction? that good spirit sure, cannot be
guilty of making any public disturbance, for it is a spirit of peace. Several
prophetic spirits certainly, and diversities of persuasions, in matter of
Religion, may live and cohabit together, without destruction of one another;
and though they come not into one Church, Congregation, or Meeting Place, yet
may converse together in one Market, City, or Commonwealth. Symmachus though a
Pagan, yet a most Learned and Virtuous one, could say, in a Speech, that he
made to Theodorick, That in matter of Religion, every man ought to have his
rights and ceremonies, as his opinion, free, and gives his reason thus: God is
a great Secret, no wonder therefore if we endeavor to find him, so many
several ways. And Constantine, though a very good Christian, professed in a
solemn Oration, Not to force any man in his Religion, but to leave to every one
that, as free as the Elements.

I would very fain know now, what these men of mighty uniformity, will say to
these great reasons, and greater authorities of our first and second Moses, the
greatest Princes, and gravest Persons, in the World, and what possibility they
can propose, to reduce the diversities of men's spirits, to this their wonderful
accord? For it is against common sense and reason, that ever men shall be one
in opinion; we know the Heathen could declare, Quot capita tot sensus; So many
men, so many minds: So that they which endeavor this specious unity, seem to
me, to go about to imprison Aeolus, and his two and thirty sons, in a bag, as
it is said, the L^planders use to do, since opinion will blow still from every
point of the Compass. And as any confinement of the wind, torments nature
with an earthquake, so to rob the soul of its freedom, (which is far more agil
and diffusive) must needs cause a cholick, with an inflammation, in the bowels
of a Kingdom. Till then, these pitiful uniformity-mongers, be pointed at, as
the only enemies of a State, and this wretched persuasion be wrought out of
the hearts of men, that they ought to make all men walk that way par-force,
which their biased Priests cry up for the only right; and till men be less
in the Letter, that they may be more one, in the Spirit, (which none but the
spiritual can apprehend) and until they leave crying for fire from Heaven,
against Brethren in the Faith, we shall always have our Churches, and Country
too, in a flame, though perhaps themselves may be first in the ashes.

In the mean time, it shall satisfy me, and I hope, all the good people of the
Land, to contemplate the Idaea, and blessed example of our gracious second, as
he did always that of the first, Moses, who opposed himself, and all his
power, against those envious spirits, that pretended unity for their
schismatical breaches of Christ's body, and Faith for their factions; and so
suppressing the true spirit of Prophecy in all others would be thought to
ingrosse it to themselves; whereas, God knows, they have none at all of it; for
the burning heats of their persecutions, and the bright flames of brotherly
charity, are lighted from as distant fires, as Heaven is from Hell.

His Mosaical Highness therefore, in humble imitation of his first Great
Master, in this Ascent of his, and in obedience to the Divine exhortations of
the Apostle, who charge us not to quench the Spirit, nor despise Prophesying;
1 Thessalonians. 5.19, 20.
and like a true Father of the children of the Prophets, ever supported them,
in their their fair, and full liberty, of Prophesying; that we may now cry out,
with the Psalmist, Great is the number of the Prophets: and further, we may
observe, and bless God, for the great fruits, and effects of that goodness,
which we now enjoy by that happy liberty; Peace within, and Honor without,
Love at home, Respect abroad, and such a Concord of discords, and sweet Union
of divisions, that we can see nothing of strife amongst us, unless it be a
religious contention on all sides, for devotion and a good life, for peaceable
conversation, obedience to Magistrates, excellency of learning; who shall do
most good in the State, and deserve the Prize; and such an Eutopia, could he
only make in England, that did deserve the Olive branches for Mercy, Peace,
and Goodness, as well as the Laurel, for his Victories, Wisdom, Government,
and Constancy, (the Crown of all.)

The four and twentieth Ascent.
MOses being thus blessed with all the beautiful embellishments of Body and Soul,
that mortal man was capable of, so admirable in the pre-eminencies of his
nature, so flourishing in all the ornaments of Art, and extraordinary
advantages of a most Noble education, nay, adorned too with Divine dignities:
being thus proved to be an absolute good Soldier, complete Captain, and
Conductor-General, a most Master-Statesman, perfect Prince, and supreme
Magistrate; and yet further, advanced to the most sublime degrees of Patriarch,
and Prophet: What can be more expected, or desired, from Heaven in favor of
his incomparable person? nothing sure, but what he had in the greatest
proportion, that ever man alive had, and that was, a profound, shall I say? or,
a high, humility? a matchless meekness of spirit, the Crown doubtless of all
his other exaltations; for without that, not all the greatness and glory of the
Earth, nor yet the graces and dignities of Heaven, would signify more to a
man, than a Medicine composed of many virtuous and vigorous simples, and
infected by the infusion of one poisonous drug.

Humility therefore; as it was the first step of all his greatness, when the
Lord found him out in the Desert, so he carried it constantly along with him,
Exodus 3.
and to Crown all his Actions and Undertakings; by this he subjected the pride
of Pharaoh, and all the perverseness of his own people, whose frequent
insurrections, and mutinous distempers, he suppressed by no thing more, Number. 14.
than his mere meekness, and often submissive falling upon his face, as to be
seen, in the Rebellion of Korah, and the Sedition of Miriam; after all which,
the Lord was pleased to give him, this gracious Character; Number. 12.
That he was a very meek man, and humble, above all the men which were upon the
face of the earth, Thus was the Lord pleased to sanctify him in his
faithfulness, and meekness, Eccles. 45.4.
as Ecclesiasticus expresses it, and so chose him out of all men.

The Parallel.
Thus we are at length arrived, within the highest Port of personal perfection,
that any Prince can possibly call an Anchor in: the sublimest step that mortal
man is capable to mount. The Stars, we know, are beheld in the bottom of a pit,
and profound humility, makes the most radiant splendours to appear in Princely
greatness.

The Sun, we see, that is the Prince of Planets, dispelleth always all the
grossest, thickest, and stiffest, vapors, and draws the thinnest and most
subtle to himself. How much more then that we do attenuate, lessen, and
anihilate our selves, which we can do no other way so well, as by the practice
of this celestial virtue of Humility, so much the nearer we are sure to
approach to the Son of Righteousness, and true Glory.

Nay, that Son of Righteousness and true Glory himself, was pleased not to
render himself, so illustrious to us, in any one particular, as in the practice
of this, both profound and sublime virtue; the whole course of his life, from
the Crib, to the Cross, being nothing else but a constant moving homily of
Humility. It is no wonder then, that the Holy spirit of God, was pleased to
take such punctual care, so expressly to describe, this excellency in our
great Patriarch; and I doubt not, but upon a strict examen, we shall find our
late Princely Protector, and second Moses, his Parallel, in this also, as well
as in all his other most heroical perfections.

As for his humility to Godward, and pure meekness of spirit, in submission to
his Will, and Divine Commands, I hope, we have pretty well put out of question
already; as for his remarkable humility, and meekness of spirit toward man,
his continual conversation cannot but bring in sufficient evidence.

Is there any man now living, that can with justice tax him of any pride, or
imperious distance, that he ever kept with his people? No, it is notoriously
known, to all that ever knew him, that he did always communicate himself with
so much sweetness, affability, facility, and courtesy, that he did ever
augment his respect, by very familiarity; the usual course most commonly to
dissolve it, and in that resembled perfectly the most precious Amethyst, which
shines so much the more clearly, and orientally, as it has been more often
worn. As nothing was too high for his courage, understanding, and piety, so
nothing was too low for his bounty, conversation, and courtesy. For God did not
only bestow on him, an equal proportion of the Mosaical spirit of meekness;
but conferred upon him in like manner, the glorious gift which the Scripture
attributes to the Patriarch Joseph, both in the Psalms, and in the Epistle to
the Hebrews, which is no small gift of the Spirit indeed, to oblige hearts with
sweetness; not unlike those famous Engines of Archimedes, which made water
mount by descending; so his most honorable humility vouchsafed to descend, but
to make himself re-ascend to the source of the prime sublimity, and so as his
virtues upon Earth, have made him Laurels here, they have procured for him most
incorruptible Crowns in Heaven.

Bern.
Well then might blessed Bernard tell us, that Magna virtus est humiltas
honorata, Humility in persons of Honor, is a most sublime virtue; indeed it is
a piece of excellency, only proper for Princes, and great Persons. I will not
deny but poor inferior spirits, may be capable of it; but this, I am sure of,
that they which lie buried in a base condition, have nothing of an equal
latitude to express it; for the great Ones of the Earth only, are they, that
are most roughly assaulted with the storms of Pride, and so consequently must
receive more glory and praise from the repulse of it.

Nay, I will be bold to assert yet further, in the behalf of our Mosaical high
Humility, that all the virtues in the World, signify nothing at all, without
it, no more, than as was said in the Ascent, a wholesome Medicament would do to
a man's health, with a mixture of poison in it: amasse all that can be called
good in any single person, and let this one thing only be wanting, those very
virtues will prove but specious vices, nay, holy traitors to his soul, and
betray it to the very worst of impieties. Let a man have all the liberality and
munificence in the World, if he be once proud of it, it will presently
degenerate into a very foul prodigality; and as the wise Socrates expresses
it, (...), makes men by the sottish usage, and management of the graces
themselves, turn those Virgins, to be prostituts, forgetting, that to know how
to give well, is a great Science; and that the distribution of gifts, and
graces, is to be made with a prudent economy. Give a man constancy, and let
him grow up to a pride of it, the nature of the virtue will be presently
destroyed, and soon pass into plain obstinacy, and perversity, the most
dangerous condition that a man can possibly fall into, though otherwise he may
be, the learned, and most knowing person alive.

It was most excellently well observed therefore of the Learned Gerson, Gerson
If you see one to walk, says he, in the way of his proper judgment, and
stiff in it, although he had one foot in Paradise, he must presently withdraw
it; for it is better to walk in the shades of death, under the conduct of
humility, than to have a Paradise it self, in any pitiful pride, or the
pleasures of proper fancy. Nay the virtue of fortitude it self, the most
consistent sure with pride, and self-conceit of any virtue; yet if it be but
infected with it, it proves presently presumption, and where that once gets
entrance, it puffs up so prodigiously, that it makes of a man, as it were, a
mere Baloon, filled with wind, a scarcrow of honor, a pitiful temerarious
nothing, void of courage, an undertaker without success, a fantastic without
shame, which in the end, will become burdensome to it self, and odious to all
the World; and makes men come into a field of honor, as it is said some of our
neighbors do, with a clattering noise, and fury like thunder, but vanish
presently like smoke: and yet such men as these, will think themselves, it may
be, valiant, Vell. Paterc.
because they fear nothing (as they say) but the wise Velleius tells us, that
Nemo saepius opprimitur quam qui nihil timet, and that frequentissimum
calamitatis initium, est securitas, To be secure in ones own opinon, and to
fear nothing, is the ready way to ruin: fear indeed is most commonly the mother
of safety, and the true means not to be afraid of a misfortune, is to fear it
always.

A Motto therefore fit for a true valiant man, to carry in his colors, is,
that which I have seen in a Noble hand, Pauca timeo, Pauciora despicio, I fear
few things, and despise fewer; Now this unhappy spirit of Pride, is the mother
of this cursed security, and what is worse, insolency; with which, true
fortitude can no way cohabit, Guichard, l. 2.
as the wise Italian tells us, Sempre e congiunto in un medesimo suggetto,
l'insolentia con la timiditate, Insolency and timidity are never found asunder;
but always accompanying one another in the same subject: So by consequence,
without this Mosaic meekness of spirit, no man can be accounted, much less
be, truly valiant.

I have seen a man in like manner, by a ridiculous conceit of his own patience,
(which it may be, he had at first, to a virtuous proportion) fool himself into
the opinion of a Stoic; but, indeed grew worse than any Stock, or, at least,
as stupid.

I should be infinite to enumerate the many massacres which this unhappy pride
of spirit, makes continually upon the whole chained of holy virtues, it is,
apparently the plain murderesse, and envenomer of them all: So much only as
has been said, may serve to show, how this high Mosaic Ascent of Humility, and
Meekness of spirit, is the very ratio formalis, as the Schools speak, of all,
and every one of the virtues, that can be seated in the heart of man.

No wonder then, that the All wise Spirit of God, took such particular care to
recommend it to us, in the person of our first Moses; and as easy must it be
to conceive a reason, why our gracious second, his precious Parallel, should so
faithfully endeavor to imitate him in that, as well as his other perfections,
they being both pre-ordained by God, to be the greatest Magazines of all
virtuous goodness amongst men, that either this, or that Age has produced.

We have seen them both in their humble retreat from, and modest avoidance of
worldly honors and advancements to humane greatness, which after they were so
violently compelled unto, by Divine precept, behold, and admire, with what
moderation, humility, and meekness, of spirit, they have ever managed them:
excellently therefore does holy Cyprian style this tanscendent virtue of
Humility, Cyprian de Nativ. Christi.
Primum religionis introitum, and ultimum Christianitatis exitum, The Gate of
all Religion, and the Crown or highest Ascent of Christianity; for who can
think, that he will be faithful to Jesus Christ, that can be unfaithful to that
virtue, which shined so (...) in him, to wit, that of humility? and truly, I
cannot cease from wonder, when I consider the little reason, that any man in
the earth has, to be proud of any thing; and it was doubtless the holy
consideration of his Mosaical Highness too.

First the highest petigree of the greatest man upon Earth, is but to have been
an eternity in nothing; for if we mount still upwards, ascending to the prime
source and origin of time, when we shall have reckoned millions of Ages, we
shall find nothing but inexplicable Labyrinths, and abysses of one great
eternity, without beginning or end: and when we shall present to our thoughts,
all that time which has preceded, be it real, or imaginary, we shall be
ashamed to see, so many millions of years, wherein we had not so much as the
being of a rush, a silly gnat, or a butter-flie.

Nay, that blustering insolent Rodomont, be he what, and where he will, that
threatens this day to hew down mountains, and thunder-strike his fellow
mortals, and thinks the whole house of Nature was created only for him, and so
prepares to swallow it all by avarice, and waste it as fast by riot, thirty or
forty years ago, more or less, was not able to contend for excellency, with a
pitiful Cater-pillar.

His Mosaical Highness, I say, considered all this, and a great deal more, to
render himself a true imitator of his Master. First, though his Nobility of
birth, was very great, as we have seen, he never intoxicated his brains with
it, as some do now adays, that make it their business to dig out, and
disentomb their Grandfathers, as it were from the ashes of old Troy, Auson. in
Paneg.
and spend so much time, as Ausonius says very well, In searching out of
uncertain Parents, that they many times give occasion to suspect, that they
have none certain. No, my Lord, though he knew very well how to value the
happiness of a good extraction; yet for any man to be proudly pufft up with
it, he accounted no less than madness; for revolving the whole mass of
mankind, we shall find, as Plato told us, long ago, That there is no King
which comes not from Clownes, nor Clown, who is not descended from the blood of
Kings.

Then for beauty of body, though his Highness had as fair a proportion, as any
man, as we have likewise showed; yet he could as little pride himself in that,
knowing it to be but a covering for ordures, the blanching of a dunghill with
snow, or at the best, but a fadding flower of the field, which has, as it
were, for Horizon, the very instant of its birth, Et dum nascantur consenuisse
rosas: no more could any of his great natural, or acquired parts, raise him
above his proper pitch, knowing the best learning amongst men, to be but a
qualified ignorance, the memory it self to be, but the belly of the soul, and
most frequently filled with nothing but wind: the best and most acute wit of
man, he looked upon as a poor thin thing, like the spiders web, and fitter to
catch flies, than any thing else: and as for the judgment, he knew how
dangerous a thing it was to confide in that, little less than a leprosy in
the heart of man.

No more could his Mosaic Soul be elevated with all the honors he enjoyed,
and greatness of this world; for he took all them for burdens, and at the
best, looked upon them, but as golden Maskes, and weather-cocks of inconstancy;
and for all manner of praises, flattery, complacency, and ticklings of some
vain men, he ever hated and contemned, as fit only to inebriate shallow
brains: for riches he evermore scorned, as the offall of the earth, the nest of
rust, and tinder of concupiscence: for Palaces and stately Houses, he valued
but as the bones of the earth, pil'd one upon another, with ciment and mortar:
for precious Stones, he esteemed as they were, the excrements of an enraged
Sea, borrowing their worth only from illusion.

Much less could his great wisdom be capable of that vanity, wherewith men
usually pride themselves, in clothes, mere nourishment for moths, to cover
bodies which must be food for worms; he looked upon all bravery of apparel, but
as plasters of the scars of sin, to wit, nakedness: borrowed feathers from
all kinds of birds, unpunisht thefts, witnesses of our poverty, that makes us
to beg the assistance of so many creatures, to cover our shame: Moreover, he
knew, that Vestitus ut tegit corpus ita detegit animum, Our attire does not
more cover the nakedness of our bodies, than discover that of our minds; his
Highness therefore purposely did (as all wise men will) avoid any vanity, or
ostentation in that. Nor yet could his Mosaic Highness, be taken with that
empty piece of pride, which most great ones now adays are possessed withal, to
behold behind him, great and gay Trains of servants, who but burden their
Masters with their many sins, and make them become answerable for their
accumulated follies.

See here a miracle of men, in the contempt of riches and honors; for the
first he never cared to hold, locked up in his coffers, nor ever thought were as
they should be, but when they were distributed; for they resembled, as I have
heard, he used to say, nothing more naturally, than a dunghill, which stinks
when it lies heaped together, but fattens fields when spread abroad: and for
the other, he took it for as great a mere mockery, to affect greatness amongst
men, as if a Rat should pride himself to be a Lord forsooth, amongst Mice. He
was so far from feeding himself with, or priding himself in, glory; that he
would often say too, as I have heard, all that, was but the swelling of the
ear. Are not these Apothegms worthy of so great a Prince? In fine, his
Highness always concluded with the Prophet Habakkuk, Quomodo potentem vinum
decipit, Habak. 2.
sic erit vir superbus, That as drunkenness was taken with wine, so were the
brains of men intoxicated with pride, and proper opinion.

There is no man will deny sure, but that all those actions, and expressions
aforesaid, were very high humiliations before God, and indubitable marks of a
pure Mosaic spirit; but where were his humilities to men, and his meeknesses
of spirit, in points of government? If this be demanded, by any doubting
person, let him tell me, how often he has found any surly, supercilious looks
fall from him, or any fastidious, disdainful words, or gestures, which so
usually accompany common greatness?

No, his Highness, besides the great amaenity, and affability of his
Noble-nature, had better studied the accomplished Cyrus, Xexoph. Cyr.
in Xenophon, who tells us, that Fastuosum ac morosum ingenium, quod fastidium
sui, aliorumque secum trahit, felix principatus non admittit: Insolency and
morosity, are not at all consistent with the condition of a happy Prince: and
what Ausonius so highly commends in his Gratianus, Auson, in Paneg. Gratiani.
Quod faciles interpellantibus praeberet aditus, nec de occupatione causaretur,
quinimo ubi postulata aut querimonias explicassent, percunctaretur, numquid
praeterea vellent? That he was a Prince of easy access, and a very patient
ear, not expostulating, why men came to trouble him? but when they had said
all, would ask still, Whether they had any more to say?

In short, his Highness was truly that, which the most gracious Emperor
Titus, would have every Prince to be careful to be; that is, Sweet, Serene, and
Pleasant to all, and Non oportere a sermon Principis quemquam tristem
discedere, That it was not fit for any Prince, to send any man from his
presence away sad, or discontented.

His Highness very well understood, that Verba aliquando munera faciunt: and
if he were forced at any time to deny a favor, he did it always so, Vt
benignis negata res verbis, sit gratior quam concessa morosis, That he would
oblige more by his very denials, than some Kings that I have known, would do by
their very grants.

It was observed by a great Critic upon Julius Caesar, that Quamvis eum
Clementia, liberalitas, and fortitudo commendarent, odium tamen, conjuratio and
praematura mors oppressit, quod elatior populo blandiri, senatoribus assurgere
gravaretur aut nesciret, verbis quoque uteretur asperis, etc. Though he was
hugely commendable for his Clemency, Liberality, and Courage, yet he fell under
a sad Fate, for want of a little complacency with the people, and soothing the
Senate with some complement, and had always too much asperity in his tongue.

Could any of these imputations ever light upon our Mosaical Protector? No, he
was ever as distant from them, as the Sphere of fire, can be from the Center of
the Earth; so that we may securely conclude, that his late Highness has as
much outdone Julius Caesar in this, as in all his other glories: never was
that great Title of Serenity, so truly given to any Prince, as to him; for it
was born with him.

Thus we have seen these two great Persons of Honor, our first and second
Moses, entering this grand Theater of the World, from the first Scene of their
humble retirements to the last issue and Catastrophe of all their happinesses,
attired with nothing but humility, that still accompanying and crowning all
their Actions; as it was the basis, so it was the vertical point of all their
greatness; nay, the very Orb and Element, that all their other Virtues moved
in, and by which they arrived at all their glories; so disproving the
Philosophy of Seneca, who says that Servitus est magnitudinus, non posse fieri
minorem, Seneca.
That it is the slavery of greatness, not to be made less; which though may
be true in bodies, they have proved to be contrary in souls: and what Pliny
assures us, to be more true, that Natura nusquam magis quam in minimis tota
est: Plin.
nature is most entirely it self, and whole in the least things.

This sweet littleness of theirs, is that, which has rendered them so great, in
the sight of God and man; for by so lessening and annihalating themselves, they
have enlarged their glories, and raised themselves so many degrees toward
Heaven, as erected eternal Trophes to their honor upon earth, and those as
great, as ever were written, or can be, in the Records of Fame.

Thus we have, I hope, happily finished the whole Staircase of all our Mosaic
difficult Ascents: we shall now beg a little breathing-space, upon the top of
this holy Mount, before we dare to adventure any higher; and yet we have but
half a dozen short and easy Ascents more left us to climb (for they are
Ascents of Favor and Prerogative) before we can introduce this glorious
Couple, our first and second Moses, within their blessed Tabernacle of Repose;
and so we do intend to conclude (though it can never be sufficiently
accomplished) this high piece of Mosaic Work.

Six Transcendental ASCENTS, To the top of the MOSAIC MOUNT, OR BLESSED
TABERNACLE OF REPOSE.
The first Transcendental ASCENT.
MOses being premonisht by God of his approaching end; made his most humble
suite unto the Lord, for to nominate his Successor, that the people might not
suffer by the vacancy of so great a Charge: and the form of his Petition is
very remarkable, which runs thus. Let the Lord God of the Spirits of all Flesh,
set a man over the Congregation, Number. 27.16.
which may go out before them, and which may lead them out, and which may bring
them in; V. 17.
that the Congregation of the Lord be not as sheep, which have no Shepherd; and
the Lord said unto Moses, V. 18.
Take thee Joshua, the son of Nun, a man in whom is the Spirit, and lay thine
hand upon him, etc. Then we find this testimony of Joshua afterward, Deuteronomy.
34.9.
That he was full of the Spirit of Wisdom; for Moses had laid his hands upon
him, and the children of Israel hearkened unto him, and did as the Lord
commanded Moses.

The Parallel.
We have hitherto, throughout all our past Ascents, seen this incomparable pair
marching, most amicably coupled, hand in hand together; as well in all their
painful actions, as sufferings. And a glorious spectacle, none sure can deny it
to be; I am sure, holy Cyprian tells us, Cyprian de Mortal.
that it is, To see such invincible courages counterbufft with storms and
tempests, on whom it would seem that heaven it self would burst and fall in
pieces; to behold two such men, I say, amidst the threats of the air, and the
ruins of the world, always standing upright, like to great brazen Colossuses,
and scorning them all, as mists, and small flakes of snow. What can we do less
in such a case, than exclaim with Seneca, Seneca.
Heu quanta sublimitas, inter ruinas humani generis, stare erectum! O what a
sublimity it is, to be erect in heart and countenance, amongst the ruins of
mankind! and give thanks to God, with Typotius, Quod digni visi sint Deo,
Typotius in Symboll.
in quibus experiretur, quantum humana natura possit pati, That he has deemed
them worthy, to serve as a trial of humane Nature, to see to how high a pitch
it could arrive.

And truly, if we do but rightly consider the rise, as well as the progress of
these two great Personages, we shall find them exactly to correspond, with that
ingenious devise of Lewis the twelfth of France, which was a celestial Cup,
advanced in rays of Gold, amongst a crowd of eclipses, with this Motto; Inter
ecclypses exorior: I rise between eclipses; We have seen, I say, this devise
fully verified, in our first and second Moses, and yet their Clemency, and
Piety, was always so great, as to pardon and pray for their very eclipsers,
and persecutors themselves, like all the ancient Martyrs, who when laden with
torments, opened so many mouths as they had wounds, to beg a pardon for the
very causers, and inflictors of them, and more like to Jesus Christ himself,
now sitting in the midst of those Martyrs, and quickening by the effusion of his
blood, even those, who had their hands deep in the shedding of it.

We have seen this matchless couple, only Parallel to themselves, in all
their most elate, stirring, and astonishing, great actions too, wherein they
have ever showed their courage like Eagles, confronting all storms; like
Lions, which oppose all violences; like Diamonds never to be broken; like
Rocks, scorning all waves; and Anvills, resisting all the strokes of hammers:
and in a word, Ambros. in haec verba Genesis 2. Nomen fluminis tertii, Tygris.
like to nothing so much, as to the River Tygris, which as blessed Ambrose
observes, Quodam cursu rapido, resistentia quaeque transverberat, neque
aliquibus cursus ejus impedimentorum haeret obstaculis: amongst all the streams
of the earth, has a current so swift and violent, that with an unresistible
rapidity and impetuosity, it combateth, and surmounteth, all the obstacles that
can be opposed against it: So the Courage of these two great and most
incomparable Captains, did use to fly through all perils, break through, and
work it self a passage, against a whole world of contrarieties.

We have seen these two super-excellent Persons, in all their eminencies of
State, likewise, Supreme Magistracies, and Principalities; we have seen them
likewise in all the perfections of their piety toward, and worship of the
Omnipotent, and the renunciation of their proper interests, for the service of
the Deity: nay, we have seen them brought up by the Divine hand, to the highest
pitch of Prophecy it self, and yet their great souls could not make a stop
there, but must mount a little higher; and that indeed is the highest step of
all Princely perfection, as we showed in our last Ascent, to wit, humility and
meekness of spirit.

It is most certain, that great felicities, are so ticklish, that it is much
more easy, to live on the dunghill of Job, with patience, than in the
management of great Kingdoms with moderation. He therefore is to be accounted
truly great, Bernard. in Ep. ad. Eugenium.
as holy Bernard tells us, upon whom, felicitas si arrisit non irrisit,
happiness has smiled upon, and not cozened; nay, the Pagan Poet could preach
as much as that too, Marshal.
when he cries out, Ardua quippe res est opibus non tradere mares, It is a most
difficult thing for a man, not to betray his manners, to a great fortune.

It is doubtless the heavyest burden, to bear a great fortune well; we see how
apt the spirits of this Age are, to have their eyes dazzled with a little
sparkle of felicity; their skins are presently puffed up, and their souls
drencht in some most dismal pride, and a sad deluge of tyrannies and
dissolutions: We have seen our Mosaical spirits of another temper, each of
them, like another Abdolomin, who did pass from a Garden, into a Royal Palace,
Abodolomin.
and did handle the Scepter, with the same humility of heart, without either
prejudice to the people, or his own authority, as one would do a spade.

This is a virtue indeed, which is but very rarely seen here in earth, but is
admired in heaven it self; and it is a virtue doubtless which comes
immediately from the treasures of God Almighty; and of this, we have seen our
incomparable pair of Princes, giving us such an example, as if they were
ordained by God, to declare how high Christian perfection may ascend, by
planting of a glorious humiliy, upon the Diamonds, Pearls, Emralds, Rubies,
and Saphyrs, of Regal Crowns, and leading in Courts, the lives of Hermits, so
commanding greatness, and humility, which seldom will admit of any aliance at
all, mutually to kiss, and sweetly embrace one another. Have we not seen, I
say, all this sufficiently made out already, and that it is, not possible to
find more personal perfectious heapt up in mortal men? Have we not seen, I say,
this heavenly pair of most incomparable Persons, only Parallel to one
another, like another Castor and Pollux, those happy Constellations of
Mariners, from the very first Port of their Cradels, to the secure Harbor of a
good old age, sailing through a boundless Sea of Bliss, amidst the storms of
State and War, making all fair weather about them, and encouraging us to steer
our course after them, if we can?

Nay yet, have we not seen them, what is more strange, like two Phenixes
together, yet incorporated, or twined at least, like the Gemini in the Zodiac,
fly through a whole heaven of happiness upon earth? Then, whither are we going
now? What, are there any Ascents yet higher, for our Mosaic spirits to mount?
Surely not, as to their personal perfections aforesaid, we have said all we
can, and seen as much as we can know, unless we could take Post upon a Pegasus,
and piercing the Empyrean, hire a Convoy of Angels, to carry us into the
beatifical Heaven, to see the Crowns, and Glories, that they enjoy. Whither is
it then, that this Transcendental Ascent will lead us? why surely, to the
sublime consideration of those Divine and Supereminent indulgencies,
privileges, and prerogatives, that they enjoyed, by the extraordinary favor
of Heaven, toward their later ends, which are no less remarkable certainly,
than all their former painful Ascents, before could be; good Princes, like the
Sun, shining always forth most gloriously, at their going down.

Now, the first great favor, and principal prerogative, that we find our first
great Moses, had indulged to him by Almighty God, was this of our present
Ascent, to have the nomination of his Successor, in so great a Charge: For
though the Lord was pleased to elect, yet he commanded his servant Moses to
nominate, Joshua to the people, for their Captain, and his Successor.

Now has not the great goodness of Heaven been graciously pleased to indulge
the very same privilege, and prerogative, to his late most Serene Highness,
of glorious memory, our second Moses? First for the nomination of this happy
Prince, that is at present placed over us, it is evident, was from his
Highness himself, though the election of him, as indubitably was from God, as
that of the great Joshua before him, was: and this liberty, or supreme power of
nomination, was given to his late most Serene Highness, by Almighty God, not
only by a private revelation, as the other was; but publicly declared and
enacted too, by the Representatives of the people assembled in Parliament, who
are presumed to carry Vocem Dei, the voice of God along with them likewise: So
that on our parts there remained nothing to be done, but to show our dutiful
reception, and active obedience, and to hearken, as the Text of our Ascent
expresses it, to all that he shall say. Sic sui semper erit Arbitrii jubere,
sufficient and nobis sola obsequii gloria, So he shall have the honor still to
command, and we will satisfy our selves with the glory of obeying.

But now, whether this way of a Divine election to a Monarchy, be better, and
of a more ancient right, than to come to it by an Hereditary succession, as to
a private Patrimony (as his Highness himself expresses it) though for my
part, I think there is no question; yet I find it to be a dispute, De trop
longue haleine, as the Frenchman speaks, of too long breath, and difficult
debate, for our present Parallel; So I shall refer it till another occasion,
and desire the Reader in the mean time, to accept of his late most Serene
Highness his own excellent words (in the Speech before cited) for a full
decision of the Controversy.

For if you had upon the old Government offered to me this one, this one thing,
I speak, as thus advised, and before God, as having been to this day of this
opinion, and this has been my constant Judgment, well known to many that hear
me speak, if this one thing had been inserted, that one thing, that this
Government should have been, and placed in my Family Hereditary, I would have
rejected it, and I could have done no other, according to my present Conscience
and Light; I will tell you my reason, though I cannot tell what God will do
with Me, not You, nor the Nation, for throwing away precious opportunities
committed to U S.

This has been my Principle, and I liked it when this Government came first to
be proposed to me, That it put Us off that Hereditary way, well looking, that
as God had declared what GOVERNMENT he had delivered over to the Jews, and
placed it upon such persons as had been instrumental for the Conduct and
Deliverance of his People; And considering that promise in Isaiah, That God
would give Rulers as at the first, and Judges as at the beginning, I did not
know, but that God might begin, and though at present with a most unworthy
Person, yet as to the future, it might be after this manner, and I thought this
might usher it in. I am speaking as to my Judgment, against making it
Hereditary, to have men chosen for their Love to God, and to Truth, and
Justice, and not to have it Hereditary; for as it is in Ecclesiastes, Who
knows whether he may beget a Fool or Wise: honest or not, what ever they be
must come in upon that account, because the Government is made a Patrimony.

Thus we see, how his most Serene Highness has put it clearly out of question,
that an ordinary fair Election of a Prince, is much better like to prove, than
any casual hereditary succession: much more then must an extraordinary, and
Divine Election, as ours has been, be more acceptable to God and man, and prove
to be more prosperous to the People: But most especially when the whole World,
is satisfied in the Divine endowments of the Person Elected, as we have been
all, in the behalf of this most gracious Prince, our present Lord Protector,
whom his Mosaical Highness, has been pleased to nominate, and bequeath to us,
for his Successor; and of whom we can conclude no otherwise, than what the
Spirit of God has done concerning Joshua; Deuteronomy. 34.9
That he is full of the Spirit of Wisdom, for our second Moses has laid his
happy hands upon him, so the whole Nation shall hearken unto him, and he shall
do as the Lord commanded our second Moses: as we shall see more amply made out,
in the following Ascents, and Parallels.

The second Transcendental Ascent.
MOses was permitted, and commanded by God, to nominate one for his Successor,
that had a very near relation to him, his own household Servant, his Minister,
or Menial Attendant in his Family; for so was Joshua, as we find in several
places of holy Scripture: Number. 11.28.
as first in the Book of Numbers: And Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of
Moses, one of his young men, answered and said, etc. Then, Josh. 1.1.
It came to pass that the Lord spoke unto Joshua the son of Nun, Moses
Minister, saying, etc.

The Parallel.
We do not find in any part of Holy Writ, that the great Patriarch Moses, had
any son capable of this great Charge, to succeed him, in the Government of Gods
people: There is indeed, mention of the Circumcision of one, but never any
thing more spoken of him; So it is to be presumed, that either he had none
living, or at least, as we said before, not capable of so great a Charge.

God Almighty in the mean time, brings this high favor and prerogative, as
near to him, as possibly might be, next to the nomination of a son, which (as
it seems) by humane collection, then could not be.

In the mean time, it may be worth our while, to sit and consider the
Transcendency of Divine Favor, and Privilege, that our great Protector, and
second Moses, had in this particular, above his Prototype the first; whilst he
has been, as we have seen, permitted, and directed, by God, to nominate his own
son; nay, his Eldest son to succeed him in the Sovereign Charge, the other
being commanded to choose, but his Menial Servant, and Minister, and that was a
Divine favor too. Herein, I say, our second Moses has out stripped his pattern;
and our Parallel here must overbalance the Ascent it self, For so much as a
son, and an Eldest son, ought to be above a Servant, in the respect, and
reputation, of any Father of a Family, so much more of favor, and indulgency
extraordinary, found our glorious Protector, and second Moses, from the hands
of God, than that great Patriarch himself, his first dear Favorite, the former
Moses did.

O stupendous transcendencies of Divine love! O happy Privileges of a Prince,
and Prerogatives unexpressible! O Sovereign Favors of Heaven, undeniable!
What man living is there now upon the face of the Earth, that can dispute,
whether it be not a most sublime instance of the Almighties affections, to any
Fathers, it being granted (which I hope will not be denied) that he is the
Sovereign Mover, and Architect of our lives and fortunes; when he is pleased to
propagate their greatness, and glories to their children? it being doubtless
the greatest temporal dispensation, that men of honor can be capable of upon
Earth, to have a flourishing Posterity given them by God, which may make them
eternally to live in the memory of men, by those most lively images of their
virtues.

It has been, we know, observed by the virtuous in all Ages, that those Princes
and great Persons, that have lived any way sordidly, or viciously, fatting
themselves with the blood and sweat of the poor, or have established any
Tyrannies in the World, have neither been fruitful, nor fortunate, in their
Posterites: and as Nature has ever showed it self to be scanty in the
propagation of beasts of prey, as Wolves and other creatures, designed only
for spoil, and no other use, which would otherwise soon bring the earth into
desolation: So Almighty God, by a secret economy of his Divine Providence,
permits not the Princes, or Potentates, who have made themselves disturbers
of the Public peace, and infringers of Laws, both Divine and Humane, (whereof
they ought to be Protectors) should make the brutishness of their savage
souls, to survive them in their Posterities.

Now, not to go far from home for an example, nor yet much distant from the
present Age; I shall produce for an instance, of this great truth, a late
Prince of our own, that was Henry the Eighth, who whilst he lived, made all
Laws his slaves, and his passions his Masters, as unquestionable a Tyrant, as
ever breathed, who left three children, that all successively sat in the
Throne after him, yet none of them had the power to propagate any issue to
perpetuate him, nor yet so much as to erect a Tomb for him; and he can to this
day, boast of no other Monument to record his memory to the World, but the same
which he left behind him, Erostratus.
who did make his ambitious brag of the burning of Diana's Temple: and which is
most to our present purpose, though hinted before, again to be noted; after his
death, as if the Lord would explicate his own indignation, and with his
dreadful hand had, written upon the walls of his Palace, Mane, Thekel, Pharez,
as his Divine Judgment against him, and all his posterity; all his then
hopeful and very glorious stem, and branches, were soon withered away or cut
off, without any issue at all, and the Crown and Scepter was so, quickly
translated to another Name and Nation, quite contrary to the Tyrants
intentions, and the projects both of his will, and Statute.

Then what has been the Catastrophe, or sad issue of that Family too, for
treading in his most unfortunate footsteps, we of this Age, have fully seen;
for no one of them, that I know of yet, has died a natural death, and the last
prince we had of that Line, lost his whole head-ship of the Church, with his
Prerogative and Sovereignty over Laws, so much desired and contended for, in
those days, upon a pitiful Scaffold, erected before the Porch of that Palace,
where his impious Predecessor, that Henry the Eighth, the first of all Kings
inhabited, and his body by a strange providence, without any forefight or
contrivance of man at all, was carried to Windsor, and there deposited in the
same Vault with him. Then look upon his disastrous issue, and we shall find,
his whole posterity too, has been so exterminated here, that there is not so
much as the print of a foot-step of them left to be seen amongst us.

This one instance, I say, that we have started, so near our own doors, though
it might serve for all; for as the judicious Spaniard tells us, En los casos
raros, Anton. Perez.
uno solo exemplo haze experiencia, In such rare occasions, one example is
enough to prescribe, and to make experience: and the acute Philip de Commines,
Phil. de Com.
observes, That the example of one sole accident, is enough sometimes to make
men wise: yet I could allege a thousand more to this purpose, if the necessity
of our main business would permit: but I must hasten.

Now, on the contrary, observe how Ecclesiasticus prophesies, Eccles. 44.11.
With the seed of the righteous shall continually remain a good inheritance,
and their children are within the Covenant: Ver. 12.
Their seed stands fast, and their children for their sakes: Ver. 13.
Their seed shall remain for ever, and their glory shall not be blotted out.
And we have as clearly found in our experience, that all those Princes, and
great Persons, who have arranged themselves, within the lists of Sanctity,
Modesty, and the observation of Laws, the Lord has as it were, immortalized
their bloods, in their happy Posterities, as we do now see it made good, in
this our precious Parallel, and might in many thousands more of Royal,
Princely, Noble, and Illustrious Families besides, which I have as little
liberty at present to produce: so shall refer to every Readers more particular
observation: whilst I that write, and every temperate person, I hope, that
reads, shall rest abundantly satisfied in the point, that it was a most
irrefragable favor of God Almighties toward us, as well as his late most
Serene Highness, to give him leave, and to direct him, to establish his Throne
in the best of his own blood, and to leave a Prince behind him, to govern us,
that he was certain, was so much of his own heavenly make, that he can never
degenerate from those his high, holy, and most heroic virtues; as we may see
more at large, in the succeeding Ascent, and Parallel.

The third Transcendental Ascent.
MOses drawing nearer toward his death, had the honor and favor, Number. 27.18.
to be commanded by the Almighty, to lay his holy hands upon his Successor
Joshua, and to bless him, and to put some of his honor upon him, Verse. 20.
that all the Congregation of the children of Israel, might be obedient, etc.

Then the Lord commanded Moses to charge Joshua, and encourage him, assuring
him, that he should go over before his people, and that he should cause them to
inherit the Land which he should see.

And last of all, when Moses was upon the point of his departure, Deuteronomy. 3.27*

Verse. 28.


the Lord himself was pleased to condescend, to give to Joshua this particular
Charge, before Moses his own face. Be strong, and of a good courage, for thou
shall bring the children of Israel into the Land which I swear unto them, and I
will be with thee: Now all this could not but be a most extraordinary comfort,
Deuteronomy. 31 23.
as it was a high transcendent prerogative, to the departing Patriarch.

The Parallel.
That this was a most Princely, and Supreme privilege, which our first Moses
by the favor of Heaven, enjoyed; to lay his hands upon, bless, and put some
of his own spirit upon his Successor, in his life time; I presume, none will
dispute, and as little can any man, I hope, doubt, but that our second Moses
too, was indulged by God a Parallel prerogative, and did the very like, to his
most gracious Son and successor: knowing him, as we all have done, to have ever
been, a most prudent, pious, and indulgent Father of his Country, and so by
consequence, he must have been much more of his own Family, and most of all of
his Eldest Son, who was not only to be the Head of that, but of three
Kingdoms, and other vast Dominions, and Territories, thereto belonging.

Nay, that he did actually part with some of his honor, to put upon him, in
his own life time, was made notoriously evident, in his resignation of that
high Title of Chancellor of the Universitie of Oxford; I say again, high Title,
and take it to be the highest, next to the Sovereignty it self* that England
can afford. Who can imagine it less, that knows that University to be one of
the four Cardinal, most Ancient, Famous, and Flourishing Universities, in the
Christian World? that has been ever acknowledged by Foreigners themselves, to
have been the happy Seminary of the greatest spirits, which have held
predominance in all manner of Learning, and Sciences, and was ever looked upon,
as the glorious Altar of the Sun, from whence light was wont to be borrowed, to
illuminate all other lamps. To be the Head, I say, of this most glorious Body,
who can deny to be equal to so great and good a Father to give, and to so
hopeful and gracious a Son, as was this our present Protector, and second
Joshua to receive?

Then as to the other part of this grand Mosaic Prerogative, held forth in our
Ascent, less doubt sure must be made, that his late Highness was most
thoroughly assured of the great worth, and due deserving of his Successor, as
also of his great felicity and prosperous successes, in all his future
undertakings.

First, by reason of his Highness his great illuminations, and particular
revelations, that he had from God himself, (as we have sufficiently seen in all
his actions before) which certainly could not fail him now, in so important an
affair as this, that so nearly did concern, the happiness of so great a
people.

Secondly, he that had so clear and thorough an inspection, into the aptitude
of all his Officers, that he employed, as we have likewise seen in those
Ascents, that treat of his Election of them, how could he choose but have an
insight extraordinary into the due merit, and high deservings of his own Son?
None sure can imagine his inspired wisdom to be capable of such a defect, that
are not themselves like those old Monsters, called the Lamiae, which were
always blind within their own doors, and could only make use of their eyes,
when they were from home.

Then lastly, how could he be unknowing to those perfections, which all the
Nation has been so satisfied in, for these many years? that he has been with
reverence looked upon, and admired, as an Angel descending from Heaven, and
vouchsafing to let himself be inchased, within a humane body: a Prince of so
incomparable sweet and excellent disposition, that he may be worthy indeed to
be called the dear delight of God, as well as man. And that this was the
judgment of all the World concerning him, I shall instance in one person for
all, who was not long since a member of that most beautiful body, before
mentioned, I mean that most famous, and flourishing University of Oxford; who
drew an anagrammatical Prophecy out of Virgil, foretelling the glorious Fate
of this happy Prince, now near two years since, and presently upon his
acceptance, of that most unvalueable honor, to be their Chancellor; which
because has proved so exactly true a Prophecy, I have thought fit to publish
my friends paper, to the perusal of all the World, and insert it here,
presuming that neither he, nor any wise man else, will be offended at it.

Celsissimo ac Gratiosissimo Domino, Domino Richardo Cromvel, Seremissimi
Domini Protectoris Filio Primogenito, and Celeberrimae Academiae Oxoniensis
Cancellario Honoratissimo. Anagramma Genethliacum, and EPITHALAMIUM.
O Richard Cromvel, magnus es, and Majori nubis.
Chara Dei soboles, Magnum Jovis Incrementum.
SIccine Virgilius, credendus Numine plenus?
Quis furor inflatus, sacrum rapit usque Prophetam?
Vt Nobis tua clara, vetus, Natalia, Vates
Praedicat, simul and sponsam? Quae denique Major
Cum siet, atque etiam (vere) tu Magnus habendus,
Quid tua Progenies fuerit, nisi Maxima, Princeps?
O Fortunatos (Nata ista Prole) Britannos!
Noster Oliverus Magnus, Sic ut usque virere
Possit, and aeternos, aetate, requireret annos!
Hoc sceptrum semper quatiat, Cromvellia Proles;
Vivat, and Imperium teneat, Primo vel ab Ortu
Solis ad Hesperium Cubile, sic Anglia vivat.
Sic vovet, optat, and Prohpetizat Amplitudinis vestrae Servus Observantissimus.

To the most Illustrious Lady, of the Thrice Noble Lord, My Lord RICHARD
CROMWELL. An Explication of the Virgilian ANAGRAMM.
Madam,
THough Virgil ben't much your acquaintance, yet
You must confess, you owe him no small debt,
Thus to foretell your Princely Husbands Birth,
His Fortunes, and his Honors upon Earth;
Your Name and Marriage too; all which does lie,
Wrapped up, we see, in's Antique Prophecy.
He calls your Lord, Great Increment of Jove;
What then must the issue be of your chaste love?
He Is great we know, and you a Major see,
How can your Children less than Maxims be?
On those fair Pillars, our Protector stands,
You give him Rulers, over Seas and Lands.
Your swelling Womb's, the Cushion, where he leanes,
And finds himself eternal by your means.
So may your Olive branches flourish still,
About Great Oliver, and his Thrones up fill.
So prays, and Prophesies, Madam, Your Ladyships most obedient Servant.

Now, for his most Serene Highness his happy Birth, there is none sure will
deny it, to be great as his, that pretended his extraction from mighty Jupiter,
and we may more truly say of him, than could be fancied of those old Heroes,
that Deus est in utroque Parente, God was apparently in each Parent.

Then for his blessed Marriage, the next thing pointed at in the Prophecy,
that can be comparable to nothing more, than to the sacrifice of Juno, where
the gall of the offering was never presented. There was so faithful and pure a
love, observed to be on both sides, that the Noble spirit of the one* lived
wholly in the other; and as the Flowers of the Sun* perpetually followed the
motions of each others heart, so they still continue to court each the others
virtuous dispositions.

All this, I say, is the Anagrammatical Prediction of Virgil himself; and as to
those sublime Honors, and Fortunes, which his Highness has since arrived at,
all that proves to be my friends proper Prophecy. Now, whether Virgil, or my
Friend, were the greater Prophet, let the World judge, whilst I shall satisfy
my self, with that great felicity, which our second Moses took in the
contemplation of his most gracious Sons, and Successors perfections: upon whom
methinks, I see him in his old Princely, and Fatherly Majesty, now looking down
from the top of the holy Mount, encouraging his most excellent son, to climb up
after him, and keep the track of his Ascents. Nay, methinks, I hear God
Almighty himself, speaking to his now most Serene Highness, Josh. 1.5.
as he did before to Joshua. There shall not any man be able to stand before
thee, all the days of thy life, as I was with my second Moses, so I will be
with thee, I will not fail thee nor forsake thee; V. 6.
Be strong and of a good courage, for unto this people shall thou divide for an
Inheritance, the Land which I swear unto their Fathers to give them: only be
thou strong, and very courageous, V. 7.
that thou may observe to do according to the Law, which Moses my Servant
commanded thee; turn not from it, either to the right hand, V. 8.
nor to the left, that thou may prosper whithersoever thou go. This Book
of the Law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou shall meditate therein,
day and night; that thou may observe to do according to all that is written
therein; for then thou shall make thy way prosperous, V. 9.
and then thou shall have good success. Have not I commanded thee? Be strong,
and of a good courage, be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed; for the Lord
thy God is with thee whithersoever thou go.

Thus was the Lord pleased to discourse with Joshua: And now methinks, I hear
all the people of this Land crying out, to our most Serene Prince, and
Protector, just as the children of Israel did there, likewise in the same
Chapter, V. 16.
to their General Joshua. All that thou command us, we will do, and
whithersoever thou sendest us, we will go, according as we hearkened unto Moses,
in all things, so will we hearken unto thee; V. 17.
only the Lord thy God be with thee, as he was with Moses. Whosoever he be
that does rebel against thy commandment, and will not hearken unto thy words,
in all that thou command him, he shall be put to death; V. 18.
only be strong, and of a good courage.

With these Divine speeches, made by God himself, and his instruments the
people, upon the inauguration of Joshua, methinks I hear our present Lord
Protector, and Princely second Joshua, treated at this very day.

What Divine documents his sacred Highness has received from the Almighty, are
only yet betwixt the Lord, and his own most serene soul but what the people
say every where, we are all ear-witnesses sufficient: the people, I say, who
have ever looked upon him, as the dearest delight of their eyes: and as the
Orator said of his Emperor, Constantine, Plin. in Paneg. Constant.
Magis magisque visus expetitur, and (novum dictu) vel praesens disideratur:
The more he is seen, the more he is looked after; and, which is more strange,
though he be still present with them, yet he is always most greedily desired,
and longed for by them: Insomuch, that I dare boldly say, had the election of a
Prince been put to the Popular choice, and all the prime spirits of the Nation,
had been culled out, to pretend for the Protectorat, his most serene Highness,
that now is, would have been the person, that they must have pitched upon by
Universal vote, and carried to the Throne, where he is seated now, with General
joy, and acclamations. A Prince he is, without flattery be it spoken (for he is
known to be so) of most incomparable great piety, and most worthy parts: A
Prince, I say, wise as Apollo, beautiful as an Amazon, and valiant as Achilles;
and having over and above all that, the sacred spirit of wisdom, courage, and
devotion, of a Joshua, and coming to the Helm of this Government, as we have
seen, by Divine institution, as he did into that; Who can at all doubt, but at
the sight of such supreme, excellent, and most celestial qualities, Walls and
Cities impregnable, shall fall before him too; Giants shall wax pale, and be
discomfited; Rivers shall retire back, the Sun it self shall stand still, and
as many Kings shall undergo the yoke? And to this, all England shall say, Amen.

The fourth Transcendental Ascent.
MOses was by the great favor of the Almighty, permitted to see the promised
Land: First the Lord commands him Thus; Get thee inup to the top of Pisgah, and
lift up thine eyes Westward, and Northward, Deuteronomy. 3.27.
and Southward, and Eastward, and behold it with thine eyes. Then when the time
of his departure came, we find, that Moses did accordingly go up from the plain
of Moab, unto the Mountain of Nebo, to the top of Pisgah, Deuteronomy. 34.1.
that is over against Jericho, and the Lord showed him all the Land of Gilead
unto Dan, and all Napthali, and the Land of Ephraim, and Manasseth, and all the
Land of Judah, unto the utmost Sea, and the South, and the plain of the Valley
of Jericho, Ver. 2.
the City of Palm Trees unto Zoar: and the Lord said unto him, This is the Land
which I swear unto Abraham, Verse. 3.
and unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, saying; Verse. 4.
I will give it unto thy seed: I have caused thee to see it with thine eyes,
but thou shall not go over thither.

The Parallel.
There is no man will deny sure, that this was a very transcendent favor and
privilege, indulged by God, to this blessed Patriarch. And has our second
Moses received less favorable kindness from the hands of the Almighty? Nay,
has he not in this too, infinitely outgone the prerogatives of his Pattern, and
great Prototype? Yes certainly, as far, as fruition can exceed an expectation,
or a possession surpasses a bare prospect only; so much more of privilege
and favor, did our second Moses find, from the goodnsse of his Heavenly
Father, and receive, beyond the former: For the sacred Text most plainly
affirms, that the great Patriarch Moses, was permitted only to see the Land
of Promise, and take his bare view, of that beloved Country of sweet Canaan, or
Palestine, then flowing with Milk and Honey, and toward which, he had been
above forty years a marching in the Head of his most mutinous, and troublesome
Army, yet not suffered to enter.

But has not our sacred second Moses made his entry? Has he not only entered,
but enjoyed for diverse years his land of Promise? Has he not driven out all his
enemies before him, and made so happy an end of his great Works, as to have
been well and securely settled, in the quiet possession and government of his
acquired Dominions, and Territories? Nay how much more advantageous was this
favor to his late Highness, in respect of his Successor too, than that which
his Archetype, the former Moses had. His late most Serene Highness, we see,
has left his Princely Son to succeed him in a clear estate, and free from any
incombrances, either at home, or abroad: and indeed those few foreign broyls,
that we are engaged in, may be rather called his most Serene Highness his
sports, and pretty divertisements, than any matters of troublesome business,
and must prove to be more profitable than dangerous: Whereas the former good
Moses, left his succeeding Joshua, not a foot of land, but what he was to fight
for, and could make him indeed heir apparent to nothing, but his sword: and
leave him, as it were, a mere Soldier of Fortune, to cut his way out to his
expectations. Though this was very true, that the Divine Patriarch knew full
well, that the Lords promises, and blessed providence would be to him a most
secure inheritance; yet none can deny, that this favor of Heaven must in any
indifferent esteem, fall short of that, which was vouchsafed to our second
Moses, as much as an estate that is litigious, and imbrangled with law suits,
is to be undervalued to a clear one, that is in quiet and undisturbed
possession; or the miserable condition of war, is worse than the most happy
halcyon state of Peace. Are not these Transcendencies indeed? so strange and
copious privileges and prerogatives, that the great goodness of Heaven, never
indulged more to any man, than it has done to our second Moses, in which he has
so far outgone his very Original Master, that grand dear Favorite of Heaven
himself, our first Moses; that we may securely say, that Moses himself has
fallen as short of his late Highness, our unparalled Protector, in some of
these divine indulgencies, as he our glorious second could fail in perfection
of Parallel to the blessed first, in any of the former difficult Ascents. But I
cannot now insist upon them, for I do find that our discourses have swelled
already to too big a volumn, so it is time to withdraw into the Tabernacle of
Repose, and there set up, if we can, our rests with theirs.

The fifth Transcendental Ascent.
MOses is now mounting of his last living Ascent, for the Holy Text tells us,
Deuteronomy. 34.1.
that he went up from the Plains of Moab, into the Mountain of Nebo, to the top
of Pisgah, over against Jericho, etc. And after he had satisfied himself with
the fair prospect of the Promised Land, he willingly steps into his so much
longed for Tabernacle of Repose. Ver. 5.
So Moses, the servant of the Lord, died there in the land of Moab, Ver. 6.
according to the word of the Lord. And he buried him in a Valley in the land of
Moab, over against Beth-peor, Ver. 7.
but no man knows of his Sepulcher unto this day. And Moses was a hundred and
twenty years old, Ver. 8.
when he died, his eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated. And the
children of Israel wept for Moses, in the Plains of Moab thirty days: so the
days of weeping and mourning for Moses were ended.

The Parallel.
Thus we see, how our pious Patriarch has no sooner taken order for a
sufficient successor for himself, and a convenient Captain for his people, but
he does most readily dispose himself for his last great journey, and Ascent,
and most cheerfully marches up the fatal Mount, whilst every step that he
took, drew blood from the hearts of his poor, disconsolate, and most afflicted
people, who followed him with their eyes, where they could not with their
persons; nay made their tears to reach him, when the sight of their eyes had
lost him, forcing those floods, contrary to the course of other waters, to run
violently upwards, and with an ascending stream, bedew every footstep of their
precious deer Prince, and beloved Patriarch. All the happy joys, and thorough
contentments that they did receive from their brave new Master, and Captain
General Joshua, could never make them forget their old dear deliverer, and
conductor, Moses. So true it is, what is observed by all Astrologers, that
every Planet which has its exaltation in one Sign, finds ever its counterpoises
in another; nor can there be any good success in humane affairs, on one side,
but it is presently paid on the other, with some discontent. Just thus, and no
otherwise, did our great Protector, and gracious second Moses depart from us:
who receiving from the Almighty the summons of his approaching death, whilst
he was in the plains of Moab, in his House or Palace of Country retirement, as
speedily and cheerfully as the former Moses did; prepared himself to march up
to this Metropolitical Mount, even to the top of Pisgah, his own Palace here:
where after he had appointed his happy Successor, and taken careful order about
the affairs of these Kingdoms, as well as of his own Family, and taken leave of
all his Friends and Familiars, and dearly beloved Army, her rendered up his soul
to his God and Savior, as sweetly as little children use to fall asleep, upon
the breasts of their Nurses; leaving us in the mean time drowned in the deluges
of our own tears: and the sorrow was so general, that one would have thought
that every house was bearing of their first born to burial, nothing was to be
seen amongst us but tears, nor heard but groans, yellings, horrors,
astonishments, and representations of death. And whereas the people of Israel,
mourned but thirty days, for their Moses, we have lamented the loss of ours,
more than thrice thirty days, and yet are not wearied with weeping, but dolori
etiam fesso, stimulos addidimus novos, we have set spurs to our tired sorrows,
and upon any occasion of his mentioning, those floodgates are so continually
open, that they have almost made an inundation upon us, and we may still see
him sailing through all the good peoples eyes of the Nation, and floating upon
the salt waters, that himself has made. For my part, I must profess that
whilst my Pen is passing over this story, I cannot choose, but commix the
sorrowful water of my eyes, with my mourning ink, so may be pardoned, I hope,
if at present I write any thing disorderly, as indeed I have done all, but
cannot doubt that the candor of those spirits, which are touched with the like
passion, will out of pity pardon mine. Nay, indeed, what English man is there
that would not be out of love with life, since he has pleased to embrace death,
satis enim vixit, qui vitan cum Principe tanto explevit, Tatitus.
for has he not lived long enough in this world, that can be so happy, as to
march out of it, in the company of such a Prince? But I must confess I am to
blame, nor can I but rebuke my self, as it is fit I should, before I can
reprove others for this unruly, unchristian, and, indeed, unreasonable passion.

For first it is a most manifest repining both against the hand of God, and
him, for the Lord has now placed him in his happy Tabernacle of Repose, and
absolved his immortal soul from all the toilsome fetters and ligaments of
flesh, as the divine Plato, though a Pagan, well expresses it, when he says,
Pater misericors illis mortalia vincula faciebat, God herein, says he, Plato
in Timao.
has most mercifully provided, like an indulgent father; for seeing that the
soul of man was like to be shut up within the body, as in a prison, he has in
his great mercy, made its chains to be mortal. How much more, then, ought we
Christians to apprehend the happiness of death, that know that very day, which
we account the last of our lives, is to be the first of our felicities; nay it
is to be the birth of another eternal day, which must draw aside the Curtain,
and discover to us the greatest secrets of nature: it is the day that must
produce us, to those great and divine lights, which we behold here only, with
the eye of faith, in this vale of tears and miseries. It is the happy day,
which must put us between the arms of the Heavenly Father, after a course of an
unquiet life, turmoiled still with storms, and so many disturbances.

Who is so sottish as not to see, that we are at this present, in the world, as
in the very belly or womb of nature, like little infants destitute both of air
and light, and can only look toward, and contemplate the happiness of
blessed souls separate from bodies. What pleasure must it be then to go out of
a dungeon so dark, a prison so straight, from such infinite ordures and
miseries, to enter into those spacious Temples of eternal splendors, where our
being never shall have end, our knowledge shall admit no ignorance, nor love or
joy suffer a change.

The old Poets themselves did always fancy, Juven. sat
that there was some happiness extraordinary in death, which the gods, as they
said, did cunningly conceal from us, that men should endure to live; they are
the very words of one of them, Mortalesque, dii caelant, ut vivere durent,
felix esse mori. Other Heathens there were, that by meet force of Philosophy
could tell us, that the body was to the soul, Lucan.
as the shadow of the earth in the eclipse of the Moon: and do we not see how
this bright Planet, which illuminates our nights, seems to be very unwillingly
captivated in the dark, but labors and sparkles with striving, to get aloft,
and free it self from those dull earthly impressions: So did his late Highness
his most illustrious and faithful soul, most readily untwine and disingage it
self from his body; well knowing it had a much better house, in the inheritance
of God, which is not a manufacture of men, but a monument of the hands of the
great Artificer, where he will be much more delighted, to see the Sun, Moon,
and stars, and all the Elements under his feet, than he could possibly be here,
with beholding them over his head. In short, who would think it much (I am sure
his Highness did not) to give up the life of a Pismire (for the greatest
Prince's upon earth, is no better) in exchange for immortality? he had always,
we know, like a good Christian, death in his desire, and life in patience.

This truly I should presume sufficient to satisfy and comfort any reasonable
Christians, for the loss (as we call it) of his late Highness:

But setting Christianity aside, methinks it should be satisfactory enough for
common men, to consider, that as the Poet tells us, Lex est, non paena perire,
Ovid. Senec. natural quaest. l. 2.
and what the Philosopher assures us; that mors naturae lex est, mors tributum
officiumque est mortalium, death is a law of nature, no punishment, it is the
very tribute, and duty of mortals: And what Plutarch, not more elegantly, than
truly, concludes, Homines sicut poma, aut matura cadunt, Plut. in vita Pomp.
aut acerba ruunt, Men, like Apples, must either fall ripe, or be pulled down
green and sower.

Now I would fain know, what have we to complain of? Did not his Highness live
to a very fair, and good old age, to a true Mosaic maturity, For, as was said
before, if by Chronological Computation, our second Moses, his forty years,
were parallel to the fourscore of the former when he came into public
employment, then his threescore and upwards, when he came to dye, stands still
parallel with the others hundred and twenty: and as for their strength of body
and mind, none can affirm him to be less his parallel to the very last: For
his Highness eye was not dim, nor any of his natural force abated.

Thus his gracious God, and benign nature plentifully provided, for that great
and most incomparable person, that his most invincible spirit, should never
quail under any sensible decay of flesh.

What more of favor, I would fain know, could his most Serene Highness
receive from the bountiful hands of Heaven? Yet some spirits there are, so
disposed to quarrel with the Almighty, that they will not yet be satisfied in
the divine dispensation, but think, and say, (I pray God not impiously) that
the heavenly and eternal Father, should have permitted some more time of life
to a person so deserving it; but let them remember, that mors aequopede pulsat,
Senec. Tray. Senec, epist. 100. idem. epist. 67.
and that intervallis distinguimar, exitu aequamur, greatness nor goodness
neither can give any privilege from death, mors omnium par est, per quae venit
diversa sunt, id in quod desinit, unum est, death, though by several ways,
brings all to the same end. These considerations sure, though drawn from mere
Heathens, would be enough to satisfy any common understandings of men: but
these quarrelsome persons, that we speak of, sure are of opinion, that all
happiness is determined to this poor life; and are, I fear, very near akin to
those, whom Plato calls (...), Plato:
whose souls are so great lovers of their bodies, that they would tie
themselves to their flesh, as closoe as they could, and after death would, as
he prettily expresses it, still walk round about their bodies, to see if they
could find a passage into them again. How much is this pitiful humor of
Christians, below the divine Philosophy of Pagans themselves? Amongst whom we
find, that there were a certain people, who by positive laws, forbad any man of
fifty years of age, to make use of the Physician, saying, that it discovered
too much love of life: and yet some Christians we find at the age of fourscore,
who will not endure to hear a word of death: but of this sad sottish temper, we
know his Mosaical Highness was not, he never valued the putting off his life,
more than the shifting of his shirt, and when he received his citation from
Heaven, he as readily obeyed, as his Master Moses did, to ascend his fatal
Mount: I pray you then be quiet you cruel friends, and do not disturb his
honored dust, now sweetly resting in his Tabernacle of Repose; for if you
consider rightly, you are bound, as the Orator tells you, Plin. Paney
Non tam vitam illi ereptam, quam mortem donatam censere, not so much to think
him bereft of life, as to have been endowed with death, in a ripe old age, and
after the enjoyment of the fruits of all his labors.

Has not this most incomparable person, resembled truly the great Ark in the
deluge, which after it had borne the whole World in the bowels of it, amongst
so many storms, and fatal convulsions of nature, at length reposed it self, in
the Mountains of Armenia? So this most admirable Prince, after he had carried
in his heart, and entrals a spirit, great as the universe it self, amonst so
many tears, dolours, and cruel acerbities of contradictions, and had delivered
himself of that painful burden, that is, had brought forth our most happy and
established peace, he stopped upon Mount Nebo, and from thence went to take his
rest, in the Mountains of Sion.

Thus the Lord, like an indulgent Father of a Family, sends his servants to
bed, so soon as they have done their work: it being all the justice and reason
in the World, that they who rise betimes to serve him, and work hard all the
day for him, should go in as good time, to sleep with him.

Let us I beseech you therefore pass over this death, in the manner of holy
Scripture, which speaks but one word only of the death of so many great
personages. Let us never so much as talk of death in a subject so wholly
replenisht with immortality. O what a death is that, to be esteemed, to see
vice and sin trodden down under his feet, and Heaven all in Crowns over his
head, to see men in admiration, all the Angels in joy, and the arms of God
ready to receive him, and fully laden with recompenses for his great services.

Nay, that the Lord did purposely and expressly intend to make his Highness
his death appear to be a most signal reward and perfect victory to him, and
that he should carry off the spoils of life it self with more triumph, than
ever mortal did, is made manifest in that it pleased his divine Majesty to take
him to himself, upon that most memorable day, the third of September, the
greatest day of all his humane glories: that he was pleased to put an end to
his life, in this World, that very day that he had got such an immortality in
fame: to set a period to his labors that very day, that he had performed so
many Herculian ones, for the glory of his God, and his Countries good; and to
crown his days with so glorious a close, nay to give him a heavenly Crown,
that very day that he had gotten so many earthly ones, and laden his
Victorious Temples, with so many flourishing Laurels of eternal renown,

Then for the glorious burial of our second Moses, though we cannot hold up our
Parallel to the height of that honor, which the first had, to be conveyed to
his grave by God himself, and put into the earth by those Almighty hands, which
had made him out of it; yet we may say, that he was interred with as much
state, and carried to his mother earth, with as much solemnity, and
magnificence, as ever person in the World was; nay his very Effigies was
honored, with so great a reverence, as if some divinity had attended the Royal
procession.

And yet this is not all the glorious Sepulture that his Highness had, for
what the Orator said of his Prince, we may, mutato nomine, most aptly conclude
of him. Totum nec capiet Olivarium, brevis ista tumuli clausura, Britannum
nomen and pectus unumquodque nobile, vivum stabit defuncto monumentum: vivet
ipse suo letho superstes, multam aetatem feret etiam mortuus, gloriaeque plenus
deducetur ad Posteros, etc. The whole great Oliver cannot be contained, within
so scanty an enclosure, as is the vault that holds his body, the British Name
it self, and every noble breast of the Nation, shall stand a living Monument to
his memory.

Thus shall his Highness outlive his death, and grow great in glory, whilst he
is consuming in his grave, and be conveyed into the arms of posterity, with
everlasting acclamations. Good Princes, as well as Poets, find their honors to
swell from their last ashes, and like Phoenixes spring afresh, from their
funeral Piles, as we shall more at large make out, in our next, which is our
last Mosaical Ascent, and closing Parallel.

The sixth and last, Transcendental Ascent.
MOses built himself a Monument in the hearts of all his people, and left a
blessed Memorial behind him; and all this was attested, by the Spirit of God
himself, after his death, expressly assuring us, that there arose not a
Prophet since in Israel, Deuteronomy. 34.10.

Ver. 11. Ver. 12.


like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face: in all the signs and wonders
which the Lord sent him to do in the Land of Egypt, to Pharaoh, and all his
servants, and to all his Land, and in all that mighty hand, and in all that
great terror, which Moses showed in the sight of all Israel.

The Parallel.
Thus the Lord is pleased to make the memory of his Saints precious (in the
language of the Spirit) as sweet ointment poured forth; for we see here, how he
will make his dead servant Moses to ascend still in this World, by the
fragrancy of his memory: and indeed it is the last Ascent, that humane
perfection is capable of; to mount up, after a blessed death, to a happy and
honorable remembrance amongst men; a most particular grace and prerogative,
which the Divine goodness indulgeth to none, but to his most dear servants.

For some there are (as Ecclesiasticus not Apocryphally observes) which have no
memorial at all, Eccles. 44.9.
who are perished, as though they had never been, V. 10.
and are become, as though they had never been born, and their children after
them; but the righteousness of merciful men, has not been forgotten, etc,
Then again their bodies are buried in peace, but their name lives for
evermore; V. 14.
nay further, the people will tell of their wisdom, V. 15.
and the Congregation will show forth their praise.

Has not our most Serene second Moses, received this precious Transcendental
favor likewise, from the hands of his gracious God? has he not so filled the
minds and mouths of all the good people, of the Nation? that they have
nothing almost left to think, and speak on, but the memory of their late great
Protector? Insomuch, that we can compare this glorious Ascent, of his Highness
his happy death, to nothing so properly, as to the expiration of the Phoenix,
upon the Mountain of the Sun, in the sweet odours of his heroic virtues.

O what a memory has his Highness left us, of his unspotted piety, and
undefiled policy, amidst all the depravations and corruptions of the Word! O
what a memory has he left us, of his arriving to the highest honors, and
dignities, by flying them, and to have ennobled all his Charges, by the
integrity of his manners! O what a memory of a life lead truly according to
Christianity, that has always daunted the most audacious Libertins, and like a
Divine Mirror, killed Basiliskes, with the repercussion of their own poison! O
what a memory has he left us, of having governed a Church and State, so as if
it had been a clear copy of Heaven, and an eternal pattern of holy Policy:
holding himself always to those heavenly Poles of piety and justice, that
support the great policy of the Universe; esteeming them, as Democritus did,
the two divinities of Weals public, or great wheels, upon which, all the
affairs of the World were to move, so establishing himself still upon those
holy Columns; as the one, has given him immortality with God, so the other has
perpetuated his memorial amongst men!

O what a memory has he left behind him, of having borne upon his shoulders so
happily, all the interests and glories of this Nation, and the very movables
of the House of God! O what a memory has he left, of having so many times
trampled the heads of Dragons under his feet, and rendered himself the wonder
of the World! For who indeed is it, but must remember, how this brave,
valorous, and Princely person, who was to join the kingdom of his virtues, to
the force of his arms, was always of so vigorous and sublime a spirit, that
he measured still, all his most difficult undertakings, by the greatness of
his own courage, and like a Caesar indeed, but more like a true Moses, resolved
to break through all obstacles, to Crown his inspired purposes.

O what a memory of a blessed death, in a good old age, and full fruition of
all his labors! to have died, as in a field of Palms, and all planted with
his own hand, manured with his constant industry, and watered with his own
painful sweats!

O what a memory after death, to be acknowledged by all, to have built himself
before his death, a most stately Tomb, stufft with the precious Stones, of his
own most goodly and incomparable virtues! all which rightly now to represent,
would require a recapitulation of all our Parallels, and take up a bulk bigger,
than this small Volume is intended to bear. And it is enough I conceive to our
present purpose, to say, that this Nation, shall for ever preserve the memory
of him, as of a Prince, that has proved it possible, though miraculous, to hold
a conjunction of piety, with the Supreme power, and Sovereign authority,
sweetly tempered with goodness, things before thought utterly incompatible in
Kings; and truly I know not, what just quarrel any man can have against his
memory, but that he has showed a path to mortal men, and trod it by his own
example, to prove it possible, to arrive at so much perfection, and that may be
a fault indeed, and worthy of exception, in so debaucht an age, as this.

But let such unsavory breaths as these, blow how, and where they please,
whilst all the sweet ones of the Nation, shall preserve a fragrant memory of
their departed Protector, and second Moses; ever acknowledgeing their lives and
fortunes, nay the liberties of their very souls, to have been the pious
purchase of his Princely pains.

Some impious great ones, we know, have brought a period upon the greatest
Empires, ruined whole Kingdoms, their people, and themselves: have we not seen,
I say, to instance in one for all, the great Roman Empire it self, which had so
many times, caused its victorious Chariots, laden with Palms and Laurels, to
pass over the heads of the most puissant Monarchs of the World, that so often
have been shaken, and so many times established by concussion; at last, by the
interposition of one wicked unlucky Prince, or two, to be most irrecoverably
entombed. How much are we engaged then to the precious memory of our late Lord
Protector, who in the staggering conditions, that our tottering state at last,
and Kingdom before was in, has not only established but augmented the glories
of our Nation; eternizing himself more amongst us, and rendering himself more
honorable to all the World, by those his great actions, than all the Monarchs
of Egypt could do, in all their rich Marbles, Pyramids and Obelisks.

What memory now, I would fain know, has that great Egyptian King Cleopes left
behind him? who prostituted his own daughter, to raise himself a Pyramid for
buryal, and it was so enormously great, as we read, that the earth seemed too
weak to bear it, and Heaven not high enough, to free it self from its
importunities: yet that, doting with age, has now forgot its founder, and he
retains the stink of a rotten reputation, and is proclaimed by all the World,
but a sottish Prince for his pains.

Pompey on the other side, we see, after he had measured three parts of the
World, more by his triumphs than travails, comes to be killed at length, by the
hand of a half man, and the earth which seemed too scanty and narrow for his
conquests, was seen to fail him for a Tomb: and what memory have all his great
actions acquired to him, but of a proud, bloody, imperious Common-wealths-man,
that could endure no corrival in greatness.

We have seen again in story, a great Manlius, precipitated, from the Capitol,
which once he had so bravely defended, that the Theater of all his glories,
might be turned into the scaffold of his dismal punishment: like that insolent
Pharaoh, whom we have so often spoken of, which thought by the help of his
false gods, to command the waves of the Sea, and to walk upon stars: yet
perished in those his very attempts, and was buried in execration and horrors.
What which memory have any of these, or other wicked Princes left behind them,
better than Erostratus before spoken of? No, nothing can erect a true monument
of eternal memory, but pure Mosaic piety.

Our glorious second Moses full well saw, that Royal Crowns themselves, did
loose their luster on heads without brains, and brows without Majesty; and did
much less regard a King without piety, than a blind Cyclop, in an hollow cave.

Princes he knew there have been, and are still in the World, born like
Diadumenus, with a Diadem of honor in their foreheads, but most of them, we
see, appear like Josias, with a leprosy there too. O what a memory then must
his late Highness have left behind him? who is well known, to have been of the
Lords own election, and so much according to his own heart, that his servant
Moses and he, may stand in line Parallel; for just by such means as he, we have
seen how he came into the Government, became the God of Monarchs, ruined the
state of his enemies, opened stormy Seas, manured Wildernesses, and cleft
Rocks, with as small a thing as a twig: just as he, he has been laborious
amongst Shepherds, sanctified and exemplary in Cities, temperate in
principalities, a Companion of Angels in his retirements, and as it were a
Cabinet friend of God. Nay has our gracious second Moses showed less piety in
the service of the Omnipotent, less sweetness in government, less greatness
of spirit in all noble enterprises, less patience in difficulties, less
prudence in the direction of his affairs, or less dispatch in his expeditions?
And to conclude in short, has he been less blessed in all his battails, having
ever had, as it were, good hap, and victories, under his pay? and can we do
less than fall down, and worship divinity in all this, and give him the
immortality of our memories at least, in lieu of those eternal obligations,
that his most Serene Highness has laid upon us? Nay have we not seen him all
along, like his old Master Moses too, holding Heaven continually for object,
and all greatness of this World in contempt? How like him too, he has always
showed himself full of the spirit of all Prudence, Piety, and Prophecy it
self; and over and above all that, crowned with a most sovereign high humility?
How he like him too, but most especially toward his later end, had blotted one
almost all, that was man within him, by a conversation wholly celestial,
reducing his flesh into so much subjection, and exalting his spirit to such an
empire over it, that he might deserve the name of God too, as his old Master
Moses did, in resemblance of whom, he was so transformed, by the superabudance
of his most excellent, and celestial qualities? And has he not deserved an
immortality upon earth, for all this, as well as Crowns in Heaven? Yes sure,
for the most malicious enemy that his Highness has in the World, cannot deny
him to have dyed, under the shadow of so many Palms, of his own most noble and
heroical virtues, that they must spring still to all eternity, and grow green
with very age: his Laurels can never wither, nor his Bays be blasted; the
resplendent rays of his honor, can never loose their luster, nor the odours
of his holy conversation, ever fail of sending forth their precious perfumes.

Thus has his most Serene Highness, our second Moses, like the former,
perfectly changed his Sepulcher into a Cradle, and even drawn life out of his
Tomb. O what an immortallty is this, to survive eternally in the mouths of men!
But how much more happy an eternity is it, to have a perpetual life in Heaven,
enjoying the very knowledge, love, life and felicity of God himself?

Come hither then all you Princes, and mighty Persons of the earth, and make
have, to take out your copy and pattern here, betaking your selves betimes to
the glorious Temple of Honor, by that difficult one, of holy virtues, which
will prove themselves to you in the end, as they have done to our first and
second Moses here, like Elias his heavenly Chariot, all flaming with glory, to
render you, not only most illustrious and eternal here upon earth, but to
transport your brave, Princely, and most purified souls, above the height of
the Empirean Heaven.

Come hither, I pray you likewise, all you malecontented spirits of this
Nation, that have so long maliciously repind, and impiously opposed your
selves, against his late most Serene Highness his Mosaical Person, and
Government, and still do continue to malign his most precious memory, together
with the power of his most gracious Son and Successor, set over us now, by God
himself, and his own divine virtues: repair hither, I say, with all the
ingenuity of judgment, and Christian candor that you can, and I doubt not but
by such an impartial perusal of our happy Parallels, you will find all your
aversions and distasts alleviated, and that the loathings and nauseousness
which you had before, did spring from the disease of your own palats only, or
Malos gustos, as the Spaniard calls them, and from no other cause at all. If
that remedy will not serve your turns, to divert the violent stream, of your
old animosities, I would earnestly desire you again (if you are not yet stark
mad with judaising) to reflect with horror, upon Corah, Dathan, and Abiram,
and all his accomplices, with the rest of that mutinous Nation, the murmuring
Israelites, and by a serious soliloquy with your own souls, you may correct
that cursed spirit of contumacy, which has so long possessed you, Cicero.
Quorum facta immitamini eorum, exitus per horrescendo, by a due consideration
of the direful effects of their devilish doings, whose steps you still pursue.
And if all this prove but counsel cast away, let me humbly beseech you once
more, through the blessed bowels of our gracious Lord and Savior, to make your
earnest and often addresses to him, and holding some such divine discourses
with him, as I shall here set down in a form, that I have sometimes used myself
upon like occasion, and I cannot doubt, but by his all-healing grace, you shall
all be reduced to a better temper, and most ample complacency with the present
government.

O most gracious Lord God, which guidest the lives, estates and conditions of
all men living in this World, and make a perfect music in the universe,
which thou composest of many accords; or let us take this great All, and
government of thine, as a Table of many colors, or a body of many members: why
should I, be it one, or be it 'tother, make my self a false harmony in so sweet
a Consort; an extravagant color, in so complete a Table, or a prodigious
member, of so beautiful a body. It shall suffice me, O Lord, to be a part in
this Music, this Table, or of this Body: set me high, set me low, let me be
white, let me be black, make me head, make me foot. My God, it is in thee to
give me my part, and in me only to play it well; why should I kick against the
spur, like a paltry Jade? Why being but a miserable earthen pot, should I argue
against my Potter, for the fashion, that he has pleased to put me in? If the
men whom I envy, or bear malice to, merit their good fortunes, and happy
advancements, I wrong thy divine justice, O Lord, to malign, or oppose them;
And if they deserve them not, they more merit my compassion, than envy; since
all their greatness, will serve them but for a burden in this life, and a far
deeper condemnation in the other. If the stars, by contribution of their rays,
do strengthen the activity of hell fire, as we are informed they do, how much
more then, will those great lights of honor, and sparkling advantages of
greatness, increase the torments of a reprobate Prince, or great person?
Besides, O Lord, why should I be guilty of so strange a malignity against my
self, as forgeting the preservation of my own person, to which I am by nature
obliged, go about to ruin any other man, a thing, that nature it self abhors
from? and if by loving my very enemy, all will make for me, as thou, O Lord,
thy self have told me: Why should I, through want of love, deprive my self of
so great advantage to my self, or so great a power over him? and this way of
revenging by love, being of all things most easy: Why should I go obout to
create a hell within my self, where thou, O my God, have a gracious purpose, to
erect a Paradise? So, Good Lord, of thy mercy, send us all a happy peace, and
true Christian complacencie, one with another, and to thine own name give the
glory, for so it properly belongs.

(...).
The Heads of the Ascents, wherein his late HIGHNESS, our renowned PROTECTOR,
deceased, stands Parallel with the great Patriarch MOSES.
THe first Ascent made Parallel, In their Nobility of Birth, and great
extraction. p. 1. The second, In their remarkable Beauty of body, and
gacefulnesse of of Person. p. 6. The third, In the great particular providence
of Heaven over them, in their miracluous preservations, from their very
infancies. p. 16. The fourth, In all the eminent advantages of their most
Liberal and Noble education. p. 21. The fifth. In their long Privacy, and happy
retirements of themselves. p. 29. The sixth, In their miraculous and divine
calls to public employment. p. 36. The seventh, In their great modesty, and
unwillingnesse to accept of their great charges. p. 43. The eighth, In their
many most stupendous deliverances of their people. p. 53. The ninth, In the
many mispirisions, and ungrateful murmurings of the common people. p. 64. The
tenth, In the malicious oppositions, frequent seditions, and dangerous
rebellions of some of the Elders themselves, and Princes of the Assembly. p.
73. The eleventh, In their great courage, and all high personal accomplishments
requisite to good Soldiers. p. 83. The twelfth, In their proportion of years,
and ability of mind and body, when they came first into office, and public
command. p. 91. The thirteenth, In their great skill in military conduct, and
all accomplishments requisite to Captains General. p, 97. The fourteenth. In
their constant felicity, and most victorious successes. p. 106. The fifteenth,
In all the parts and abilities requisite to the accomplishment of great
Statesmen. p. 115. The sixteenth, In their great care, and prudent caution, in
the election of honest and able Officers, and Ministers under them. p. 125. The
seventeenth, In their extraordinary clemency, and sweet temper of their
government. p. 138. The eighteenth, In their great pity and piety toward the
very purses, as well as persons of their people. p. 149. The nineteenth, In
their great piety toward God, and exemplary zeal for his glory and worship. p.
159 The twentieth, In their most extraordinary gift and spirit of prayer. p.
168 The one and twentieth, In their most exemplary practical parts of true
piety, and renunciation of proper interests, for the service and glory of their
God. p. 182. The two and twentieth, In the divine dignity, and gift of the
spirit of Prophecy. p. 201. The three and twentieth, In their endeavors to
procure that holy spirit of Prophecy for others, and indulging that divine
liberty of prophesying. p. 216. The four and twentieth, In their high humility,
and matchless meekness of spirit. p. 233
The Heads of the six Transcendental Ascents, and Parallels.
THe first Transcendental Ascent made Parallel, In the happy power of
nomination of their Successors. p. 251 The second, In the nomination of Persons
of their nearest relations, to be their Successors. p. 261. The third, In the
imparting of some of their spirit and honor to their Successors, in their life
time, and the assurance they had of their virtues, and prosperous successes. p.
267. The fourth, In the fair prospect of the fruits, and fruition of the
effects, of all their labors. p. 279. The fifth, In their happy departure out
of this life, and glorious funerals. p. 283. The sixth, In the magnificent
memorials, and eternal monuments that they have erected in the hearts of all
good men. p. 295
FINIS.

