THE DECLARATION AND REMONSTRANCE OF THE Kings Majesty's loyal Subjects within
the City of LONDON, to the Lords and Commons Assembled at Westminster,
concerning the Army under the Command of the Lord Genesis Fairfax, and the
discontents and jealousies thereof, occasioned by their averseness to the
settlement of Religion, their disaffection to the City, and the advancement of
their own private power and ends.

ALSO, The Proposalls of Sir CHARLES LUCAS, to the Council of War before his
death. And a Great Fight near Namptwich, in Cheshire, diverse killed, and 1500.
taken prisoners.

blazon of the City of London

LONDON Printed in the Year, MDCXLVIII.

The Declaration of the Kings Majesty's loyal Subjects within the City of
London, concerning the Parliament and Army.
THe Right Honorable, the Lord Mayor* Aldermen, and Common Council of the
City of London, having taken into serious Consideration the great and apparent
eiminent dangers, and present Commotions, distructiue to the Parl. City, and
Ki^gdom, occasioned by the sad divisions and discontents amongst those that
have formerly joined together for the safety of Religion, and the Laws of the
Realm; after some consideration thereupon unaminously declares their
resolution and desires to both Houses of Parliament, for the allowing and
removal of the jealousies and discontent, which are the visible causes of our
sad divisions and distinctions. viz. those concerning the Parliament seem to
arise from these apprehentions and fears.

1. That the Parl. intend not really to settle religion according to the Word
of God, and the Solemn League and Covenant, not the execution of justice upon
delinquents, but what they do therein, arises more out of the several
exigents they are brought into: then out of a love and liking of the things
themselves, and full resolutions to maintain them. 2. That they intend to alter
the ancient and fundamental Government of this Kingdom by King, Lords, and
Commons. 3. That they intend not only the necessary continuance of the Army at
present, and to make use thereof for subduing the common enemy, and quieting
the distempers of the Kingdom, but to govern the Kingdom by an Army, to be
perpetually maintained to that end, and consequently the continuing of Excise
and Taxations. 4. That they intend not really to make a Peace with the King,
though they might have it with safety and security to Religion, Law, and
liberty.

For Remedy whereof, it is earnestly desired. Wight or shall resolve upon at
any other place, may be so managed, that it may be a real demonstration to the
Kingdom, that as the Parl. will not recede from the grounds of their cause, so
there shall be no other just cause given, by delay or obstruction, to a well
grounded peace on their parts. That upon such a settle meant care may be is
taken of easing the people of the burden of Armies and taxations, and
encouragement given to advance trade.

(...) conc^^ning the City.

For remedy, whereof it is desired.

The discontents and jealousies of the Army.
1. From their aversness to the settlement of Religion in doctrine, worship,
Discipline and Government, according to the word of God and the solemn league
and Covenant, And their covntinancing by their power multitudes of persons of
unsound judgments, and those opposite to such a settlement. 2. Their not
submitting formerly to the Parliaments commands, and intermedling with the
transactions of State, and their disaffection to the City of London, both
Ministers and people well-affected, who have been faithful to the cause, and
stand for Reformation. 3. That if by the assistance of the persons and the
estats of the well-affected they should be enabled to overcome the present
insurrections and Armies raised against it, they would turn their success to
the advancment of their own private power and ends.


For R^medy whereof.

31. August 1648,
The Lords have considered of your Petition, and the Petition of diverse
well-affected Ministers, Citizens, and others of the City of London, and parts
adjacent, and have commanded me to return thanks unto you for your good
affection expressed in this particular, and do desire you that you would return
thanks to those well-affected Ministers, Citizens, and others of the City of
London, and parts adjacent, for their good affection which they have expressed
in desiring the removal of all jealousies, and endeavoring a perfect union of
the well affected, in order to to the procuring of a safe and wel-grounded peace.

Io. Brown Cler, Parliamentorum.

Die Iovis 31. Aug. 1648.
THe house being informed that the Sheriffs and other Citizens were at the
door, they called them in, and Sheriff Bide informed the house, that on Tuesday
last a Petition was brought unto the Common Council, signed by many hands of
Citizens of good quallity, and very well-affected; that the Court of Common
Council conceived it to be a business of very high concernment, and therefore
the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons in Common Council assembled had
commanded them to bring it and present it to the House accompanied with a
Petition of their own.

Resolved, etc. consideration on Monday morning next, and that they be
acquainted that the House is now upon the great business of the Treaty.

The Sheriffs Aldermen and Citizens were ^gain called in, and Mr. Speaker by
the command of (...) according to the Vote, did give them (...) their answer.

H. Elsing Cler. Parl D. Com.
Sir,
Since the late sign near Preston in Lancashire, here has happened some
action, between the English and the Scots, and a (...) disputation diverse Scots
were killed, and (...) taken prisoners. We daly exp^ct n^^^s of conquering of
Mou^^ and his Army, they are very near to an engagement* God grant us success
^o co^quer the Invaders.

Namptwich Aug. 29. 1648.


The Proposals of Sr. Charles Lucas* to the Council of war before his death.
Sir Charles Lucas b^ing brought before the Council of war, and having the
sentence of death passed against him, to have Millitary Justice for the
shedding so much innocent blood, propounded, 1. that the way with him was
without president. 2. That he ought to have been heard, and to have had a
legal trial, whereby he might have appealed, etc.

FINIS.

