AN EXACT HISTORY of the life of JAMES NAYLOR WITH HIS PARENTS, BIRTH,
EDUCATION, PROFESSION, ACTIONS, and BLASPHEEMIES.

ALSO How he came first to be a QUAKER, and received his commission from Heaven
(as he says) when he was in the Field at Plow.

Taken from his own mouth.

With the Doctrines, Tenets and practices of some other of the same Sect.

By JOHN DEACON.

Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3. If there arise among you a Prophet, or a dreamer of dreams,
and gives thee a sign or wonder: and the sign come to pass, etc. Thou shall
not hearken unto the words of that Prophet; for the Lord proves you, to know
whether you love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul

Isaiah 14.12, 13, 14, 15. How art thou fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer? etc. For
thou have said in thine heart, I will ascend into Heaven, I will ascend above
the heights of the clouds, I will be like unto the most high. Yet thou shall be
brought down to Hell, to the sides of the pit

2 These. 2.3. Let no man deceive you by any means, for that day shall not come,
except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed. the
son of perdition

London, Printed for Edward Thomas, and are to be sold at his house in Green
Arbor, 1657.

To the Reader
Courteous Reader,
I suppose thee sensible of that which I may well call a sound principle, as
that the supreme and best end of all things is Gods glory; first and next our
own happiness, into which ocean we ought to empty and pour forth all our
desires, actions and abilities, that so we may enjoy Gods most comfortable
blessing here, with the fruition thereof (eternal life) hereafter; and
therefore in every undertaking, with Moses, I esteem it a signal evidence not
only of real wit, but a step hire of true wisdom, seriously to weigh and
consider what the end may produce; which (Courteous Reader) has not been the
least of my care in this present undertaking; for truth being an atribute of
God, and love the like. I think to defend the first, and demonstrate the other,
cannot but tend to what has been said; and I dare presume that in this one
undertaking (if you read with a single eye) you will find them both performed,
truth defended by preventing falsehoods and untrue reports, and love
demonstrated by perverting those that would deceive the inquisitive, which it is
probable the covetous may attempt not with an intent to satisfy the Reader,
but his own unsatisfied purse.

I must needs confess the trouble in collecting, this relation has been
great, and the pains no less, which I might have avoided, but then have left
thee perhaps either misinformed, or else not at all acquainted with those
unheard of misdemeanors.

And if any shall suppose that because I have heretofore had controversy both
by dispute and in Print with the said James Naylor, and that therefore what I
have written may be rather out of envy to the man, then love to the truth: I
assure him to the contrary, for what I have done was and is only in discharge
of that duty I suppose lies on every Christian, to communicate that which may
be beneficial to others, which he knows himself; as this must needs be which
also will evidently witness, what with some cautions I have heretofore said in
their Society, that I feared (and now am sure of it) that if all the errors and
blasphemies that have been either forged or upheld by any or all the archest
Heretics since the death of our Savior were buried in irreviveable oblivion,
they might be equalled if not exuperated in them and their opinions, as the
ensuing discourse will demonstrate.

I have been plain because I would be brief, and brief because the occasion
required it; and have said nothing but for what I have an evidence either one
way or other: so that you need not mistrust the certainty, but rather admire
the absurdity of his actions, of whom thou have here, First, a true Relation of
his birth and education; next the manner how he was seduced; after that a true
Narrative of what has been remarkable since that time, either for action or
opinion, with an exact relation of their Principles and Tenets, and then
lastly, some very choice stories of many of their Sect: All which may serve to
witness with the truth that they are erroneous: which that we may all see so
as to avoid, and in avoiding them embrace that truth, and possess that grace
which will assuredly conduct us safely to an eternal habitation, is and shall
be the desires and most affectionate wishes of

From my lodging at Bun-hill London, December. the 30th. 1656. Your assured
Friend in what he can, JOHN DEACON.

An exact History of the Life and Actions of James Naylor since he became a
Quaker.
Jesus Christ the only real and eternal Son of the Almighty Father, that out
of a foreseeing and fore knowing sense (of the state of all things) in himself
foresaw and understood that the instable and mutable mind of miserable man
would be always busied and employed upon one subject or another, esteemed it a
part of that true wisdom inherent in himself, prescribed such a matter for it
to work on, as might tend principally to their own perpetual good, and his
eternal glory. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, (and then that they might reap
no discouragement by the want of meaner enjoyments, as riches and honor, he
promises a taste of that here (his blessings) which in a higher sense shall be
wholly enjoyed hereafter) and all these things shall be added unto you.

And to attain any happiness or precious enjoyment which is to be purchased by
the overcomming of withholding difficulties; we must first endeavor to remove
all defects and impediments as evil which is contrary and opposite to good;
and the readiest way so to do is to understand and know the cause that may
either withhold us from the omission of duty, or encourage us to the commission
of disobedience, that so that being known we may be the better fortified to
withstand any temptation from them proceeding that providence should suffer to
assault us, which is the intent and substance of this precedent discourse.

Sad it is to consider, that as the world draws near to a period, the
wickedness of men innumerates; and that every day Which sets them a step
nearer to death, should throw them a stride further from a better life: as if
every Age were only an addition of impiety, and a new torrent of iniquity,
which added a stream more to the completing the fullness of such sins as might
extract an immediate destruction, as not only bare reports, but to sad
experience verifies in every Age, but more especially in this wherein we live:
not only Satan endeavoring to transfigure himself into an Angel of light; but
man attempts to transform himself into an impe and angel of darkness, in that
a wretched and sinful man shall be no more called James but ( Jezebel for
enchantment, and not) Jesus.

But I come to what I intend, God in his justice have given over men at this
time to yield subjection to the alurements of Satan, and to believe lies
because they have pleasure in unrighteousness, etc. Among which number chiefly
is one who for his horrid blasphemies, is unworthy to be what he seems, a man
who is well known by the name of James Naylor, of whom it is hard to say whether
he is most endued with wit or wickedness; but it is easy to suppose; it were
well for him he had none of the first, so he were void of the latter. But since
Providence offers so sad a subject, I can do no less in duty but lay forth
my self and my abilities in a case of this consequence, when a man shall assume
the name of God, and take unto himself his attributes, as does this grand
Seducer of whom I now intend to treat: and since some have worthily written of
his Trial and Examination, etc. I shall not go about to erect any thing that
may savor of Tautology, but carefully, truly and impartially, treat of what he
has done and practiced since he came to be a Quaker; that so by his
miscarriages the industrious may be improved, and the drowsy awakened to
understand the deceits of, and arm himself against the man of sin and his
factors; and that I may so do I shall methodically proceed.

First, To decide that which various reports render disputable to most, when
indeed what is said seems to be raised by such as would willingly say
something, yet know not well what, which savours rather of a busie-brain, then
a well grounded knowledge; I mean his Parents, birth and profession, etc.

He is the son of one Goodman Naylor (so called in the Country) of Anderslow in
the County of York, where he was born, neither to much plenty or mean penury;
but as he was not over-rich, so was he not over-poor; but such was his estate,
that with his own industry (by report) he might have lived comfortably, as
other Country people do whose hands are the Tenants that produce a livelihood.
Concerning his profession, reports are various, some say he was a Gentleman
born and bred, others that he followed husbandry; and some say this, and others
that, but to satisfy the industrious, I shall in few words declare what I can
a vouch to be truth if man may be believed; a Gentleman, now one of that
honorable Society of Grayes Inn, who was either born or bred (if not both)
either in or near the same Town or place where this false prophet had his
entrance into this transitory world, who was also School fellow with this
Naylor, and knew his friends, reported to a friend of mine, before sufficient
witness, that this James Naylor was the son of one Goodman Naylor (so called
in the Country) by profession a Sow-gelder, and did also follow the same
profession of a Sow-gelder, and thereof made either all, or part of his
livelihood (which was also reported by one that was a fellow Soldier with him
in the Army) till such time as he took up Arms and served in the Army, first
under the Lord Fairfax, next under the Lord Lambert. And for his education it
was neither such as might indue him with more then to understand, write well,
and read his mother tongue; nor less then might make him capable to undergo
any ordinary employment; and though he be a man of an exceeding quick wit, and
sharp apprehension, enriched with that commendable gift of good oritory with a
very delightable melody in his utterance; yet he either out of policy or
neglect, endeavors to make the world believe he has not at all bettered or
improved it; for in his answer to my Public Discovery, he seems to be
ignorant what the word etimoliger means in that; when for his endeavoring to
derive the word Trinity from Rome, in reply to that I call him deceitful
Sophister, yet simple etimoliger; and in his answer to that Reply, he says,
here I am called a Soffister and an etimoliger, as if the word were odious, or
had some relation to a scandalous or reviling style; but it is freely confessed
that in another book, which he owneth, though perhaps some Jesuit writ it;
being an answer to Mr. Joshua Miller's Antichrist in Man, the Quaking Idol. He
there flies from what he pretends, immediate revelation, to the rules of art
and learning, endeavoring to confute logical Silogisms by the like, and that
not only by such as bear only the name, but also the exact rules according to
art, though void of the power, because they want the force of truth; so that I
find he can write a very legible hand, (if that he writ to me was his own) he
spells good English; and either he has more in him then he will make known,
(and then perhaps he is what I judge him to be, a Jesuit) or else some other
writes what he owns. In the next place it will be necessary to declare his
original call and entrance into this damnable heresy wherein he now stands,
not as various reports render it, but as he himself has often declared it, not
only in private, but in the public meeting at the Mouth within Aldersgate,
London, to me and many others that have had discourse with him there.

The manner of his call and entrance into this damnable Sect and Heresy
wherein be now stands.
HE said, As I was in the Field at Plow, in Barley-seed time, meditating on the
things of God, (in his apprehension) suddenly I heard a voice saying unto me,
Get thee out from thy Fathers house, and from thy kindred, and I will be with
thee at all times, and in all places. Whereupon I exceedingly rejoiced, that I
had heard the voice of that God whom from a child I had endeavored to serve in
sincerity and uprightness of heart, and whom before that time I had never
Known in truth: So I went home and waited there a good while, and not being
obedient to that heavenly call, I was cast down and remained in a sad
condition, as many friends can witness, who wondered to see such a change in
me, and thought I was distracted, and that the hand of God upon me had made me
lunatic by destruction of my senses, and I would never have spoken nor eaten
more: but after I was mad, and willing to go, I gave my estate away, and I
began to make some provision, as Money, Apparel, and other necessaries for my
journey; but a while afterward going with a friend from my own house on some
business, having an old suit on, without any money, the voice spoke again,
commanding me to go into the West, and then it should be revealed to me what
was appointed for me to do; and not knowing whither I should go, or what was
appointed for me to do, neither having taken my leave of her whom the world
calls my Wife, and those children which according to the flesh are mine, I was
obedient, and after I had been there a while, it was given me what I should
declare; and ever since I have been obedient to that which is pure in me and in
you all, Christ manifest in mortal flesh.

Whereupon I asked him whether that friend or any else besides himself heard
that same voice? or how should it be known to be a truth, since we had nothing
but his own word for it? He answered it was not a carnal audible voice, to be
heard with an earthly ear, for it was heavenly; and that it is true, the spirit
beaereth witness, and I know his witness is true.

Q. I asked him whether the voice were external or internal, and to whom he
gave his estate?

A. He said that that which is pure in all your consciences, which convinces
you of the evil you do, Christ in you, the true light spoke to that of God in
me, and I heard it, and will witness to that of God in you all (or words to
this purpose) that it is pure and eternal.

Q. I asked him to whom he gave his goods and estate?

A. He said to his Wife and children.

When indeed I had thought in imitation of the Pharisees, he had boasted of
some deeds of charity he had done with it before men, not but that it was well
bestowed as it was disposed of; for I think as they had most need of it, so
they had most right to it; and the promise he faith, is fulfilled in that God
has witnessed to his doctrine; but what that Witness, what that Power, and
what that voice is, and from whence is evident.

First, By his Apostasy, in that when he had associated himself with a people
that endeavored to live and walk with and in the Lord, that he should
backslide from those ways of truth and embrace such errors as have led him unto
the height of blasphemy: when as the Apostle says, They (and so he) went forth
from us, because they were not of us: but like tares among Wheat disagreeable
and fit for nothing but Destruction.

Secondly, By his Actions, the first step whereof led him to such art Act as
gives much suspicion, nay even assurance of inconstancy and adulteries, etc. as
hereafter shall be made evident in this discourse.

Thirdly, His Doctrine, in that he preaches down all truth and up all errors,
as denying either Magistracy or Ministry; or either Gospel or civil Laws, or
Discipline, etc.

Fourthly, By his Blasphemies of which he is justly convicted (and for which he
has partly suffered) by the Supreme Authority; as that he is the Son of God,
and the Son of God is but one; and then he being one, and the Son of God as (he
says) there is by that account no other: and questionless he has been long of
this judgment though not so public in it: For long since he said, he was as
holy: just and good as God himself, thereby claiming anequality with God though
at a farther distance then now; for then he only claimed an equality by
purity, but now by dignity and affinity, as being the Son of God, and one with
the Father: See Mr. Farmer's Satan enthroned in his Chair of Pestilence etc.

I have first laid down those four Heads as a groundwork to what I intend to
enlarge upon in prosecution of this Treatise; but before I proceed to do so, I
shall speak a word or two concerning the proceeding of the Supreme Authority
against him of whom we now treat; by reason that many though some indiscreetly
say, The sentence pronounced against him savours of a harsh judgment thereby
endeavoring to scandalize the supreme and high Authority with cruelty: to
which I shall speak a word or two impartially.

Since it is esteemed not only in this, but in all other Nations, an act of
high in justice to sentence him to die the very worst of deaths, that shall
assume unto himself the title of his Prince or Governor; or that shall any
ways endeavor to impair the titles and glory of him: how much more ought he
to die or suffer a worse punishment that shall commit a greater offense, and
make himself the Son of God, the King of righteousness. I have read of them
that for bearing in their Coats of Arms that which belonged only to the Crown
have suffered as Traitors; as Lord Howard Duke of Norfolk, with his son the
Earl of Surrey, in the days of Henry the 8th. though men in great and high
esteem and of no less honor, for this offense and no other were arraigned,
convicted and condemned as Traitors: then how much more ought he that shall
make himself the Son of God, etc. to die if it were possible a hundred times?
for look how much God is above man, so much ought he to suffer a just torment
more then death if it were possible; And therefore the sentence which was past
upon him, and he has partly undergone, was more in mercy then justice could
well admit, and they with honor pronounce against him: but it is true indeed,
mercy shall find mercy, and its a signal token of a tender charity in that
mercy was exalted in the midst of just Judgment.

I shall now proceed to treat upon and examine the several things before laid
down.

First, That it is an evidence that that voice, that power, and that witness
is not of God or goodness, that spoke to him, goes with him, and testifies
of him. Firft, by reason of his apostasy; it is a precept in the word of God,
concerning him which backslideth from the faith which stands in Jesus Christ
the only real and eternal Son of God the Father, after the first and second
admonition, if he repent not, give (says the holy Ghost) or deliver such a man
over to Satan, which is, excommunicate, or exclude him; so then he being
delivered over to Satan is no more of God, in respect that power which is given
to the Church to excommuninate false members, has been exercised on him as a
backsliding brother; we ought to look on him as one under the power of Satan,
and not to bid him good speed, lest we be partakers with him in his evil
deeds: And indeed if we consider him in the state of a fallen brother, we cannot
wonder to see him reign in all manner of wickedness, in respect the Holy Ghost
says, that false Prophets mnst come, and false Christ's shall arise: it is just
with God to give him over to believe lies, because he has pleasure in
unrighteousness; 2 These. 2 10, 11, 12. 1 John 4.8. Heb. 12.29.
For as God is light, and so able to discern all things; so is he
all-sufficient to understand and do all things: and as he is all love to his
children; so is he all judgment (yet merciful) to his enemies: Therefore let
him repent him of and not persevere in his blasphemies; 1 Timothy 1.23.
for though he can contemn Authority, and say in the mind he is in, he would
not be uncovered though he were in the Parliament house: Yet let him know, that
he that resists (or contemns) the Powers, resists the Ordinances of God:
and he that resists, See Mr.Bourn, p. 41.
receives unto himself damnation: And it is a most sad thing indeed with
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram to play with and contemn the wrath of God-lest the
bowels of the earth chastise their presumption. Romans 13.2, 3.
I both would and shall endeavor brevity in what convenience may require; yet
for the good of those that stand between two not knowing whether they were
better to backslide or stand fast where they are: I shall endeavor in a few
words to show you what I apprehend to be the cause of the Lords for saking him,
and giving him over tp his own lust: and as I often told him and George Fox,
Borows and Hoberthorn, etc. I observed a Learned Author laid this down as maxim
in Divinity, that when a man ceases (with this quaking Sect) to be guided by
Gods Laws, God gives him over to be ruled by his own lusts; and therefore I
wished them not to whet and provoke the anger of the Lord which is a consuming
fire: And in a word, I am clearly of this opinion, that had he had true faith,
he could never have finally fallen to reprobation and blasphemy: It is
probable he might have faith, but not true faith; for as says Dr. Holmes,
there is a faith of adherance, and there is a faith of assurance, etc. The true
faith must be exercised in true worship, the end whereof is true happiness, and
all worship not agreeing with Gods revealed will, is profaneness and irreligion,
the end whereof is not happy but wretched; For this is life eternal to know
God, and whom he has sent Jesus Christ, and (not James Naylor.) And he that
expects to reign with nim, must believe that he is able to save to the
uttermost; Heb. 11.6. John 1.11. 2 Cor. 5.7. John 20 29. Heb. 11.1. Ephesians. 2.8.
and all other that pretend so to do besides him are seducers; and let him
pretend what revelations he will, this a true believer must know and rely on,
That no man has seen Gods essence, that is greater then any finite
apprehension; so that let Quakers and their seducing teachers say what they
please; this is truth and no lie, we walk by faith (the eye of the soul) and
not by sight; and therefore Christ when he had assumed a visible nature (in his
incarnation) for that work of our Redemption would not be long conversant on
earth in his public Ministry, that our salvations might not be in sense, but
believing; blessed are they that have not seen yet have believed. The necessity
of faith appears in that, the just shall live by it: by faith we are justified,
without it we cannot please God; Habakkuk 2.4.
and what is not of faith is sin: the excellency of it in that it apprehends
the riches of Christ, and in him the unspeakable treasure of Gods mercy, peace
of conscience, reconcilation with God, remission of sin, indemptnity from the
guilt and punishment, etc. In fine all things which concur to the completing
true happiness. It styled Abraham Gods friend, and us his sons; it is the
sanctuary of a troubled spirit the first fruits of the heavenly Paradise: In a
word, precious is that faith which believes all the word of God is true and to
be obeyed, and says, that Jesus (and not James) is the true Christ: and that
there is Salvation in no other name under Heaven. They best know how sweet a
Jewel faith is, that can value the enjoyment by the want of it: but to such as
Naylor and his sect, who are deluded with false light and temptations of
security, there appears no want of it in themselves, because they are secure:
but I heartily wish they knew, and would believe there is a common faith, which
reprobates may have, and that is either historical such at the Devils have,
Jam. 2.19. or temporal, as Mat. 13.20. Acts 8.13. and this is either a faith of
miracles, or a delusion of security. There be many degrees, but one only
object of true and saving faith, and that is Jesus Christ (and not James
Naylor,) and that which we are to believe and obey, is the infallible truth of
God (the first, God, the second, his Oracles.) and his Will concerning our
Salvation revealed in his Word. The word and testimony of man may be the ground
of opinion which is of things probable; but true faith can stand on no other
basis but the Word of God which is infallible, certain and can have no falsehood
in it, and he that goes without this guide runs like those Israelites to
the mountains of the Cananites, Numb. 14 40.
to their own destruction, as this Sect, and particularly him of whom we now
speak, gives too sad a testimony of this truth.

I desire thy excuse (Courteous Reader) if I have been transported too far on
this Subject, be thou pleased to read it but with as much patience as I writ
it, and 'twill extenuate the Teadiousnesse of it; I shall rest no longer here,
but press onward to what I intend, and that leads me to the second ground,
which argues the spirit by which he is acted to be not divine but diabolical.
Which is this,

Secondly, By his actions in general, but chiefly by reason that the first step
he took after his apostasy gives strong suspicion, nay plain assurance that he
is guilty of inconstancy and adultery, to the clearing of which I shall
proceed, and in so doing it will be requisite to trace him along from the
beginning, when he first left that Church whereof he was a member; and in so
doing observe what is worth the noting, as shall seem most convenient.

Naylor being a member of a Congregation at Wool-Church in Yorkshire, he was
there excommunicated for his blasphemous Tenets, as Mr. Christopher Marshall
Pastor of that Church whereof he was a member confessed; (...)
who is also well known to be an able, godly and sincere Minister of the Word
of God; who also in a Letter to a friend, a Copy whereof I read, is related
this story, that James Naylor, since he was a Quaker, having gotten into the
acquaintance of a woman named Mistress Roper, and her husband being gone away
from her on some occasion a long voyage; he the said James Naylor used greatly
to frequent her company, being more then ordinarily, and to be plain, more then
civily familiar with her, using frequently to dandle her on his knee, embracing
and kissing her more then was either fitting or beseeming civility; and in the
time of her busbands absence, either by some other, or (as is most likely) and
is supposed by James Naylor she was gotten with child, and when her husband had
been absent from her, and Naylor acquainted with her seven and forty weeks, she
was brought to bed of a Bastard-child; and this was several times proffered by
my self and my loving friend Mr. Persival, to be proved and made good before
any Magistrate, if they durst put it to trial; and I proffered to read the
Letter, or at least a Copy of it, at their public meeting, provided that
Naylor or any other should but engage that I should have neither violence
offered to me nor to the paper, but it would not be granted; and Naylor himself
when accused with it in his meeting, was unable to clear himself any further
then with silence, which gives consent, A weak excuse (yet as strong as his
innocense.)
and leaving his standing he said, This is a priest lie. And without question
had he been able to have said any thing that might have savoured of an excuse,
he would have been ready to have spoke that with much addition, his tongue
being free to run commonly, not only beyond reason, but truth also; and one
passage in the said Letter must not be omitted; which was,

Naylor being on a time in private with her, the said Mistress Roper, dandling,
embracing and kissing her lasciviously, she in a jesting manner thus expressed
her self, as glorying in their stolen wickdness, Now James, what would the
world say should they see thee and I in this posture? but what his ananswer was
I cannot say, but it may easily be supposed to be such as should encourage her
in her sin with greater impudency, if it might be; and though he nor his
friends durst not bring it to the Bar of justice, he knowing his own guilt, and
fearing the punishment on the Law in that case provided: yet Providence has so
disposed of that business, that since he was in question for that horrid and
scarce to be paralel'd blasphemy, it has been a matter disputed of before the
Seat of Justice; for Mr. Persival, our a zeal to Piety, by having impiety
corrected, went to the Honorable Bramfield, a known godly pious Gentleman, and
Churchman of the Committee chosen to examine his misdemeanors, and gave him to
understand the matter, and told him, that if his Honor pleased to send for Mr.
Lamb at Elie-House, he had in his custody the original Copy of the Letter,
containing the whole proceedings before the said Church, under Mr. Marshall's
own hand: Which Mr. Lamb being sent for, and producing the said Papers, they
were read to the said Naylor's face in the open Court; who being asked what he
could say for himself? as to this did not nor indeed could not deny the action,
but only denied the time, as being not since he was a Quaker, but when he was a
Soldier; and he said it was not in that nature in which those Letters
presented it, as in any dishonest or lascivious way, but only he then kissed
her in the way of courtship. To which, answer was returned that it was no such
thing as he pretended, but since he was a professed Quaker, and not before;
which when he see it would be made so evident, that it would be rendered
inexcusable, he was silent as to that; and that it is so by consequence,
hereafter shall be verified. Thus much for this particular act, I shall now
come to treat of some of his actions in general.

Here follows a brief Narrative of some Actions committed by him, with
several other Passages of the like nature, since, and not before he was a
Quaker.
JAmes Naylor being on a time in a meeting at Sedbergh in the North,
peremptarily asked one who is reputed to bean honest sincere Christian, named
Samuel Handley, whether he were free from sin or no? who replied, he was
sensible of his own infirmities, and therefore a sinner; with that Naylor
railed at him with the uncivil terms of Thief and Murderer, Cane and the like;
and justified himself to be perfectly free from sin: And here may I fitly
insert a passage between one (whose name I omit, because he is well known about
where he lives) and my self at the Bull and Mouth within Aldersgate.

I being on a time at the said meeting, fell by chance in discourse with one
who (by his signal terms as thou and thee) I supposed to be a Quaker, with
whom (after other things) I had some speech concerning present and perfect
perfection, which he in part denying, I said that Naylor owned, and preached to
maintain it, as in a Letter extant, in the Quakers whitest Devil unvailed;
whereupon the aforesaid A.A. called me liar, and child of the devil, till
producing the book it self I read unto him Naylors own words; which when he
heard, he said, does James say so? I answered, yes; nay then said he, It is
truth. So far are they bewitched with his delusion, as to steer their faith by
his unstable and vitiated brain.

Naylor hearing of a Bull-baiting in Chesterfield, whereof Mr. Billingsly was
Pastor, he writ a Letter to the said known godly Minister, wherein he said that
swearing, cursing, bulbaiting, and blaspheming of God was the fruits of John
Billingsly's Ministry; thereby endeavoring to scandalize the man that had done
him no prejudice; See Learned and Reverend Mr. Bourn's defense of the
Scritures, p. 17. 18.
which indeed was his usual practice, as is evident in many particulars too
tedious to name; which is a signal demonstration ofa malicious spirit: but when
he was in public, he was accused with this act of falsehood (indeed the proper
fruits of his spirit) he denied it, calling him liar that laid it to his
charge, till his Letter was produced, which proved him in an untruth, when he
wanted not impudence to excuse (but grace to repent for) that lying accusation.

A Poor honest Countryman of Wingerworth in the County of Derby, having heard
Naylor prate after his usual manner (error and blasphemy) was so infused (not
with pure light as they pretend) but with a desperate divelish humor, that he
destroyed and drowned himself; which plainly speaks by what power and spirit
they are acted: Not unlike to this was that of Mary White, who by the damnable
sedition of Burrows, Howgall, and Hoberthorn, the orators for the promotion of
the man of sin James Naylor (not the) but their Christ.
and his cause, was miserably be witched and enchanted to death after several
and sad motions and fits, as heaving and struggling like Convulsion fits, with
strange outcries, as barking like a Dog, lowing like a Cow, etc. witnessed by
Bartholomew Le^ald, See a sheet called quakers or enchanters Sold by Mr. Dod
Susannah Green, and William White on oath before Edmund Harvey, Esquire And the
like that of Gilpine and also Cotton Crosland that hanged himself, who
pretended he knew more and higher things himself them any or all the Ministers
in England did; the truth whereof the end demonstrates. And another in the
North, See Gilpin toward the latter end.
whose name I think was Birch, who was seen in the act committing Buggery with
a mare, and for it fled, all then professed Quakers.

It were in vain to cite every slight passage, and to treat upon his several
lies and falsehoods which would rather afford a great volume, then be contained
in so small a tract as this Treatise: and although much more might be said to
this purpose, I only intended to touch on this by the way, and come to the next
thing intended to be treated on, as an evidence that he is under a spirit of
error.

The third evidence is his Doctrine, in that he preaches down all truth, and
up all error, etc. and here I shall begin with that which is most material to
this subject. See Mr. Bourn, his defense of the Scriptures, 9. 20.


And first, In that he says he is as holy, just and good as God himself,
without either limitation or reservation; as was witnessed by two at Kendal,
and an honest Inhabitant of Vnderborow near to Kendal: Says, he and many
others heard him utter this blasphemy, but being all followers of Naylor he
believes they will be slow and unwilling to testify the truth in this case:
yet he calls me lier often for accusing him for holding perfect perfection,
when by this account, if he were as holy, just and good as God himself, See my
Public discovery of their secret deceit.
and not perfect, what then? is God imperfect? O horrid blasphemy! He holds
that the Scriptures are not the word of God, but only a declaration of that
word; and that their words and Letters are the declaration also; so then both
being one in quality, equality afordeth no different distinction: and some of
them have burned the Bible (as I have heard them boast) in contempt of it. And
Naylor has said more then once that he that expected to be saved by that Jesus
Christ that died at Jerusalem should be deceived; See the perfect Pharisee. p.
8.
and this character the holy Ghost gives of the man of sin, antichrist; See Mr.
Boure, p. 16.
if any man (as Naylor in effect) denies Christ as being come in the flesh that
is a deceiver and an antichrist; 1 John 2.22.23.
he has also erroneously taught that we owe no obedience to any Magistrates,
or to render them any honor or subjection, which though in public he denied
before the vulgar people, yet then was he testified to be in a lie by one of
his own Sect, who openly confessed he received that doctrine from Naylor
himself, see the Northern Relation, p. 9. and oftentimes he has denied that
the Scriptures and written word of God to be either the judge of spirits or of
controversies, or the rule by which every Christian ought to walk, and by which
he ought to guide himself and limit his actions; and when I said I did
understand a distinct and vast difference between Christ the word, and the word
of Christ, the first being God, the other but the expressive temporal word of
God, See my Public discovery.
wherein, the holy Ghost stooping to our infirmities speaks in such terms as
may impresse on our capacities. I defy your distinctions and your carnal
words, for Christ is the word, and God is the word, and all other words are
without in the nature, etc. He also affirmed in his answers to my queries
(extant in my Public Discovery) that that immortality, that incorruption,
etc. spoken of us enjoyed by Saints in Heaven, he enjoyed here immediately on
earth; and that in opposing him and his heresy, I sought and endeavored to
kill the just one in them, and that I would murder them that were out of Cains
way and were transplanted from death to life, with much more of the like absurd
stuff. And on a time being disputing with a godly able Minister, about that
light in all men, Naylor laid down this absurd error, That an Indian that never
heard nor read of Christ, by that which is in every man, knew Christ Jesus, See
the defense of the Scriptures p. p. 22.
as well as any man. It will not be impertinent in this place to insert one
notable story of him.

A very notable Story worth your Observation, and unquestionably true.
JAmes Naylor being on a time at a place where it so fell out that a godly
Minister* chanced to be at the same time who stood up and said unto him, One
Mr. Cole a known godly Minister.
the Lord put it upon my spirit to speak a few words unto him on some things
that might tend to edify the audience: to which Naylor audaciously and
presumptiously said, (as making it a matter admirable) have thou received a
message from the Lord, and I not know of it* thereby pretending privacy to and
knowledge of the hidden secrets and unsearchable councels of the Lord, like to
Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 15. Which way went the Spirit of the Lord from me to speak
unto thee? thus does he presumtiously lift himself up above what he is; but I
shall wave what might be further said on this subject, not intending to write
much, but only to give an evident demonstration in brief of what may set him
forth to be as he is a deceiver, and not as he pretends a Savior: and to that
end I come unto the Fourth argument or evidence that he is under a spirit of
sedition and heresy.

The fourth evidence which plainly declares he is under a spirit not Divine but
Diabolical, to wit, his Blasphemies.
ANd in this order might have been inserted several particulars already treated
of, but that I intend no needless repetition of things past, in respect this
present juncture of time gives too large a subject to treat upon, and not only
for us to wonder at; but for future posterity also to admire that so much of
the Devil should inhabit in a man, out of which I shall complete this Chapter.

Most blasphemous is, and was that expression, I am the Son of God, and the Son
of God is but one; See Mr. Farmer, p. 14. 15, 16, 17
and the like I am says he, the prophet of the most high God, I am the Son of
God, and the everlasting righteousness is wrought in me: and then arrogantly
as imitating Christ, he blasphemously applies the words to himself, if ye had
known the Father, ye would have known me also; and as he gives these
testimonies of blasphemy of himself, and is thereby guilty of blasphemy; so
also in respect that he receives titles from others which are as bad as when
they call him King of Israel, he answers to it, see Mr. Farmer's Satan
enthroned, etc. When he was asked art thou the unspotted Lamb of God that
take away the sins of the world? he answers in the affirmative, Were I not a
Lamb, Wolves would not seek to devour me: thus taking to himself the titles
and attributes only belonging to Christ, therein robbing God of his glory and
honor. And those Proselytes of his who are trained up by and under him, do
questionless nothing but what they have learnt of him, and a witness to this
truth, it is in that he corrects them not, but countenanceth them in their
actions and expressions of the highest blasphemy; as thou everlasting Son of
righteousness and Prince of peace: Oh how my soul travelleth to see this day
which Abraham saw and was glad, and in the same letter as a signal of obedience
to him is added* Oh I am ready to fear as a servant, and to obey as a child:
and again, thy name is no more to be called James but Jesus, Page 8.
thou King of Israel, and thou on Son of the most High; Page 13.
and Oh thou beloved of the Lord, the Prophet of the most High; and Martha
Simonds (a woman for her toughe, Page 4.
indeed better befitting a Cuckingstool then a speaking place) does acknowledge
she worshipped him; and being asked why she did so, she said, she ought so to do
it being her duty, she calls him Lord, because (he says) he is Lord of
righteousness and Prince of peace, and anointed King of Israel; Page 15. 16.
and Dorcas Erbury witnesses, that he is the only begotten Son of God, Page
17. 18.
and that he is worthy of honor being the holy Lord of Israel, and she says,
she knows no other Savior, and she believes in him the World calls James
Naylor, and that she calls him the Son of God, and she is commanded to call him
Lord and Master, and to serve him with much more of the like nature: which to
repeat at large were tedious and unnecessary in respect this is sufficient to
show him guilty of the Fact for which he now has suffered the greater part of
his punishment; and what I have said, I suppose is sufficient to convince any
rational sensible man, that the spirit Ruling in him is not Divine but
Diabolical; and I am confident that he which shall read Mr. John Gilpins Book,
wherein he relates how he was seduced by the Devil (yet with a Quakers
pretenses of a more pure and clear light even Christ himself) who possessed him
immediately and really four several times; and shall read this relation of
Naylor's call into this sect, will find such a concurrence in the manner that
the difference will rest only here, the subject is not Gilpin but Naylor; and
as the manner was alike, so is the matter, both being delusions veiled under
glorious pretenses of divine revelation: there ecstasies were both of alike
strain after the manner of the working of Satan by their own reports; only one
is seired in impudence, the other salved with repentance: but one passage in
that of Gilpin I cannot omit willingly, which is this.

A Remarkable passage and worthy your Observation.
GIlpin having but once tasted of that bitter berry of Apostasy from the truth,
yet wanting that inward evidence from an internal light which others boasted
of, could not be contented to weigh but pressed forwards from the shallow side
to the bottomless channel of soul impoverishing errors: and therefore extremely
thirsted after the act of quakeing, thinking that then he should feel that
internal power that might evidence their external preaching, which as yet he
could not do: But when the Devil had so fair an opportunity as this to enlarge
his Dominion, he cast him into that action he so much desired. When the Devil
as it afterward appeared and confessed it self to be in the likeness of a
Dove, descended upon him, and entered into him, pretending to be the holy Ghost:
in this state he going to their meetings where one Christopher Atkinson was
speaking, he returned home with great joy in that the power (as he says) which
was within him had enabled him to witness to what was said, so that it may
easily be discerned what that power is, whose doctrine the Devil bears a
witness unto; I am clearly of this opinion that Satan cannot witness unto the
things of God really, but to overthrow them further by his chief policy.

I come now to what I would willingly be brief in, which is to speak a word or
two to the opening and explaining of the politic designs of this man of sin
James Naylor, in the carryiny on this blasphemy, and high treason against the
most high God of Heaven and Earth.

The Politic deceits of this seducing Sophister in carrying on this his
design of Blasphemy and Treason against God.
ANd in so doing I shall first of all observe two or three things and that but
name them.

And the first is, that it was his usual custom and common doctrine both to
act and to teach that it was unlawful, nay sinful to give or receive
civilities, good morrow or good deen, or you are welcome; or fare you well; nay
not from children to their Parents, or inferiors to their Magistrates in
general. And next more particularly, he not only forbid it to his hearers, but
upbraided others that received titles of honor or respects, as Sir and the
like: and in my Public discovery in his 14. queries to me, and to several
others he renders this as an invective against the Ministers, and as a signal
token of a false Prophet, who stand praying in their Synagogue (but he cannot
say the Pillory) and being called Masters, etc.

And lastly, What he upbraided as blameable in others he now cries up not only
as virtuous, but as a fruit of the immortal seed in himself, being called not
only Master but Lord; and not Lord only neither, but King of righteousness and
Prince of peace: See Satan enthroned, etc. p. 13. are these words, thou King of
Israel, and Son of the most High* And see Mr.Farmer's Satan enthroned, etc. p.
7. are these words; Oh thou fairest amongst ten thousand, thou only begotten
Son of God, how my heart painteth after thee: Oh stay me with Flagons and
comfort me with Wine, and the like, which they do not only in public but in
common too, as Timothy Wedlock testifyeth; See Mr. Farmer's Satan enthroned,
etc. page 17. you may discern the hypocrisy of this deceiver that will
practice contrary to his own doctrine, embracing not only the civilities of
Master, but honor as Lord; and not only honor as Lord, but worship as Christ
also. I shall now having spoke somewhat to this, also proceed to relate one
Story which I had from a hand of repute; which was this.

An observable story, (and yet very true) of one Duesbury (an eminent Quaker in
this Land) how he lay with one Rebekah Burnhil, who he or Naylor, or some of
their grandees had seduced to their Heresy.
A Friend of mine, who is a zealous friend to the truth, and an ingenuous
opposer of their Heresy, had by his industrious care procured a relation under
the hand of a Lincolnshire Gentleman, named Mr. White, how that Duesbury (a
known Seducer too, and Preacher of this Quaking heresy) having enticed a silly
woman, named Rebekah Burnhill to his sedition, he then endeavored to pull her
one step nearer to destruction by multiplying sin to iniquity, and so as he had
drawn her to his heresy he endeavored to entice her to his lust, which she
resisting, and he persuing, she salluted him with this question, How could he
in conscience so much wrong his Wife, as to lie with any other woman if he
might? and what did he thinks she would say to it she knew it? He answered, I
do her no wrong at all, in that I freely give her the same liberty I take my
self; (that was freely to be a Whore, as he was a Whoremaster) whereupon in a
short space he obtained his desire; and having satisfied his lust, she proposed
another question to him.

Rebekah. Qu. What if I should then by you prove with child? what should I then
do?

Duesb. An. Why then you must be content to be numbered amongst the
transgressors, and to make your grave with the wicked; and what a pure Saint
this was I leave it to any impartial Reader to judge, that knowing the event,
would against knowledge and that light he calls pure, commit sin: with which we
should deal as did Joab with Absalom, not spare it for its beauty or any thing
dilectable in it, but pierce it to the heart; and that by three darts,

The first, Repentance for sin.

The second, Abstenance from sin.

The third, Resolution against sin.

But to our purpose, The said Rebekah Burnhill afterward repenting of her
offense, and as bewailing her sin, confessed to the said Mr. White what I have
here presented. And further, that James Naylor did attempt the same
inconstancy, but she denied him; and Naylor has been known to say, that he
could as willingly and freely lie with one Rebekah as with his own Wife: on
which words Mr. Jeremiah Ives propounded this question to Naylor in the common
meeting place.

Q. James Naylor, What Rebekah did you mean, when you said you could as
willingly, as freely, and as lawfully lie with one Rebekah as with your own
Wife?

He paused a little, and then said,

A. There be more Rebekahs then one in the world.

To which was replied,

Rep. That there are more Rebekahs then one, is nothing to the question
propounded; therefore we desire to resolved not how many Rebekahs there be,
Romans 1.21.22, 23, 24, 25
but which Rebekah you could so willingly lie with? Romans 2. 22.


But when he saw that he could not avoid the question, Romans 2.5, 8, 9.
he became silent.

So Mr. Persival made use of this as an argument at that present of Naylors
guilt in this particular, and said to the people, You may observe that as to
the thing whereof Naylor is now accused, he cannot, or at least does say
nothing to clear himself of it, but according to his custom endeavored to
avoid the questions. And truly to me it appears that the chief cause of his
silence was not being able either to deny or confute what he was accused for,
lest in so attempting to do the thing might have been aggravated according to
its proper nature, tolerating sin; and since all his impudence afforded him not
a confidence to outface this truth, its unquestionable true, else he would not
have spared tongue to have rayled and lied too if that would have done it.

And here I cannot but pause upon and indeed admire the seared impudence of
this arch Heretic, in that passage between him and Mr. Ives; when Naylor (that
pretends to abhor distinctions of persons except they may acrue to his
advantage) was in discourse with Mr. Ives about Christ's being born after the
flesh, or according to the flesh; Naylor made a vast distinction between these
two expressions, after the flesh and according to the flesh: But Mr. Ives
proved from Scripture a concurrance and so no difference between them; which
dispute with other things he inserts in Print, in answer whereunto Naylor
falsely asserts that Mr. Ives makes no distinction between being born after the
flesh and after the spirit. This passage I can witness true, because I read
it; and truly since it is a matter which may seem a mystery to some what his
intent should be in thus doing, since it must needs redound to his
disparagement when the deceit is discovered; I shall give you my thoughts of
it, it being a principle amongst them to receive what their leaders lay down or
write as infallible truth; and that whatsoever is made public by them, they
all will peruse, he did it to confirm them to himself, that are seduced by him,
by making and representing them as odious as may be, that in any ways oppose or
withstand his heresies; and that this is common with him, who so reads my
Public Discovery and his pretended answer cannot but witness.

The manner how James Naylor was burned, first through the tongue, and
afterward branded in the forehead with the letter B. at the Royal Exchange,
London.
THe relation of his former justly deserved punishment. As first, Standing on
the Pillory at the Pallace-yard Westminster, and whipping from thence to the
Royal Exchange, London having been heretofore largely related by some who have
noised it through the Land, I shall not so much as mind it, but pass it over,
and come to speak to that which last he underwent with much Impudence.

On Saturday December the 27th. about 11. of the clock he was in a Coach
conveyed from the common Goal of Newgate to the Black Boy near to the Royal
Exchange, London; in which house he continued till the Clock had struck twelve
at noon, when by diverse on foot with Holberts, he was guarded to the Pillory,
where when he came they presently put his head into the same, and having pinned
it down, came up Martha Symonds, and with her two others, who was said to be
Hannah Stranger and Dorcas Erbury; the first seated her self just behind him on
the right side, the two latter before him, the one on the right hand, the other
on the left, just at his feet, in imitation of Mary Magdalen and Mary the
Mother of Jesus, and Mary the Mother of Cleophas, John 19.25. thereby to
witness their still blasphemous and presumptious and heretical adoration of
him, as Jesus the Christ, as is more evidently expressed by that act of Robert
Rich, whom I saw stick up a paper over his head, in which it is said was writ,
This is the King of the Jews; word by word with that in Luke 23.38. which
plainly fulfills the words of our true Savior, False christ's must come, and
false prophets shall arise; and then he gives us this signal whereby we should
know them when they come, who shall say, lo here, and lo there is Christ, as
do these: Since then we see the prophecy fulfilled, let us obey the command
also; believe them not. This I speak by the way, to employ that space of time
between his first coming and his sufferings; for when he had stood just one
hour and three quarters, they took him forth of the Pillory, and having bound
him fast with his back to the same, the Executioner pulled off his Cap, and
having hood wink't his face and taken fast hold of his tongue, with a red hot
Iron he bored a hole quite through; which having done, and pulling the cloth off
that covered his face, he put a handkerchief over his eyes, and so putting his
left hand in his pole, he taking the red hot Iron-letter in his other hand, put
it to his forehead, which gave a little flash of smoke; which being done, Rich
licked the same, as did the dogs the wounds of Lazarus; and then sang, which he
did often before, both stroaking and kissing him, which he suffered with an
admired impudence; so Naylor was first conveyed back to the Black-boy, and
thence again to Newgate, where he rests till he sets forward to suffer deserved
shame in like manner at Bristoll. What I have said in this, I saw and therefore
can witness.

I shall now proceed to lay down some of their wicked and erroneous Tenets not
held out to my knowledge by any one man; but by them all in General.
1. They deny distinction of the persons in the Godhead; see Fox's Saul's
errant to Damascus p. 18. there he affirms, that it shows only a busy mind to
enquire whether there be any individual God distinguished into the Father, Son,
and holy Ghost. 2. They hold the holy Scriptures, to wit, the writings of the
Prophets, Evangelists and Apostles as not being the Word of God, but some of
them call it carnal, and all of them a dead letter. 3. They deny any Exposition
except such as they themselves make, and call expounding, conjuration; and he
that takes a Text to expound it, they say is a Conjurer. 4. They hold their own
licentious and erroneous writings and speakings to be equal with the written
Word of God: and George Fox said to Jos. Killet that it was all one and the
same to take a Text out of his writings and Paul 's Epistles, See the discovery
of a Treacherous design, etc. p. 5.
and to preach upon it: this is an evidence by what spirit these men are under.
See Mr. Bourn, p. 22.
5. They hold that Jesus Christ is come into their flesh, that the man Christ
dwells in them, and that he is savingly in all men, even Turks and Infidels, but
that in them he is held under corruption. 6. They deny the Ascension. 7. Some
deny the Resurrection. Saints errand to Damascup, p. 57.
8. They disown Christ's imputative righteousness, and depend upon that which is
inherent in themselves. 9. They hold that in Regeneration there is no new
matter, no habit of grace or seed of God infused; but that Christ that was in
man before, is then only raised up in them out of Prison, and from under
corruption. 10. They hold the full enjoyment of present purity and immortality,
See my Public Discovery, etc..
as who so reads my Public Discovery may find it clearly proved, with fullness
of glory that they enjoy God, Christ, the Resurrection, Judgment, and all they
look for they enjoy here in this life, not expecting any other World or
Kingdom, but deny any local Heaven or Hell. 12. They hold that they neither do
nor can sin. 13. They hold that to pray that our sins may be forgiven, is
needless; and to ask any thing of God, is folly; for he knows our wants. 14.
They deny all Ordinances, and concerning Prayer, Preaching, the Sacraments,
etc. Fox said, away with them for he denied them all: And I heard Edward
Borowes say, that they were an abomination to the Lord, with much more of the
like nature. But think not that I shall accuse any one man as holding all
these, but only that amongst them this they believe, some in a lesser and some
in a greater measure. I shall only make mention of some absurd actions and
opinions practiced and upheld amongst them that now are and were of their
society in general.
A brief Narrative of some very Remarkable passages and absurdities committed
by and amongst that heretical Sect of Quakers.
ANd whereas Christopher Atkinson was once as famous as most that now stand
with and among them, I shall in a word give you to understand, that last Spring
at a Sessions held at Norwich, he the said Atkinson was indicted, arraigned and
found guilty of adultery, and then confessed the Fact, and since has left
their society, and lives civilly with his Wife in the said City, as a Letter I
once saw from thence testified to be true: this Atkinson was once adored rather
as an Angel then respected as a man amongst them: But it is evident that he was
rotten at the Core, and his heart was not found.

George Fox before sufficient witness, See the Perfect Pharisee, p. 3.
as Doctor Marshall, Col. West and one Mr. Sawro, said, that he was equal with
God himself; See Mr. Bourn's Defense of the Scriptures, p. 90.
see the relation of the Northern Quakers, p. 2. who also said, he was the
eternal Judge of the World, as George Beket, Adam Sands testifyeth, etc.

He has also avowed himself to be the Christ, as George Beket and Isaac Bourn
affirms, see the same Author, p. 3. so did James Naylor say also, that he was
God and Christ, as testifyeth three witnesses.

Here follows a story no less strange then true, though the strangeness of
it may render it some what incredible; which is as follows,
LAst Spring, or thereabouts, were met together in Yorkshire, about an hundred
and six score men, women and children, of all ages and sects except sucking
babes, about eight a clock in the evening, where they continued their usual
discourse till about eleven of the clock at night; Romans 2.22, 23, 24.
and when their speaker had done his rabble, they all very lovingly (like swine
in a stye) went to bed together in the straw stark naked, save what men and
women were in beds. An act not becoming Christians, but rather Infidels. This
was often times (in my hearing) offered to be proved in their public meeting
place, but they never durst put it to trial. And but a little before that there
were (as I was informed for a certain truth) some of this factious heresy
presumed so far on their delusions, that they slew a child, presuming to raise
it from the dead; which when they saw they could not accomplish, they were
apprehended, and at the Sizes condemned and executed for the said murder.

Not much unlike this was that bold peremptory part of George Fox, who near
Kendal commanded a cripple to cast away his crutches and walk, which he did,
but remained a cripple still; and Fox wrought his own disparagement, see the
irreligion of the Northern Quakers, p. 29. Many more be the absurdities that I
could name of this like nature, but I shall only instance two or three in brief.

A man came stark naked to the Market-crosse in Kertby-more, and there stood
speaking in that posture to the people, with this excuse, That he stood naked
by the command of the spirit, that he might speak the naked truth; What father
that was (whether of of truth or of lies) the actistrates. on demon.
witness Mr. George Emot in his Northern blast, about p. 6.

At Whyton, a place also in Yorkshire, a woman of this quaking sect, came naked
from her own bed to another woman's husband, a companion and of her own sect,
and bid him open his bed, for the Father* had sent her unto him; See the
queriers and Quakers case at the second hearing is no lie, p.
the man had at that time another man in bed with him, he rose to give place to
this woman, and left this serious couple to lie together, according to the
woman's revelations.

A most Remarkable Story yet very true, of that mad, blind and presumptuous
spirit in them.
ONe Mistress Williamson at Appleby most senslesly affirmed in the hearing of
diverse, that she was the eternal Son of God, to which some presently Replied,
that she was a woman; and therefore could not be the eternal Son of God: to
which she boldly replied, no, you are all women, but I am a man. By this may
easily resolved how absurd, non-sensical and arogant that spirit in them is,
that transports them so far as to impossibilities.

As peremptory a passage almost is that if not as blasphemous of Edward Burrows
in a Letter of his from Waterford in Ireland; in which are these words,
I live says he, in a Land where the Devil rules Lords and Kings, but I am
reserved in eternal power and glory, and righteousness over all to reign for
ever. And to reign over all in that sense, can be none under Christ; for of
him the Apostle says, that when he is said to have all things made subject
unto him; yet God that subjecteth all is excepted: and if we favor him so much
in construction as to exempt the Father, its evident he assumes the place of
the Son; which to do, is blasphemy: And little less is that boldness of the
same Seducer when he sets this expression to his Pamphlet, Sealed by the
eternal spirit of God: which expression of his if seriously considered, little
cause had some persons not now mean in Authority so much to justify that grand
seducer James Naylor, as to say, (though unjustly) his accusations were rather
of malice then matter of fact. If he or they that so said would but weigh what
back-friends, not only Naylor but all their Sect are in general to them;
because they deny authority; but in particular in that here Borowes says, he
lives in a Land where the Devil (not God) rules Lords and Kings: when
questionless by the latter is meant, his Highness, but that he dares not speak
out: as more plainly appears by that of Francis Howgal in the North, who told
one Mr. Burton a Magistrate there, that the Law (said Howgal) by which thou
actest, is Tyranny and Oppression. And if the Law be Tyranny, What then (by his
account) is the Lawmakers and maintainer but a Tyrant? I hope the supreme
Authority will take their own honor and safety into serious consideration with
the glory of Christ and his Gospel, which is deeply interested in this business.

And a strong witness of the unsanctity of their spirit, is their unstability;
for God is unchangeable, for he changes not; and as is he, so is his spirit:
and that theirs is no stable but mutable one is evident in that a man in the
North in a town called Kerbylansdale that had been of their society, a good
while falling sick of an Ague, of which being kept in a month, and being
recovered went to their meeting again, he professed he found them so much
altered in their Judgments and Principles in that time, that he could only by
their faces, but not by their Principles know them to be the same men.

And one Mr. Geor. Emot in his Northern blast, p. 6. ingeniously confesses,
that since he left them and returned to his right senses, (he testifyeth who
had tried the experience) that though (whilst he was a Quaker) he thought
himself to be all light; he knew nothing really (but imaginary) but what he
knew before, and had learned of the Ministers.

And as stability is an evidence of the spirit of godlyness, as witnesses that
of Jude concerning Michael's Disputation with the Devil about the body of
Moses, he durst offer neither violence of words or deeds further, then the Lord
reward thee, and this I have heard them preach (if their confused nonsensical
prating may be so termed) but I never knew them practice it, and therefore to
me their unbridled and libertaine-like words and actions, is an evidence that
if their spirit be infallible as they pretend, its not impiety but inquity; and
since God and Christ, and their spirit is meekness, joy, peace and love, what
is contrary (as violent discourse but turbulent and malicious) is not of God,
but in opposition to him; and since the spirit in Naylor, and the other of his
Fraternity, is such a spirit, its clear they are not of God or goodness.

And to demonstrate this is so easy that superfluities of matter for proof
makes me pause which to insert and which to omit; therefore I shall only make
use of what has passed between them and me, or but little else.

One time being at the Bull and Mouth, and having by chance the day before seen
a sheet of printed paper containing there informations given in upon oath
proving that one Borows and Howgall, and chiefly one Hoberthorn had bewitched
or enchanted Mary White to death; which having about me at that time, after
some discourse had with him, that then and at that time there spoke (who before
I never saw) I produced this sheet, and standing on a place with my feet about
a story from the ground, I went to read, and in some places to comment upon it,
the Quakers by violence plucked me down by the legs, when (had not Gods
preservance been stronger then the Devil and their malice, I might have been
in danger of death; but God in mercy preserved me that I had no hurt.

The party then speaking was Richard Hobberthorn, who though he heard himself
so much in question, and I often asked him his name, yet he would neither
confess nor deny it, or say any thing to the clearing the matter of fact.

They called me then dog, serpent, and devil, etc.

An other time one of their mankind women pulled a lock of hair from off my head
in their society in a great quantity, with several blows and thrusts; with
cursings and judgments I think innumerable.

But I wonder the less at this, in respect Mr. Bourn in his Defense of the
Scriptures, in the Epistle Dedicatory, he testifies that a Quaker told him that
his house was formerly plundered but ere long should be pulled down about his
ears.

And in Glocestershire, the Quakers making a disturbance at the burial of an
Inhabitant of Paneswick in the said County, and going to offer violence or at
least uncivilities to the Minister at the grave, and one Mr. R. P. a known
honest Christian, then high Constable, doing his duty to keep the pence: a
Quaker then presently strikes the said Officer over the side of the head so
violently, that he received much damage. This I am sure is a truth.

Much more I might speak, and have truth my protector; but I had rather be
sparing then to abound.

A very evidential passage of that lunatic and unparaleld spirit that rules
in them, as how like men distracted they run along the Streets in a strange
manner.
ON Sunday last, being December the 28th. about two or three of the clock in
the afternoon, some Quakers being met together at the sign of the Rose in the
new marketplace Westminster, where Martha Symons and the other two Sisters in
iniquity are in custody, of a sudden that spirit in them moved them to fall a
singing their titular songs of Sion, as they call them, and dancing a while
till on the sudden they ran down stairs and forth of doors, and so down the
Strand, and Fleetstreet to the Royal Exchange, London crying and proclaiming
fire and vengeance against Jerusalem, and the sword of the Lords wrath was
drawn against this great and wicked City, where one I. B. a now professed
Quaker, meeting with them, asked them the matter, who replied the word of the
Lord was gone forth, I said he, I know that long since it went forth, but what
was the cause they run in that unwonted manner, or words to this effect, they
said that the vengeance and fire of the Lords wrath was poured forth against
this City, and Jerusalem must come to judgment, who being since asked
seriously what he thought of them, says he really believes they are either mad
or bewitched, some of them ran without hats, some without clokes, some without
either. What to term this strange and unheard of sort of men, is such a mystery
to me, as I know better how to admire at then express; and therefore leave it
to the ingenuous Reader to determine.

FINIS.

