A DECLARATION, Of a strange and Wonderful MONSTER: Born in KIRKHAM Parish in
LANCASHIRE (the Child of Mrs. Haughton, a Popish Gentlewoman) the face of it
upon the breast, and without a head (after the mother had wished rather to bear
a Child without a head then a Round head) and had cursed the PARLIAMENT.

Attested by Mr. FLEETWOOD, Minister of the same Parish, under his own hand;
and Mrs. Gattaker the Midwife, and diverse other eyewitnesses: Whose testimony
was brought up by a Member of the House of Commons.

Appointed to be printed according to Order: And desired to be published in all
the Counties, Cities, Towns, and Parishes in England: Being the same Copies
that were presented to the Parliament.

London, Printed by Jane Coe. 1646.

A DECLARATION OF A Strange and Wonderful MONSTER: born in Kirkham Parish, in
Lancashire.
THis wonderful manifestation of Gods anger, against wicked and profane
people; we shall lay open thus.

1. In declaring where it was done.

2. Upon whom.

3. What is supposed might be the cause.

4. What proofs there are to make it appear to be a truth.

In the first, we have discovered the County, Parish, and the House.

In the second; the woman her parentage, her husband, and religion.

In the third, her course of life, and her speeches.

In the fourth, that it is confirmed, both by relation and testimonials under
their own hands, who were eye witnesses.

First, the Dukedom of Lancashire is the County where this Monster was brought
forth; the County it self lies North, bordering upon the West of Yorkshire,
and Derby-shire, and by the Irish Sea. The people that live there, are a mixed
Number; some precious godly people; but for the most part very bad: No parts in
England has had so many Witches, none fuller of Papists, and they were the
chief Instruments in seeking to have that wicked Book of Allowance for Sports
on the Lords Day to be published, and it was set forth by their procurements,
and the godly people amongst them have suffered very much under their
reproaches and wicked malice.

This Monster was born in the Town and Parish of Kirkeham in that County, which
is in Amoundernesse Hundred, between Preston and little Morton, within three
miles of Clifton, on the West side of Lancashire, within some three miles of
one point of the Sea, and some six or seven miles of the main; a Parish which
God has blessed with good Ministers, and some godly people (though but few) in
it; who by the malice of wicked and profane Wretches, have been much abused
heretofore.

This Gentlewoman (for so she is both by Birth and Marriage) was delivered of
this Monster at her Husbands house in Kirkeham Parish aforesaid, and about a
mile from Kirkeham Town, where the Midwife being sent for came to her, and
delivered her in that house, the Child (or rather Monster) was born, but dead,
and there it was showed, and from thence carried into the Churchyard a day or
two after, and there buried: after which, some (in Gentlemen's habit) were seen
to go in; supposed to be Popish Priests and Friars: and thus you have the place
where this Monster was brought forth.

Secondly, for the woman that bore it, she is a good hansome, proportionable,
comely Gentlewoman, young, and of a good complexion, of a merry disposition,
and an healthful Nature, well personed, had her conditions been suitable.

For her Parents they were of a very bitter disposition against godly people;
Papists they were both, and divertive against honest protestants, For her
mother she would usually call honest men Roundheads and Puritans, and
Heretics, many gentlemen did much use her house, which were suspected to be
popish priests her husband (which was this woman's father) was called Mr.
Brown, who lived in the parish of Kirkham also: And amongst other reproaches
and scorns which her mother cast upon religious people she took her Cat; and
said that it must be made a Roundhead like Burton, Prinne, and Bastwicke, and
causing the ears to be cut off; called her cat Prynnn (instead of Pusse) both
then and after she has often said, that she hoped to see the Church flourish
again (meaning the Popish Church) and all Roundheads subdued; and she has
done much for the releife of poor Papists in those parts.

The young woman, viz: Mistress Brownes daughter, who bore this monster, was
married by one Master Haughton a papist also; for none else were admitted to
come suitors to her, This Master Haugh^on then lived at Grimshall in the same
County, but after they were married dwelt sometimes in a village near Kerkham
in the same parish where her mother lived, Mr. Haughton is a gentleman
descended of an ancient family, well known in those parts and not altogether of
such a bitter spirit as those he matched with, he has been a gentleman well
bred, only in a popish way educated.

The woman he married was a notorious papist, and would many times hold a
notable discourse with her neighbors about her religion, she was not only
borne of popish parents, but bred, and brought up with them, and educated in
the popish Religion having many popish pictures, and Crucifixes, and other
popish trumpery wherein she much delighted; and i^ she were at any time
reproved for the superstitious fooleries she so affected, she would speak much
in defense thereof, and was always very obstinate, and would express much
invection against those godly protestants and others that reproved her.

3 Now for the course of life which the woman lived, who bare this monster, it
has been much spent in popish devotion; and some^imes in company with her
neighbors the gentlewomen and Fa^^^ers wives that lived about her, she was one
v^ry zealous amongst papists, and fri^ndly amongst neighbors, only when her
Religion was touched, she expressed much passion.

She has been often heard to curse against Mr. Prinn, Mr. Burton, and Doctor
Bastwick, and the Roundheads. Also to revile the Parliament, and say that she
thought that the King and the Bishops were the righter part of us; she has
been heard to wish, that she and hers might never live to be Roundheads, nor
Separatists, and that she has praid to God, that she might never live to see
any of hers such; and that the Puritans and Independents deserve all to be
hanged: and many such like expressions would often fall from her.

Amongst the rest, one speech of hers was most notorious, and has rested in
the memory of some Gentlewomen, and others that heard her when she spoke it;
that being in company with her, they fell to discourse of the present miseries
of the Kingdom, by these wars; and some spoke against the Cavaliers, and the
Papists in the Kings Army; Whereupon this Mrs. Haugton said little less
against the Roundheads and Independents, and she said the King was in the right
against them; she was replied to, that those called Roundheads were honest men,
and in the rght way of walking, and living like the people of Ged, and suitable
to the profession of Christians: And withal wishing, if it pleased God, that
she had her eyes opened, and was such a Roundhead. No says she, I had rather
have no head, nor life: I nor any of mine, I hope will ever be such. Answer was
made her, that her children if she had any, might (if God so please) have their
eyes opened; and see that good which she is ignorant of. Mrs. Haughton made
answer again in these words: I pray God, that rather than I shall be a
Roundhead, or bear a Roundhead, I may bring forth a Child without a head. This
was a fearful saying, and taken notice of by diverse of her neighbors that
heard her speak it. And this many who know it, do apprehend, might be a great
means to provoke God to show such a testimony of his displeasure against her,
by causing her to bring forth this Monster, whose Picture is in the Title Page
of this Book.

4. Now for testimony of the truth of this, we shall give it you in Order thus:

Her Neighbors who heard her speak the aforesaid words, have been with Mr.
Fleetwood the Minister of the Parish of Kirkham, where she was brought to bed
of this Monster, and where it was buried also, and it was told to some of the
Committee of the County what had happened and that she had spoke those words.
And after that she was with child, and delivered of the Monster, one Widow
Gattaker the Midwife, formerly wife to Mr. Gattaker, sometimes Vicat of the
said Parish; she being a godly woman, could not be eased in her mind, until
she had discharged her conscience in making it known to Mr. Fleetwood the
Minister aforesaid; That she had brought the said Mrs. Haughton to bed of a
Monster, which had no head; declaring her opinion, that she verily believed
that it was the hand of God upon her, for those imprecations she wished upon
her self, as is before expressed: The Minister he spoke of it to others, and so
did the Midwife also, which made it to be spread up and down the Country, so
that it came to the ears of some of the Committee; And for the further
satisfaction of the truth thereof, Colonel More an honest godly Gentleman, a
Member of the House of Commons, and one of the Committee being there, it was
desired he should send a Letter to Mr. Fleetwood the Minister of the Parish, to
know the certainty of it, whether it was truth or not; which Letter was writ,
and by him sent accordingly. And Mr. Fleetwood receiving the said Letter, sent
for the Midwife about it, and she still confirmed what she said before, yet for
better satisfaction, Mr. Fleetwood caused the grave to be opened, and the
child to be taken up, and laid to view, and found there a body without an
head, as the Midwife had said; only the child had a face upon the breast of
it, as you may see in the portraicture.

The Certificate was showed before diverse of the Committee, and by Colonel
More a Member of the House of Commons, brought up to London, and showed to
diverse of the House; who have commanded it to be printed, that so all the
Kingdom might see the hand of God herein; to the comfort of his people, and
the terror of the wicked that deride and scorn them.

A Copy of a Certificate under the hand of Mr. Edward Fleetwood Minister of
Kirkham Parish in Lancashire, concerning the Monster brought forth by Mrs.
Haughton a Papist, living in that Parish.
AS we must tell no lie, so we should not conceal any truth; especially when it
tends to Gods glory: There was a great Papist and of great Parentage, within
the Parish of Kirkham, and his wives mother being of the same Religion, did
usually scoff and mock the Roundheads, and in derision of Mr. Prinne, and
others, cut off the the Cats ears, and called it by his name. But behold an
example of the justice and equity of God in his judgments: As Adonibezeck was
repaid in his own kind: Haman hanged upon the same Gallows he had prepared
for Mordecai, and Pharaoh and all his Host drowned in the Sea into which he
had thought to have driven the Israelites, And likewise one of the Popish
Prelates, who said he would not dine before Ridley and Latimore were burnt, was
burned in his own enttrails. So (much what) alike, it fell out with this man's
wise, a Popish creature, who being great with child, when the time of her
delivery came, she brought forth a Monstrous child without an head* ugly and
deformed, the portraicture whereof (as near as we could delineate) is here
described, and my self,

EDWARD FLEETWOOD, Pastor* With the Midwife, and others who saw the Child
taken out of its grave; Witnesses hereof.

FINIS.

