THE DECLARATION AND RESOLUTION Of many thousands Citizens of LONDON CONCERNING
The Army, under the Command of the Lord General Fairfax, and their present
Proceedings touching the Treaty; And the further proceedings of the Citizens
concerning the Papers sent up from the Army.

Also, Ten Propositions from His Majesty's loyal Subjects within the Realm of
England, to the Citizens and Army, concerning the Reign and Government of their
Dread Sovereign Lord King Charles.

blazon of the City of London

8ber ye 12th 1648 Printed for C. VV. and are to be sole near the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill.

THE PROPOSALS Of the Subjects of ENGLAND Concerning The Reign and Government
of their Dread Sovereign Lord the KING.
SUfficient Authority makes a just and lawful Parliament, endued with absolute
power, and not to be dissolved by any departure: To which may be added, the
third Record or Act of Continuance, against the which the King has no power,
nor any Court in the Kingdom; and whatsoever is done without it, about it, or
against it, is void in Law. Hear then poor people these poisoned positions
penned in papers against the King, Legis non habet vigorem, quod principi
placet, Bract. f. 107. Gods Minister ought to do that which is only right, and
his will is of no force for a Law, because it ought to subscribe to the Law,
and not the Law to it. See Errors for Arguments to move you.

There is Art in Errors, and Errors in Arguments are armed with truth:

The King is to be obeyed, his life preserved, and his Laws observed, and by
them, both he and his people are to be protected.

His promises art to them that shall obey his personal Comands in his Camp
against his highest Court, condemned of Ordinances.

As first that of the Militia, which devests his Majesty of his power to
protect his people. 2 That of Men and Money to be laid upon them to protect
themselves. 3 To rebel against his personal Commands. 4 To kill him in his
Army. 5 To rule him and all his people by an arbitrary Government. 6 To change
Religion. 7 Maintain Rebellion. 8 Commit his best subjects. 9 Commend and
countenance his enemies. Lastly, Keep him from his Parliament.

I shall easily answer all these. The Kings power to protect his people must be
known, what it is, where it is, and in whom it is. What it is? No Regalt,
personal, or private power, but a righteous, politic, and public power. In a
word, not the judgment of the King merely Royal, Imperial, and Arbytrary, but
the judgment of the Kingdom legally, and judicially performed.

Where it is? Not in the Camp and Cabinet of the King, but the great Council
of the Kingdom.

In whom it is? Not in the persons departed, but in the three Persons that
remain by the Writ of Suwmans, and Act of Continuance.

For the persons departed against both, have no cause to call their powers
after them, but are condemned by both as violaters of their own Acts, and
therefore the business to be considered, is left in trust with them, forsaken
by the others, and it is not the Parliament but the King himself that devests
himself of his own power, by his own Act and default; and having transferred
his power to his Court, he may not recall it from them.

2 Men and Money; Answer, but the iminent danger the Parliament is to take care
for, and most against them that are departed, and call as many as they can at
home and abroad to rebel against their own Authority, for out of Parliament
they have none; and the Royal power rebels against the politic, and the
politic defends it where it ought to be, and resists it where no Law can
justify it.

3 To rebel against the personal Commands of the King is no rebellion, but the
resistance of wrong, and Rebellion is properly against the Kings Authority
which defends the person, and the person cannot be safe without it, but casts
it self wilfully into peril, to perish with Rebels against the care of the
common protection.

4 To kill the King is no good man's intention, and his party is the Argument of
the war, which being against his own authority, must be suppressed for his
safety in his own body.

5 The Parliament is no Arbitrary Government, and what the three powers do is
judicial in cases extraordinary, and Ordinances need no other Laws then their
own powers.

6 To change what is humane, is no alteration of Religion.

7 Rebellion is against the Parliament, not by it.

8 They are not the best subjects that reject the Parliament.

9 They are not the Kingdoms enemies that fight for the Parliament.

Lastly, his Majesty's fears cannot be in his supreme Council, where He and
we all are safe.

A Declaration of the power of a King, and the Loyalty of His Subjects.
THE Oath of God binds every Subject to keep the Kings Commandment, which he
may do, when he is deemed to do the contrary, and shall not need to make have
out of his sight, that face shall change for the better, that boldly holds out
in well doing. We must not stand in any evil, for so we may suffer his just
displeasure that has dominion over us.

And therefore all men ought to be careful of what they are justly commanded,
and fear not words that want warrant. Kings are men, and have their passions,
and must have time to digest them, and return where they should be and happy
shall they be when they understand their powers aright.

We have waded through a most wearisome way, clogged with clamor as the
thickest clay, or as clouds of dust that blind every man's eyes, and the more we
stir, the more we strive to choke our selves, and it were happy we were out of
the way in some other Kingdom to seek our own peace, if the Parliament may not
make it. The Assembly was confused, Acts 19.32. and the major part knew not why
they met.

Such Assemblies there be too many, where multitudes meet.

Can any man rejoice that Tumults turned the King from his Council, and now we
hear men rejoice that they hope the like Tumults will turn the Council out of
the Kingdom.

And if we lose both, where shall our happiness be? The best desire is, that
both may meet, and except that be, we are like to expect greater Tumults to
take all from Us We should see better betwixt parties, if we our selves would
not be parties. The beauty of truth, is her nakedness, and therefore she seeks
no corners: but falsehood is ugly, and therefore like ill complexions uses
varnish. The Parliament paints not, but is plain, and they that have erred set
Colors on their Causes to contend with truth it self.

The Declaration of the Citizens of London, concerning the Treaty, and the Army.
Diverse of the Citizens of London having received several papers from the
Army, touching the Treaty, and bringing to condign punishment the abettors and
fomenters of the late war and commotions within this Kingdom, have declared
their unanimous. Resolutions to join with them therein, and to live and die,
and stand and fall with them in the said Engagement, even for those particulars
of common Right and Freedom for which they first took up arms; and do further
declare, that they will by Gods assistance, second them with their utmost power
and might in their greatest straights and difficulties against all opposition
whatsoeve.

This is the sense and resolution of many thousands well affected Citizens in
and about the City of London, who subscribed to the large Petition, presented
to the House of Commons, concerning a personal treaty with the King.

FINIS.

