THE DECLARATION AND REMONSTRANCE OF THE Lords, Knights, and Gentry of the
COVNTIE OF Cornwall.

Agreed on by the whole County in general, October. 10. 1642.

Wherein is declared the Resolution of the said Lords, Knights, and Gentry,
concerning the King and Parliament.

Together with their proceedings against Sir Ralph Hopton, who has now took
Castle in Cornwall, having there fifty Pieces of Ordnance, and 200. men.

Together with the Resolution of hoth Houses concerning the same.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Horton. October. 13. 1642.

THE DECLARATION AND REMONSTRANCE of the Lords, Knights, and Gentry of the
County of CORNWALL, agreed on by the whole County in general: Oct. 10th. 1642.
THe Right Honorable ROBERT Earl of Warwick, having received intelligence
from both Houses of Parliament of the great preparations that are now making in
Holland, and to be sent over into England to assist His Majesty against the
Honorable Houses of Parliament, he no sooner had received their message, but
he sent four lusty brave Ships to guard the Sea Ports near to New Castle; And
having remained there some certain time, by their Intelligencers abroad, they
had information that five Ships lay hovering up and down near or about
Calice, but they had no sooner received this news, but they presently hoisted
sail, and took their way toward those parts, but the enemy hearing of their
coming, immediately struck sail and went toward Holland, insomuch that
before our Ships could get within sight of them, they were gone; but it is very
probable that the Hollanders will make stay of them there; the old Prince of
Orange does labor very much to send Arms and ammunition to the King, but the
young Prince is much against the same, and does daily work to turn his father
from so doing.

Information was given to the honorable Assembly of Parliament that Sir Ralph
Hopton has taken Pimick Castle in Cornwall, and has strongly fortified the
same, having already about 200. soldiers in the same, and it was moreover
signified that he has got at the least fifty pieces of Ordnance, and does
begin to shoot with the same daily, thinking by that means to make the County
come in to assist him, but the greatest part of the County stands firm and well
affected to the Parliament, and are now resolved to take the same resolution as
the men of Manchester did, having summoned the whole County to appear within
five miles of the said Castle, and there to conclude on such matters that does
now concern their lives and estates, and as it is supposed they will gather a
head and besiege the said Castle: and for the aid and assistance of them, the
Parliament has given order and Command that those two Regiments that are now
going toward Bristow and Minehead, and shall go into Cornwall to aid and
assist the COUNTY and inhabitants against the said Sir Ralph Hopton, and that
the will and pleasure of both houses shall be made known therein; and that
their desire is that more Forces shall be raised in that County to aid and
assist the Parliaments Forces.

There was also more letters came to the House of COMMONS from Weston Gate,
intimating and signifying that the Marquess of Hartford is in South Wales, and
does daily labor and endeavor to win the hearts of the Welshmen, striving
exceedingly to raise those Counties to aid His Majesty against the Parliament,
and losing very much of the great strength he has, saying that he is above
30000. strong, Horse and Foot.

Thus he does daily relate to those parts, thinking by this means to draw on
those that stand as Newters, but it is credibly reported that His Majesty has
not half that number.

Prince Robert does now begin to declare his Resolution, concerning his
residence here in England, and it is supposed that if His Majesty would but
give way to it, he would soon return to Holland.

FINIS.

