A Declaration of the Generals at Sea, and the Captains under their Command,
concerning the late Dissolution of the Parliament; And their Resolution
thereupon.
As it was sent to Vice Admiral Penn, to be Communicated to the Commanders and
Officers of the Ships under his Command.
GENTLEMEN,
THere being certain Intelligence come to our Hands of the great change within
our Nation, viz. The Dissolution of this Parliament. We the General Commanders
and Officers here present with this part of the Fleet, have had a very serious
Consideration thereof, as also what was our duty, and incombent upon us in such
a juncture of time, and find it set upon our spirits that we were Called and
Entrusted by this Nation for Defense of the same against the Enemies thereof at
Sea, whether the People of the United Provinces, or others: And we are resolved
in the strength of God unanimously to prosecute the same according to the trust
reposed in us; and have thought good to signify the same unto you, desiring
you will take the effectuallest course you can for the strengthening and
encouraging one another in this work; and doubt not but the Lord who has done
great and wonderful things for his people that have trusted in him, will also
be found among us his poor unworthy servants, if we continue firm and constant
in our duties, walking before him in faith, humility and dependence, not
seeking our selves, but his glory; which that we may all do, is the desire and
prayers of

From on board the Resolution at the Spithead, 22 April, 1653. Your very
affectionate Friends and Brethren, Captains.
Richard Deane, Tho. Crosby. Says Hawly. Lionel Lane. Tho. Arkinstall. Jo.
Jefferson. Giles Shelly. Rob. Sanders. Edw. Blagg. Rob. Graves. Will. Limbrey.
Rich. Stayner. George Moncke. Fran. Park, Ja. Peacocke, Andr. Rand, Geo.
Dakins, Nich. Foster, Jer. Smith, Ben. Grimston; John Hayward, Anth. Earning,
Will. Pyle, John Edwin,
Generals.
Will. Haddocke, Tho. Thorowgood, Will Goodson, Fran. Bundidge, Robert Clarke,
John Seaman, Eustace Smith, Tho. Hare, Nich. Lucas, Jonath. Hide, Will. Morcock.

This is a true Copy of the Original sent to Vice Admiral Penn, to be
Communicated to the Commanders and Officers of the Ships under his Command.

Ex: John Poortmans Cler'.


General Blake is ashore, for the better Recovery of his health.

Vice Admiral Penn is come into the Downs; we have there at present above 70.
Sail of gallant Ships; where it is expected that General Deane, and General
Moncke will be with him very suddenly; and then away upon Action.



London, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, dwelling in Thamestreet over against
Baynards-Castle.


