A DECLARATION OF Diverse Gentlemen and others in the Principality OF WALES,
WITH Their Propositions to his Highness Prince Charles, desiring him to be
their General, and to grant them an Act of Indemnity for what is past, with
allowance for their Arrears due to them at this present.

And their Instructions how to carry on the work, and to have intelligence with
the Scots and Irish, and their Desires to have Ships and Men of War sent into
those parts.

Also, a true Relation of the last Fight at Colchester, with the burning of one
of their Wind-mills; in which action there were diverse killed and wounded on
both sides.

Together with the taking of two Captains, diverse Officers, and 80
Common-souldiers at Wentbridge.

London, Printed for R. VV. 1648.

A LETTER OF The Confederate Welch-men to His Highness the Prince OF WALES
May it please your Highness,
WE hope our Declaration which we have now sent unto your Highness, will give
you ample satisfaction as well of our integrity heretofore, as of our
intentio^s for the future to serve your Royal Father, and your Self, as far
as we are able to make you both great and glorious as the Parliament promised,
and we ever intended, and did till of late, conceive that they did so too, but
as soon as we clearly saw that they went clean contrary ways, we addressed our
selves to his Majesty, and had a promise to have speedy directions from him,
which we have not yet had; the reason whereof, as we conceive, is because of
the close restraint upon him, in regard whereof we do now apply our selves unto
your Highness.

We have sent some Propositions, which we hope will seem reasonable to your
Highness, and to confirm us in our endeavors, and that your Highness will
please to sign them and some instructions concerning our wants and supplies, to
which we hope your Highness will please to give us a speedy answer, that so we
may go on the more cheerfully to restore your Royal Father to his greatness,
that he may long reign over us, and when it shall please God to give him a
Kingdom of glory in Heaven, to leave all His Kingdoms on Earth, to you his
Successor in peace and happiness, which shall ever be the prayer of.

Propositions sent by the Confederate Welsh to his Highness the Prince of
Wales.
I. THat his Highness the Prince of Wales will be pleased to own them for his
Army, and to be their General, and if he please, to come hither in person, if
not to appoint.

II. That they may have an Act of Oblivion and indemnity, and a general
pardon for all things heretofore done by them during this war, and to be freed
from suits in law, by particular persons for any thing by them done, touching,
or in relation to the war.

III. That they may be paid all such arrears as shall appear to be due to them
at this time, and for which the Parliament has promised to give them
Debenters, and a reasonable time and course to be appointed for the payment
thereof, and for their future pay.

That they may continue in such Offices and places as now they have, until they
be preferred to greater.

Instructions to carry on the work.
TO take course for Arms and Ammunition

To send Commissioners.

To keep intelligence and correspondency with the Prince, and to have a
character to write to him by, and to receive Letters from him.

To consider what correspondency and intelligence they shall have with the
Scots and Irish, and other parts of England and North Wales, and to what
particular persons they shall make their addresses.

How they may have intelligence from London, parliament, and Army.

To know their proceedings from time to time, and make addresses therein.

To have Ships and Men of War sent down into these parts.

To send some men of experience to advise and assist them upon all occasions.

To consider what Officers and Commanders shall be sent hither, wherein
particular care is to be taken, and not to send any that may give offense to
the soldiers or Country here.

To take care to raise men and money, and that the persons that receive the
money may be men of trust, and that they may either give good security or an
Oath, or both to employ it as shall be directed; and that if it be
mis-imployed, he shall give notice of it to the Prince, or such as he shall
appoint to that purpose.

That there may be some of the Country, and some of the Army, and some from the
Prince that may join together in raising of money, and quartering of Soldiers
in such a way as may least offend the Country.

To provide for Proclamations of Pardon for all such as shall adhere to them.

This Plot was secretly carried on by a great party of Gentlemen and others,
who privately got subscriptions of hands, and had taken an Oath of secrecy to
be faithful each to other in the pursuance of this their Design; and to give
the better gloss to their intended business they drew up a Declaration in the
Name of the subscribers to this effect. viz.

A Declaration of diverse Gentlemen and others in the Prineipality of Wales.
WE who have subscribed our names do declare, That we will use our utmost
endeavors to bring the King to a personal Treaty with his Parliament, with
freedom, honor; and safety; to the end that the just Prerogative of the King,
privileges of Parliament, laws of the Land, Liberties of the people, may be
all maintained and preserved in their proper bounds, and the Protestant
Religion as it now stands established by the Law of the Land restored
throughout the Kingdom, with such regard to be had of tender consciences as
shall be allowed of by Act of Parliament.

It is an old proverb and a true one, delay breeds danger, which our Northern
counties finds too true, and if this former mentioned design be not prevented
may prove as dangerous to the Counties in Wales.

It was long rumoured, that the Scots were raising an Army to come against
England though few believed it, or sought to prevent it, which now to late they
repent, and have found it to their cost, no report but a truth, and though the
well-affected would not take time by the fore lock, yet the Royalists did, for
they immediately seized on Pomfract Castle withal the Arms and Ammuntion
therein, and began to imbody a strong party in the North, to join with the
Scots, which the other neglecting, is the cause that the Scots come forward
with much expedition and success.

For they have seized on Carlisle, Barwick and Appleby, and diverse other
places* and are now on their march to Bernard castle notwithstanding Maj. Genesis
Lamberts opposition, who has endeavored, as much as possible could be to
retard their march, but for want of moneys, which is the sinews of war, and
supplies of men, he is forced to retreat.

On Wednesday, the 17 of July, a party of our horse being at Wentbridg, and
thinking themselves very secure, took up their quarters; every one making what
provision he could, for himself and his horse, but the enemy at Pomfract having
notice thereof by their spies, drew forth a party and suddenly fell upon our
men in their quarters, where they found some sleeping, others drinking, and
none of them in a posture of defense or able to dispute the business: they
took about eighty common Soldiers, two Captains and diverse other Officers.

From Colchester our last intelligence informs us, his Excellency commanded
forth a party of his Forces, to fire on of the enemies Windmils which stood
near the walls of the said city, who having fitted themselves with hand Granado
'e, and other matterialls fitting for that purpose, made their approach, which
the enemy perceiving, provided to resist them and defend themselves, between
whom began a very hot despute, but our men prevailed so far, that they had
their design in firing the said mill, and hoping it would take good effect they
retreated, which the enemy were very joyful of, for by that means they had
good opportunity, to quench the fire which in short space they did, to their
comfort and our grief.

In this conflict there were many killed and wounded on both sides, what the
enemies loss was we cannot as yet learn, on our side we lost not above 6 or 7
men, and about 11 were slightly wounded.

Those in the town are very free of Ammunition of late which we perceive by
their superfluous shooting, in the town, whereby we are persuaded that they are
in a better condition then we expected, and are likely to hold out yet at the
least a month longer.

FINIS.

