THE Declaration and Proposalls Of the Citizens of LONDON, TO The Kings
Majesty, Army, and Kingdom, Communicating their gallant and Royal Resolution,
for the establishing of his sacred Majesty, His Royal Consort, the Queen,
Charles Prince of Wales, James Duke of York, and the rest of the Royal Family,
in their just Rights and Privileges, and to establish a firm and lasting Peace
between Prince and people; with the time prefixed and set down, for the
bringing of his Majesty to London, and the re-inthroning of Him in his Royal
Palace at Westminster; And their D^sires to the Kingdom for the p^rformance
thereof, by subscribing and promoting the said D^claration, throughout all the
Corners of the Nation. Likewise, their Remonstrance to the Kingdom, touching
the Lord Genesis Fairfax, and Lieutenant Genesis Cromwell, to be sent chief General
into Ireland, for the red^cement of that Kingdom, to the obedience of His
Majesty, and the Crown of England.

ORdered that this Declaration and Proposal be forthwith publish^d throughout
the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, to be subscribed unto, by all
Persons whatso^ver, above the Age of 16. and to be record^d for a grand Law for
future Ages,



C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE they royal blazon of England, surmounted by a crown

Dec: 26 LONDON, Printed for Richard Cradock, 1648

A Declaration from the City of London to the Kingdom of England, and
Dominion of Wales, touching the enlarging of His Majesty, etc.
Whereas through the violation of his Majesty's Oath and Covenant made unto
the People at his Coronation, all our late and present Woe and Miseries of War
both in England and Ireland have come; as also the great divisions amongst our
most worthy and eminent persons of the Commonwealth, with the great
distempered and unconstant actings, and high fallings, even in the Parliament
it self: And for that it is the due Right and Privilege of the folk or people
of this Nation, to make and choose our and their Laws by an equal
Representative in Parliament, as by the foresaid Coronation Oath and Covenant
fully appears; Therefore the Right Honorable the Lord Major, Aldermen and
Common Counsel of the City of London, do in the N^me of the City, First,
Humbly offer unto the High Court of Parliament assembled at Westminster, this
present entitled Paper, called A great Agreement of all the People of England
and Wales, for their Approbation and Subscription; and that it may thence be
dismissed, and forthwith sent into every part of the Land, to be Agreed on,
Consented to, and Subscribed by all the Freeborn People of the same (above the
Age of Sixteen) on pain for the Refusers to be excluded and debarred the
protection of the Law of the Land; and that all the Subscriptions may be
brought into the present particular Representatives of Parliament, to be
Returned and Recorded there for a grand Law for ever.

1. THat the King, by the Advice of his evil Council, through usurping anp
incroaching upon ou Freedoms, and by leaving the Parliament, and levying a War
against it, is guilty of all the blood, vast expense of Treasure, and Ruin
that has been occasioned by these Wars within the Kingdoms of England and
Ireland.

2. That if any King of England shall hereafter challenge to himself a Negative
voice, to the determinations of the Representative in Parliament; and shall not
according to the Duty of his Kingly Office, Consent and Sign all such Laws, as
the people by their Representative, The Commons of England, from time to time
assembling in Parliament, after Consultation had with the Lords therein (when
sitting) shall make and choose, may be deposed by the same Parliament.

3. That all Laws made or to be made, every person may be be bound alike; and
that no degree of Lords, Peers of Parliament (now or hereafter assembled) or
others, No Tenure, Estate, Charter or Office soever, shall confer any
exemption from the ordinary course of Justice, and Legal proceedings,
whereunto others are subjected.

4. That our meanings and intentions are, Nor to leave our selves liable to the
least of mercy, touching ou^ Freedoms, either of the most righteous, or evil
and unrighteous Princes, (disclaiming confidence in vain man) But knowing that
Justice punishment ought never to be inflicted, but where in reason it will
convert into mercy, and seeing that it has pleased God. That a Covenant is
passed between this Nation and our Brethren of Scotland whereby mercy is
claimed by that Nation on his Maj. behalf: Therefore if the King shall assent
unto this Agreement, that then he may be proclaimed and Crowned King again. And
who after the first 4. years in which the Kingdoms debts may be paid, may in a
Parliamentary way have as great an Annual Revenue conferred upon him, as (one
year with another of his Reign) was yet evee brought into the Exchequer,
notwithstanding those vast illegal sums thereof, raised by the multitude of
Monopolies, and destroying usurping projects, Except what shall be defalked for
such Charges as henceforth shall be thought fit to be defrayed by the Parl.
which formerly was done by the King.

5. That all or any person or persons that shall approve, or any way allow of
any thing which the King, or any person by or under him have done in this late
miserable and distructive War, may be dealt with as in case of high Treason.

6. That if any person or persons whatsoever, that shall any way wilfully
endeavor to disgrace (by approbious speeches) any person or persons for
assisting the King in his War against the Parl. may be bound to the good
behavior, with great surety for the some.

7. That a general Revisement may be had of all the Laws and Statutes now in
force, and that those intending and relating to the maintenance of popery,
prelacy, Episcopacy, Superstition, and all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction or
Government, and whatsoever else that will not best stand with the good of the
Nation according to this present age, may be repealed.

8. That the people being at this time very unequallie distributed for
electing their Representatives, may be more indifferently proportioned; And
that not only every Freeholder, but Copyholder also, that is worth 40 s. per
annum, and every other person that is worth 50 l. personal Estate, may have
Voices in the election thereof.

9. That the people do of course choose themselves a Parl. once every 2.
years, after the most f^ee and uncontrolable manner, upon pain of high Treason
to the Disturbers, over-bearer or over-bearers of any person or persons of the
Elections forever, and to continue by the space of 5. months, to begin on
every first Thursday in every second March; and to begin to sit upon the
first Thursday in April then next ensuing, after this, and to continue till the
last day of August then next day following also, and no longer; and that this
may terminate and end before May 1649.

10. That out of every Parl. there may be a Committee of State appointed,
consisting of 40. of the Members thereof, 6. to be out of the City of London,
Westminster, and the Borrough of Southwark; and the nex to be equally
proportioned for the several other Counties, Cities, and Towns corporate of
England and Wales, to negotiate in the Intervals of Parl. of all things given
them in charge by the said Parl.

11. That his Excellency the L. Genesis Lieutenant Genesis Cromwell, the Lord Mayor
of our City, the Earl of Northumberland, the Lord Gray of Groobie, the L.
Wharton M. G. Skippon, Commis. Genesis Ireton, Sir John Potts, Sir Will. Waller,
Sir Will. Brereton, Sir John Maynard, Col. Haslo, Mr. Alderm^n Fouke, Mr.
Alderman Gibbs, M^. Fran. Allen, M. G. Massey. Col. Wilson, Col. Fleetwood,
Col. Harrison, Col. Russel, Sir Arthur Haflerig, Sir Gilbert Pickering, S r
Henry Vain junior Mr. Perpoint, Col. Martin, Col Rigbie, Mr. Holland, Sir John
Palgrave, Maj. Wildeman, Lieut. Col. Lilburn, Col. Ludlow, may be a Committee
to continue until the first day of the next Parl. to regulate, place, displace,
confirm, commissionates or non commission all Justices belonging to the Court,
of Westminster, with the Officers and Offices thereunto belonging, all Sheriffs
of Counties and Justices of Peace, and all other Officers, and Offices
whatsoever, formerlie occasioned to be granted by his Maj. whether by
usurpation or otherwise.

12. That the Earl of Pembrook, E. of Denbigh, E. of Kent, Mr. S^rjeant Wild.
Sir Tho: Withrington, the Lord Lisle, Sir John Danvers, Sir H^n. Mildmay,
together, with the rest of the excellent and honorable Committee for the
regulating of Offices and Officers, may be the Committee of State for the next
ensuing Intervals of Parliament.

13. That henceforth no Free born person of this Nation be hereafter pressed to
serve in the War.

14. That a st^ict Account may be taken of all those persons that have been
Treasurers, Receivers, or otherwise any way entrusted with the Tre^sure of the
State.

15. That all the Dean and Chapters Lands may be sold for payment of the
public Debts, or for what other uses the Parl, shall think fit; and that all
the Soldiers of the new Model now in Arms may either be paid by proportions
out of the Marish Lands, Fens, and Common pastures For every Trooper that is
behind, and in Arrear for every year (or proportionable according to that
time) the sum of 4 l. per annum, during his life, without allowance for free
quarter, and every Footman the sum of 5 s. per annum, with proportion to time
as aforesaid, and if it shall happen that the said Marish Lands, Fens, and
Common Pastures will not be sufficient to perform the same, that then it may be
made up out of the aforesaid Deans and Chapte^s Lands: Gonditionally provided,
That all such, as shall be assigned by the gene^al Council of the Army for the
Service of Ireland, do not refuse the same; but that all such as shall be
dismissed thither, shall have the fee-seemple of the said proportions of Land
to them and their heirs for ever: And all others, that shall desire to leave
the Wars, and shall be dismissed the Army by the Council of War also, may
for^hwith be satisfied their Arrears upon his Excellencies discharge.

16. That the great weight and Charge of Ireland may be entrusted in a
faithful Gommittee, consisting of 9. at the least, for ordering that Affair,
whereof 2. to be Members of the City of London.

FINIS.

