A DECLARATION FROM Many thousands of His Majesty's loyal and faithful
Subjects in the County of YORK, CONCERNING The raising of an Army both of Horse
and Foot to aid and assist the KING: AND The Resolution of the Knights, Gentry,
and Freeholders thereupon; As also, their Protestation touching the Northern
Army.

Likewise, the humble Remonstrance and Proposals of diverse Knights, Gentry, and
Freeholders in the County of Leicester; concerning the Kings Majesty, Crown,
and Kingdom.

Sent to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.

ORdered that this Declaration be published in all the Parish Churches, and
Market Towns within the said County of YORK.



march 27 Printed at London for R. VV. 1648.

The Humble REMONSTRANCE AND PROPOSALS OF His Majesty's Loyal and faithful
Subjects, the Knights, Ministers, Gentry, Freesholders, and many thousands of
the Inhabitants of the County of Leicester.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
WE your Majesty's Loyal, faithful, and obedient Subjects of Liecestershire,
situated in the midst of your Kingdom of England, and in the midst of our
great fears and apparent dangers, by the levying of Forces, as it is thought,
against the Honorable and illustrious Parliament, thereby to rout and ruin
their manifest, good, and godly purposes, and the more fully to effect this
Design, you have by the ill advice of your late pernicious Council morgaged,
pawned or sold the glory of the Land, the Jewels and treasvres of the Crown,
which ought as highly to be prized as the Militia, or any Magazine whatsoever:
For 1. the one chiefly serves to secure what is yours in possession. And 2. the
other (being so easily parted with) abateth the luster of your Kingdom.

Therefore may it please your Majesty to hearken to the worthy and
wel-deserving men of your King^ome, your hopeful, and our happy Parliament, and
become more near in person, and join in affection with your great Court of
Judicature; for surely that high Assembly with Gods blessing, and your
assenting unto them, can soon procure your and our safety, and annihilate all
distractions and distempers.

And that you would freely grant your Royal consent for the putting our county
in a posture of defense, by reason of the emminent danger Northward; because we
desire to follow the good example of our Neighbor Country men in Lincolnshire,
and others, and to join your self with your Parliament. Otherwise, when they
shall declare, and nominate the particular disturbers of yours and our peace,
the procurers of your and our fears, jealousies and amazement out of their
known experience, we shall take upon us the boldness to remove from your
Majesty, such prosecutors as are enemies to the State, and hinderers to the
tranquillity of the same. Therefore we your faithful Subjects and Servadts
humbly sue, that your Majesty woule accord with your Parltament, etc.

And we with our lives, estate, and fortunes, shall be obedient and loyal unto
your Majesty.

And pray, etc.
A Declaration of his Majesty's most loyal and faithful Subjects within the
County of York, touching the raising of Forces for the KING.
WE the Gentry, Freeholders, and others of the county of York, being none of
us present, or consenting to the late Assembly, where Propositions were made
for the raising of Forces of Horse and Foot in this County, the leavying of
moneys for the maintenance of them, and taking away the Arms of some peaceable
Subjects, or none at all of Us consenting to the lawless and unpresidented
presentment of the Grand Juries at the last Assizes held for this County, being
framed to give more strength and color to part of their^ ^^oposition, the said
propositions and presentiments, being contrary to the Law of the Land, and
tending to the introducing of an arbytrary Government, the taking away the
propriety of every Subject in his estate, and which is the worst of all evils,
to beget a War in the bowels of this Country. We think our selves, and all the
rest of the subjects of this County, to be so highly conceined in the
proceedings aforementioned, as without great disadvantage to us all, we may
not be silent therein, Do make this our Protestation and Declaration before God
and the whole world, that all our endeavors and labors shall only tend to
the settlement and continuance of a real peace, according to the Laws of the
Land, and to the uniting of the fractions, and taking away the distractions
that have most unhappily broken the general unity of the Inhabitants of this
County. And that nothing can be more dangerous and deRructive thereunto then
the raising of such Forces. We conceiving the advisings thereof to proceed from
some destructive councels; the ends whereof are to imbroyl this Kingdom in such
a deluge of war, as has already, though under other pretenses, swallowed up
the Protestant Religion, the peace and prosperous condition of the Kingdom of
Ireland.

And seeing his sacred Majesty has often declared unto Us, That the Laws of
the Land shall qe the Rule of His Government, and that hh suspects it shall be
the measure of our subjection; we cannot conceive that any of these proceedings
so grievous to the Subject, are consented to, or waranted by his gracious
Majesty.

And therefore we further declare, that we will not consent, nor as much as in
us lies, suffer that any such Forces be raised within this County, nor that
the Arms of any subjects, other then Popish Recusants be taken from them; nor
will we consent or suffer, that any frrraign Forces be brought in upon Us; and
if any such attempts ^^albe offered or made, we will endeavor to suppress
them, and to keep the peace of the County entire, so far as the known Laws of
the Land shall enable us therein.

And we do likewise declare, That we shall be most ready and willing, to meet
the rest of the Gentry and Inhabitants of this County, to advise of such
matters as may endanger the violation of the peace thereof.

And we desire that this our Declaration may be published in all the Parish
Churches and Markets of this County, to the end that all men may take notice of
this our Resolution and proceedings.

The Resolution of the Commissioners of Scotland, concerning several Articles
touching the Kings Majesty.
TO the first Article, they declare, That his Majesty has nothing in it of his
affection to, or liking and approbation of the Covenant, but only what He is
content to yield in order to his own interest. Yea, an Act of Parliament for
security of those who have taken, or shall take the Covenant does or may suppose
some fault or somewhat justly challengable in the taking of the Covenant, which
needs an Act of Indemnity.

And although the concession were certain and absolute, it amounts to no more
but to a leaving of the Covenant arbitrary, which is contrary to the Acts of
the General Assembly and Parliament in this Kingdom, and to one of the chief
Propositions of Religion once agreed upon by both Kingdoms for a safe and well
grounded peace, viz.

The Proposition concerning his Majesty's swearing and signing of the League
and Covenant, and enjoining by Act of Parliament in both Kingdoms the taking
thereof by all the Subjects in the three Kingdoms, with such penalties as
shall be agreed by both Kingdoms: So that the first Article of his Majesty's
offer is a most manifest altering of the state of this cause; Is is also a
strengthening of the hearts and hands both of the Sectaries, and of the
malignant party, a partaking and conniving at the sin of all those who in the
three Kingdoms have refused, or shall refuse to enter into the Solemn League and
Covenant, an introducing of a detestable indifferency or neutrality in this
Cause which so much concerns the glory of God, the good of the Kingdom, and
the honor of the King.

Neither are we moved with that objection which is hinted concerning the
constraining or enforcing men's consciences.

They refuse a necessary duty who refuse to take the Covenant; and the penalty
or punishment of such refusal is no constraining of the conscience, more then
the penalty or punishment of a Subject, who refuses to take the Oath of
allegiance, is a constraining of the conscience to Loyalty, or more then the
punishment of Idolaters, and Seducers mentioned so often in Scripture, can be
called a restraining of the conscience to the fear of God.

To the second. For ought we know the conditions couched in the first Article,
are also to be understood in this and the following Article: However this
second Article as it is but the same in substance with some of his Majesty's
concessions in former messages, so that which is proposed in it is but a
toleration of Presbyterial Government in England, and that but for three years.

To the 3. As we do approve of the suppression of the particular Heresies and
Schisms ennumerate in his Maj. offer; so we see not how it can be reconciled
with his Majesty's Message of Novem. 16. in which there was a concession to all
such as differ from Presbyterial Government: And do further find the Article
dangerous and defective in omitting Erastianism, and other dangerous errors,
especially those which may prove destructive to the Covenant, in ministering the
occasion for Papists and Prelates to plead for a toleration, although the
Covenant binds us to endeavor the extirpation both of Popery and Prelacy.

And being now very sensible of the present danger His Maj. person and
Monarchial Government is in by that prevalent party of Sectaries, We shall so
far as concerns the duty of our places and callings, endeavor the
preservation of Monarchial Government in his Majesty, and his Posterity,
according to the Covenant; not being ignorant what calamities and confusion use
to attend to change either of the government it self, or of the Royal Line.

And having now discovered the snares and dangers, we shall in the next place
seriously propose some pious counsels to the Members of this Church and
Kingdom, viz. 1. We exhort every one to make more conscience of endeavoring a
real Reformation. And 2. To avoid enemies, and beware of dangers on all hands.
We c^^not see but Religion, Govenant, and Presbyterial Governme^^ is now in
great danger by the power and prevalency of Se^^^ries in England.


Impr.

G. (...).

FINIS.

