A DECLARATION CONCERNING The miserable sufferINGS OF THE COVNTRIE, under some
of the SCOTS FORCES that quarter in the NORTH OF ENGLAND,

Certified in two several said to be LETTERS written from the Inhabitants of
Stainton, and Cleaveland. but made at London by ye (...).

Printed and Published according to Order.

October: 24th LONDON Printed by E. E. 1646.

A DECLARATJON Concerning the miserable sufferings of the COVNTRIE under some
of the Scots forces that quarter in the North of England, certified in two
several letters from the Inhabitants of Stainton, and Cleaveland.
SIR,
I Am very sorry that there is so little credit given to our Petitions and
letters; if those that have not faith to believe them had but our gests amongst
them one month: they would be more sencible of our sufferings; In the interim
so long as we have either Cattle or Corn, they will coinhabit with us, and
command, and without limit exact, until they see an end of us, and ours; no
part of this Kingdom has suffered so much by supposed friends, as this poor
Cleave* and; for if it were exactly counted it could not amount to less then
80000. l. yet receive we neither pity nor relief; although it is well known,
that when the Scots were in the West; we paid a monthly ascesment for 4.
months; But now the whole Army is gotten into the North and there they Lord
it, without any contribution from any part of this Kingdom: certainly the
Southern parts suppose that the Scots are marched into their own Country; or
else this North, part is totally assigned to ruin, and destruction; God knows
how many woeful souls have weekly, daily, and hourly, expected relief; but
the time is nor yet come; God in his good time help us, for our case is
miserable: diverse overtures have been for sending another Gentleman to assist
you in soliciting; but no money can be raised for his expense; And he will not
undertake it gratis as you have done; But I think ere long you will have
Westminster Hall full of Petitions; for the Country intends to send 3. or 4.
out of every Town; in the mean time, Sir, I beseech you let us still depend
upon you, for other hopes we have none, but what may be (from your endless
endeavors, and unwearied pains) derived: Sir no more for the present but that
I am,

Your very humble servant, Signed by the Inhabitants.
Stainton the 12. of October 1646.
SIR,
IN some of your last letters, you seemed to comfort our dying hopes, and
dispairing spirits: that the Scots were to have 200000 l. and so to march; and
since the brute thereof: I dare affirm their Army has bin prejudicial to
these parts, 1^0000. l. and for any thing we can perceive their depa^ture as
far of, as at the first; we hear and read the good Language they give you at
London: but we feel contrary effects here by their actions: we did hope when
the Earl of Newcastle was vanq^ished, our greatest miseries had been past: but
we have found the contrary, he only sucked some of our blood, but the Scots
have devoured our flesh, and are now picking our bones: Betwixt them both, I am
sure neither you nor any Gentleman of this Wepontake of Langbarfe have made 12.
pence profit of their Estates; our slavery are far greater then any those of
the Turks both for our persons and Estates, they in Turkey are quit for a fifth
part, we in a year pay our Revenew several times over, by Ordinances of
Parliament, since the Scots came into Yorkshire the whole Country was assessed
per. month, 10000. l. 7000. l. now 3500. l. a month: but we pay now for
billet and sesse to the Scots Army here after the rate of a hundred and forty
thousand pounds per mensem, and now a part of this hundred pays a thousand
pounds a week to 2. Regiments of them, we are the absolutest slaves that ever
was read of; for they ascesse us at their pleasure, levy it as they please, if
they bid us go or ride, none dare refuse, to provide any thing for their
appetites though we fetch it 10. miles (they being very excessive in their
diet) they kill us in hot blood, beat us in cold, Captain John VVelden they
lately slew, in seeking to rescue his neighbors from their Robberies, he has
served faithfully (and with great courage) the Parliament, and deserved a
better reward, and what his enemies could not do, is effected by the pretended
friends of the Parliament, I would you could use some means to the Parliament
that some parts of his Ariers might be got for his poor wife: we mightily
admire at the Parliaments confidence, and the good opinion the City has of
their integrity, I could wish some visiters were sent from them to view their
carryage and our misery, our observation of them these 18. months have been
far different from people that came to preserve us, they have protected
Delinquents, Papists, not suffering the O^dinances of Parliament to be
excecuted, fresh forces daly come in from Scotland, their Garrisons recruited,
additionall fortifications, great supply of victuals, the Scots Army being
receptacle and sanctuary of Delinquents and Cavaliers, and such as have fought
against the Kingdom, and for Vandrusks Regiment though disbanded. It is but
transferred into several veins of the Scots Army which the Country feels to
their great costs and personal dangers; on the contrary, the well affected are
not only discountenanced, but great and insupportable burdens are laid upon
them; so that they are glad to be intercessors to their enemies for very small
courtesies. These are bad symptoms, either of a good intention or of a peace
betwixt the Kingdoms: and it will be found; that if we should fall to blows,
(which I tremble to think on) that the waste and spoil that the Parliament
has suffered the Scots to make here is so great; that there will not be found
a weeks Provision in all this Country if they should have occasion to send any
confiderable forces hither, whereas about Newcastle and Northumberland they
keep things fair and fresh, f a foul day should happen. Sir, in a word, our
stock is clean wasted; our little corn we had ill got in by reason of the
great moisture, we are now threshing it for the Scots, we are eating our last
bread; who have been able to get away, are gone. And we do expect a great
mortality, the Pestilence, being begun already amongst us; we the well affected
prays you to petition the Honorable House of Commons that they will give us
2. or 3. months allowance out of our Estates, having had nothing these 5.
years out of them; or allowance in consideration of them, protections for our
persons; for our debts; until we be restored to our Estates, 4000. l. per
mensem, we have said to the Scots Army constantly since they came into this
Weapontakee. And lastly, (Sir) if my name should be known, and produced as
Author of this letter, I could not hope to live these days; so terrible are
these guests to us, I will cease to be further troublesome; and rest

Your assured friend to serve you, Signed by the Inhabitants.
Cleveland September the 13. 1646
FINIS.

