A DECLARATION From His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, AND The General
Council of the ARMY;

CONCERNING, The obstructive proceedings of diverse Citizens of LonLon, toward
the Soldiery; As also the Charge of the Army upon them, and the rest of their
Adherents about the City.

Together with their last Proposals to both Houses of Parliament, and a Letter
from his Exceliency and the Army, read in both Houses of Parliament upon
Satturday last, and communicated to the Lord Major, Aldermen, and
Common Council of the City of London.

BY the appointment of his Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax, and the General
Council of the Army, this Declaration, together with the Proposals, were sent
to the Commissioners of Lords and Commons residing with the Army, to be
presented to both Houses of Parliament, and read upon Satturday (...) September.
18. 1647. 7ber 21

Printed at London for C. W. and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill, 1647.

A DECLARATION FROM His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the General
Council of the Army, concerning the City of London etc.
Whereas the great neglect of diverse persons within the City of London, has
occasioned too many delays in raising Money for supply of the Army, and other
Forces of the Kingdom; His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the
General-Councell of the Army, Does declare, That they take notice of the great
wants of the Soldiery, both of the Army, and other Forces, and Garrisons; as
also of the sufferings of the County, in respect of free quarter, which might
have been peevented, and a course taken for disbanding superfluous Forces, and
sending over of others for the relief of Ireland, and the supplying of those
that are there already, had it not been for neglect or delay of those on whom
the Parliament have depended in that particular, and they do especially take
notice of the delays made by the City in advancing of that sum, which the
Houses have demanded of them upon the security of the Arreares so long since
due from the City to the Army; upon which they do declare, and propound to
this effect.

I. That for what time their defauls or delays have occasioned, and shall
further occasion the Armies stay hereabouts, the charge thereof should some way
be laid upon them, and their adherents about the City.

II. That the Houses would be pleased speedily to consider of the Delinquencie
of those that had a hand in the Tumult, Desine, and Engagement of a new War,
and that such Fines may be upon them for the same, as shall be agreeable to
justice.

III. That in case the Money be not brought in by the time limited, the
Parliament would be pleased to give leave to the General (with the advice and
directions of the Committee for the Army) for the levying of the said Arreares.

All which they rather desire from grounds of reason and evidence from the
speeches of many in the City, and designs and hopes of the Parliament and
Armies Enemies to raise the Army into distempers, and the Country about them
into confusion.

This Declaration was agreed upon at the Headquarters at Putney, upon Thursday
last, there being a General Council of the Army appointed to be held every
Thursday. The General Council met in the Church, the General, many General
Officers, Field-Officers, inferior Officers, and Agitators met. A great part
of the time was spent in consideration, and debate of the Proposals of the
Army, and some few things agreed upon to be altered, and explained in them,
which no doubt will give much satisfaction to the Kingdom.

After the aforesaid Declaration was finished, it was, by the appointment of
his Excellency, and the Council of War, sent to the Right Honorable the
Commissioners of Lords and Commons residing with the Army, to be presented from
them to both Houses of Parliament, which according, with a Letter from the
General and Army, to this effect, vix. That they earnestly desired, some
speedy course might be taken for their pay, that so they might be enabled to
pay their quarters, was presented to both Houses of Parliament upon Satturday
last, and after reading thereof, ordered to be communicated to the Lord Major,
Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London.

The Debates of the General Officers of the ARMY.
SIR,
UPon Thursday last, being the 16. of this instant, his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax, and the general Officers of the army, had a great meeting at Putney,
where they spent much time, in debating upon the present affairs of the
Kingdom, and upon many great and weighty matters, exceedingly material toward
the settling of a firm peace and union. During which time of consultation, in
debate thereof, many worthy and excellent speeches were made at the Council
table, in the presence of the General, Lieutenant General, and the rest of
the Officers assembled together, by certain Colonels of the Army, which was to
this effect viz.

That they desired nothing so much, in respect of their own particulars, as to
see this languishing and tottering Kingdom, restored to a happy and
flourishing condition, that so the pure light of the Gospel may shine forth in
abundance, and appear in its full l^st^e throughout all dark and obscure
corners of the Kingdom, and that the joyful news of Peace may have its full
Echo and tryumphant sound throughout all his Majesty's Realms and Dominions,
and that the hearts both of King and People may be firmly kuit and united
together, etc. With many other worthy expressions and protestations, touching
the settling of a firm peace.

Much time were spent, touching diverse weighty businesses in behalf of the
whole Kingdom, concerning the peace, and future safety; as also some things
debated upon in reference to the Proposalls, that after the Rights, Liberties,
Peace and safety of the Kingdom being provided for, the Kings Majesty's Royal
person, his Gonsort the Queena, their Highnesses, Charles Prince of Wales,
James Duke of York, and the rest of the Royal Issue, may be restored to a
condition of safety, honor, and freedom in this Nation, without diminution to
their personal Rights, or further limitation to the exercise of the Regal
power, etc.

No ways are left unassayed, for the obtaining of a speedy settlement of the
Kingdom, and establishing of his Majesty and his Royal posterity in their
full Rights and Freedoms, so that there is great hopes of a happy and mutual
concurrence, betwixt the King and his great Council. The General Council
goes on unammously in all their Undertakings, and not so much as one dissenting
Member amongst them.

BY the appointment of his Excellency, and the Council of War, the
foregoing Declaration was sent to the Commissioners of Lords and Commons, to
be presented to both Houses of Parliament.

FINIS.

