A DECLARATION From His Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax AND The general Council of
the ARMY, OF Their Resolutions to the Parliament in their Proceedings
Concerning the KING.

11 Januarii, 1647.
REad twice in the Honorable House of Commons, and upon the Question approved,
and Ordered to be forthwith printed and published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
Jan. 12. 1647.

A Declaration from His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax and the general Council
of the Army, of their Resolutions to the Parliament in their Proceedings
concerning the King.
NOtwithstanding the high violations of the Kingdoms Rights and Liberties, and
the endeavors to swallow up the whole Interest of the Kingdom, into the Power
and Will of a KING; which the present Kings Reign has afforded: We have
observed, That the Parliament was (through His Necessities, and against His
declared Intentions to the contrary) called and put into a condition of
Vindicating the Kingdom in those things, and has yet acted with that
tenderness toward the King (as to any thing of Right that might be in Him, or
Duty toward Him) as that in the Protestation, Covenant, and many Declarations
published by them, They have held forth a careful regard of the preservation of
the Kings Person, and just Rights, with and in the preservation and vindication
of the public Interests and Safety of the Kingdom; And by the whole Series of
their Actions, and their manifold humble Addresses to Him for the preservation
and settlement of all: They have (we conceive) abundantly demonstrated the
Reality and Innocence of their Intentions toward Him.

In all which we have still understood the Sense and Intention to be no other,
then that the preservation of the Kings Person, and particular Rights, should
be so far endeavored, as it might be consistent with, and not destructive to,
those greater and more obliging public Interests of, Religion, and the
Rights, Liberties, and Safety of the Kingdom, and not otherwise.

And according^^ (...) Declarations and Papers, (...) ^^^^sionally passed from
this Army (as to (...) of settlement to the Kingdom:) (...) expressed our real
wishes, That if the King would, in things Necessary, and Essential to the
clearing, settling, and securing of those public Interests, give His
concurrence (to put them past future disputes) Then His Rights should be
considered, and settled, so far as might be consistent with those Superior
Interests of the Public, and the Security thereof for future.

And that by an Address to the King upon things so purely Essential to those
Public ends, it might once come to a clear trial, Whether we could, with the
preservation of the Kings Person, and particular Interest, have a Security to
the other, has been our earnest Desire, our great expectation, and our
endeavor, that we and others might be kept in a patient waiting for such an
issue.

Now in the Parliaments last Address to the King, we find they have insisted
only upon some few things, so Essential to that Interest of the Kingdom which
they have hitherto engaged for, as that without betraying the Safety of the
Kingdom and themselves, and all that had engaged with them in that Cause, or
without denying that which God in the issue of the War has been such Testimony
unto, they could not go lower; And (those things granted) they have offered to
Treat for all the rest.

Thus we account that great business of settlement to the Kingdom, and Security
to the public Interest thereof, by and with the Kings concurrence to be
brought to so clear a Trial, as that (upon the Kings denial of those things) we
can see no further hopes of settlement, or Security that way: And therefore
understanding, that upon the consideration of that Denial, added to so many
other, the Honorable House of Commons by several Votes on Monday last, have
resolved, Not to make any further Address or Application to the King, nor
receive any from Him, nor to suffer either, in others: We do freely and
unanimously Declare, (for our selves and the Army) That we are resolved
(through the Grace of God) firmly to adhere to, and stand by the Parliament in
those things Voted on Monday last concerning the King, and in what shall be
further necessary for prosecution thereof; and for the settling and securing of
the Parliament and Kingdom without the King, and against Him, or any other that
shall hereafter partake with Him.

At the general Council of the Army at Windsor, January the 9th 1647.
The Question being put, Whether this Declaration shall pass in the Name of the
General and this Council, It was Resolved in the Affirmative (nemine
contradicente.)

By the appointment of His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the general
Council of the Army, Signed, JOHN RUSHWORTH.

FINIS.

