THE DECLARATION AND ENGAGEMENT Of the Officers and soldiers of Col.
Ingoldsbies Regiment for the present Government, whereunto is added two Letters.

OF A great fight between Col. Jones and the Marq. of Ormond, with the routing
of Ormonds whole body of horse, and pursuing him to Waterford, The surrender of
Ross and other Garrisons to the Lord Lievt. Cromwell, since the taking of
Waxford, with the besieging of Duncanon.

ALSO An Act made at Edinburgh for receiving all persons to the Sacrament, that
were formerly debarred from it, the expectation they have of the Prince, and
the Earl of Mourtons joining with the enemy in the North.

October 30London, Printed by B. A. 1649.

The free and cordial RESOLVTIONS And ENGAGEMENTS OF The Officers and
Soldiers of the eight Companies of Col. Ingoldsbies Regiment, now residing in
the Garrisons both of Bristol, and Oxford, of the 29 of September, 1649.
WHereas there is a great and horrid design now on foot for the raising a new
war and bringing the Nation in blood again by which combustion, and confusion,
to take an opportunity to set up the Princes interest in this Nation, to which
end they have and do use all endeavors, to raise discontents in the hearts of
the people and specially of the private soldiers, casting unjust aspersions
upon the Parliament thereby, to render them odious as also representing the
General and his Council ol Officers to be Tyrannical and unfaithful,
persuading the people and soldiers, on these and the like grounds, to disown
the Parliament, to cast off the Lord General and his Council, dividing the
soldiers from their Officers, and so to be without Parliamentary and Military,
Authority, for the carrying on of which design, they have sent their Agents
abroad with traitorous and railing Pamphlets to all the Regiments of the Army,
some of them being of late among us, have by their wicked delusions so far
ensnared and engaged that had not God wonderfully prevented, we had been a
means of involving the whole Nation in blood, and had not our noble General
been merciful unto us, some of us had deservedly lost our lives with delusions
and deceipts; we do beseech our fellow Soldiers of the Army, to be careful
least they be ensnared as some of us were, and for the prevention of the like
mischief among us for the future, we do declare, that such traitorous plots we
do utterly abhor and disclaim looking on such men as our greatest enemies,
that shall endeavor to seduce us to them, and shall if at any time we find
such amongst us, apprehend and persecute them to the utmost, and do likewise
freely and really engage, to continue our due obedience to the Parliament, our
General, and all others, now in just Authority over us, and do bless God for
the good we and this Nation do enjoy, by their acts of Piety and justice, and
wise managing of the publik affairs, for the establishment of peace upon good
and sure grounds, in the prosecution of which things we do engage to stand or
fall with them, against all attempts whatsoever, end by whomsoever.

Signed by the Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, and all other Officers and
Soldiers of the said Regiment.

A Letter of the last news from Ireland, as follows.
SIR,
IT has pleased God to bless our Army with success, that since the taking of
the Garrison of Wexford (of which I believe you have already received the
particulars) there is surrendered into our possession, Rosse (another Port-town
of great consequence and some other Garrisons. It is most certain there were but
two men lost at the taking of Wexford, and it is as true, that Colonel Jones
has had a great fight with Ormond, and beaten his whole party of Horse,
himself being in the head of them, After the rout, Colonel Jones had the
pursuit of them to Waterford, by which means the Enemies Horse, which was the
only strength that Ormond had, are very much shattered and broken. Some
additionall foot from England would be very useful for this service, for that a
great number of our men are as useful to be be left behind in Garrisons, as
others re for the supporting of a standing Army in the field. We understand
there be six companies of Colonel Fenwicks, and four of Colonel Moots, ready
to be transported, we hope they will be supplied with shipping, rud be ready to
go over by the next fair wind; part of their provisions are already put aboard.
Our army is now set down before Duncanon.

October 27. 1649.
A Letter from Newcastle.
SIR,
OUr Garrison is in a good condition, so is Carlisle and Barwick, we have this
week, been very much troubled with a Witch-finder, that has seized upon twenty
seven women in this town for being witches, but being questioned he has
privately gotten away, and it is probable that if there be any witch in England
he is one. Our Regiment was drawn forth on Tuesday and the Officers and
Soldiers did unanimously subscribe to the new engagement. For the news from
Scotland it is not much, but a copy of my Letter is as follows.

If our King come hither, I hope I shall be shortly with you, and we are now
beginning to be in expectation what news from him, though little is is here at
the present. Our Ministers here fly very high against the Sectaries. From the
North little, only that the Earl of Mourton is joined with them of Orkenay,
and it is reported they should be raising men, but uncertain: many of our horse
are drawn northward, for securing of those parts, there is news in the printed
Papers of the taking the Scots ship with Ammunition and landing men in
Caithness is not true; from Ireland we hear that Colonel Aconet with a party
of about fifty lying in Antrim, were cut off by Col. Hambleton and the town
hurnt, here is a flying report that Belfast is besieged. There is an act of the
Presbytery in Edinburgh lately come forth, giving liberty to all which were
debarred from the Sacrament by an act of the Kirk, to come in and give
satisfaction proferring thereupon, that they shall be admitted, to the next
Sacrament the ninth of November. next, so that it is very probable most of our
sinful engagers will be received into the fellowship of the Church,

Newcastle 24. October. 1649.
29 October. 1649.
Imprimatur,

J.R.

FINIS.

