THE DECLARATION AND RESOLUTION OF The States of Holland, touching the
Parliament and Commonwealth of ENGLAND.

WITH Their calling of a General Council at the Hague, and their PROCLAMATION
and PROCEEDINGS concerning the last Great Sea Fight upon the DOWNS.

TOGETHER, With a perfect Narrative thereof, sent to the Parliament, and one
hundred sail of Men of War to be forthwith sent out for the preservation of the
STATES.

LONDON: Printed for G: HORTON. 1652.

A brief RELATION OF The occasion and manner of the late fight in the Downs,
betwixt the Fleet of the Commonwealth of England under the command of Gener
all Blague, and that of the States of the united Provinces under the command of
Admiral Trump, May, 19 1652. according to an account given by diverse who were
eyewitnesses of the action.
BEfore we proced to the main, it will be necessary to give you (as a
preparative thereunto) a short view of the behavior of certain Dutch ships
toward Capt. Young, Capt. of the President Frigot.

As Captain Young was coming to the Westward, to take the command of the
West-guard, the 12 instant, he discried a Fleet of about 12 sail coming from
the Southward; and making sail off to them, he found them to be a Fleet of
Hollanders come from Genoa and Legorn. Three with Flags were states men of war
for convoy, the rest Merchants ships. Hereupon Captain Young sent his Master to
the Admiral to let them know that amity was as yet continued between the two
States, and therefore that he summoned him to strike.

Upon this, the Admiral took in his Flagg, and put abroad a P^ndant, saying he
belonged to Amsterdam. But then the Vice Admiral came up with his Flagg
abroad, being a ship of 42 guns who would by no means be persuaded to strike,
though called on over and over. Then Captain Young fitting himself gave him
abroad side, and received another from him, which made the rest to engage, but
after the exchange of four or five broad sides, Captain Reynolds and Captain
Chapman coming in, the Rear and Vice Admiral also were at length forced to
strike; which being done, they were civilly used in regard of the treaty on
foot betwixt both nations.

The Vice Admiral was much shattered, and it seems nothing but pure necessity
made him strike, for, he sent Capt. Young word that his ship was ready to sink
having four foot water in the hold; and that he had order from the States, that
if he struck he should loose his head for it.

Now that which in the next place is most remarkable is the behavior or the
Dutch the day before this last fight; which seemed very fair.

For, Upon the 18 instant, Van Trump with a Fleet of 42 sail on the back side
of Goodwins sands, was discovered by Major Bourn who command the Andrew, and by
the rest of our ships riding in the Downs. They bearing toward the Road, Major
Bourn commmanded the Greyhound to make sail and to stand out and speak with
them, who when she came near struck their Top sails, demeaning themselves
civilly, and saying, they came from Admiral Trump with a message to the
commander in chief in the Downs. Hereupon they stood out in the Road with our
Squadron, and coming aboard, they in the name of their General very plausibly
saluted our ships with this account, in order they said) unto the satisfaction
of this nation; how that the Northerly winds having blown hard for diverse days,
they were put further to the Sout^ward then they intended, they having rode for
some days off Dunkirk, where they had lost several of their Anchors and
cables; adding that they had no intention of injury to the English nation.

Yet even at that time, our ships were jealous they had some design in their so
near approach, because an expression dropped from one of their Captains in
discourse, which did import that they were unwilling to strike their flagg. And
however disguised, their coming thus could be no less then a Bravado, since
it was then in their choice whether they would have came so near our Fl^et or
no; Genesis Blague was at that time also Westward with the greatest part of the
Fleet, to whom Major Bourn immediately sent an express of all that passed, and
ordered the Assurance and the Gray hound to he near their Fleet that night, to
observe their motion.

General Blague being in Rye Bay, did there r^ceive the express with an
account of all from Major Bourn; whereupon he made all possible speed to ply up
toward them, and on Wednesday the nineteenth instant in the morning, he saw
them at Anchor in and near Dover road.

Being come within three Leagues of them, they weighed, and stood away by a
wind to the Eastward, our Fleet supposing their intention was to leave us to
avoid the dispute of the Flag. About two hours after they altered their course;
For, a Captain of their own, now our prisoner, confesses, that as they rode
off toward the French coast, a ship of the States of Holland came toward
them, and made a waft with his Flag to Vantrump, who bore up to that ship, and
a boat went from that aboard Vantrump. Whereupon he immediately made all the
sail he could, hastening with his Fleet toward ours, and bore up directly with
our Fleet, himself being headmost of his own.

Being come near, within Musket Shot, Genesis Blague shot a Gun. but without a
Ball, at his Flag; which he did also twice more, Vantrump answering him with a
Gun on the averse side of his ship, which signified a high disdain or scorn
(according to the Sea-custome) and then immediately, instead of striking
(according to the ancient Usage) he hung out a red Flag, which his Officers
that we have taken, confess was the Signal, and gave our General a
Broadside, and so the fight began about four of the Clock in the Evening,
far otherwise then what has been reported by Trump himself, and others.

Then Major Bourn coming in to the engagement with eight ships more, the fight
was continued for above four hours till night parted them.

The next morning the Dutch Fleet was espied about four leagues distance from
ours toward the Coast of France. What harm we have done them is not fully
known, but one of them was supposed to be sunk, and another of thirty Guns
we have taken, with the Captains of both, the Maine-mast of the first being
shot by the Board, and much water in the Hold, which made one of our Captains
to give her over as in a sinking condition. We have six men of our Admirals
slain, and nine or ten desperately wounded, and five and twenty more not
without danger, among them the Master and one of his Mates.

The Admiral received above seventy great shot in the Hull and Masts; but in
the Sails and Rigging without number, having engaged some time alone with the
whole body of the Dutch Fleet; and though he were the principal man that they
aimed at, yet he came off wi^h honor.

One thing may not be omitted, that upon news of this fight, diverse sea men of
Dover, Deal, and Sandwich, to the number of three hundred voluntarily boated
themselves to our Fleet; and though engaged in the Generals ship, in the heat
of the fight, came off without the loss of one man.

Since this, we understand that General Blague plies to and again with his
Fleet, being well reinforced, and that Trump with his Fleet is returned home.
We have prisoners of the Dutch two Captains, two Lieutenant, and about a
hundred and fifty others.

One thing more is to be added to our foregoing relation, which is very
observable; how that as Trump came on toward our Admiral, he commanded up two
of his men, who kept still at the top of his Main Mast, as if they meant to take
down the flagg; a pretty mysterious passage to amuse us touching their
intention. We shall make no inference upon the whole matter, but leave the
world to judge.

Since this great blow given by the English, the States of Holland have called
a General Council, whose results tended to peace and unity with the
Comm^n-wealth of England, and declared their Resolutions for a Union. Yet
notwithstanding, many of them seemed to own what Van Trump had done in the
precedent action, and to that end, Declared, That an Act, or Edict, should be
forthwith published in reference thereunto. But the States General are clear of
a contrary opinion, and seem to be exceedingly exasperated against all those
that shall be instrumental, aiding, contriving, or assisting, in making a
breach with England.

There is an additional Fleet of 100 sail setting forth, their Design
pretended, for the safety and preservation of the United Provinces:
Nevertheless, many of the Dutchmen rage exceedingly, and swear to be revenged
of the English. Their great Threats are little to be feared; and as they liked
their last Supper, so let them prepare for a Breakfast.

FINIS.

