AN EXACT RELATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS AND TRANSACTIONS OF THE LATE PARLIAMENT:
Their Beginning and Ending.

With a brief account of their Expense of the time of their Session, and of
the Acts that were made by them, who were dissolved the 12. December. 1653.

As likewise of four great Votes, viz.

I. For abolishing the Court of Chancery. II. For a new Model of the Law. III.
For taking away the power of Patrons to make Presentations. IV. That innocent
negative Vote of not agreeing with the Report of the Committee for Tithes.
And an account of some Reasons of those Votes: With a brief Apology in way of
Vindication of those Gentlemen that appeared for the Votes from the great
OUTCRY made against them.

By L. D. a Member of the late PARLIAMENT.

Math. 5.11. Blessed are ye when men revile you, and persecute you, and speak
all manner of evil of you falsely for my Names sake; rejoice and be exceeding
glad, for great is your reward in Heaven. London, Printed for Livewell Chapman,
at the Crown in Pope's Head Alley. 1654.

To the Reader.
HAd not great Blasphemy reproach and scorn been offered every where unto the
holy name of God, his truth, his ways, his servants, by evil men to the great
grief of many fearing God, The following relation and discourse had never
seen the light: the particular persons loaded with great reproach and
scandal, could in regard of themselves, have been contented to have borne all
patiently with silence: and left the clearing of their innocence to the most
righteous God. It is no new thing in the world for good men to be reproached
for well doing, and to have no other reward for endeavoring to do their
Country service, and laboring to take off their heavy oppressions and
grievances, then to be counted evil doers: what is generally reported, is as
easily believed and taken for truth though it be never so false: great
lightness and vanity attending persons as is too too evident. That one part of
the House would have destroyed all the Ministry, the good as well as the bad
(passes for current) when as they were only against that old corrupt unequal,
burdensome and debate making way of their maintenance by Tithes: In which way
beside other things, many a good soul has only 20 or 30 l. per Ann. to keep
him and his alive; and others of less desert have 300 or 400 l. per Ann. or
more, they thinking some more equal and less burdensome way might be found
out and provided; and that their wives and children might have had alowance for
their subsistence also when they were dead: many also were against their
standing on that old Popish foot of account as now they do, as a part of the
old Hierarchy, judging it reason that as Archbishops and Bishops, Deans, and
Prebends, etc. were removed as Antichristian; so Parsons, Vicars, Curats,
Rectors, Donatives, and Incumbents, (strangers to the Gospel) should be taken
away also being of the same stamp: and that all faithful Teachers and
Preachers of the truth and Gospel, should by Law stand upon a more Gospel
account, and their outward interest secured unto them accordingly: a short Bill
being by them offered for that purpose but refused; whether this amounts to
the destroying the Godly Ministry, or whether they were their enemies or rather
their friends in it, they may please to consider. Reader, if thou think that
thou art come to Canaan the land of rest, and that there is attained unto the
full end aimed at and intended by Almighty God, in answer of all those mighty
works and wonders (near unto miracles) that he has wrought in these Lands:
If thou think there is already the harvest of all that treasure spent, and
blood spilt in the late Wars, then rejoice and be glad: but if thou judge
God intended greater and more high things then yet thou have seen, in way of
removing wickedness and oppression, and advancing justice and righteousness,
then believe, and wait and pray; so advises he that is a well wisher to the
interest of the Lord Christ, the welfare of the Saints, and the prosperity of
the common wealth of England.

L. D.

AN EXACT RELATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS and Transactions of the late Parliament,
their beginning and ending: with a brief account of the expense of their time
while they sat; and the Acts that were made by them, who were dissolved the
12th of December. 1653.
THe Parliament that sat so long, and had so many changes and alterations, and
yet was preserved and continued: Was a Counsel that God did highly honor in
making of them Instruments of very great things, many of them being very good
things, as to the freedom and profit of the people; Amongst which the Change
of the Government from Kingly to that of a Commonwealth, may worthily be
mentioned, as not of the least, but of the greatest, both to Religions
Interest, and the Civil Benefit of all good men.

But long sitting Contracted dullness, and a kind of Indisposition to go on
any farther to perfect the work which divine providence had carried them on in
wonderfully: Many of them minding more the greatning of themselves, rather then
righting the wronged, and releiving the oppressed people, and performing their
promises to them; so not proceeding to perfect the work of Justice and
freedom so happily begun and carried on by them, as Instruments in the hand o^
God. They became low in the hearts and esteem of good people; and divine
providence so ordering of it, (without which nothing comes to pass) they were
dissolved.

And upon an high Account for Godliness, and the Love of the truth, and cause
of God, and Interest of his people, others were called together out of the
Countries and Cities respectively, who assembling at the place and time
appointed, after a large Speech made unto them concerning the ground of
dissolving the former Counsel, and calling of this; There was delivered unto
them an Instrument in Parchment under seal; delivering the whole power of the
Nation or Commonwealth into their hands, to take care of, and to govern for
their good. It is very observable that of all that were so chosen and summoned
to appear for the end aforesaid, being one hundred and forty persons, there
were but two that refused the call and work; so unanimous a Concurrence was
there found as to the service: Though they knew well their call was not
according to ancient formalitie, and the way of the Nation. There seemed to be
two Reasons wherein there was satisfaction: First, that divine providence had
cast it on them, without their seeking in the least; Secondly, the necessity,
as the case of the Commonwealth stood of having some to Act and carry on
Affairs in way of Government, till there might be an Attayner to a better way
of settlement, by the Choice of the good people of this Nation, which was not
to be denied to be their just right, and dearly purchased liberty.

It was great satisfaction and encouragement to some, that their Names had been
presented as to that service by the Churches, and other Godly persons: And
withal, because they were to undergo the Trouble but one year, or little
more: And so long they were willing to serve their Country freely, to their
best Abilities, looking for no reward.

The fourth of July, 1653. those thus Assembled and Empowered, did adjourne
themselves from Whitehall to the Parliament House, to meet the next morning at
eight of the Clock, and then to begin with seeking God by prayer: which
accordingly they did, and the service was performed by the Members amongst
themselves, eight or ten speaking in prayer to God; and some briefly from the
Word; Much of the presence of Christ, and of his Spirit, appearing that day, to
the great gladding of the hearts of many; some affirming they never enjoyed so
much of the Spirit and presence of Christ in any of the meetings and exercises
of Religion in all their lives, as they did that day. In the Evening of that
day Mr Francis Rouse was called to the Chair, and chosen Speaker: and then the
House was adjourned to the next day: when the House appointed to pray again
three or four days after; which accordingly was done by the Members;
principally by such as had not don service before; when also the Lord General
was present; and it was a very Comfortable day. But after the House had spent
the first day in prayer, and were the next day met again, after prayer, which
was daily performed by one Member or other, as they were found free to perform
it; They then proceeded to call over the House; Read and laid up the Instrument
of their Impowering, chose a Clerk, and after a Sergeant at Arms, and chose a
Committee to Consider what Officers and Attendants were necessary to be taken
in; and to Consider of the Fees and Salaries of such as should be Employed;
which accordingly was done, and Confirmed by the House: Charge being given to
the Committee that care should be taken that none but such as feared God should
be Employed. About this Time there was a great Debate what name they should
give themselves to be called by, in as much as their call was looked on as
extraordinary; Diverse Titles were proposed; but at last being put to the vote
it was carried; To call themselves by the name of the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England. The lowness and innocence of the Title, having
little of earthly glory or boasting in it, induced some to give their vote for
that; though others were much against it. The first thing that was done was a
solemn Declaration to the good people of this Commonwealth, and to all the
world of owning themselves a Parliament, and the Supreme Power of this Nation.
Which was drawn up by a Committee, and then read and passed in the House; In
which specious things are held forth, of the goodness of God to the people of
these Nations, with Intimation of what our Indevours should be, for their good:
stirring them up earnestly to prayer, and seeking of God: which seemed to be
well relished by all good people.

Then there was a proceed to choose the Council of State, of the number of
Thirty one persons; which accordingly was done. The Powers and Instructions
read and passed, It so fell out that the great grievance of Tithes was taken on
and debated three or four days, but with little success, for whereas all the
House for the most part were sencible that it was a grievance fit to be
removed. The difference was, some would not give way to the remove of it, till
some other thing were provided to be set in the room of it: Others would have
it removed as a grievance in the first place; and then to make provision as God
should direct. In the Debate, difference was made betwixt Impropriators, and
that which was otherwise; and all seemed free and willing that Impropriators
should be satisfied the value: And therefore upon the choosing of a Committee
for Tithes; only that of Incumbants was to be considered of.

The House after much time spent as before, waved it till a further time and
better leisure: Then the House was methodized into several Committees, for the
better dispatch of business, so as none might be idle, but all employed in
public service; beside the Council of State, six or seven Committees were
chosen and set to work, The Committee for the Army, The Committee for Prisons,
and Prisoners, The Committee for Regulating the Law, The Committee for
Justices, and for the poor, The Committee for Public Debts, The Committee for
the Scotch and Irish Affairs, The Committee for Petitions; which Committees
sat daily, and took great pains, morning and evening, almost every day in the
week, to dispatch business, and make things ready for the House: And many
things were fitted and prepared, of which hereafter.

Mr. Lilburn about this time Petitioned the House, then his Wife Petitioned,
after some of Buckinghmshire, and also Hertfordshire; likewise some in and
about London: Lastly, some that called themselves young men, and Apprentices,
who delivered a high and peremptory Petition in his behalf; all which occasioned
much debate and expense of time: The young men's Petition was voted scandalous,
and they ordered to be taken into custody, and accordingly six of them were
committed, one in a few days being sick, the House discharged him; the five
Petitioning, having been in custody some days, and having been something
stiff, refusing to tell their names, instead of being released, were ordered
to be sent to Bridewell, there to be kept to hard labor, and accordingly they
were sent, and kept there, and after some time they being some of them sick,
and having Petitioned twice, four of the five were by Order of the House
released, the other remains Prisoner to this day; the only high piece of
Justice the House did all the time of their sitting, and wherein there could
not be much of honor, for it was but as the Lion trampling on the Mouse. This
business of Mr. Lilburne receiving and answering the Petitions before
mentioned, concerning himself and the Apprentices Petitions for their Liberty,
spent very much time, and held many sharp debates; some Members of the House
earnestly moving to have had his Trial suspended, and the Act called in
Question by which he was Banished, and made a Felon, that the merit of the
cause might be looked into; which they professed again and again they did not
do it so much in the favor of Mr. Lilburn, as in the right of themselves and
their posterities, and all English men, which they judged highly concerned
therein. But other Gentlemen of note being very opposite, nothing came of the
whole but expense of time, and loss of the love and affections of many good
people, whose Petitions were denied; his Trial going on, as some in the House
had suggested, so it came to pass, he was by the Jury acquitted, to the
loosing the love of some, and to the scorn and contempt by others.

By this time many matters were fitted and prepared by the Committees, who made
their daily reports. The Council of State having the pre-eminence to be first
heard, diverse things were offered by them, some of which had been considered of
by them in the interval of Parliament; many things passed and were dispatched
of what they reported, and which other Committees did likewise report, which
spent not a little time. Business came on so fast from Committees, which did
cause striving which should be first heard, and much time lost thereby. There
were many particular things ordered and dispatched by the House, as The
relieving the sufferings of many by fires in several parts of the Nation; some
their grievances redressed; some their Petitions and desires granted; some had
obstructions in their Purchases removed by the House. The business of
providing moneys (all other things ever giving way to that) occasioned expense
of much time, and great debate of ways and means to that end. The Fights at
Sea coming to knowledge by Letters, the reading of them, the acknowledging Gods
goodness, and praising of his holy name, the taking care to provide for the
sick and maimed, the relieving the Widows of such whose Husbands were slain,
the honoring with rewards the Chieftains and Commanders, with the bestowing
several sums of money on the widows and Children of such Captains as were slain
in the Fight, in consideration of their loss of such Husbands and Fathers: All
which were things just and honorable, but not done without expense of time.
The dispatch of Ambassadors to foreign parts, as to Turkey, and to Sweden,
their Letters of Credence, and Commissions signed and sealed; the receipt of
Letters from Switzerland, and other free States, the reading of them and
returning Answers, may be reckoned into the expense of time. The Council of
State chosen a second time by the Box or Glass where every one put in his
paper of Names, and those that had most Votes carried it, spent more then one
whole day.

To omit very many things, toward the end of the House's sitting, the business
of the Excise came on, where about three days were spent in passing the Rates
particularly by Vote. The Old and New Drapery, Hats, Capps, and Tobacco-pipes,
were by Vote exempted from the duty of Excise: The Bill following in Order of
the Rates, was very large of about eighty sheets of paper, spent one whole day
in the hearing of it read; and there appeared so many snares and difficulties
in it as to trade, as was judged no way fit to be put on a people that expected
freedom as the price of their blood and treasure, by them spent in the late
war: whereupon it was by general consent waved and laid aside. There were
diverse Bills prepared by several Committees, some of which were read in the
House, and others offered to have them read, but other business hindered, as,
A Bill for constituting a Committee for Advance of Trade, A Bill for
Workhouses, and providing for the poor. Diverse Bills for the Regulation of the
Law, and making of it less chargeable to the people, and more expeditions.

There were severrll Acts passed by the House, in time of their sitting, the
perticulars here follow. Viz.

1 An Act for the Committee of the Army, and Treasurers of War.

2 An Act for constituting Commissioners for ordering and managing the
Admiralty and Navy.

3 An Act for the settling the Court of Admiralty; much time spent in fixing on
Judges.

4 An Act for taking away Fines on Original Writs, which was as some knowing
Gentlemen of worth in the House affirmed, to the saving of the people of this
Commonwealth, an hundred and twenty thousand pound per annum, only ten or
twelve thousand pound thereof coming to the State.

5 An Act touching the several Receipts of the Revenue and Treasuries of the
Commonwealth, and the bringing them into one Treasury.

6 An Act for Marriages, and the registring of them; as also Births and
Burials; much time spent in the debate about Marriages, there being many
nicities and difficult cases relating to that subject.

7 An Act for the more speedy bringing in of the Arrears of the Excise, and
settling Commissioners to that end.

8 An Act concerning the Planters of Tobacco in Gloucestershire, and elsewhere.

9 An Act to continue the receipt of the Excise til the 29 of December last.

10 An Act additional and explanatory for the sale of the remaining Fee
farm-rents, and finishing the whole business.

11 An Act for settling Ireland, and making it a part of the Commonwealth; and
satisfying the Adventurers and Soldiers with Lands; which Act being very large
and comprehensive, took many days Debate before it could be passed as a Law.

12 An Act for the relief of Creditors and poor Prisoners; the fruit of it has
showed the worth of it, three hundred poor starving souls having been freed
thereby, in and about London: a Law so just and honorable, as England has
seen few better, which passed not without serious debate.

13 An Act for Accounts, and clearing public Debts, and for the discovery of
fraud and concealment of any thing due to the Commonwealth.

14 An Act impowering the Committee of the Army to state and determine the
accounts of all Soldiers and others employed by them, for moneys by them
received from the 26 of March, 1647. until the 25 of July, 1653.

15 An Act for redress of delays, and mischiefs, arising by Writs of error,
and Writs of false judgment in several cases.

16 An Act for repealing of a branch of an Act of the late Parliament,
entitled, An Act for subscribing the Engagement; which was much to the ease
and profit of the people, and to the loss of the Lawyers.

17 An Act for the regulating the making of Stuffes in the County of Norwich
and Norfolk.

18 An Act for a High Court of Justice, cost indeed but one days time the
reading, debate, and passing for a Law, by reason of the great have some
Gentlemen made, pretending great danger to themselves, and the Commonwealth,
so as no reasons could prevail to have it recommitted as some desired; or that
the Acts for Treasons might be read, that the Commissioners were to proceed
upon, as others moved to have them: nor yet that the Bil might be engrossed,
being to be a Law that concerned life, for then it could not have passed til
the next day, when some that were perceived that day absent, being praying at
the Black Friars, might be present, and hinder, as it is likely they feared,
the passing of it; which had they done, they had saved much the credit of the
Counsel, for to wise men it seemed a very weak piece, and experience has
(thanks be to God) shown there was not that sudden danger as some Gentlemen
suggested, that did not let to say (in answer to those that would have had it
engrossed against the next morning) That they knew not but by that time they
might have their Throats cut.

19 An Act for Deofforistation, and improvement of the Forests, and of the
Honors, Manors, Lands, and Tenements within the limits and perambulations of
the same, heretofore belonging to the King, Queen, and Prince: a very large
Act, and comprehensive in the perticulars; wherein the old Farmers of the
Custom House, that lent the old King money to make War with the Scots, were
admitted to have their old Debts made Public Faith to double on, to the sum of
two hundred seventy six thousand pounds, to the end to be sure to have money
against the Spring: It was complied with, and some very eminent and wise
Gentlemen made others believe there was no question but the money would be
provided ready against the times, though other Members of less note, told the
House what they thought, even as it is come to pass.

20 An Act confirming to the Purchasers of Sir John Stowels Lands, what they
had purchased of the State.

21 An Act for an Assesment at the rate of one hundred and twenty thousand
pound a Month, for six Months, from the twenty-fifth of December, One thousand
six hundred fifty and three, to the twenty-fourth of June then next ensuing,
for the maintenance of the Armies and Navy of this Commonwealth, being a very
large Act, and that which took up many days in the debate and passing of it,
there being a desire if possible it might have been to have abated something of
that sum, and that it might be laid equally: Many Votes passed, and very sharp
debates, by reason of the great inequality that was evident in the laying of
the Tax, some Countries bearing beyond their proportion, and some much less,
which made the burden more grievous then otherwise it would be: When after
many days spent in the modelizing of the Bill, and it came to be passed, some
Gentlemen gave their reasons why they could not give their Yea to pass it for
a Law, for the unrighteousness that was in it (and something else) which had
been laid forth in the debate. The great unequality betwixt County and County,
City and City, Hundred and Hundred, and so of particular Estates, some paying
but two or three shillings the pound, and others four or five, yea some ten or
twelve shillings for their real Estate, beside what they paid for their
personal: In which some of London passionately complained of their being
over-rated, they paying eight thousand pound a Month, the fifteenth part of the
whole Assesment of the Commonwealth: when as they with great confidence
affirmed, that they were not the fortieth part of the Commonwealth in value,
as their case now was. The Act engrossed, and the Question being put, the No's
(as to the making it a Law that very day) had they been prosecuted to the pole,
had hazzarded the passing of it; It having been earnestly pressed that it might
be amended at the Table, or recommitted to be amended against the next day.

A Gentleman that first moved to have the House give u^ that morning they were
Dissolved, made this one of his Reasons why he could sit no longer with his
fellows, because of their dealing so dis-ingenuously with the Army; some other
Gentlemen having spoken to the same account; but as to this those that gave
their No's in the Vote against the then passing of the Bill upon the account
before, can say they never were in arms against the Parliament and Army, nor
were ever in Oxford or any other Garrison that stood in opposition to them. And
for their constant cordial affection to them, they may safely say without
boasting, they have been but a very little behind them that have been the
highest and best affected in the Nation, what ever those Gentlemen please to
say: To endeavor to have the Assesment equally laid and born, tended much to
the Armies good rather then hurt, whereby they might continue to enjoy the love
and affection of the people unto them.

22 An Act for the continuing of the Privileges and Jurisdiction of the County
of Lancaster.

23 An Act touching Idiots and Lunaticks.

24 An Act for inabling Commissioners of Parliament for compounding with
DELINQUENTS, to dispose of two parts of the Lands and Estates of Recusants, for
the benefit of the Commonwealth. An Act that cost much time in the Debate of
it, for that some Gentlemen fearing it amounted to the Toleration of Popery,
did strongly oppose it, and caused it to be so modelized as that it was never
like to attain the end aimed at, as some then declared: Of which experience now
can best declare and speak.

25. A second Act for the Constituting Commissioners for ordering and mannaging
of the Affairs of the Admiraltie and Navy.

26. An Act for the better and more effectual discovery of Thieves and
high-way-men.

There was also a Bill brought in and Read and Debated for the Uniting of
Scotland to the Commonwealth of England, as a part of it, with equal
privileges: which spent two or three days Debate in a Grand Committee of the
whole House, before it was ordered to be Engrossed, being a thing of very great
weight and concernment, being engrossed it lay ready on the Table to be read
and passed. But the Highlanders putting the Country into distemper, it was not
put to be passed for a Law while the House continued.

By this time it will appear the House was not altogether Idle, nor at a stand
in their work, so as there was need to have them dissolved on that score.
Indeed much more might have been done and proceeded in, if there had not been
something that did let. The two Great Grievances of the Law and Tithes, had
such friends in the House; as that when either of those things came into
Debate, the House was as divided into two parts; The one very Indulgent, still
pleading and making defense in their behalf; The other Endeavoring the
redress of them. Great Counsels agree not in all things presently, yet is
that no good Ground of their dissolution; That the House was not Idle, nor at a
stand, nor in an Incapacitie, to do the work of the Nation. Though so divided
as aforesaid, may beside what appears already, be further taken knowledge of
by these Ensuing Votes which follow.

There were four great Votes, that passed in the time of the sitting of the
House, which some Interests were much displeased at, and they passed not without
great Debate.

First, A Vote for the Abolishing and taking away the Court of Chancery.

Secondly, A Vote for a new Body or Model of the Law.

Thirdly, A Vote to take away the power of Patrons to make presentations.

Fourthly, That Innocent Negative Vote of not agreeing with the Report of the
Committee for Tithes, Touching what they Reported, as the best way to eject
scandalous profane and ignorant Ministers, etc. Upon which followed presently
the dissolution of the House.

A little of each of these, because of the great dust that is raised, to the
blinding of some, and inraging of others, against them that sought not
themselves, but the good of the Commonwealth in general, and no private or
particular Interests.

First, For the Chancery, It was looked on as a great grievance, one of the
greatest in the Nation, so many horrible things were affirmed of it by Members
of the House, as those that were or had a mind to be Advocates for it, had
little to say on the behalf of it, and so at the end of one days Debate, the
question being put, it was voted down.

For Delatories, Chargeablenesse, and a faculty of letting Blood the people in
the purse-veine, even to their utter perishing and undoing, as by what was
spoken and affirmed at the Debate. That Court may compare (if not surpass) any
Court in the world; It was Confidently affirmed by knowing Gentlemen of worth;
that there were depending in that Court, Twenty three thousand Causes; That
some of them had been there depending five, some ten, some twenty, some
thirty years and more; That there had been spent in Causes many hundred, nay
thousands of pounds, to the ruin, nay utter undoing of many families; That no
Ship almost (to wit, Cause) that sailed in the Sea of the Law, but first or
last putting into that Port, and if they made any considerable stay there, they
suffered so much loss, as the Remedy was as bad as the Disease; That what was
Ordered one day, was Contradicted the next, so as in some Causes there had been
five hundred Orders, and far more as some affirmed. That when the purses of
the Clients began to be empty, and their spirits a little cooled; then by a
Reference to some Gentlemen in the Country, the Cause so long depending, at so
great Charge, came to be ended, so as some did look on it as it now is, as a
Mystery of wickedness, and a standing Cheat.

How sad a thing is it that after such Appearances of God in the Land, such a
Court, in such a way of practice, should be continued, to greaten the Retayners
to it, and practisers in it, by the ruin of others, eating the fatt and sweet
of other men's labors and estates. It is to be hoped such wickedness is not
long lived; How did good people rejoice when they heard of that Vote, and how
sad and sorrowful were the Lawyers and Clerks, for the fear of the loss of
their great Diana may be remembered: with their great joy and making Bonfiers,
and drinking Sack when they were delivered from their fears by the
dissolution of the late Parliament.

The Committee for the Regulating of the Law, in pursuance of the Vote, brought
in a Bill for the Taking away the said Court: But for that there was not
provision made for the future, and for the Causes then depending, altogether;
It was opposed by those Gentlemen that had no mind it should be taken away; And
so it came to be waved and laid aside, and the Committee ordered to bring in a
Bill that might do all.

The Members of that Committee, having many of them occasion to be absent in
the Country, in fetching up and settling their Families before Winter. Nothing
was done till toward the Term, when a Bill was brought in and read in the
House; That was looked on by many as the washing of the Blackamore, or pruining
or lopping evil branches, where three or four in a little time will come in
stead of one cut off. Upon Debate it came to the Question, and was carried in
the Negative, and cast out.

Then shortly after another Bill was brought in and read, which to very many
seemed to be a setting up of two Courts, rather then a casting down one, and
an establishing of the Chancery, rather then a Taking of it away: Some
Gentlemen of great Note of the Long Robe, had a hand in it; That it is likely
will never spoil their own Trade; The Bill by very many, after a long and
sharp Debate, was judged short of the end aimed at, and being put to the
Question, it passed in the Negative, and was also cast out; At which some of
those Gentlemen aforesaid, were very much displeased.

The Term by this time was begun, and the people not eased as was hoped it
would have been, at which those Members that carried the Vote for putting down
that corrupt Court, were sorely vexed and troubled, who took little delight to
come through the Hall, and to see the corrupt Trade going on; some of them
moved to have had the Court suspended for three weeks or a month, till something
might be done in it, but it was not consented unto, or thought fit, and so the
Term and trade of the Law went on, and the Committee went to work again: and by
this time some other Members of that Committee, that were not such great
zealots for the upholding of that Court, were come to Town, so as a Bill was
modelized and prepared, which they of the Committee thought would answer the
end, and be to the liking of the House; in which was provided for the taking
down the Court, and for the dispatch of the Causes depending, and providing for
the future in a summary way, so as any ordinary cause might be determined and
ended for twenty or forty shillings, and in a very short time, and much strife
and going to Law prevented.

But the House being full of business there was no opportunity to tender it,
and so they let it alone til a fitter time and more leisure.

If a Copy of that intended Bill were Printed, it might be judged what their
intentions were; for that after it was got in and twice read in the House in
one day.

The second Vote which was for a new body of the Law, passed not without a
large Debate; the Clerk in drawing up the Question, put the word Body in stead
of Model, which some Members for the passing of the Vote before and after,
desired to have had altered: but others, lovers of the Law as now it is,
opposed the alteration of the word, being very angry at the Vote, and so it
went as it was, with some seeming disadvantage, by means of the word Body,
which some of those aforesaid being angry, would needs fancy, and accordingly
reported, as if it were intended to destroy the Law, and take away the Laws we
had been fighting for all this while as our birthright and inheritance.

And such a noise was made about it, that made many believe that the House was
modelized of Monsters, rather then men of reason and judgment.

There were very sober and moderate Gentlemen, in the account of all men, that
concurred heartily in this Vote, such as upon whom little blemish will stick.

The Reasons, or some of them that were alleged in the Debate, producing this
Vote, was the intricacy, uncertainty, and incongruity in many things with the
word of God, and right reason, in the Laws as now they are.

First, whereas the Laws ought to be easy, plain, and short, so as they that
were to be subject to them, and have benefit by them, might be ^ble to know and
understand them in some good measure.

They are now so voluminous, and thereby Intricate and uncertain, dark and
concealed, as few are able to come to the knowledge of them. Those of the
profession of the Law differing in very many cases, what the Law is, and being
of several opinions about this and the other thing: And then how should
others, though highly concerned be able to understand them; and their Interest
therein contained. There being so many Law-Bookes of great Bulk, so many old
mustie Records, Reports, and Book-Cases; As that after the time spent in
School-learning, the rest of the Time of the flower of a man's years, would be
little enough to read them over, and peruse them.

And beside, those Records and Book-Cases are very ill Guides or Lights to go
by, for who knows the Circumstances that did attend them, which alters often
times the whole Case; who knows whither in those Cases, bribery did not make
the Judgment, or the powerfullnesse of some great man, or the love or hatred
of the Judge, or the Negligence or Corruption of the Advocate. And besides, in
those Law-Cases, some presidents are directly Contrary to others; And an
Advocate or Counsel alleges one Case or Report, and another another: and
then the Judge follows which he pleases: how Arbitrary is the Law in this
Case? and at what uncertainty are the great Interests and proprieties of men?

Beside, how various are the Customs, which notwithstanding passes for Law?
Usually unknown, but to some old men of the place, which though it be never so
unrighteous and unreasonable, Time out of mind, carries it. How bulky and
voluminous are the Statute Books? and of so great a price as few are able to
buy them, and so large that few can spare time to read them, to know their
right, and how they are concerned in them; and yet they must be judged, and
stand or fall by them. And many times some old musty Statute of a hundred years
old, and more imprinted, is found and made use of by some crafty Lawyer, to the
undoing of an honest man that meant no hurt, nor knew any thing at all of the
danger. Upon something held forth to this effect, the Vote was carried for a
New body or model of the Law, and a Committee chosen to that end, who met
often, and had the help of some Gentlemen of worth, that have deserved well of
their Country, being true Patriots: who liked well the thing, as very useful
and desirable: It being not a destroying of the LAW, or putting it down, as
some scandalously reported: But a reducing the wholesome, just, and good Laws,
into a Body, from them that are useless, and out of date; such as concerned the
Bishops, and holy Church (so called) and were made in favor of Kings, and the
lusts of great men, of which there are very many: the Law of God being eyed,
and right Reason looked unto in all: there being some of the Laws that are
contrary to both: as the putting men to death for Theft, The sparing the lives
of men for Murder, under the notion and name of Manslaughter, a term and
distinction not found in the righteous Law of God: And that unreasonable Law,
that if a Wagon or Cart, etc. driven by the owner, or some other, with never
so great care and endeavor, fall, and kill any person, the owner, though it
were his own son or servant could no way help it, shall loose his Horse and
Wagon by the profane and superstitious name of Deodand; And the owners of the
goods shall loose them also upon the same account, though they were as innocent
as Abel: other instances might also be given.

The way the Committee took in order to their work which must needs be
elaborate; was by reducing the several Laws to their proper heads, to which
they did belong: and so modelizing or imbodying of them, taking knowledge of
the nature of them, and what the Law of God said in the case, and now agreeable
to right reason they were; likewise how proportionable the punishment was to
the offense or crime; and wherein there seemed any thing either deficient, or
excessive, to offer a supply and remedy, in order to rectifying the whole: The
Committee began with Criminals; Treason being the highest, they considered the
kinds: what was meet to be a judged Treason, in a free Commonwealth; and what
was meet to be the punishment of Grand and Petty Treason: Then they proceeded
to Murder, the kinds of it, and what was to be so ajudged, and the punishment
thereof. The like they intended concerning Theft, and after to have asertained
and secured property; As also the excecutive part of the Law: so as a person
should not need to loose, or part with one property, to secure and keep
another, as now it is: Persons being forced to loose or part with the property
of their Cow, to keep the property of their Horse; and one piece or parcel of
Land to preserve and keep another. Which Body of Law when modelized, was to be
reported to the House to be considered of, and passed by them as they should
see cause: A work great, and of high and great esteem with many, for the great
fruit and benefit that would come by it: By which means the great volumes of
Law would come to be reduced into the bigness of a pocket book, as it is
proportionable in New England and elsewhere: A thing of so great worth and
benefit as England is not yet worthy of, nor likely in a short time to be so
blessed as to enjoy. And this being the true End and Endeavor of those Members
that labored in that Committee, it is submitted to every godly (and rational)
man in the Nation, whether (as is most falsely and wickedly reported, and
charged upon persons acting in so much love to their Country) their endeavors
tended to destroying the whole Laws, and pulling them up by the roots.

The third Vote was the taking away of patrons Presentations, which thing is
one of the strong holds of Satan: At the passing of this Vote some Gentlemen
were greatly offended; pretending it was a destroying, and taking away
propriety: The Gentleman that moved first to have the House dissolved, made
this one of his great Reasons why he could sit no longer with his fellows,
being very contious, like those that stumble at a straw, and yet leap over a
block: Tith mint, and Commin, and neglect the great things of the Law: This
Vote after a sharp Debate was carried in, in which very sober Gentlemen
concurred, such as are not blemished, as Sectaries, or Levellers: Though they
had of this kind o^ property themselves, some two or three a piece that out of
conscience for the better advance of the knowledge of the Gospel, and Interest
of the Lord Christ, they were willing to part with their right herein.

The nature of this propriety may be a little minded, because of the great
outcry that is every where made, Oh the Parliament men, many of them are such
as would destroy all property: As if they had none themselves, when as though
all of them had not very bulkie Estates, yet they had free Estates, and were
not of broken Fortunes, or such as owed great sums of money, ten thousand
pounds and more, and those to whom they were so in debt knew not how to get a
penny of it, but stood in need of privilege and protection, as formerly it has
been: The nature of this property looked into, and considered, will appear to
be partly of an earthly, and partly of spiritual nature; These two mixed and
twisted together, make up this right or property: of having power to present a
Person to be Minister there. To have the earthly, or civil advantaged Tithes,
and offerings, and Gleab land if there be any; and to have the more religious,
or spiritual right and Interest, the cure and care of souls, of all living
within that circumference called a Parish, and to have the right to officiat to
God, and man there; And is not this property worth the standing for? to be Lord
Patron, so as he may open the door to whom he pleases; And be sure he let in
such a one as will comply and serve his Interest, and wink at his vicious
courses, and not vex and disquiet his greatness by telling him of his faults,
as sometime John Baptist did Herod; or as those, which profanely they call
Puritans, and Sectarian Ministers use to do.

But seeing to sell this property, were no less then the sin of Simony, what
worldly advantage can he make of it: thus, if the Church be full (so they
blasphemously call it) Christ being the only fulness of the Church: And not some
ignorant, profane, and lasie Priest: That is a miserable fullness, with which
some Churches (so called) are filled; In such a case of fullness the Lord Patron
may sell the reversion for a considerable sum of money, to some one or other
that has sent his Son to Oxford, o^ ^ambridge, to learn the Art of Logic, and
Philosophy; By which Craft he may know how to get his living another day: And
so the old Incumbent dying, this young Artist comes to be presented one, to
enter and take possession, and so to enjoy his portion his Father provided for
him: The Gleab, the Tithes, and oblations; Together with the care, and cure of
souls, and right of officiating to God, and man there, for this his Father
bought, and purchased for him, and who shall take it from him. But if the
Church be empty, that is, of a Priest; then all his propriety amounts but to
a shadow, unless it be sure to put in one that being beholding to him, shall be
sure to serve him, and to forbear his lusts; or else marry his Kinswoman, or
his Wives Gentlewoman, or Chambermaid: in consideration of being presented to
be settled there: But can this work of darkness, and root of Iniquity, abide the
light, or look in the face, without blushing the glorious light of the Gospel
that now shines in this our horizon: Is not this property, a relick of the
Merchandise of the great Whore, Revel: 18.13. that buyeth, and sells amongst
other wares the souls of men. What a sad account have the most of these
proprietors, these presenters, and presented to make, for the many thousand
souls, that have perished by their means.

But does that Gentleman that made this one of his Reasons as before, why he
could fit no longer with his fellows to do the work of the Commonwealth, think
indeed, and is it really his judgment, that a Parliament or Supreme Authority,
have nothing to do to meddle with propriety; so as it should be so great an
offense, to meddle with the aytie property of presentations: Sure upon
consideration he and those Gentlemen that were so offended, cannot but think
otherwise. That the Parliament may for a common good meddle with, and take away
propriety, of a higher nature then Presentations, and of higher, and more nigh
concernment: especially when particular men's propriety is prejudicial to common
good, so as the whole is profited by the loss of particular persons, he surely
was one of them that gave his yea for the passing of the Bill for the monthly
Assessement, notwithstanding it meddled with propriety, even the ^^th part of
the yearly Revenue, and Incomb of most men, and sure he cannot but think they
might do it in order to pass like good, without any destroying propriety;
Though many are as unwilling to part with it, as those Gentlemen can be to part
with their propriety of Presentations.

Was it a destroying propriety in his judgment, for the former Parliament to
take into their hands, and to sell away the Lands of Bishops, Deans, and
Chapters, which they enjoyed as their proprieties, with many rights and
privileges not inferior to Presentations; which some of them had never made
forfeit, or of by-acting against the Parliament.

Was the taking the fifth and twentieth part of Persons Estates for the good of
the whole, a destroying propriety, indeed some said so then, but we know what
they were accounted for so saying, no less then Malignants.

Surely those Gentlemen will not so say of the Instrument, or model of new
Government, or those that made it, as they do of those that passed that Vote;
Notwithstanding it take two hundred thousand pound per annum, for the carrying
of it on.

The former Parliament they did not reckon that they went beyond their Power,
nor that they overthrew propriety, when they passed the Act for the draining of
the Fens; giving away very much of the Lands, (the chiefest propriety) of the
owner to the undertakers in order to Public good.

The fourth Vote, whereupon followed the Dissolution of the Parliament, was
that harmless Negative of not Complying with the Report of the Committee;
Touching what they offered as the best way to eject ignorant, profane, and
scandalous Ministers; and encouraging them that are good, etc. of which two
things, and so an end of this discourse; first of the proceed to it, and in the
Debate of it; And then that which followed after it til the House was
Dissolved: The proceed was shortly thus: After the aforesaid Vote had passed,
and some of the Gentlemen of the House were in readiness to offer the Bill; The
Committee for Tithes to countet-work, and keep that off as some thought, did on
Monday morning offer this Repor^ and many were for the taking of it on; others
were against the meddling with it at that time, some moving to have the Bill
taken in concerning Presentations, some to fall on things of more present
concernment, as the Bill for uniting Scotland to England Reasons were offered
on every side, and after one of the clock the House rose, and nothing fastened
on: The next morning those that were for the Report to be taken in the day
before, moved again, and the other not opposing, it was taken in, but not
without being put to the Vote whether the House would take it in, which was
carried in the Affirmative, and so the Debate began, and continued day after
day, til after one of the clock each day: The Speaker being aged, and not able
to sit longer: The Debate was managed day by day with very great seriousness,
many Arguments and Scriptures being alleged.

The House being evenly poysed, and great attendance being given by the
Members, waiting the time of the Vote; and though any Member might by the Rules
of the House have spoken every day so long as the Debate continued, yet such
was the modesty showed, that hardly any on all the five days spoke twice;
very little of heat or passion being showed all that time, only one Gentleman
or two that were for the Report, seeing themselves and their party so engaged,
flue out a little, complaining of the expense of Time, to have given a check to
the going on of the Debate: But the Orders of the House being called for, by
some of the other side to the Speaker, he declared it to be the right of every
one to be heard, and that the question could not be put so long as any would
speak to it; withal those Gentlemen were told of their restlesness to take on
the Debate, and how now they wanted patience to wait the Issue of it: after
three or four days a Member that was against the Report offered an Expedient,
but was not accepted: At last on Saturday toward noon the question grew near as
did also the end of the Parliament, some Members that were against 1ste Report
having not spoken, and assaying to speak, were persuaded to forbear, who only
gathered the Issue and result of the whole and left it to the House, which was
whether upon the whole this in the report was the best expedient for that end;
which some on the other side that w^^ for the Report perceiving the stress of
the question put there, moved that the word best might be put out; but it was
not admitted, having been in the Report all the time of the Debate: so about
one of the clock the Vote passed, and upon dividing the House was carried in
the Negative: A Debate of that nature and length in so great a Council, hardly
ever passed with such soberness and little heat or passion: The business was in
statu quo, as to any ones being either better or worse, the report was laid
aside, for that the first part of it whereon the other part depended was
rejected; to wit, that the best way to eject ignorant, profane, and scandalous
Ministers, and to encourage them that are good, was by sending certain
Commissioners empowered to do it: as at full has been put forth in Print
already: There was at the passing this Vote 115. Members, whereof 54. were for
the affirmative, and 56. for the negative; and two Gentlemen tellers for each
side, and the Speaker, which make up that number.

To go about to tell of the Arguments insisted on, from the Scriptures, and
from Experience, and other Reasons of a prudentiall consideration, would be too
tedious; that this Vote that hurt no body should occasion such wonderful
displeasure, and outcry every where is at least wonderful: If men were asked
(as Micah was) what aileth them? they would hardly be able to tell, so well as
he did: is it not much, when as godly sober men in discharge of their duty and
trust, for the glory of God, and good of their Country, should leave their
habitations, relations and enjoyments, spend their time and means to serve
their Country, and be so rewarded with scandalous and false reports, and to
have judgment of high condemnation passed on them upon hearsay, without the
least show of proof? Is it not much that men of learning, Leaders and Teachers
of others, that would be esteemed godly Orthodox Divines, Ministers of Christ,
and Preachers of his Gospel, should be of such a spirit and strain so unlike
Christ and the Gospel, as to utter such speeches in Pulpits, and elsewhere?
that they meaning those that complied not in the before mentioned Vote, and
voted in the other, were the arrantest Rogues and Villains that ever the earth
bare: That their design was worse then the Gunpowder treason: That they would
have destroyed the Magistracy and the Ministry, the Law and the Go^ etc. That
it were well if one of ten of them were hanged up, and then there would be
happy days: might not inquiry be made, what is the matter of this their so
great rage and displeasure; who has hurt them or done them wrong? no question,
but they would say: Oh they would have destroyed all the Ministers, good as well
as bad, and overthrown the Gospel; for so they frequently say: heinous crimes
indeed: but how does it appear? only thus: they were against those grievances
of the Law, and Tithes, and would have had those taken away; and they would not
concur with the Report of the Committee in order to the settling of Tithes, that
being in the bottom of the Report; so as by these men's Logic and conclusion,
those two great grievances of the Law and Tithes, (which these so reproched
labored to have taken away) are the Magistracy and Ministry; the corrupt Law,
or corruption of the Law, are the Magistracy; and Tithes they are the Ministry:
yea more, the Gospel also; but alas, Magistracy can stand without such horrible
corruptions of Law, and the Ministry without Tithes, as it is in other
Countries where there is neither of them. But the belly has no ears, and
therefore no more shall be said.

The before mentioned Vote passing as it did, those Gentlemen that missed of
their expectations, and were crossed of having their wills, greatly fearing, as
it seems, it would go ill with those corrupt interests of the Lawyers and
Clergy, which they endeavored to support: they took the Pet and were exceeding
wroth diverse of them, and that afternoon and the next day (being the Lords
day, a day fittter for better employment) they took Counsel with and among
themselves, holding Cabals, and there consulting the overthrow and dissolution
of the House, which was as they had declared to all the world the supreme
Authority or Magistracy, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England: is it
not much that Gentlemen pretending so high to wisdom and godliness, for missing
the having their wills in a Vote carried in the Negative should be induced
thereby presently to take on such desperate Counsels and resolves, and to draw
others into them ignorantly, forgetting as it seems what they had solemly
declared before God and all the world; to wit, that the House was the Supreme
Authority of the Commonwealth of England, which Commonwealth God had highly
honored, and made famous throughout the world; forgetting also their severity
against malapart word^ ^^en in a Petition, because it was the supreme
Authority: What might such Counsels, Resolves and Actings merit by their own
Law? had they no charity in them toward their fellows, because crossed in that
poor Vote? had they lost or laid aside the fear of God, that they could thus
venture to overthrow Magistracy even the greatest in the Commonwealth, the
Parliament and supreme Authority, to the indangering the whole Cause? The
Members that they were so angry with, and have so reproached as being against
Magistracy and Ministry, because that poor negative Vote was carried against
their wills may say to them as Jehu said to the Rulers of Samaria, 2 King. 109
ye be righteous: Indeed they voted in the affirmative in those former Votes,
and in the negative in these last Votes concerning Triers: but who consulted
and put in practice the overthrow and dissolution of the Parliament, and
Supreme Authority of the Commonwealth of England? having slept upon their
Counsels, they are of the same mind still, and address themselves to put it in
execution, rising early and coming betime to put in practice their design,
which was to dissolve and put to an end the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England in their own esteem: and being come, they feared not to begin with
prayer to God the searcher of hearts, and then proceed to declare their purpose
and the reasons of it, laying load upon their fellows in way of blame, that
were less guilty of evil then themselves, uttering words that could not but
astonish any good soul of a dying Parliament; charging their fellows that
were for the removing of the great grievances of the Law and Tithes, that they
followed their own wills; nay, their own lusts, words not fit to be spoken in
a free Counsel, and that might have been more truly said of themselves: when
those of the other side that knew nothing of their design offered to speak,
telling them it was no time to debate; only one good Patriot of those that were
zealous for the remove of those before mentioned great grievances, stood up and
got audience, speaking against what they had moved, intimating the good Bills
that were in readiness to be brought in for the Peoples good; and protesting
before God, Angels and Men, against what they had moved; and others of the same
party standing ready to do the like, who called to the Speaker to be heard
those Gentlemen without hearing their fellows, or admitting the debate, or
putting the question, rose up out of their places to be gone, and others in
simplicity followed, as once many did after Absalom, 2 Samuel 15.11. not knowing
any thing at all, but how they performed their Trust the world may judge.

The Speaker forgetting the duty of his place, though he was earnestly called
unto to keep the Chayr, he left it, and the Sergeant as if he had been of
Counsel, took up the Mace, and carried it before him, though he was spoken
unto to the contrary, as in like manner did the chief Clerk: and thus in an
irruptions way going out of the House without any Adjournment or Vote, left
sitting thirty four or thirty five Members in the House; whether those that so
went away were a greater or a lesser number, as is more likely, but is hard to
be determined, though it be thought by some, there were not seventy so early in
the House. Those that went out of the house going toward White Hall, met some
coming to the House, who seeing them go in that manner, thought they had
Adjourned thither, and so went along with them; others they sent for up and
down where they could find them, to come to them to the Horse Chamber, where
they were: Those in the House immediately betook themselves to consider what
they had to do, being so deserted of their Fellows: and telling over their
number, they found themselves but thirty four, or thirty five, which could not
make a House, forty being the least number that might act in a Parliamentary
way. And as they were going to consider among themselves, a Colonel and
Lieutenant Colonel of the Army, entered the House, and desired them to depart:
the Members desired them to withdraw, for that they as Members of Parliament,
had warrant to be there, and if they had warrant to put them out, they wished
them to show it; but not many words passed, but they went back and opened the
doors, and brought in the soldiers with their Muskets, and so then the
Gentlemen rose and went out; which was done before the other were half way at
White Hall: and some so put out of the House, went after to White Hall to see
what they were there doing, and found them in the Horse Chamber, preparing a
writing of surrender of their power back into his hands, from whom they had
received it. If they had been his Counsel, and not Legislators, or a
Parliament, much might have been in it; it was three or four lines written in
fowr or six several papers, that so the Gentlemen might the more easily read
and see what it was, which then the Clerk engrossed in Parchment, and then they
signed it, by subscribing their names so many as would. First the Speaker, and
then other according to their quality. It may be wondered at, that so great a
power should be passed by so low and little an Instrument. Some Gentlemen went
three or four days after, and set their hands to it: they that subscribed it,
did it on several grounds and reasons: some did it knowingly to dissolve the
House, before dissolved by the Soldiers, and their disorderly going away,
which they had plotted and resolved before: some because some eminent persons
of their party did it before them, expecting by that means to have been rid of
some of the other party at the least, and they to have been continued in power
without them, wherein they were deceived, and not a little vexed: some therein
looked no further then at their own quiet, and to be rid of a troublesome
employment: some that they might not be thought lovers of power and dignity;
and some out of weakness, and fear of the loss of some worldly enjoyment,
which they have sufficiently repented and been sorry for since.

But how weak an Act, and contrary to their trust it was for those that
professed themselves to be Legislators, had made Laws and levied money by way
of Tax upon the people as the Parliament and Supreme Authority of the
Commonwealth of England, as clothed with their power, so easily, and without
their knowledge or consent whom they pretended to represent in Parliament, to
give up, or give away their power which was none of theirs to give, but at the
most to use for their good; to do it without debate or consideration, in so
weighty a case; to do it when the Parliament was dissolved by themselves and
the Soldiers, and they but in the capacity of singular persons; to give it up,
as much as in them lay, into the hands of one single person, and that against a
standing Law then in being, not repealed: was it not in effect to render all
the people of England slavs: as would easily be granted by their own party, if
they had so delivered to Charles Stuart: were ever men so weak, rash, and
inconsiderate, so outwitted, or carried away with passion and spleen against
their fellows, because they endeavored to remove those grievances of Tithes
and the Law which the people of this Nation groan exceedingly under? But might
not the validity of this act of theirs be queried? if a Jury should give up
their Verdict so, or deliver over their trust to others, would it be counted
valid? but so it was, and so they did: and so an end of that Parliament that
sat five months and three days as the supreme Power of the Commonwealth of
England, whom God preserve.

And so an end of this Relation and Discourse, with the calling to mind the
saying of the Psalmist, 11. Psalm. 4.7. If the Foundations be destroyed, what
can the Righteous do? The righteous Lord loves righteousness, his countenance
does behold the Upright.

FINIS.

