A DECLARATION CONCERNING ^is Majesty's Royal Person, touching His present
Resolution and Condition. And a Copy of the Scots Representation, humbly
tendered to His Sacred Majesty in the Name of the whole Kingdom of ^cotland,
concerning the proceedings of the Parliament of England.

^s also, the Copy of a Letter from Windsor, touching the great Rising in the
West, viz. in Gloucester-shire, Hampsh re, and Wilt-shire.

C R
depiction of King Charles I of England

London, Printed for G. Horton, January 6. 1647.

A DECLARATION CONCERNING The Kings Majesty's Royal Person, and His Resolution
touching the present Affairs of the Kingdom.
SIR,
SInce my last unto you, December. 31. 1647. we have received other intelligence
from the Western Parts, the particulars whereof, I have sent you here enclosed,
together with the Copy of another Paper from the Town of Chippenham in
Wiltshire, concerning the late tumultuous rising of a great number of People in
those parts, pretending for the Kig. the brief summary follows:

That upon Friday last, a great Company of People assembled together in a
tumultuous manner, and some in a disguised manner, being very well armed, and
having gather^^ (...) the quarters of diverse soldiers under command of his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and in a (...) manner, sell upon diverse Officers
and Exc^^^-(...) plu^dering and spoy^ing of that which they had; but at last,
the Officers getting more aid and assistance together, rallyed and fell
fiercely upon the said party, insomuch that a not conflict did ensue: but at
last the Cavalry retreated, the Ex^ Officers and Soldiers pursued them,
wounded some, and took diverse prisoners, who did confess, that the
Gloucestershire men did promise to join with them, and expected a greater Force
from Hampshire, and Wiltshire.

It is said, that they have had several meetings in the aforesaid Counties,
and has endeavored to draw others to them. It is time to take some course to
quell these spirits before they break forth into a fire. In have, I rest,

Your assured Friend,
Winsor 5. Ian. 1647.
His Majesty's Declaration and Resolation ^oncer^ng His Royal person.
CHARLES R.

THe necessity of complying with all engaged inter^sts in these great
distempers for a perfect settlement of Peace* His Majesty finds to be none of
the least di^^^culties, He has met with since the time of his afflictions,
which is too visible when at the same time that the two Houses of the English
Parliament do present to his Majesty several Bills, and Propositions for his
content Commissioners of Scotland do openly protest against thens, so that were
there nothing in the case but the consideration of that difference, His Majesty
cannot imagine how to give such an ^n^wer to what now is proposed, as thereby
to promise himself his great end, A perfect Peace; and when His Majesty
further considers how impossible it is (in the condition he now stands) to
fulfill the desires of his two Houses, since the only ancient and known
ways of passing Laws, are either by his Majesty's personal Assent in the
House of Peers, or by Commission under his great Seal of England, he cannot
but wonder at such failings in the manner of address which now is made anto
him, unless his two Houses intend that His Majesty shall allow of a Great
Seal made without his Authority, even before there be any consideration had
thereupon in a Treaty; which as it may hereafter hazard the security it self,
so for the present it seems very unreasonable to His Majesty: And though His
Majesty his willing to believe that the intention of very many in both Houses
in sending these Bills before a Treaty was only to obtain a trust from him,
and not to take any advantage by passing them* to force other things from him,
which are either against his Conscience or Honor; yet His Majesty believes it
clear to all understandings that these Bills contain (as they are now ^pend)
nor only the divesting himself of all Soveraignity, and that without
possibility of recovery either of him or his Successors, except by repeal of
of those Bills; but also the making his concessions guilty of the greatest
pressures which can be laid upon the Subject* as in other perticulars, so by
giving an Arbitrary and unlimited power to the two Houses for ever, to raise
and levy Forces for Land or Sea-service of what persons (without distinction of
qualities) and to what numbers they please, and likewise for the payment of
them to leavy what moneys in such sort, and by such ways, and means, and
consequently upon the Estates of what soever persons they shall think he and
appoint which is utterly inconsistent with the liberty and property of the
people, and his Majesty's trust in protecting; so if the Major part of both
Houses should think it necessary to put the rest of the Propositions into Bills
His Majesty leaves all the world to judge how unsafe it would be for him to
consent thereunto; and if not what a strange condition, what a strange
condition of the passing of these four Bills His Majesty and all his Subjects
would be cast into.

And here his Majesty thinks it not unfit to wish his two Houses to consider
well the manner of their proceeding. That when his Maj. desires a personal
Treaty with them for the settling of a peace; they in answer, propose the very
subject matter of the most essential part thereof to be first granted. A thing
which will be hard^y credible to posterity.

Wherefore his Majesty declares, That neither the desire of being freed from
this tedious and irksome condition of life his Majesty has so long suffered,
nor the apprehension of what may befall him, in case his two Houses shall not
afford him a personal Treaty, shall make him change his Resolution; of not
consenting to any Act till the whole peace be concluded. Yet then he intends
not only to give just and reasonable satisfaction in the particulars presented
to him; but also to make good all other concessions mentioned in his Message of
the 16 of Novem. last, which he thought would have produced better effects,
then what he finds in the Bills and to positions now preferred unto him.

And yet his Majesty cannot give over, but now again earnestly presses for a
personal Treaty, so passion^tely is he af^^cted with the advantages which
pe^ce will being to his Majesty and all His Subjects, of which he will not at
all despair, there being no other visible way to obtain a wel-grounded peace.

However his Majesty is very much at case within himself, for having fulfilled
the Offices both of a Christian and of a King, and will patiently yea is the
good pleasure of Almighty God, to incline the hearts of his two houses to
consider their King; and (...) compassionate their fellow subjects miseries.

Given at Carisbr^^k Castle (...) the Is^^ of Wight. D^^^m. ^8. 1647.
For the Speaker of the Lord-house pro tempo^e, to be communicated to the Lords
and Commons of the Parliament of England a^ West^^^st^^ (...) the Co^^issi^^^^s
of the Parli^^^^^ of Scotland.
A Declaration of the Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, touching His
Majesty's person.
May it please your Majesty,
THere is nothing which we more constantly endeavored and do more earnestly
desire, then a good agreement, and happy peace between your Majesty, and your
Parliament of both Kingdoms; neither have we left any means unassayed, that
with united Councels with the Houses of Parliament of England, and by making
joint applications to your May. there might be a composure of all differences.
But the new Propositions communicated to us by the Houses, and the Bills
therewith presented to your Majesty are so prejudicial to Religion, Crown, and
the union and interest of the Kingdoms, and so far different from the former
proceedings and engagements betwixt the Kingdoms, as we cannot concur therein.
Therefore we do in the name of the Kingdom of Scotland, dissent from these
Bills now tendered to your Majesty.

Lauderdail. C. Erskin. R. Barkley. H. Kennedy.


A Relation of Captain Ingrams address to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax,
and the Council of War, declared by way of message, as from GOD.
THat Captain Ingram came to the Council of War, and desired he might be heard
to make his acknowledgment, and give reasons to the contrary, according to the
former Order of the Council of War.

The Council of War answered, that that day was ordered to debate with the
Commissioners of Parliament, concerning the disbanding of supernumeraries, and
desired, that he would withdraw for the present, and a further day should be
appointed ^or his business.

He answered, that that was the day, which was ordered for his business, and
though the Court-Marshall might think other business of more public
concernment, yet his business was more then ordinary, for he was commanded
from God to deliver it, and on that only day.

The General and Council of War being willing to give place and pre-eminence
to any thing that should be delivered from God, he was heard, and began to read
a very large justification but was desired to forbear for the present.

By Letters from Hereford it is advertized, That not long since, there was a
great Rising in Wales, and diverse of the Welsh appeared in several places of
the Country, in a very mutinous and disorderly manner: insomuch, that at the
last, they gathered to a great head, and marched to a place called Long-town
within 20. miles of Hereford, and fell upon diverse of the soldiery in their
quarters, but were repulsed, and beaten off by Col* Hertons R^giment.

January 5.
Imprimatur

G. M.



FINIS.

