A SERMON Preached before the KING AT WHITE HALL, November. 5. 1696.

By Sir WILLIAM DAWES, Baronet, D. D. and Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

Published by His Majesty's Special Command.

The Second Edition.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Speed, at the three Crowns, near the Royal Exchange
in Cornhill, MDCLXXXXVI.

A SERMON Preached before the KING AT WHITE HALL, Nov. 5th. 1696.
Job, Chap. V. Verse. 12. He disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that
their hands cannot perform their enterprise.
HE, that is, God, of whom we have express mention in the 8th Verse of this
Chapter, I would seek unto God, says Eliphaz to Job, and unto God would I
commit my cause, and then, having spoken very great things of God in the 9, 10,
and 11 Verses, he goes on to set forth his Praise, in these Words of my Text;
He disappointeth the devices of the crafty, etc.

The word, which we here render crafty, is used in a double sense in Scripture,
sometimes in a good, but most commonly in a bad one. In the 12th Chap. of Prove.
v. 23. and in other places of that Book it is Translated prudent: but generally
it stands to denote such as are wickedly cunning; as in the 83d Psalm. v. the
3d, They have taken crafty counsel against thy People; wickedly crafty no
doubt, since it was against the People of God; and in the same sense you may
meet with it, in several other places of Holy Writ. And that this sense, though a
very bad one, belongs to the crafty in my Text, seems to me to be very plain
from their being represented there as Enemies to God, as such whose devices he
would disappoint; And, in this opinion I am farther confirmed by the Vulgar
Latin, which renders the Word, which we here Translate crafty, Maligm
wicked or malicious.

This then I take to be the meaning of my Text, that, with how much art and
subtilty soever wicked Men may lay their plots and ill designs, there is a God,
who both can, and frequently does disappoint and baffle them, make them vain,
and of none effect. Psalm. 33.10.


That God can do this will be denied by none who Believe a God, an Omniscient
and Omnipotent God; and that he actually does it, by none that own his
Providence; and I hope I speak to such only at present, as do both. I shall not
therefore spend any time needlessly, in the proof of a truth, which I look upon
here as granted; but immediately proceed to make the best use and improvement I
can of it, with respect to the design of our present Meeting.

And, in order to this, I will endeavor, in my following Discourse,

First. To show how, and in what cases we may reasonably suppose the
disappointments of crafty Men's devices to be from God. And from hence,

Secondly. To make you sensible, how eminently God's Hand appeared in those
Deliverances of this Nation, from the devices of crafty Men, which we this Day
Commemorate. And then

Thirdly and Lastly, conclude with some Practical Inferences from the Whole.

First. I am to show how, and in what cases we may reasonably suppose the
disappointments of crafty Men's devices to be from God; from him I mean, not as
the common effects of his Ordinary Providence, for in this sense all events
whatsoever must necessarily be acknowledged to come from him: but as the
Extraordinary Effects of his particular and special Providence, as his own more
immediate and proper doing. And here I shall not insist upon those which are
plainly Miraculous, that is, either above or contrary to Nature, because these
are allowed on all hands to belong to God; but on such only, as either visibly
are the immediate effects of Natural Causes, or at least are capable of being
ascribed to them: and being so, make it difficult to determine, when they are,
or are not the effects of nature, when of nature proceeding in her common
course, and when of nature, in a more than usual manner, influenced and
directed by God. Now though it is absolutely impossible, in such a nice case as
this, full of perplexity and variety, to lay down such perfect and exact Rules,
as shall clearly and effectually reach and decide all questions about this
matter: yet we may certainly go a great way toward it, if we heedfully observe
these which follow.

First then, when a disappointment shall be brought about, in a way, though not
miraculous, yet evidently strange, surprising and unusual, we ought in reason
to place this to God's account. Thus, for example, when those very means, by
which crafty Men intend to accomplish their designs, shall defeat and blast
them; when those, that are engaged in a bad cause, shall all on a sudden be
struck with a panick fear, and forsake the defense of it; when a considerable
number of Conspiators, all Men of art and contrivance, shall neglect to make
provision against their Discovery, in some very plain and obvious case, and
thereby spoil their whole Plot; when a man, of notoriously lewd and wicked
principles, shall in an instant become scrupulous, and think himself obliged in
Conscience to reveal his ungodly devices, and his accomplices in them, and by
so doing destroy a very hopeful design. In these and many other such like
cases, of which we want not instances in History, I dare appeal to any man of
sense, whither it is not more agreeable to reason to ascribe such
disappointments to God: Job 5.9.
who does mavelous things without number: Psalm. 14.6.9.
who turns the way of the wicked upside down: by whom sinners are made
afraid, Isa. 33.14. Job 12.17. Prove. 21.1.
and Hypocrites surpised with fearfulness: who leads Counselors away
spoiled, and makes the Judges fools: and who turns the heart of Man which
way soever he pleases than merely because there is a Simple possibility, not a
Moral one, of their being the events of natural chance, to force them upon her.

Secondly. The Hand of God is apparently visible in those Disappointments,
which involve Men either in those very Mischiefs, which they had prepared for
others, or at least in others, for their grievousness and soreness not unlike
them. Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 9. cap. 9.
As when Maxentius not only failed of his design against Constantines Life, but
perished by that very same deceitful Bridge, which he had laid for him; as when
a parcel of base and inhuman Traitors, that Plot and Contrive how they may
take away their Prince's Life, not only are defeated in their Purposes, but are
brought to a scandalous and miserable end themselves; This plainly seems to be
the doing of him, who delights to recompense Men according to their deeds, Jer.
25.14.
and to make the Mischief of the Wicked return upon their own heads, Ps. 7.16.
and their violent dealings come down upon their own pates.

Thirdly. When the Devices of wicked Men shall luckily meet with a
disappointment, just at that very time, when they are ripe and ready for
execution, this is another very probable sign of its being from God. Judit.
9.11.
For he is a God of the afflicted, and helper of the oppressed, an upholder of
the weak, a Protector of the forlorn, a Savior of such as are without hope. He
can indeed, if he thinks fit, confound and baffle Men's devices, even in the
very beginning of them: but he seems oftentimes to suffer them to thrive and
prosper for a while, purely for this end, that he may dash them, in the very
critical moment, when they think themselves infallibly secure of their
enterprise: and by administering such wise and seasonable relief to his
servants, take away from them even all pretenses of ascribing it to blind and
undesigning chance.

Fourthly. When good Men, at the very time of their Praying for their Enemies
disappointment, shall obtain their desire; there can be no doubt then who it is
that grants it. Thus when the Enemies of Theodosius were disappointed in their
Designs of routing him entirely, Socrat. Scholast. Eccl. Hist. l. 5. cap. xxv.
by a Tempestuous Wind, which arose immediately, upon his supplicating God for
Aid, and fought so strongly against his Enemies, as to change the Face of the
Day, and give him, who but just before was declining apace, at first an eminent
Advantage, and at last a Complete Victory over his Enemies: To what cause shall
we ascribe this Disappointment? Shall we say, that Fortune heard his Prayer,
and came to his Relief? alas! she is deaf and cannot hear, or, if she could,
cannot hasten her pace one jot. Or shall we say, that she luckily happened to
come, without design, just as he was Praying, and so made her deliverance look
like an Answer to his Prayers? this is highly improbable; but it is more than
probable, that it came from him who hears prayer, Psalm. 65.2. Ps. 148.8.
who helps his servants when they cry unto him, and can make even Winds and
Storms fulfill his Word.

Fifthly. When a great number of unexpected accidents shall, as it were,
conspire to begin, carry on, and at last consummate any notable disappointment,
as in the case of Haman, Esther, c. 5, 6, 7, 8.
who was defeated in his purposes against Mordecai and the Jews, by many
strange and unaccountable accidents meeting together, as you may read in his
Story; in such a case there seems to be too much art and contrivance for
Fortune to lay a Claim or Title to. She may indeed possibly, now and then, by
the casual concurrence of two or three happy accidents, get the praise of a
lucky hit; but, that she should bring any long train of accidents together,
which shall all serve to promote and farther the same end, is very hard to be
believed by us, who know her variableness and uncertainty. And to whom then can
such disappointments as these be attributed? To whom, but him, who has the
Management and Superintendency of all Accidents, and therefore can Connect and
Range them together in such an useful order, that, for a considerable time
together, they shall all, without interruption, be subordinate and helpful to
each other.

But I forbear being too particular, least I should be tedious.

Lastly then, let it suffice to observe, once for all, that, whenever there
are any extraordinary instances of Power, Wisdom and Goodness, visible in the
disappointments of Wicked Men's Designs, they ought then to be looked upon, as
God's special doing. For where shall we expect to see God, if not there, where
his Attributes appear in a more than ordinary Luster and Brightness, and do, as
it were, call us to him? Where shall we acknowledge his special and immediate
presence, if not there, where we cannot, without a manifest contempt of his
honor, deny it?

When therefore any Plot or Design, that has been laid with all the Art and
Contrivance of Human Policy, and fortified with all the Power of Human
Strength, so that it seems to Men Infallible, and absolutely incapable of being
defeated, shall, after all, miscarry, and come to nothing; then are we in
reason bound to say, Behold he that is Mighty in strength and Wisdom has done
this, yea, Job 36.5. Psalm. 67.11. Prove. 8.14.
the Arm of him, to whom Power belongs, and the Counsel of him, who is
Understanding, has brought it to pass.

And to the same Author ought we to ascribe those disappointments, by which
and very signal and eminent good is obtained; as the releif of the oppressed,
the helping them to right that suffer wrong, the preservation of the public
Peace of a Nation, the saving a whole Kingdom from ruin and the like. These
are great and noble ends, worthy the care and Providence of God, and moreover
such as, he himself has assured us, he delights to farther and promote. And
therefore there can be do doubt, but that, when disappointments evidently tend
to such ends as these, God has more then a little share in the management and
ordering of them.

But there are three cases more especially, in which we should be very careful
to give God the glory of the disappointment of wicked Men's devices, and those
are, when they are levelled against his Church, his Anointed, and his peculiar
People. He has so frequently, both in words and actions, declared himself to be
in an especial and extraordinary manner, the Protector and Guardian of these,
that we cannot without Impiety suppose any weapon formed against them should be
made unprosperous, without his particular direction; we cannot without a kind
of Sacrilege, ascribe the good that befalls these, to any other cause, than
that Providence, which is always watching over them for their Good.

These are all the signs, that I can at present think off, whereby we may know
the disappointments of crafty Men's Devices to be from God. And, by the help of
these, I hope I shall find it an easy matter,

Secondly. To make you sensible how eminently God's has appeared in those
Deliverances of this Nation, from the Devices of crafty Men, which we this day
Commemorate. Deliverances I say, for they are double; our Ears have been
pleased with the Story of the one, and our Eyes blessed with the Sight of the
other, and even at this day we feel and enjoy the happy effects of both. Happy
effects indeed! even our Laws, our Liberties, our Properties, our Lives, and,
what is still abundantly dearer to us, than all these, our Religion.

If we look back to the days of old, what a glorious and surprising scene of
Providence may we there view. Have not our Fathers told us, what, a crafty race
of Men, crafty even in the worst of senses, conspired at once both against them
and God: against God's People, against God's Anointed, against God's Religion;
against their Lives and Fortunes, against their Prince and Government, against
their way of Worship and Salvation? Have they not told us, how cunningly and
how secretly their enemies hid their Plot in the dark caverns of the Earth, how
successfully they throve in it, for a long time, and how near they brought it
to execution; how little, in the mean while they themselves dreamt of their
danger, and how unable they were to prevent it? Have they not told us all this?
Yes, and, to our comfort, a great deal more: They have told us, how their God,
in whom they trusted, came suddenly and seasonably to their relief: what a
wonderful and unexpected accident he sent, not many days before that on which
they were destined for slaughter, to inform them of the danger they were in,
and to warn them to provide against it: How wisely and how powerfully he
defeated all the Deeplaid and Infallible Contrivances, as they then no doubt
thought them, who had the Blessings of Infallibility upon them, of his and
their Enemies: How justly he retorted the mischeifs, they had designed for his
People, upon their own heads: and How gloriously he preserved his Truth and his
Anointed from becoming a prey to Idolatrous and Blood-thirsty Men, and suffered
not his Heritage to be brought to confusion. And, from these remarkable
circumstances of their deliverance, they have wisely and piously inferred, that
it was the Lord's doing, and Religiously devoted this day to his Service, as an
argument not only of their sense of his goodness, but also of their
thankfulness for it.

But we need not go so far backwards, to behold God stretching out his Arm for
our deliverance. We may all remember, and certainly we shall never forget it!
how very lately the wicked offspring of the same race of crafty Men, whom I
mentioned before (whose custom it is to observe our Savior's commands by
halves, and to put on the cunning of the Serpent, without the Innocence of the
Dove,) were industriously, contriving our ruin. Not so secretly indeed as the
others, but no less dangerously, because their openness had Power and Authority
to support it. Nay, so far had they prevailed in their designs, that they had
more than began to profane and defile God's Sanctuary, more than began to
pillage and oppress his People. But I love not to repeat such Melancholy
Truths; It is enough to say our case was bad, and, as we then thought,
desperate; but he, whose thoughts are not as our thoughts, Isa. 55.8.
did not think so; and happy was it for us that he did not. He saw and had
compassion on our tears, saw in what need we stood of a Deliverer, and he
immediately became one to us. And that we might, even from the beginning of our
Deliverance, know it to be from him, he began it, with an Happy Omen, on this
very Day, on which he had done such wonderful things for our Forefathers in
times past. Nor did it want other marks of being his: It was commenced, carried
on and perfected in Wonders, his Enemies courage forsaking them, unaccountable
fears laying hold on them, and making them to stagger like drunken Men, Ps.
107.27.
and to be at their wits end: It came in Judgment to make his enemies feel
those evils which they had not only threatened, but in part executed against
others: It came in season, when they began to Lord it over his heritage, with
an high hand: It came to answer the earnest cries and importunities of his
Servants: It came attended with a mighty concurrence of lucky accidents, and,
in a word, it came with such extraordinary power, wisdom and goodness, to pull
down the strong holds of the wicked, to turn all their craft into foolishness,
and to preserve and secure the true Religion, and the true servants of it, that
we have no Room to doubt, from whence it came.

Oh! Blessed Day, which God himself has marked with double Characters of Joy!
We may now vie with our Forefathers, for instances of the Divine favor and
Protection, and hope that we are not worse, than they were, because we have not
fared worse. It is indeed a mavelous Love, wherewith God has loved us. Oh let
us study how we may repay it, in acts of Duty and Obedience. But this advice
will more properly belong to my

Third Head, under which I now come to make some practical inferences from the
whole. And, Is it then manifest that the great, and wise, and good God, who
beholds and overrules all the most secret Counsels of the crafty, has, in a
most illustrious manner, twice even on the same day, defeated and confounded
all the promising and hopeful devices of our enemies against us? Methinks the
consideration of this should,

1. Discourage them from attempting us any more. When they see the Providence
of God so zealously engaged on our behalf, it is not greater wickedness, than
it is folly, to fight against it; Prove. 21.30.
for there is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel, I may safely add, nor
power against the Lord. They can never prevail against us without his leave:
and he has hitherto given them but very small ground to hope that they shall
obtain it; So far has he been from shining upon their Counsels, that he has
showed his displeasure and dslike of them, in repeated disappointments, thereby
plainly forbidding them to tempt him any more.

The Egyptians, when they persu'd the Israelites to the Red Sea, and saw the
hand of God divide it, to make a passage for them, argued very wisely, in
saying, Let us flee from the face of Israel, Exodus 14.25.
for the Lord fights for them against the Egyptians. And certainly, were not
our enemies more hardened than the Aeygptians, they would argue in like manner,
and say of us; Behold the Keeper of Israel, who neither slumbereth nor
sleeps, watches over this People for their Defense, and therefore it is in
vain to hope that any design, which we can Form against them, shall prosper.

I am sure, had they Argued thus some years ago, they had saved themselves a
great deal of shame and trouble; but, as the wise Providence of God has ordered
it, which knows how to bring good out of evil, it is well for us, that they did
not. For their frequent Disappointments of late, and especially that last
Signal one, which is fresh upon ours, and, I dare say, upon their Minds too,
are such new and evident Testimonies of the Divine Love and Care over us, as
must certainly Damp their Spirits, and abate the Heat of their Designs against
us.

2. This Consideration should encourage us, in all our straits and
difficulties, to place our hope and confidence in God; In God, I say, who has
already given us such glorious and happy tastes and earnests, not only of his
Ability, but also of his readiness and willingness to help us. What, though our
case, to Human fight, seem dark and melancholy, though our enemies lay close
siege to us, and their devices, appear to be contrived with so much art and
cunning, and supported with so much strength and power, that they can hardly
possibly fail of success; Must we Despair because of this, Why so? Ought we not
rather to Argue thus with our selves? Were we never before in as bad a case?
Were we never reduced to such straits before? And who then delivered us out of
them? Who indeed but he whose arm is still as long as ever, whose power and
will to save is still the same. Let us not fear then, neither be dismayed, but
in our greatest dangers still confide in him that has redeemed us, and say, as
David did upon a like occasion, 1 Samuel 17.37.
The Lord that delivered our Forefathers from the Gunpowder Plot, and our
selves from another, that would as certainly, though not so suddenly, have proved
fatal to us, shall deliver us likewise from the snares now laid for us. To him
then let us commit our cause, Psalm. 33.18.
Let us hope in his mercy, and his eye will be upon us, Psalm. 37.5.
let us trust also in him, and he shall bring it to pass.

3. It should likewise encourage us to make our earnest Prayers to God for help
in time of need. There is no motive, which can so powerfully engage Men to seek
unto God, as a firm belief that they shall obtain what they seek for, that they
shall ask and have. And this we have abundant reason to believe concerning our
selves, from those many favorable and gracious Answers which God has given to
our prayers hitherto. Psalm. 61.2, 3.
From the end of the earth, says David unto God, will I cry unto thee, when my
heart is overwhelmed: for thou have been a shelter for me, and a strong Tower
from the enemy. God has been a shelter to us likewise, therefore let us cry
unto him in the time of trouble. More especially at this time, when the devices
of our enemies are many, and their strength great against us, let us entreat
him to be our deliverer. Psalm. 83.
Keep not thou silence O God, v. 1, 2, 3, 4.
hold not thy peace, and be not still O God. For lo thine enemies make a
tumult: and they that hate thee have lift up the head. They have taken crafty
counsel against thy people, and consulted against thy hidden ones. They have
said, come, and let us cut them off from being a Nation: that the name of
Israel may be no more in remembrance. But, O Lord, Psalm. 25.6.
Remember thy tender mercies, and thy loving kindnesses which have been ever of
old: and give not thy Scepter unto them that be nothing, Esther 14.11.
and let them not laugh at our fall, but turn their devices upon themselves,
and make him an example that has begun this against us.

4. And lastly, Since God has done such wonderful things for us, we must be
sure not to forget to glorify him. This, he has plainly told us, he expect
from us: I will deliver thee, says he, and thou shall Glorify me. Psalm. 50.15.


Glorify him, by acknowledging his Salvation, by confessing that our own arm
did not save us, but his right hand, and his arm, Psalm. 44.3^.
and the light of his countenance, because he had a favor unto us.

Glorify him, by rejoicing in it: We will rejoice in his Salvation, because
the Heathen are sunk down in the pit that they made, Psalm. 9.14.15.
in the net which they hid is their own foot taken.

Glorify him by declaring his works, Ps. 45.11, 12.
by telling the people of his doings, by speaking of the glory of his Kingdom,
and talking of his power; by making known to the sons of Men his mighty acts,
and the glorious Majesty of his Kingdom.

Glorify him, Ps. 26.7.
by having his praise continually in our mouths, by declaring his name unto our
brethren, by praising him especially in the midst of the great congregation,
and by publishing all his wondrous works with the voice of thanksgiving. But,
above all,

Glorify him, by our lives and conversations, by behaving our selves as
becomes those, whom the Lord has redeemed, and delivered from the hand of the
enemy. This, this is that sacrifice with which God is well pleased: for behold
to obey and to do justice is better and more acceptable to him than sacrifice.
1 S^m. 15.23.
Prove. 2^.3.


Let this then be our way of Glorifying God: Let us be careful not only to
honor him with our lips, but also to order our Conversation aright, that so we
may both praise him worthily for past Deliverances, and engage him to show us
his salvation in the times to come. If we do this we may safely defy all the
strength and cunning of our enemies, and apply those words of God to them,
which he spoke by the mouth of his Holy Prophet Isaiah, Chapter 8. v. 9, 10.
Associate your selves, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces: and give
ear all ye of far Countries: Gird your selves, and ye shall be broken to
pieces: Gird your selves, and ye shall be broken to pieces. Take counsel
together and it shall come to naught. Speak the word, and it shall not stand,
for God is with us.

THE END.

