THE DECLARATION AND RESOLUTION OF Diverse Officers and Soldiers under the
command of Major General Laughorn, concerning the proceedings of Col. Poyer,
Governor of Pembroke Castle in Wales; And their Resolution touching his
Excellency the Lord General.

Also another late Fight betwixt the Forces under command of Col. Poyer, and
the Parliament Forces belonging to his Excellency the Lord General.

And the great danger of Adjutant General Fleming, and diverse other Gentlemen,
by Poyers surrounding them, with their gallant success thereupon.

LONDON: LONDON, Printed for R. W. MDCXLVIII.

ANOTHER LATE FIGHT BETWIXT The Forces under command of Col. Poyer, [and the
Parliaments Forces belonging to his Excellency the Lord General, near the
Garrison of Pembroke.
Honored Sir,
WE have lately received intelligence of Col. Hortons advance toward Pembroke
Castle, with a gallant party of Horse, and it is said he will be there within
few days, We daily expect the coming up of the other Forces designed for the
said service, which if speedily performed, will be the only means of bringing
Poyer and his Confederates under subjection and feat.

There has lately been another Fight betwixt the Enemy, and the Bristol Forces
belonging to Col. Overton, within three or four miles of Pembroke town, which
conflict continued not long, by reason our Forces were over-powred, yet they
defended themselves with such Heroic and unanimous spirits, (although very
deeply engaged) that they denied to yield, unless upon honorable terms and
conditions, which terms, after some dispute, were granted them, as will appear
by the enclosed paper. The Enemy came down with a strong party of Horse and
Foot, and thought to have surprised them in their quarters, but by the great
vigilance of the Bristol party, they were timely discovered, and gallantly
repulsed; for further satisfaction whereof, I shall refer you to the enclosed.

Worthy Sir,
THe miseries of the destroyed County of Pembroke do very much increase. This
Evening a Vessel arived here that came yester^ay morning out of Milford and
brings news that Poyer is near 500. strong in Foot, and that Captain Addis
Troop, one other Troop of Major General Laughorns horse, are fallen in to him,
which amounts to about 100. he is daily raising more Forces both of Horse and
Foot, and to that end does frequently muster the Country into Pembroke town,
who do out of pure fear obey him, and does make very full appearances before
him, with Bills, Holberts, and such other weapons as they can get, and out of
them upon Satterday last he pressed 100. men, besides what he has pressed
since in the Country, he has sessed all the Country Parishes about him to a
tax, near trible as much on any parish as the three months Sesment for the
Army is, which he forces the Inhabitants to bring into him in money or
provision* or both, and such as do refuse he threatens to plunder, he has
imprisoned Mr. Lort, Mr. Bowen, and Mr. Poyer, with several others, and made
them all pay their ransomes.

On Tuesday last a little before night, the two Companies of soldiers that
went down by water from Bristol, landed near Hentlan in Milford, and on
Wednesday were set upon by the two troops of Horse, and about 100. Foot of
Poyers in Pulchran Church, and Churchyard, but they maintained the place, and
are not taken as the report was, but had conditions upon treaty, to march away
with their arms, and are gone to Cardiff, upon engagement not to land again in
Milford.

The same day Poyer beset Hentlau house, where was Mr. White, Mr. Roger Lort,
Adjutant General Flemming, Mr. John Lort, and several other Commissioners and
Gentlemen that were met together, about the accommodating and quartering of the
new landed soldiers, all of them are and was in great danger of taking, but
they also by a stratagem escaped, and are got on ship-boord.

One Butler a Colonel of the Kings Army, a grand Malignant, commanded the Foot
that were about the House, and had provided bars of Iron, sledges, and other
instruments, for the breaking open of the doors of the house.

By this, and what has formerly been certified, you may see the settled
resolution and activenesse of Poyer, and his adherents to raise a new war,
which I am confident will grow to such a head on a sudden, if not timely
prevented, in those malignant and discontented parts, as will not easily be
overcome.

The disbanding of Maj. Genesis Laughorns Forces goes on very successefully and
peaceably. The several Companies and Troops disbanded, being as follows.

Col, Lewis Foot his Company. Cap. Jones troop. Cap. Lloyds troop. Col. Lewis
troop. Capt. Griffiths troop of Dragoons. Cap. Thomas Vaughans troop.
All these showed a willingness to obey the Parliaments Orders,
notwithstanding they received Orders from Colonel Powel on pain of death to be
that day at Carmarthen, and bring three days provision with them, Col. Horton
it is thought by this time has entered Pembrokeshire, and confined Poyer to a
narrower compass then he had. Some troops of Major Genesis Laughorns men are gone
with him to testify their fidelity to the parliament against those which
revolted, which with some others joined, makes him about 12. or 1300. strong.
Likewise Lieut. Col. Read with 8. Companies of Col. Overtons Regiment, are
marched after, very well appointed, and at the coming away of the last
Messenger, were as far as Cardiff.

Poyer as yet has but very few Horse, nor is not able to keep the field, but
will be again sufficiently penned up in the Castle, upon the appearance of the
additional Forces sent down.

Brecon. April 8. 1648.
The Copy of another Letter from the West.
Worthy Sir,
Our troubles here are great, Poyer and the Welsh-men still continue their
insolent carriage, and that they have secured most of the Committee whom they
took. But there are ships come into the Harbor to block them up, and to
prevent the coming of any relief unto them. The number of the Rebels are not
so great as is reported. Their whole Body does not amount to a thousand,
although it it is rumoured they are at the least four or five thousand strong.
The Inhabitants adjacent are very much incensed against them, by reason of
their great burdens and oppressures, occasioned by their present plundering
both of provision, Goods, and Chattel: Poyer has declared the grounds and
reason of his present Engagement, and entertaines all that comes to him: he
has summoned in the Inhabitants in those parts.

Bristol 9. April. 1648.
A Letter sent from the City of Bristol, touching the resolution and
proceedings of Col. Poyer.
Noble Sir,
THe affairs here are in a very sad condition, our fears daily increase, and
the Country is divided; for the malignant party gives out high speeches, and
diverse of the Cavalry resorts to Pembroke Castle, for the assistance of col.
Poyer, and it is to be feared, they will very much endanger the public peace
of these Counties, and prove a great obstruction to the proceedings of
Parliament, etc. Their numbers increase, but not to that heigh as is reported,
although it be rumoured that they are 4. or 5000. strong, but I can assure you
to the contrary, that they do not consist of above 8. or 900. Horse and Foot,
and diverse of them slightly armed, the greatest part of them are such who its
thought will hardly change many blows.

We do also further hear, that the Forces designed by his Excellency the Lord
General are upon their march, Colonel Horton (we hear) is upon his march, as
also Sir Hardresse Waller, and Col. Okey, with their Regiments. The Countrymen
are summoned in to Pembroke, but upon what occasion we know not, unless it be
to fortify the town, which is very probable.

We daily expect Col. Horton with his Regiment, who (its said) is upon his
advance toward Pembroke, for the blocking up of the insolent Revels; but we
are informed, that the cause of his so long stay, is, because he expects a
Randeavouz with the rest of the Forces appointed for that service, which is all
at present, from

Bristol 9. of April 1648. Your most obliged Servant, James Gibson.

Postscript.
SIR,
Upon the close of this Letter here arrived a Gentleman from Cardiff, who does
assure us, that the greatest part of Major General Laughorns Forces have
subscribed to a Declaration, wherein they protest against any confederacy or
compliance with Poyer and his Confederates in this action, and that such of
their Soldiers as have or shall go in to him, they have and will look upon as
Enemies and disturbers of the peace of the Kingdom, and that they are resolved
and ready to aid and assist his Excellency the Lord General against any party
or parties whatsoever.

By all this, yet we hope this storm in Wales so much heightened by Malignants
will suddenly be blown over, and their malignant expectations to engage a new
War in those parts frustrated.

Bristol April 9. 1648.
Imprimatur,

G. M.

FINIS.

