A DECLARATION FROM The Right Honorable, the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons
of the City of LONDON, Presented to His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, IN
Behalf of the whole City ingenerall; concerning the present marching in of the
Army under his Excellencies Command. ALSO, The gallant Answer of His Excellency
Sir Thomas Fairfax, touching the Honorable City of LONDON. Likewise the
Articles of the Treaty, agreed upon betwixt the CITY and the ARMY.

Imprinted at London, for Richard Hatfield, 1647.

ARTICLES OF THE TREATY AGREED Upon betwixt His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax,
and the Commissioners for the City of London.
HIs Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, being advanced near the City of London,
with a gallant and puissant Army, occasioned by the late disturbances, and
tumultuous Risings of diverse disaffected persons within this City, sent
several Messages to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council, for a
speedy composall of all things in love, for the preservation and safety of this
famous City, and for the preventing of a second War.

Whereupon the Right Honorable the Lord Major, together with the Aldermen, and
Common Council of the said City, seriously consulting and debating thereupon,
after some time spent in debate thereof, resolved to send Commissioners to his
Excellency, to treat with him, and his Council of War, which was accordingly
done, and the said Commissioners dispatched away, insomuch that there began a
happy treaty, and after two or three days spent in consultation concerning the
great and weighty affairs of the Kingdom, the fourth day produced happy
tidings of a peace, all things being agreed upon betwixt the City and the Army,
which Agreement, or Articles, ware to this effect, viz.

1. That the Forces and Ordnance be forthwith drawn off from the
Fortifications and Bulwarks about the Lines of Communication.

2. That a speedy course may be taken for the quitting of all Forts on
Southwark side, which are not as yet in the possession of the Forces under
command of his Excellency.

3. That Giles Fort, the two Forts at Foxe-Hall, and the rest of the Forts down
to the Water side, be surrendered to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, or any
other whom he shall please to appoint.

All which particulars were agreed upon, and assented to by the Right Honorable
the Lord Mayor of London, as appears by the ensuing Declaration (or Message)
sent from his Lordship to his Excellency.

A Copy of the said Declaration follows:
Whereas, we understand your Excellencies and your Honorable Council of
War, their expectation to be possessed of all Forts from Giles Fort, and that
to be one, down unto the River side by six of the clock this Evening. And we
take notice for what reasons your Excellency is led to insist thereupon.

For our parts, that we may manifest how ready we are to comply with all things
which may beget a good understanding, we have readily consented thereunto, as
far as the Cognizance thereof belongs to this Court, and have given directions
accordingly to the Committee of the Militia, for drawing off all Forces and
Ordnance; unto which work they do now instantly apply themselves, and we are
confident your Excellency will find performance accordingly. The Committee of
Militia will also give Order for quitting such Forts on Southwark side, as are
not as yet in possession of your Forces.

And now next unto Almighty God we do rely upon your Excellencies honorable
word for our safety, and to be protected from all violence of the Soldiery.

The Answer of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, to the aforesaid Declaration.
My Lord and Gentlemen,
I Am very glad to find so ready a compliance in answer to my last desire sent
to the Common Council, and have accordingly given Order for three Regiments of
Foot, and two of Horse, to possess those Forts you mention in your last, and
to lie thereabouts; I am with the rest of the Army marched up to Hammersmith,
in order to the security of the Lords and Commons, who I suppose will to morrow
sit in parliament, the preserving of their privileges, and securing them from
violence, that with freedom they may sit to discharge their trusts, has been
the cause of my near approach to your City. And whereas you are pleased to
express your hopes of preservation from violence, you may be confident nothing
shall pass from this army, but what shall be for the safety of your City, and
I doubt not, though some disaffected persons to the peace of this Kingdom have
endeavored to beget a misunderstanding between this army and the City, hoping
thereby to embroyle this Kingdom in new troubles; yet that this army will
always so behave themselves as to witness to the world the integrity of their
hearts, in having no other design, but the quiet and happy settlement of a
firm and lasting peace, wherein both the whole Kingdom, and your City in
particular, will have cause to rejoice in the goodness of God; the
accomplishment whereof, will truly glad the hearts of this army, and in
particular, of

Your most humble Servant, Thomas Fairfax.

His Excellency Sir T. Fairfax his Forces entered the West parts of the city;
and at the time of their coming to the Forts a Declaration was published in the
city to this purpose.

That the late pernicious Engagement set on foot in the city, and much more the
prodigious violence done to both houses of Parl. rendered their former way of
treaty merely vain and hopeless, till the Parl. be vind cated and restored to
a condition of freedom: they therefore thought good to make a public tender of
the heads of certain Proposals.

That the things hereafter proposed being provided for by this Parl.) a certain
time may be set for the ending of this Parl. That a Biennial parl may be
called, each bienniall Parl to sit 120 days, and afterward to be adjorned by
the King and no Parl. to sit above 240 days. That liberty be given to members
to enter their dissenting voices in the house and judicial power cleared the
right and liberty of the Commons of England cleared, and no judgment against
them by the Peers, without the concurrence of the Commons. That the Militia
both by Sea and Land for ten years be disposed by the Parl. no person that
has bin in hostility against the Parl. shall bear any Office during 5 years.
That an Act be made for restraining of Peers made since the 21. of May, 1642.
An Act for making void all Declarations against the Parl. making void all
Grants, consiring the treaty with Scotland. That the way may be clear for
petitions, the Excise taken off in convenient time, the rules and course of Law
reduced and reformed, and none enforced to answer to accuse themselves, etc.
The large power of Committees taken away, and provision made for payment of the
Arrears of all that have served the State. Its said all that is due this way
comes to 1100000. l. but that it is desired, that this sum should be raised
only out of a general tax through the City, is not true.

FINIS,

