A DECLARATION From his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, And the General
Council of the ARMY, Of their Resolutions to adhere to the PARLIAMENT, in
their Proceedings concerning the KING. Presented to the Honorable House of
Commons, by Col. Sir Hardres Waller, Col. Whaley, Col. Baxter, and Col. Okey,
January 11. 1647. Together with the Parliaments Answer thereunto.

And Ordered to be forthwith printed and published.

Hen. Elsyng Cler. Parl. D. Com.



BY the Appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the General
Council of the Army.

JOHN RUSHWORTH Secr.



LONDON. Printed for George Whittington, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Blue Anchor in Cornhill; near the Royal Exchange.

A DECLARATION From his Excellency; Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, And the General
Council of the ARMY, etc.
NOtwithstanding the high violations of the Kingdoms Rights and Liberties, and
the endeavors to swallow up the whole interest of the Kingdom into the power
and will of a King, which the present Kings Reign has afforded; we have
observed, That the Parliament was (through his necessities,) and against his
declared intentions to the contrary, called and put into a condition of
vindicating the Kingdom in those things, has yet and acted with that
tenderness toward the King, (as to any thing of right that might be in him,
or duty toward him) as that in the Protestation, Covenant, and many
Declarations published by them; They have held forth a careful regard to the
preservation of the Kings Person, and just Rights with, and in the preservation
and vindication of the public interests and safety of the Kingdom. And by the
whole series of their actions, and their manifold humble addresses to him, for
the preservation and settlement of all, They have, we conceive, abundantly
demonstrated the realty and innocence of their intentions toward him: In all
which; we have still understood, the sense and intention to be no other then
that the preservation of the Kings Person, and particular Rights, should be so
endeavored as it might be consistent with, and not distructive to those great
and more obliging public interests of Religion, and the rights, liberties, and
safety of the Kingdom, and not otherwise.

And accordingly, in the late Declarations and papers that have occasionally
past from this Army, as to our desires of settlement to the Kingdom, we have
expressed our real wishes, that if the King would in things necessary, and
essential to the clearing, settling, and securing of those public interests,
give his concurence to put them past future disputes, then his rights should be
considered, and settled, so far as might be consistent with those superior
interests of the public, and the security thereof for future.

And that by an address to the King upon things so purely essential to those
public ends it might once more come to a clear Trial; whether we could with
the preservation of the Kings Person, and particular interests have a security
to the other, has been our earnest desire, our great expectation, and our
endeavor that we and others might be kept in a patient waiting for such an
issue.

Now in the Parliaments last address to the King, we find they have insisted
only upon some few things so essential to that interest of the Kingdom, which
they have hitherto engaged for, as that without betraying the safety of the
Kingdom and themselves, and all that had engaged with them in that Cause;
without denying that which God in the issue of the War has borne such
Testimony unto; they could not go lower, and (those things granted,) they have
offered to treat for all the rest.

Thus we account, That great business of a settlement to the Kingdom, and
security to the public interest thereof, by and with the Kings Concurrence, to
be brought to so clear a Trial as that (upon the Kings denial of those
things) we can see no further hopes of settlement or security that way. And
therefore understanding, that upon the consideration of that denial, added to
so many other. The Honorable House of Commons, by several votes on Monday
last, have resolved not to make any further address or application to the
King, nor receive any from him, nor to suffer either in others. We do freely
and unanimously declare, for our selves and the ARMY; that we are resolved
through the Grace of God, firmly to adhere with, and stand by the Parliament in
the things voted on Monday last concerning the King, and in what shall be
further necessary for prosecution thereof, and for the settling and securing of
the Parliament and Kingdom, without the King and against him, or any other that
shall hereafter partake with him.

Windsor Ian. 9. 1647. By the Appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax,
and the General Council of the Army. John Rushworth Secr.


