A DECLARATION AND REPRESENTATION FROM THE Forces of the Northern Associations
to his Excellency, Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX.

And by him presented to the Parliament, JUNE the 12th. 1647.

July 13 LONDON, Printed for John Benson, and are to be sold at his shop in
Chancery Lane near the Rouls, 1647

A Declaration of the free and constant coherence of the Soldiers in the
Northern Association, with the Army now under the command of his Excellency
Sir Thomas Fairfax.
WHereas there has been an express of the real and honorable intentions,
and grounds of and from the Army manifested (in most just and honest terms to
the Houses of Parliament and Kingdom) clearing to every indifferent and sound
judgment the cause of their proceedings, for the kingdom and their own dues,
and interressed satisfactions, we having, by Gods providence, the opportunity
to show our affections no less ready and inclinable, to maintain and confirm
the lawful obteining of our right and just privileges then themselves declare
to be: We therefore declare, as in duty bound, for the mercies we have received
from God, and the faithful service we owe to the Kingdom, to join and
associate our selves with the Southern Army, under the command of his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, for the speedy and happy effecting, a true,
lasting and well grounded peace, wherein may consist the pre-eminence of all
honor and welfare, both to the King, Parliament, and Kingdom, and that there
may be no misapprehensions, as usually public actions and resolves are liable
unto at the first, appearing in the eyes of men un-acquainted in the business,
and in the eyes of those (who being pre-possessed of guilt cunningly oppose,)
We further declare our selves free from any secret intentions in reference to
the promotion of any p^rticular design, or our own particular interrests, but
are absolutely raised and moved (in our selves) to a necessary compliance with
that Army upon those good, clear and sound principles, which tends to the
promotion and protection of justice, and the liberty of the subject, as
hitherto (by the management of the affairs of so great importance) have
appeared, we shall no less endeavor to defend with our lives and estates, The
lawful designs of those truly well affected Soldiers then we would oppose a
foreign invasion or prevent an indirect or unwarrantable war, our warrant
being the same for either nature or law, and the Covenant binding thereto.

We shall therefore prosecute the discovery of all persons complotted and
combined against us and these just desires, that we may keep our friends and
Nation free from any enforced injury or prejudice, whatsoever, especially we
giving to understand that we have not any intentions to spill the blood of any
man, or to wrong them in their proper goods, or entrench upon the conscience,
of any, our chiefest care being in this our Declaration and intentions at
present and for future, to provide for a correspondencie with that Army, to
live or dye, rejoice or suffer with them, as we are mutually engaged, our
expectations of reward being no other then the salving of those grievances
published from that Army (with our own) the Soldiers honor and livelihood
repaired, their service thankfully requited, and all corrupt persons in
authority in Court of Judicature and Offices of the Kingdom expunged, and all
such several good Acts as shall be for the present and future concernment, of
the Kingdom (...) satisfactory to the generality, so we desire not to require
an addition of redresses of any particular man's wants or sufferings whatsoever,
but attend on the general business in hand, for the accomplishment of the
Armies, our own, and the well affected of the Kingdoms desires, and just
demands, the necessity, justice, and sincerity whereof, we desire to vindicate
as our lives.

Pomfret, July 5 1647,
The humble Representation of the Soldiers of the Northern Association,
presented first to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and to be by him
presented to the Honorable Houses of Parliament.
1 THat the Honorable Houses of Parliament would be pleased to look upon the
representative desire and grievances of his Excellencies Army, as our desires
and grievances, which we humbly desire may be justly (not fainedly) granted and
redressed.

2 That whereas the Parliament was pleased to declare against their just
desires contained in their representations, and proceed to disband before
redress of the grievances, we humbly desire that the misrepresentours of the
aforesaid desires and obstructours of their just satisfactions, their desires
and grievances being ours, may be brought forth to legal trial.

3 That the illegal imprisonment of several Officers and the endeavors used
by some to imprison others for speaking in the behalf of his Excellencies Army,
and their just dues may be repaired, and the occasion thereof dealt with
according to their deserts.

4 That those who endeavored to render his Excellencies Army odious by
aspersions, and thereby to deprive them of that Honor which they have so
deerly bought, and to incense the Kingdom and Soldiers against them, may be
proceeded against according to justice.

5 That such provision may be made for better supply of us for the future,
whereby we may be enabled to discharge our Quarters, that so we may not for
necessary food be beholding to the Parliaments friends, who have spent their
estates in the Service, whose preservation is the things we desire, and in
whose happiness our own is involved.

To his Excellency Sir THO. FAIRFAX, Captain General of all the Forces raised
for the Parliament in England, Dominion of Wales. The humble desires of the
Soldiers of the Northern Association, shows.
THat whereas your Excellencies Petitioners having for some few years past
served the Parliament and Kingdom in the late unnatural Wars, and having
undergone the same with all cheerfulness and readiness notwithstanding the
sad coffeehouse, and sad sufferings which we have undergone, being not at
all thereby so discouraged, as to manifest any visible distemper, or
unwillingness unto the aforesaid service our conditions being at present so
uncertain, that we know not to whom to repair as our chief Conductor, and by
reason of the same we are exposed to an incapacity of being made partakers of
the fruits of our wearied travels and dangerous services, out of the experience
that we have had of your Excellencies care for the satisfaction and
preservation both of Soldiers and Subjects, we are emboldned to present these
as follows.

That your Excellency would be pleased to make our satisfaction and
preservation, the object of your Excellencies care together with the Army at
present under your Excellencies command, and resident with you.

That to the end we may be exempted from further obedience to any other command
then what may conduce for the obteining of our just dues and privileges, the
establishing of the peace of the Kingdom, and with which your Excellencies
advice and approbation shall concur.

That your Excellency would be pleased to recommend this annexed representation
of our desires to the Parliament, to prevent misunderstanding betwixt the
Parliament and the Soldiers of this Kingdom, for the obteining of their just
desires, and putting an end to these present distractions.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc. Colonel General Points Regiment of
Horse.
Robert Bradley Nathanael Croft
Colonel Bethels Regiment.
George Issot Thomas Jackson
Colonel Copley's Regiment.
Nicholas Baker William Bates
Colonel Overton's Regiment.
John Bennington William Wren
Colonel Overton's Regiment.
John Mark Edward Field
Colonel Ponsonby's Regiment.
Thomas Hunter Thomas Wharton
Colonel Collenwoods Regiment.
Robert Sharp Thomas Shacklock
Colonel Legard Regiment.
Robert Tod William Blanchard


Agitating in the behalf of the several and respective Regiments.
FINIS.

