A DECLARATION AND Manifestation of the Proceedings of both Armies, also a true
Relation of the remarkable Passages that have happened since Saturday, from the
beginning of the fight to this present seventeenth of November.

Together with their plundering of certain West-Countrey Waines, and the
retteat of Ais Majesty's Forces, as also of the death of certain noble and
eminent Personages of His Majesty's Army: and how His Majesty sent a Herald of
Arms concerning a Treaty of Peace, and while the paper was reading, a Cannon
was shot off, and the Bullet whizzed by his Excellencies Ear.

Also the manner of His Majesty's Armies Retreat from Brainfordto Kingstone
upon Thames, and to Gilford, His Majesty being now at Oatlands: with the
Resolution of the Parliaments Forces to pursue them.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Watson and Will. Cook.. 1642.

A DECLARATION AND MANIFESTATION OF the Proceedings of both Armies, and also a
true Relation of all the remarkable passages that have happened since Saturday
from the beginning of the Fight to this present 17. of November, and of their
plundering, etc.
THe Plague proceeds from the hand of God, War from the hands of men; the sins
of men provoking the justice of Almighty God both to visit and chastise them.
The hand of God has these many years with slow and unwilling strokes been
correcting this Nation to repentance: and because our willing blindness would
not let us take notice of the hand of God, he has now left us to be punished
by the hands of men, in which God has increased his judgments, as we have
increased our sins, and insensibly, yet greedily, we fall from one misery to
another; from the hands of God we are fallen into the hands of men, and
mistaken in distempers of Religion either through too glaring or to dim a
zeal, we have armed both Heaven and earth against us. What a misery and an
astonishment of heart is it, what a horror, what a wonder to behold a Nation
whom the succession of so many Princes had kept long flourishing in Peace,
whom the bounty of the Sea had with watery arms increased, and defended from
all foreign danger, whom the honor of their Cheivalry had made the envy and
supportance of other Nations should fall now divided amongst themselves, and
whom no hands but their own could overcome should dig into their own
bowels, and by a lamentable effusion of blood should make their own
ss^aughters the best Annalls of their immortality, and Religion? In the
Relation of the Battle at ^in^ton there have not been wanting able tongues
and pens? but because Fancy has persuaded many men to bring in Victory to
what side they please, and the truth of the proceedings in that battle, has by
Royal Authority Printed at Oxford been much inverted, I have addressed sir
this Relation of the battle at Brainford unto you, and that without faction
or affection, the Causes whereof are far asunder from me.

On Sat^rday in the afternoon his Majesty's Forces taking the advantage of the
Mist in a close and still march brought up their forces unto Brainford, they
had entered the old town as far as the Bridge, where they were incountred by
my Lord Roberts Regiment, who hearing how near the Kings fo^ces had advanced
themselves, removed that morning from Putney, and were now marching toward
Acton where the night before they were to lodge. The unexpected presence of his
Majesty's forces did not amaze them but encourage them, with great resolution
they came up unto the charge, my Lord Roberts himself amongst the foremost
bestirred him most bravely, and showed himself most worthy of so absolute a
Regiment as they themselves worthy of so brave a Colonel, maugre the forces of
Prince Rupert they still maintained the Bridge, and with one Regiment did
oppose the Army Royal. When their powder and shot was spent they would not
abandon the place, and were less weary of their Bause and Colonel then of
their lives, They resolved with their Swords and butt end of Muskets to dispute
it out unto the last man, when (as success often attends high resolves) behold
where Colonel Hampdens and Colonel Hollis Regiment came in to second them, and
clearing the bridge with the loss but of a few of our men, made great
slaughter of the adversaries. The night following passed with little sleep on
either side, they were careful to observe all advantages and warnings
whatsoever, and the noise of preparations from London did encourage one, and
affright the other. In the morning it was reported that His Majesty had sent
unto his Excellence concerning a Treaty of Peace; his Excellence had that
morning drawn forth and marshalled his Army, with intent either to receive or
give the battle. He was more desirous of peace then victory, and while with
earnest eyes he was perusing the Paper from His majesty, the hope and harmony
of peace was lost in the loud voice of a Canon, which at that instant had
di^charged a bullet amongst his Excellencies Troops, and whizzing by his
Excellencies ear, gave him counsel, where ever he heard of that, to look
unto himself; no greater hostility was that day acted, and his Majesty's
messengers for a pretended peace were rather admitted then believed. The
soldiers cried, no parley, and were very eager to have the fight begun. That
afternoon there came up two Ve^^els which were appointed to guard the Thames,
and discharged many small Pieces against Sion House, which belongs unto my
Lord of Northumberland, and where it is thought were then resident some
persons of the highest account in His Majesty's Army, they did beat down and
maime much of the building which stood toward the waters side, and were secure
themselves by reason that the pieces that were planted on the top of Sion house
did still shoot over them, and those that were planted lovver were discharged
with so much inconvenience, that they never came near them: howsoever one of
our Vessels in their return to London was sunk, the Men, Cannon and
Ammunition being all preserved. Our men that performed this service by water
gave the Kings Engineeres much commendation, and said, they never savv men give
fire better. Toward the evening Prince Robert made as if he would incampe
himself, and the Works seemed to be follovved with great industry from
Brainford up toward my Lord of Desmonds house, but all in policy, for by
that invention he had the means and opportunity to withdraw his Canon and
Artillery from Brainford with less suspicion, which being ob^ayned he
retreated with some disorder and what speed he could toward Kingston. This was
no sooer diicovered by his Excellence, but he thundered against him with 16 or,
18. Cannon shot which overtook his troops with as much indignation as they ran
away with feere, and levelling of them with the ground told them how bad a
couneellor was fear. There was after their depaature many muskets found that
instead of bullets were laden with arrows which in the muskets were united into
one body and seemed but one arrow, but in the discharge they divided
themselves, and were full of danger, a new and desperate way of murder,

The infantry of his Majesty now extremely poor, many of them are reported to
be Irish, had you seen them, you would have called them rather the ragged then
the royal regiments, to cover which defect assisted by necessity the mother of
invention, they found a means to relieve themselves.

On Monday about ten of the clock in the morning it was their for tune to meet
with 4 or 5 wains laden with cloth from. Glocestershire were conveighing their
carriag unto London with out any long salutation the soldiers demanded of them
what was their carriage, although it is not to be doubted but that they knew
very well what it was answer was made with much speek and more trembling, that
it was cloth which they were carrying unto London they desired them as they
were gentremen they would not wrong them they demanded of them again if they
knew what the comm^ssion of Aarray was, which when they replied, they did not
very well, they told them that they would help their understandings to conceive
it, and cutting the cords from the wains, and showing them in what a naked
estate their present condition was, they fell to plundring of the wains the
first man that drew his sword was one Hemor, he had bin sometimes a barber in
the City, and a mad shaver in the field. The cloth was not measured by the
yard, and the handful over he said was the City measure, and a little to
precise, the which he did abhor, but from the elbow to the end of the middle
singer, which he called a cubite, two cubits and a half was allowed for a
yard, and sometimes grumbled at as scanting measure to, thus they divided
amongst them with their swords the poor man's cloth who cried out Gent, what
mean you, answer was made that they wanted clothes, and that they meant to make
them understand, and to obey the Commission of Array, and having sufficiently
pillaged the wains, they made after their comrads with what speed they could,
who wondering to see every man laden with so much cloth, desired to be partakers
of their adventure, and would fain know how honestly they came by it. According
to Sherards premonition they returned no other answer but this, Cloth, Oath,
Noth, which being in a language not to be understood, was thus construed by
them; Cloth, that they had gotten cloth to make them a suit: Oath, that they
owed for it: Noth, that they would pay nothing for it. Thus in the midst of
danger, and his Excellencies Army pursuing them at the heels, did they make a
sport of robbery, a wretched sort of people, who condemned to robbery, do
thrive by extortion, as the usurer by his money, and by a less cruel method
they have found a more compendious way by rapine and destruction unto wealth.

On the report of the death of some soldiers in my Lord Roberts his Regiment
on Saturday last, their wives now in London, whose names had almost dropped from
my pen, hearing of it, did forth with put themselves into mourning habit, but
mistaken in the intelligence, on the monday following did shake off at once
both their sorrows and blacks, one of them who was overcome with sorrow at the
report of her husbands death, was wonderfully re-comforted at the sight of his
return, wherein her excellence was such, that she began now to feel a nearer
violence from her own joy, and fainting away in his arms, had almost made him
a widdower, whose widow she supposed she had been.

One thing cannot be forgotten, and that is, that it is generally believed that
Prince Robert is dead, and that he was slain at the battle of Kynton, and to
be one of those brave Cavaliers that were buried in Christ-Church at the Kings
first coming to Oxford, and that he who personates him now is William the young
Lord Strafford, who is much like P. Robert in growth and stature, but more like
his father in physiognomy, who was too true a prophet of these civil tumults.
And to add a greater belief to this apprehension and report, besides the
acknowledgment that it is a frequent policy in war so to do, to keep the army
undiscouraged, is an observation upon my L. of Northamptons death, who was a
principal agent for his Majesty in Warwickshire for the commission of Array;
it is credibly reported that he was slain before Coventry at the same time when
Captain Leg was taken prisoner; for since that time he was never heard of, nor
any news concerning him, and that because he should not be discovered by any of
the Parliaments soldiers, in that sudden tumult and confusion, one of his own
soldiers, being unable to carry him away, did cut off his head and took it
with him, the policy of war in this way preventing the justice of the
Parliement.

The Lord Brook on monday morning, being the 14. of November. set forward from
his own house in Holborne toward the Army, he had the acclamations and hearty
wishes of all the people as he passed by, and no doubt but his journey will
find success, which has been furthered by so many prayers.

On monday night there was brought to Blackfriars from Brainford the body of
Lieutenant Colonel Quales, who was slain at Branford, and to be interred with
some others there slain in one common grave, but being conveyed (as was said)
to London, he received more solemn rights, and slept alone.

On that night there was brought from Brainford guarded by some of Colonel
Hollis Regiment 22. Cavaliers, most of them extremely poor, some of them
extremely wounded, neither had any of them the aspect of a true soldier,
except two Gentlemen, one of which was said to have been sometimes of the inner
Temple, and a Knights son of great repute in Oxfordshire.

His Majesty is this day, being the 15. of November. at Isleworth, some part of
his Excellencies Army are marched to meet Prince Roberts Forces on the Front,
and his Excellency continues still to pursue them on the Rear; it is verily
believed that ere many days be passed over, Prince Robert and his Forces will
be so hemmed in, that he will no more find means and opportunity to escape,
that his flying army will have their wings cut, neither that there shall be any
slight or stratagem for the further delay of the war, but that their
unnatural tumults shall find a period by a speedy reconcilement, or by a
happy victory, wherein His Majesty's Person shall be secured from any further
danger, his royal thoughts from entertaining any evil counsels, and his
Kingdoms from the pale hand of ruin, and the bloody one of War.

FINIS.

