THE DECLARATION AND PROPOSALS Of the Citizens of LONDON, CONCERNING The Lord
General Fairfax, and the Armies entering, and quartering within the Walls of
the said City; and the promise and Protestation of the Common Council
thereupon.

WITH The Answer and Resolution of His Excellency to the said Declaration and
Proposals; Sent to the Right Honorable, the Lord Major, and Court of Aldermen.

AND His Excellencies further Desires and Declaration touching the said City,
and the Excize Office.

Signed, T. FAIRFAX.

TOGETHER, With the Proposals of the Army, concerning Major Genesis Brown, and
the impeached Members now under restraint; presented to the House of Commons by
Col. Whaley. And the Answer of the House thereunto.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Princed for JOHN WOOLRIDGE, 1648.

THE DECLARATION Of the Citizens of LONDON TO The Lord General Fairfax, and
their Propositions touching the Army.
THe Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common council having seriously debated the
desires of his Excellency the Lord Genesis Fairfax (in order to the acommodation
of the Army) upon mature deliberation thereon, made choice of a Committee, to
represent and declare the sense and proposals of the Citizens of London, to his
Excellency, a copy whereof follows, viz. 1 That the City for their security
of 40000 l. desired, may have all the arrears upon any assesments made for this
army within London, and the Liberties thereof, which did g^ow due to be paid
before the 25. of March last, freed from all engagements. 2 And of those
arreares all that money paid into the Treasury sinde the 30. of November. last,
to be accounted part of the 40000. desired. And that with the money received
out uf Weavers hall, and the 5500. l lately received of the Treasurers, the
rest shall be paid on Monday next. 3 That a Common Counsel have undertaken to
discharge the Generals engagements concerning the money taken out of Weavers
Hall, to pay the same thither out of the said arrears. 4 That the Common
council has promised to get in the rest of their arrears, and also to make the
new assesments for the six months ending Michaelmas last, and to collect the
same withal expedition. 5 And upon thls engagement they do humbly pray, that
the army may this night be withdrawn out of the City and Liberties thereof,
according to the intimation of col. Whaley, and col. Thomlinson.

Guild Hal, London, 9 December. 1648.
His Excellencies Answer to the said Declaration and Proposals.
My Lord and Gentlemen,
I Have perused your paper, and I find the point of security has much troubled
you and us, whereby we are yet without our money, and necessities daily grow
upon us. To prevent which and to make things clear (which I do not conceive
your papers do) I desire that you will within 14. day, or sooner if you please
cause all the money charged upon the City of London for the Army until the 25.
of March next, and in arrear. This being done, I shall both repay the Money from
Weavers Hall, and withdraw all the Forces from the City, the continuance of
which in the City in the mean time, will (I conceive) facilitate your work in
collecting your said moneys.

Subscribed, T. FAIRFAX.

The Lord Generals Declaratson to the City.
My Lord,
HAving sent so often to you for the arreares due from the City, and desired
sums of money to be advanced by you, far short of the sums due from you, yet I
have been delayed and denied, to the hazard of the army, and the prejudice of
others in the Suburbs upon whom they are quartered; wherefore I thought fit to
send to seize the said Tresuries, and to send some forces into the City to
quarter there until I may be satisfied the Arrears due unto the Army: and if
this seem strange unto you, it is no less then that our forces have been
ordered to do by the Parl. in the several Counties of the Kingdom where
assesments have not bin paid, and there to continue until they have bin paid:
and here give me leave to tell you, the Counties of the kingdom have born free
quarter, and that in a great measure, for want of your paying your Arrears
equally with them; wherefore, these ways if they dislike you, yet they are
merely long of your selves, and are of as great regret to me and to the Army as
your selves, we wishing not only the good and prosperity of your City, but that
things may be so carried toward you, as may give no cause of jealousy: I
thought fit to let you know, that if you shall take a speedy course to supply
us with 40000. l. forthwith, according to my former Desire, and provide
speedily what also is in Arrear, I shall not only cause the moneys in the
Treasuries to be not made use of, but leave them to be disposed of as right
they might, and also cause my Forces to be withdrawn from being in any sort
troublesome or chargable to the City; And let the world judge whether this be
not just and equal dealing with you. I rest, My Lord,

Your affectionate servant, T. FAIRFAX.

The Armies Impeachment.
THat whereas Denzil Hollis Esquire; Lionel Copley Esquire; Maj. Genesis Massy, and others
of your members, were in the year 1647. impeached by your selves for treason,
or for high crimes and misdemeanors, in relation to the treasonable Engagement
of the city of London, etc. and upon clear proofs against them, were by your
censure expelled the House; yet by the prevalency of their Faction the same
persons were afterward readmitted to sit in the House, and vote as formerly,
without any trial or satisfaction in the things whereof they were accused: We
demand that all those members so impeached may be forthwith secured, to be
brought to justice or trial for their said crims, and that such others of their
faction, may be secluded from the House, etc.

That whereas by the confederacy of Major Genesis Brown (now Sheriff of London)
with the said impeached members, and others, the Scots were invited and drawn
in to invade this Kingdom the last Summer, insomuch as when upon the actual
Invasion the House proceeded to declare them enemies, and those that adhered to
them traitors; yet the said confederates and other treacherous members (to the
number of ninety and odd, as upon the division of the House appeared) did by
their Councels and Votes endeavor to hinder the house from declaring against
their confederate invaeers; We desire, that the said M. G. Brown may be also
secured and brought to judgment, and that the rest of the ninety and odd
persons dissenting in the said vote, may be excluded the house, and not
trusted further in your Councels.

That whereas in a continued Series of your proceedings for many months
together, we have seen the prevalence of the same treacherous, corupt, and
divided councels, through factions and private interests, and in their late
Votes declaring the Kings past concessions to be a ground for the house to
proceed upon for the settlement of the peace of the kingdom* notwithstanding
the visible insufficiency and defects of them in things essentially concerning
the public interest and liberties of the Kingdom

That such as by faithfulness have retained their trust, being set in a
condition to pursue and perform the same, without such interruptions,
diversions and depravations of councels, as formerly, We shall desire and hope
you will speedily nnd vigorously proceed, 1 To take order for the execution of
Justice, 2 To set a short period to your own power, 3 To provide for a speedy
succession of equal Representatives, according to our late Remonstrance,
wherein differences in the kingdom may be ended, and we and others may
comfortably acquiese; as (for our parts) we hereby engage, and assure you we
shall.

By the Appointment of his Excellency the Lord Fairfax, Lord General, and his
General Council of Officers. Signed, JOHN RUSHWORTH, Secr.
Col. Pride having received Orders from the General, to secure a certain
number of the Parliament, on Wednesday last marched with his Regiment to
Westminster, and took diverse of them into custody, viz. Sir William Waller,
Major Genesis Massey, Sir Benjamin Rudyard, Col. Hollis, Col. Fines, and about 30
more, who are committed to safe custody, and whether they shall have their
inlargment upon paroll, or be continued prisoners* is uncertain.



A Declaration from his Excellency the Lord Genesis Fairfax concerning the Excize,
and the Citizens of London.
Whereas upon the 8. of this instant month, a party of Horse and Foot came to
the Excize Office in Broadstreet, which perhaps will occasion some to think the
Army came thither with a purpose to interrupt any more levying of the Excive;
These are to declare, and assure them, that the said Forces came thither by a
mistake, and that there was not any intentions to give interruption unto the
due levying of the Excize, or to seize upon any money in Cash; and that you may
proceed as formerly, according to those Ordinances, and Orders of Parliament,
which you have received concerning the same.

Subscribed, T. FAIRFAX.
Several Proposals have been presented to the House of Commons, by Col.
Whaley, in the name of the Officers and Soldiers of the Army in order to an
impeachment against Major Genesis Brown, and diverse other Members now under
restraint: Whereupon the House ordered that a Committee should be appointed to
treat with his Excellency, concerning the said Members.



FINIS.

