The Declaration and Protestation agreed upon by the Grand Jury at the Assizes
held for the County of Worcester, the third day of August. 1642. and assented
unto by the High Sheriff, the Lord Coventry, the Baronets, Knights, Justices
of the Peace, Gentlemen and Freeholders of the County of WORCESTER aforesaid.
WE do with all thankfulness, acknowledge our selves very sensible of those
sundry good Laws, which, through His Majesty's great Grace and Goodness, have
been obtained for us this Parliament. And we do no less rejoice in His
Majesty's Pious and Tender Care, repeated by His gracious Declarations in
print, and expressions by letter read unto us, and all the County at this
Assizes, in open Court, to defend and maintain the true Protestant Religion, by
Law established, against Popish Recusants, Anabaptists, and all other
Seperatists. And that the Laws of the Land shall be the Rule of His Majesty's
Government, whereby the Subjects Liberty and Property is defended: And that
His Majesty will preserve the freedom, and just Privilege of Parliament, with
all which promises and expressions we are so abundantly satisfied, That we do
not anyway distrust His Majesty's Constancy in these Resolutions. And we do
declare, That we will be ready to attend His Majesty, in all lawful ways,
for the putting of the County in a posture of Arms, for the Defense of His
Majesty, and the Peace of His Kingdoms. Therefore we do resolve, according to
our Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and late Protestation, to adventure our
Lives and Fortunes, in Defense of His Majesty's Royal Person and Honor, and
the just rights and Privileges of Parliament, and the known Laws of the Land,
and Liberties of the Subjects, That thereby the Distractions and Disturbances
of His Majesty's Kingdoms may be reduced to His Majesty's Legal Government.
And whereas the Grand Jury, at the last Sessions, delivered a Petition, thereby
desiring the exercising of the Militia, we utterly disavow it, as not agreeable
to the intents or desires of us, or any Considerable number of the said County.
And we do hereby declare, That by the Information which we have received from
several of the persons then of the Grand Jury, That it was not of their own
framing, but contrived and prepared for them by some few persons, not well
affected to the Peace and quiet of this County.

THo. Coventry. Ed. Vernon. Vic. Com. John Washbourne. Robert Steynor. Ed.
Littleton. Ed. Solley, Major. Henry Foord, Vic. John Packington. William
Russell. Henry Herbert. Row. Berkley. John Hambury. George Street. Francis
Hincley. John Slantan. James Littleton. Henry Ingram. Joseph Walshe. Sam.
Sandys. Robert Wyld. Henry Townshend. Ed. Burret. Nich. Gower. John Fleet.
George Savage. George Symonds. Ed. Dingley. Antony Palmer Urban Air
Coronat. Francis Walker. Cler. John Baion. John Hunt. Ed. Emes.
Constables Capital.
The Grand Jury of the County of Worcester.
Mar. Sandys. Tho. Child. Phil. Brace. Io. Lench. John Dyckins. Fran. Sheldon.
Io. Ewett. William Cliffe. I. Clent. Ed. Broad. Ed. Davies. Tho. Chetle. George
Middlemore. Thomas Sanders. William Muckland.
The Grand Jury of the County of the City.
William Tailor. Francis Hughes. George Brook. Philip Davis. Tho. Lysons. Tho.
Pomfrey. Rich. Sharman. Francis Sharman. William Gibbes. Tho. Rea. Hen. Smith.
Tho. Hill. Robert Sollers.
Imprinted at York by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN Bill. 1642.


