The Declaration and Protestation Agreed upon by the Grand Jury at the Assizes
held for the County of Salop the eight day of August 1642. And assented unto by
the High Sheriff and diverse of the Justices of Peace Gentlemen, and
Freeholders of the said County there present.
WHEREAS our Honorable and worchie Neighbors of the County of Worcester,
have made a Loyal Declaration of their Confidence in our Sovereign Lord the
Kings government over us according to our known Laws, And since our faith
goes hand in hand with theirs, we will not so much as alter their words but
we also do with all thankfulness and unanimously acknowledge our selves
sensible of the good Laws which through His Majesty's goodness have been
enacted this Parliament, And we do much rejoice in his Majesty's Pious, and
tender Care expressed by his Majesty's Declarations and expressions in print,
and lastly by his Highness Letter read unto us publicly this Assizes in open
Court to defend and maintain the true Protestant Religion by the Law
established against Popish Recusants, Anabaptists and other Separatists, And
that the Laws of the land shall be the rule of His Majesty's government,
whereby the Subjects liberty and property is defended: And that His Majesty
will preserve the freedom and just privileges of Parliament, with all which
expressions we are so abundantly satisfied that we do not any way distrust his
Majesty's constancy in these resolutions: And we do declare that we will be
ready to attend and obey His Majesty in all Lawful ways for the putting of
the Country in a posture of Arms for the defense of His Majesty and the peace
of his Highness Kingdoms. And do resolve according to our Oaths of Supremacy
and allegiance and late protestation to adventure our lives and fortunes in
the defense of his Majesty's Royal and Sacred Person and Honor, the Just
right and Privileges of Parliament and the known Laws of the Land and
liberties of the Subjects that thereby the distractions and disturbances of his
Majesty's Kingdom may be reduced to his Legal Government.

The Names of the Grand Jury,
Paul Harris Knight, and Bar. Tho. Waldridg Knight, and B. Vinc. Corbett, Kni.
and Bar. William Owen, Knight. Walter Pigott, Esquire. Thomas Iton, Esquire.
Edward Crescett, Esquire. Edward Baldwyn, Esquire. Thomas Sciven, Esquire.
Francis Otley, Esquire. Francis Thorns, Esquire. Roger Kinnaston, Esquire.
Richard Lloyd, Esquire. Francis Billingsley, Esquire. Edward Stanley, Esquire.
London, Printed for G. Badger, and R. Marriott in St. Dunstans Churchyard,
1642.


