The Communicants Instructor.

OR, A SACRAMENTAL Catechism, IN WHICH The Nature of the Covenant of Grace, and
the visible Seals thereof (viz.) Baptism and the Lord's Supper, with the Gospel
Qualifications of worthy Receivers, are opened with all plainness and clearness
by way of Question and Answer.

Recommended to the Use of the Younger and more Ignorant sort, especially to
such as desire Admission to, and would worthily Partake of the Lord's Supper;
with a Request to the Charitable, That they would make it a Piece of their
Spiritual Alms to the Poor.

By George Day, Minister of the Gospel.

Heb. 5.12. For when for the time ye ought to be Teachers, ye have need that
one teach you again which be the first Principles of the Oracles of God, and
are become such as have need of Milk, and not of strong Meat. LONDON: Printed
for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside near
Mercers-Chappel, 1700.

The EPISTLE to the READER.
Christian Reader,
THOUGH Baptism and the Supper of the Lord be sacred Ordinances, and Christ's own
Institutions, yet such is the sin and shame of this degenerate Age, That
Multitudes under the Christian Profession live in a careless Omission of them,
and not a few in a profane Con^^mpt and Opposition against them. The Fault of
the former sort proceeds from gross Ignorance of the spiritual Nature, Use, and
Ends of these Ordinances: That of the latter, from a Spirit prepossessed and
prejudiced with Error.

Now, though I have little hopes of doing any good upon the Erroneous by this
brief and slender Piece, seeing their Malignity against the Truths which they
disown, will (probably) incline them to reject it with disdain on the first
sight of the Title Page, without vouchsafing it a sober perusal; yet the hopes
of being somewhat serviceable to the Ignorant, especially to such as are
desirous of spiritual Knowledge, and are willing to be instructed, have at
length prevailed with me to comply with the Request of Christian Friends, in
exposing this mean Essay to public View.

I know there are many excellent Helps of this kind already extant, and
therefore this may well be thought needless; and I confess, this very
Consideration has suppressed these Meditations for many years, by me; but
observing diverse Tracts that speak much of the Lord's Supper, say little or
nothing of Baptism, (though this being the initiating Ordinance, and first seal
of the Gospel Covenant, ought first to be considered, and well understood) I
have therefore endeavored to open both these holy Ordinances distinctly,
together with the Nature of the Covenant of Grace, to which they are annexed,
as its visible signs and seals.

I have made it my Business to gather the most material and soul-concerning
Truths that I find scattered in many excellent Authors, that have written on
this Subject, and contracted them, that I might give thee much in a little, and
crowd as much precious Matter into these few Pages as I well could, without
prejudice to the sense, and with due regard to weaker Memories, that a little
Pains and Patience may make much Truth thine own.

I have also endeavored to express my sense of things with the greatest
plainness and clearness I could, using words and phrases that may easily be
understood by persons of mean Capacity, and studiously declining others; having
observed in Teaching both Young and Old, that the want of understanding the
true meaning, though but of one word in a Sentence, has made the whole
unintelligible, and so unprofitable to them.

Thou will find to most of the Answers scripture Proofs subjoined, though only
referred to, for brevities sake, therefore pray turn to them, and see with
thine own eyes how clearly and fully these Truths are confirmed by the holy
Scriptures, and so the reason why thou should believe them; for we ought to
make no Position or Assertion an Article of our Christian Faith, but what is
founded on a Divine Attestation, and bottomed on the written Word of God, which
is the only, perfect, and perpetual Rule of our Christian Faith and Practice.

I have purposely chosen to give thee this Help in a Catechistical method, by
way of Question and Answer for these Reasons:

1. Because it is the most easy, plain familiar way of instructing the
Ignorant, and therefore like to he the more profitable.

2. Because it is of great Antiquity, having been used not only in the
Christian, but also in the Jewish Church, yea, some of the Learned trace its
Foot steps back to the beginning of time, concluding, that it was practiced by
Adam himself, who catechized or instructed his Sons in the Doctrine of Man's
Fall, of the Seed of the Woman, and of worshipping of God by offering
sacrifices, etc. [Read Willet, Downham, Greenham, Pemble, and others on this
Subject.]

3. Because the neglect of Catechizing for 20 or (...) years last past (which
we should reflect on with ^ame and grief) has been one great cause of the
^ecay of Knowledge in our days; there being ma^y thousands of adult and grown
Persons, [and ma^y of them Parents and Governors of Families] ^osly ignorant
of the very Fundamentals of the ^hristian Faith which they profess; and that
though me of them have sat under the preaching of the lord a long time. Indeed,
it is an Observation I ^^ve often made, and am confirmed in it by daily
exerience, That uncatechised Heads understand but ^ittle of the most excellent
Sermons they bear, and therefore it is not to be thought strange, that they
grow little the wiser by them. O that this were duly considered, and might
prove a cogent Argument to Ministers and Governors of Families for the Revival
of this useful Exercise among us!

And (because my words may have little weight) let me here take leave humbly to
mind my Reverend Brethren of a serious and weighty Passage of a great Divine
now in Glory. Prouble Vind. Great. Praef. p. 13, 14.
I could heartily wish (said he) that those [Ministers] among us, whom either
Ease or Pride have made careless in this Office [of Ca^^chising] would be
pleased to look abroad into such Congregations, where this course is held, and
to compare them with their own and others, where it is neglected; they should
soon perceive how fair and open a passage is made for preaching to follow
after, where diligent Catechizing has gone before; and on the other side, how
hopeless their Endeavors is, who labor to imprint in the Heads of their
People the Knowledge of Conclusions before they have learned the Principles of
Divinity.

If these Men complain and say, We have spent our strength in vain, and our
Labor without profit, preaching long, and seeing little Reformation; I will
not pity them, who are lik^ unwise Nurses, that, when their Children thrive
not, lay the Blame upon their sickly Bodies when the Fault is in their own
indiscretion, who feed them not with Childrens Bread, but forc^ upon them
stronger Meat, which they cannon digest, but vomit up again. (Thus he.)

To this hearty wish of his I subjoyn another, Th^^ all the Pastors of Churches
may fully and faithfully obey that Precept of the Chief Shepherd, John 21.15,
16. requiring them to feed his Lambs as well as his Sheep.

I shall close with a word or two of Counsel; (Reader) if thou art yet weak in
spiritual Knowledge, and willing to be instructed, that thou may be made wise
to Salvation, let me beseech thee to follow this faithful Advice.

1. Labor for a distinct and methodical Knowledge of the great
Foundation-Truths of the Christian Religion, those first Principles of the
Oracles of God, drawn up to thine hand in many more general Catechisms;
especially I recommend to thy use that excellent Catechism of the Assembly of
Divines, both shorter and larger; a little Labor will commit the lesser to thy
memory, and read the other with diligence to explain that, with Mr. Lies, Mr.
Doolittles, and Mr. Vincents Explanations. The Knowledge of these Truths will
prepare thee to read the holy Scriptures, and hear Sermons with Understanding
and Profit.

Next, I offer thee the serious perusal of this Sacramental Catechism, in the
composure of which I have purposely left out several Questions very proper to
have been inserted, because they are already answered in the Assemblies
Catechism. Say not thou art too old to learn a Catechism (if ignorant) unless
thou think thy self also too old to go to Heaven, and so too old to learn
the way thither. Be not ashamed of using the means to get Knowledge, but be
^shamed of thy Ignorance, and blush to bear a Child of Seven years old, that
has been well catechized, give a better account of the Christian Faith than
many of 30, 40, or of 50 years of Age can do.

2. Pray earnestly and daily for the inward teachings of God's holy Spirit in
and with the outward teachings of the Word; without this, tho tho^ may fill
thy Head with the Notions of Truth, ye thou will never feel the saving
Impressions of the^ on thy heart, but remain a stranger to the life an^ power
of Godliness. Read those precious promises and humbly plead them in prayer,
Prove. 1.23. Isa^ 59.21. Luke 11.13.

3. And lastly, Believe the Truths which thou ha^ ^^earnt, and live according
to the Rule of them. Le Knowledge and Practice (as an holy Taine) g^ ^^nd in
hand, and stilt keep pace each with other ^^^h of them are required as
necessary qualification to entitle thee to true happiness, John 13 17. O d^ not
aim at any thing short of that! The Experimental and Practical Christian will
be found to be the wisest and best in the great discriminating Day. Tha^ thou
may be such an one, and that thy Meditation may contribute somewhat thereto,
is the sincere an^ fervent Prayer of

December. 19. 1691. Thine and the Church in Christ, George Day.

A SACRAMENTAL Catechism.
Quest. 1. WHat is a Sacarment in general?

Answ. A Sacrament is an holy Ordinance of Divine Institution, annexed to the
Covenants which God has made with Men, wherein by outward and sensible signs
the Promises of the Covenant are represented, sealed, and applied to God's
Vovenant People, and they are bound to obey him, Genesis 17.10. Romans 4.11.

Q. 2. Are these Ordinances called by the name of Sacraments in the holy
Scriptures?

A. No. Yet seeing it is a word very fit to signify the thing to which it is
applied, it may lawfully be used.

Q. 3. What is the original and proper signification of the word [Sacrament]?

A. As it was used of old in a civil sense, it signified an Oath taken in War
by Soldiers to their General, whereby they were bound to perform the Duties of
that Relation.

Q. 4. Why are the Seals of God's Covenants called Sacraments?

A. Because by our receiving them we are bound (as it were) by an Oath to
perform the Duties of God's Vovenant People, Romans 6.3, 4, 5.

Q. 5. What are the parts of a Sacrament?

A. Two. The one is an outward visible sign, or thing signifying, which may be
seen by the Eye of the Body; as Water in Baptism, and Bread and Wine in the
Lord's Supper. The other is the inward and spiritual grace, or thing signified,
which can only be seen by the Eye of the Soul, or by Faith, and that is Christ
with all his saving Benefits, Matthew. 3.11. 1 Pet. 3.21. Romans 2.28, 29.

Q. 6. Do all those who receive the outward signs receive the inward grace also?

A. No. For wicked and graceless persons may receive the outward signs, but not
the inward grace with them; none but true believers receive them both.

Q. 7. What is a Covenant in the general?

A. A Covenant is a solemn Contract or Agreement between several persons, two
at the least, wherein they do mutually bind themselves each to other, in
certain Articles, to both their Contents, and usually confirmed by signs and
seals, Genesis 21.27. 1 Samuel 18 3.

Q 8. Has God ever made a Covenant with Man?

A. Yes. Tho God be infinitely above Man, yet he has been pleased, through
condescending grace, to deal with Man in this familiar way of Covenanting, as a
Man with his Friend, Genesis 15.18.

Q. 9. What Covenants has God made with Man?

A. Two especially. The first called the Covenant of Works. The second, The
Covenant of Grace, Gal. 4.23, 24.

Q. 10. What is the Covenant of Works?

A. That Covenant which God made with our first Parents, Adam and Eve, in the
estate of Innocence, and in them, with all their Children, wherein God promised
perfect happiness to them, upon Condition of their perfect Obedience to him;
and threatened them with Death on their Disobedience, Genesis 2.16, 17. Gal. 3.12.

Q. 11. Why is this called the Covenant of Works?

A. Because it required the Works of Man's Obedience to the whole Law of God,
as the Condition of his Life and Happiness, Lev. 18.5.

Q. 12. Had our first Parents sufficient strength to perform that Condition,
and keep that Covenant with God?

A. Yes. Our first Parents being created upright and perfect, had sufficient
power to perform perfect Obedience to the Law of God, and so to keep his
Covenant, Eccl. 7.29.

Q. 13. Did our first Parents keep their Covenant with God?

A. No. Our first Parents brake their Covenant with God, by complying with the
Temptation of Satan in eating the forbidden Fruit, and thereby brought
themselves, and all the Children descending from them by ordinary Generation,
into an estate of sin and misery, Genesis 3. begin. Romans 5.12.

Q. 14. Does God suffer Adam and all his Children to perish in their sinful and
miserable state?

A. No. God did of his own free grace from all Eternity elect some of fallen
Mankind to everlasting life, and gave them to Jesus Christ, that they might be
recoveted and saved by him, Ephesians. 1.4.

Q. 15. Did the Lord Jesus Christ then undertake to be a Savior to them?

A. Yes. There was an Eternal Compact, or Agreement between God the Father and
God the Son (which is commonly called the Covenant of Redemption) wherein God
the Father gave the Elect unto God the Son, as to a Redeemer, and he engaged to
perform the work of their Redemption, Isa. 59.20, 21. Psalm. 89.3, 4, 19, 20,
etc.

Q. 16. Did God make another Covenant with Man after the first was broken?

A. Yes. God was pleased to make a second Covenant with Man, called the
Covenant of Grace, Genesis 17.2, 7.

Q. 17. What is this Covenant of Grace?

A. The Covenant of Grace is that which God made with Man in his fallen and
sinful state wherein God, through the Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ,
promises Pardon and Life unto all penitent and believing sinners, Acts 2.37.
and 16.30.

Q. 18. Why is this called the Covenant of Grace?

A. 1. Because all that is promised in it is the fruit of God's free grace in
Christ to sinners. 2. Because it is the free grace of God that inclined God to
make it, and that persuades and enables us to consent to it, and to keep it,
Ephesians. 2.8.

Q. 19. What is the condition of this Covenant on Man's part?

A. The great comprehensive Condition of its Faith in Jesus Christ, which, (if
it be true and saving) is accompanied with Repentance, and all other Graces in
the Heart, and brings forth new Obedience in the Life, John 3.16. Acts 20.21.
James 2.18.

Q 20. How can it be called a Covenant of Grace, if it is Conditional?

A. Very well. For, 1. It is an Act of God's free grace, and infinite
Condescension in God to make a Covenant with Man his Creature, whatever the
Condition be. 2. The Condition it self is gracious. Faith in Christ. 3. God
himself has graciously undertaken for both Parts of the Covenant, his own and
ours too, and by his grace persuades and enables us to consent to the Covenant,
and perform the condition of it.

Q. 21. Is any Man able to perform this Condition in his own strength?

A. No. we are in our natural state both unwilling to consent to, and unable to
perform the Condition of this Covenant; but God is pleased to make his Elect
both willing and able by his special Grace, Psalm. 110.3. 2 Cor. 3.5. and 12.9.
Phil. 4.13.

Q. 22. What are the Differences between the Covenant of Works, and the
Covenant of Grace?

A. These Ten especially.

1. The Covenant of Works was made between God and the first Adam with all his
Natural Seed, i.e. all Mankind. But the Covenant of Grace was made between God
and the second Adam, i.e. the Lord Jesus Christ, and all his Spiritual Seed, i
e. All God's Elect, which are only some of Mankind.

Q. 23. What is another?

A. 2. That was made with Man in a state of Innocence: This was made with Man
in a state of sin.

Q. 24. What is another?

A. 3. The Condition of that, was perfect Obedience; the Condition of this, is
Faith.

Q. 25. What is another?

A. 4. Under that, Man was entrusted with the keeping of himself, and his own
happiness; under this, he is kept by the power of God.

Q. 26. What is another?

A. 5. Under that, Man was to be justified by his own Righteousness; under
this, by the Righteousness of Christ.

Q. 27. What is another?

A. 6. Under that, the least sin was a breach of the Covenant; under this,
nothing but Unbelief and final Perseverance therein, is a breach of the
Covenant.

Q. 28. What is another?

A. 7. That promised not pardon to the sinner upon Repentance, this does.

Q. 29. What is another?

A. 8. That was of use only for a little time, until Man's Fall; this has
been of use ever since, and will be to the end of the World.

Q. 30. What is another?

A. 9. That was especially designed for the glory of God's Justice; this for
the Glory of God's Mercy.

Q. 31. What is another?

A. 10. That had no Mediator, or Surety; this has a Mediator and Surety, the
Lord Jesus Christ.

Q. 32. What does Christ do as Mediator of the Covenant?

A. Christ, as Mediator of the Covenant, being himself both God and Man,
performs the great Work of Reconciling God and Man, whom sin had made Enemies,
and brings them into a Covenant of Grace and Peace each with other, 1 Timothy 2.5.
Hebr. 8.6. c. 9.15.

Q. 33. What does Christ do as the Surety of the Covenant?

A. Christ as the Surety of the Covenant, undertakes to see the Covenant
faithfully and fully performed; i e. That God shall perform his Promises to his
Elect; and that they shall perform the condition of the Covenant unto God,
Hebr. 7.22.

Q. 34. Has the Covenant of Grace been always the same, or diverse?

A The Covenant of Grace has been always the same, as to the Substance of it,
but it has been different as to the manner of its Administration or
Dispensation, and so is distinguished into the Old and New Covenant of Grace.
Jer. 31.31. Hebr. 8.13.

Q. 35. Which is called the Old Covenant of Grace?

A. That which was Administered before the Coming of Christ in the Flesh.

Q. 36. Which is called the New Covenant of Grace.

A. That which is Administered since the Coming of Christ in the Christian
Church.

Q. 37. Wherein does the Administration of the New Covenant differ from that
of the Old?

A. 1. In the easiness of it. That was Administered by Promises, Prophesies,
Sacrifices, and other Types, which were costly, painful, and burdensome
Sacrific^e: But this is administered by the preaching of the Word, and
dispensing of the Sacraments, Baptism and the Lord's Supper which are sewer in
number, and more e^sily performed, Gal. 5.1. Acts 15.9.

Q. 38. Wherein else?

A 2. In the clearness of it. That was Administered by dark Types and Figures,
which were shadows of good things then to come; but this is Administered by
light and clear Ordinances, by which Christ and his Benefits are more plainly
revealed to us, Hebr. 10.1. 2 Timothy 1.10. 2 Cor. 3.18.

Q. 39. Wherein else?

A. 3. In the efficacy and power of it. That was weak and unprofitable
incomparison of this: Because the Spirit of God was not given to the Church in
so large a measure before Christ, as it is since, Hebr. 7.18. Acts 2.17. John
7.39.

Q. 40. Wherein else?

A. 4. In the visible Seals of it. That had Circumcision, and the Passover, for
its Seals; this has Baptism and the Lord's Supper.

Q. 41. Wherein else?

A. 5. In the Latitude and Extent of it. That extended peculiarly to the Jews;
this extends both to the Jews and Gentiles, Romans 9.4. Ephesians. 2.12, 13, 14, 15.
Col. 3.11. Mark 16.15. Acts 10.34, 35, 36.

Q. 42. Wherein else.

A. 6. In the Duration and Continuance of it. That was to continue but until
Christ came in the Flesh; but this is to continue until Christ comes in glory.

Q. 43. Who changed the Administration of the Covenant?

A. The Lord Jesus Christ himself, who is the only Head, and Lawgiver of his
Church, and so has power to Alter or Add, lay aside, or set up such Laws and
Ordinances in it as he pleases, Heb. 8.8, 9, 10. James 4.12.

Q. 44. Why did Christ change the Administration of the Covenant?

A. For his own glory, and the Churches good; for

1. Those Ordinances under the Old Covenant were more dark, difficult, costly
and weak, than these under the New Covenant.

2. Those Ordinances became unsuitable, and unserviceable to the Church after
Christ's coming in the flesh, because they signified Christ to come; therefore
when Christ, the Substance of them, was come, those Sadows must be done away.

Q. 45. How has God confirmed the Covenant of Grace?

A. God has confirmed it by 4 things: 1. By his Word of Promise, Genesis 17.7. 2.
By his Oath, Genesis 22.16, 17. Hebr. 6.13, 14, 17, 18. 3. By the death of Christ,
Heb. 9.16, 17. 4. By the Signs and Seals of the Covenant, Romans 4.11.


Q. 46. What are the Signs and Seals of the New covenant of grace now in
Gospel days?

A. The Signs and Seals of the New Covenant, are Baptism and the Lord's Supper.

Q. 47. Why are these Ordinances called Signs and Seals of the Covenant?

A. Because they are of the same signification and use to the Covenant of
Grace, as Signs and Seals put to Covenants between Man and Man use to be.

Q. 48. What is their signification, and use?

A. These Ordinances, as Signs, do signify the Grace and Good Will of God in
Christ to his Vovenant People; and as Seals do confirm, conveigh and apply the
Grant of the Covenant, or a Right to all the Blessings promised therein to
Belie^ers, and their engagement to Obedience, 1 Pet. 3.21. Romans 6.3, 4. Gal.
3.27.

Q. 49. Do these Sacraments certainly ^ork grace in all that receive them?

A. No. It is evident that many of ^ose who are baptized, and have recei^ed the
Lord's Supper, live and dye in a ^aceless state, Acts 8.23. Luke 13.26, 27.

Q 50. Who then do receive saving beneby the Sacraments?

A. Those only receive saving benefit the Sacraments to whom the holy Spi^^^ of
God does bless them, working in ^^d by them on their Hearts, as he does (...)
all God's Elect, 1 Cor. 3.7.

Q. 51. What is Baptism?

A. Baptism is an holy Ordinance of frist, wherein the washing with Water,
(...) or into the Name of the Father, the (...) and the Holy Ghost, signifies
and seals (...) ingrafting into Christ, Remission of (...) by his Blood, and
Regeneration by Spirit, and whereby the Persons bap^^ed are solemnly entered
into the visible Church, and into an open and professed engagement to be wholly
and only God's Vovenant People, Matthew. 28.19. Gal. 3.27. Mark 1.4. Rev. 1.5.
Tit. 3.5. Ephesians. 5.26. 1 Cor. 12.13. Romans 6.4, 5.

Q. 52. What be the Parts of Baptism?

A. They are two. The outward and visible part signifying; and the inward and
spiritual part signified.

Q 53. What is the outward signifying part of Baptism.

A. The outward signifying part of Baptism consists in the washing the Body
with the Element of Water, and the use of the words of Institution, i e.
Baptizing, etc.

Q. 54. What is the inward part signifie^ by the outward signs?

A. 1. By the washing with Water i^ signified two things; the washing awa^ of
the guilt of our sins, or our Pardon and Justification procured by the blood o^
Christ; and the washing away of the filt^ of sin, or our Sanctification by the
Spir^^ of Christ in the work of Regeneration Romans 1.5. John 3.5.

2 By the words of Institution, i e. Ba^tizing in the Name of the Father, Son,
(...) Holy Ghost, two things are also signifie^

1. That Ministers have Authori^ both from God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
to administer Baptism.

2. That the Persons baptized do enter into an holy Covenant with God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; i e. They take this only living and true God to be
their own and only God, and give up themselves, (if grown Persons) or are given
up by their Parents (if Infants) to this God, to be his Covenant-servants,
Matthew. 28.18, 19. 2 Cor. 8.5.

Q. 55. What are the special Ends of Baptism?

A. The special Ends of Baptism are of two sorts.

1. Such as respect God; and so it is to be (1.) A Sign to signify the Grace
of the Covenant; and (2.) A Seal to confirm the Grant of the Covenant, Romans
4.11. Col. 2.11, 12. Acts 22.16. Ephesians. 5.26.

2. Such as respect Man; and so it is to be (1.) A Badge of our Christian
Profession; (2.) A Bond to oblige us to perform the Duties of the Covenant,
Gal. 5.3. Romans 8.12. 1 Pet. 3.21.

Q. 56. To whom is Baptism to be Administered?

A. Baptism is not to be administered to any that are out of the visible Church
of Christ, until they are instructed in the Christian Religion, and profess
Faith in Christ, and Obedience unto him: But the Infants of such as are Members
of the visible Church are to be baptized, Matthew. 28.19. Acts 2.41. Genesis 17.7,
10. Acts 2.38, 39.

Q. 57. How may it be proved that the Infants of Church Members have a Right to
Baptism?

A. It may be proved by these Ar^guments.

1. By their Covenant Relation to God. Those that are in Covenant have a right
to the Signs and Seals of the Covenant: But the Children of believing Parents
are in Covenant, Therefore they have a right to the Signs and Seals of it, Genesis
17.7. Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.

Q. 58. Have Infants then a Right to the Lord's Supper also, and should they
receive it?

A. The Infants of Believers have a remote, though not an immediate and actual
right to the Lord's Supper, and therefore may not receive it in their Infancy,
for want of a capacity to discern the Lord's Body, or to understand the Nature,
Use and Ends of that Ordinance, and to use it accordingly.

Q. 59. Should they not then be kept from Baptism also for the same Reason,
seeing they understand not that Ordinance?

A. No. For they are as capable of Receiving this Ordinance of Baptism, as the
Jewish Infants were of Circumcision at 8 days old, and ought to be baptized,
because Baptism comes in the room of Circumcision; and as that was the
Sacrament of Initiation or Entrance into the Church, and into the Covenant, so
is this, Matt. 28.19, 20. Col. 2.11.12.

Q. 60. By what other Argument is it proved?

A. 2. By the Command of our Lord Jesus Christ requiring his Apostles, and in
them all Gospel Ministers, to Disciple all Nations, Baptizing them; and Infants
are a very considerable part of Nations.

Q. 61. But must they not believe first, and then be baptized, as Mark 16.16?
And how can Infants believe?

A. Adult or grown Persons without the Church, must first be instructed in the
Doctrine of Christ, and believe in him before they are admitted to Baptism, as
Acts. 2.38, 39, 40, 41. But the Infants of Church Members may be baptized, though
they do not actually believe, because they are the Children of Believers,
seeing Children are parts of their Parents, and are accounted but as one Person
with them, both by the Laws of God and Man, as the Root and Branches are but
one Tree, Romans 11.16.

Q. 62. By what other Argument is it proved?

A. 3. By the Example and Practice of the Apostles in the Primitive Church, who
baptized whole Households, and the universal Practice of the Christian Church in
all Ages ever since, which has been the same, Acts 16.15, 33. 1 Cor. 1.16.

Q. 63. What is the Duty of those Christian Parents who offer their Children to
God in Baptism?

A. Their Duty is, 1. To make a serious Profession of their Faith in God, the
Father, Son, and Spirit, and Obedience to him according to his Word.

2. To own and renew the Covenant which they made with God in their own Baptism.

3. To consent in the Name and behalf of their Children, (being parts of
themselves) that they shall be the Lord's Covenan-servants.

4. To bring their Children up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord, to
teach them the Nature of that Covenant with God which they make in Baptism by
their Parents consent, and to command them to keep it, Ephesians. 6.4. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7.
Genesis 18.19. 1 Chro. 28.9.

Q. 64. Is Baptism to be administered by dippin or sprinkling?

A. Baptism may be administered either by dipping or sprinkling: For, 1. The
Original word signifies to wash, whether by dipping or sprinkling, as Mark
7.4.2. The Christian Churches have used both.

Q 65. Where should Baptism be administered?

A. Baptism being a Public or Church-Ordinance, by which Persons are solemnly
addmitted into the Church of Christ, should ordinarily be administered in the
Public Assemblies of Christians, that thereby,

1. The whole Assembly may join in Prayer for a blessing upon the Ordinance.

2. Those that (...) ^^ptized, may be put in mind of the Covenant which they
made in (...) Baptism, and be stirred up to keep (...).

Q 66. May (...) administered in Priv^^^ (...)?

A. Yes, in case of ^ecessity; (as in times of Persecution, or of the sickness
of the Persons to be baptized, etc) It may be administered in private Families,
provided there be a competent number of other Christians present to be
witnesses of the Administration, and to join in Prayer for a Blessing, Acts
8.38. and 16.33.

Q 67. How often is Baptism to be administered to the same person?

A. Only once. 1. Because it is the Sacrament of our New Birth, and we are to
be but once new born.

2. Because it is the Ordinance of our Admission or Entrance into the Church of
O^rist, and we are to be entered but once into it.

Q. 68. Which is the other Sacrament of the New Testament?

A. The other Sacrament of the New Testament is the Lord's Supper.

Q. 69. What is the Lord's Supper?

A. The Lord's Supper is an holy Ordinance of Christ, wherein by giving and
receiving Bread and Wine, according to Christ's appointment, his Death is
showed forth, and the worthy Receivers are, (...) after a corporal and carnal
manner, (...) by Faith, made partakers of his Body (...) Blood, with all his
Benefits to their Spiritual Nourishment and Growth in Grace, the confirming of
their Union and Communion with Christ, the testifying and renewing their
Covenant with God, and thankfulness to him, and their mutual Love to, and
fellowship with each other, as Members of the same Mystical Body, Matthew. 26.26,
27, 28. 1 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25, 26. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17.

Q 70. What be the parts of the Lord's Sapper?

A. They are two. The outward and visible parts signifying; and the inward and
spiritual part signified.

Q. 71. What are the outward parts of this Ordinance?

A. The outward parts of this Ordinance are three; (1) Signifying Things or
Elements; (2.) Signifying Words; (3.) Signifying Affions.

Q. 72. What are the signifying Things or Elements?

A. Bread and Wine.

Q. 73. What do they signify?

A. The Bread signifies and represents the Body of Christ. The Wine, the
Blood of Christ. Both together signify whole Christ with all his Saving
Benefits.

Q. 74. What be the signifying Words?

A. The words of Institution, Take, Eat, This is my Body which is broken for
you,; Do this in remembrance of me: And, This Cup is the New Testament in my
Blood, shed for many for the Remission of Sins, Drink ye all of it.

Q. 75. What do these words signify, or contain?

A. They contain, 1. A Command, requiring the use of this Ordinance, in these
words, Take, Eat, This Bread, and Drink of this Cup. Do this in remembrance of
me.

2. A Promise, assuring us of Christ giving himself to the worthy Receivers, in
these words, This is my Body, and This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood,
etc.

Q. 76. Are the Elements of Bread and Wine then turned into the very Body and
Blood of Christ in this Ordinance after Consecration?

A. No. They remain still in their own Nature, real Bread and Wine, and are
only changed from a common to a Religious Use, to signify and represent the
Body and Blood of Christ.

Q. 77. How may this be proved?

A. Three ways.

1. By Scripture. Which informs us that the Body of Christ was whole, and his
Blood in his Veins, when he first instituted and administered this Ordinance;
and that the same Body was afterward crucified, buried, rose again on the third
day, appeared alive to many Witnesses, and at length ascended into Heaven, and
that it is there to remain until the time of the Restitution of all things,
Matthew. 26.35. 1 Cor. 15.4, 5, 6. Acts 1.9, 10, 11. and 3.21. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.

Q. 78. How else?

A. 2. By Reason. For Christ having but one Body, it is against Reason to think
that he could both give his Body to his Disciples to eat, and his Blood to
drink; and yet at the same time have it still alive and whole by them. Had it
been thus, he must have had two Bodies at the same time; for its contrary to
the nature of a Body to be in two places at once.

Yea further; If the Bread and Wine were turned into the Body and Blood of
Christ, then supposing the Lord's Supper was administered in a thousand places
at the same time, Christ would have a thousand Bodies at the same time.

Q. 79. How else?

A. 3. By Sense. For we see and taste that it is still Bread and Wine, and not
Flesh and Blood. And if we cannot believe our Senses in this matter, How shall
we believe them in any other thing?

Q 80. But does not Christ call the Bread his Bo^y, and the Wine his Blood?

A. Yes; but Christ speaks this not in a proper, but in a figurative, or
improper sense, calling the sign by the name of the thing signified by it;
which manner of speech Christ did often use: So he calls himself, a Door, a
Vine, a Light, etc. not that he was really changed into these very things; but
to teach us, that he is of like use to our Souls, that these are to our Bodies,
John 10.7. and 15.1.

Q. 81. Is not Christ then really and truly present in this Ordinance of his
Supper.

A. Yes. Christ is really and truly present in this as in all other
Gospel Ordinances, but not corporally or carnally, but spiritually; and so he
is to be fed upon, not by the Mouth of the Body, but of the Soul, that is, to
be received, and applied to the Soul by Faith, John 6.56. Ephesians. 3.17.

Q. 82. What are the signifying Actions to be used in this Ordinance?

A. 1. The Actions to be used by the Minister, are Taking, Blessing, Breaking,
and Giving the Bread to the Communicants, and Taking, giving Thanks, and giving
the Cup also to them. 2. The Actions of the Communicants are Taking and
Partaking, or Eating the Bread, and Drinking the Wine, Matt. 26.26, 27, 28.

Q. 83. What is signified by the Ministers taking the Bread and Wine when he
comes to the Table?

A. It signifies God the Fathers taking or choosing, and designing Christ from
all Eternity to be Man's Redeemer, Isa. 42.1.

Q. 84. What is signified by the Ministers Blessing the Elements, or giving
Thanks.

A. It signifies the setting of them apart from a common to an holy use, and
is to be performed by declaring the words of Institution, and by praying to God
for a blessing on this Ordinance, joined with giving Thanks unto God for Jesus
Christ, and for all his benefits.

Q 85. What is signified by the Breaking of the Bread?

A. It signifies all the Sufferings of Christ, especially the breaking of his
Body and shedding of his Blood upon the Cross.

Q. 86. What is signified by the Ministers giving the Bread and Wine to the
Communicants?

A. It signifies God the Fathers giving Christ as a Savior, and Christ's
giving himself, with all his benefits, to true Believers, John 3.16.

Q. 87. What is signified by the Communicants taking the Bread and Wine?

A. It signifies their thankful accepting and receiving of Christ to be their
Savior with all his benefits, by Faith, John 1.12.

Q. 88. What is signified by the Communicants eating the Bread, and drinking
the Wine?

A. It signifies their applying of Christ, with all his benefits, by Faith,
unto their own Souls in particular; that each Believer may believingly say of
Christ, as Thomas, My Lord, and my God, John 20.28.

Q. 89. For what holy Ends is the Lord's Supper to be used?

A. For such holy Ends as these:

1. For the preserving of the Remembrance of Christ, and his matchless Love in
dying for Sinners; this Ordinance being a lively showing forth of his Death
Luke 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25, 26. Gal. 3.1^

Q 90. What other End?

A. 2. For the spiritual nourishing and strengthening of the inward Man, or o^
grace in the Heart; as Faith, Repentance Love, Hope, etc For this Reason it
seems to be called, a Supper, being a spiritual Meal for Souls, in which Christ
himself is our spiritual Food, 1 Cor. 11.20.

Q 91. What other End?

A. 3. For the fealing and confirming the New Covenant of Grace, or the New
Testament: For as the last Will or Testament of a Man is confirmed, and comes
in force by the Death of the Testator, or of him that made it; so the Death of
Christ (which is represented in this Ordinance) confirms the New Covenant, as
being Christ's last Will and Testament, Heb. 9.15, 16, 17.

Q. 93. For what other?

A. 4. For the testifying of Believers thankfulness to Christ, for his Love to
them in dying for them. Therefore it is sometimes called the Eucharist, or the
Thanksgiving; and the Cup is called the Cup of blessing, 1 Cor. 10.16.

Q 93. For what other?

A. 5. For the strengthening and increase of believers Union to, and communion
with Christ and him crucified; and also with one another, as Fellow Members of
the same Mystical Body of Christ, his Church; for which cause it is also called
the Communion, 1 Cor, 10.16, 17.

Q. 94. Is it sufficient to partake of the Lord's Supper (as of Baptism) only
once.

A. No. Believers should often partake of this Ordinance (if it may be) because
of their constant need of it, in order to the obtaining of the holy Ends
thereof, 1 Cor. 11.26.

Q. 95. To whom is the Lord's Supper to be administered?

A. The Lord's Supper is to be administered only to such as have a Gospel-right
to it, and a Gospel fitness, or preparedness for it.

Q. 96. What is a Gospel-right to this Ordinance?

A. There is a twofold Gospel-right, (1.) Outward, with Reference to the
Church; (2.) Inward, with Reference to God.

Q. 97. Who have an outward Right, with Reference to the Church?

A. All such have an outward and visible Right to the Lord's Supper, who being
baptized and grown Persons, do make a credible Profession of their being in
Covenant with God, or of their Faith in Christ, and Obedience to him, Acts
8.36, 37, 38.

Q. 98. When is their Profession to be accounted credible, or worthy to be
believed?

A. When they have a competent measure of Gospel-knowledge, seriously and
understandingly own and consent to their Covenant with God in baptism, and live
a religious and unblameable Life according to Gospel-Rule, Phil. 1.27.

Q. 99. Who may examine and judge of this outward and visible Right?

A. That particular Church of Christ, with which they desire to join, and walk
in full Communion, especially the Pastor thereof, 1 Pet. 5.2. Heb. 13.17.

Q. 100. Who then are to be kept off from this Ordinance?

A. All such as are grossly ignorant of the Doctrine of Christ, or openly
vicious and scandalous in their Lives.

Q. 101. Who are to be accounted grossly ignorant?

A. All such as understand not the Principles of the Christian Religion, the
Nature of the New Birth, or a Work of Grace upon their Heart, nor the Nature,
Use and Ends of this holy Ordinance, 1 Cor. 15.34.

Q. 102. Why should such ignorant persons be kept off from this Ordinance?

A. Because they want an Eye to discern the Lord's Body, an hand to receive
him, and a Mouth to feed upon him; and therefore if they should partake of this
Ordinance, they would receive no benefit, but much hurt by it.

Q. 103. Who are to be accounted openly vicious, or scandalous?

A. All such as live in any open or known course of sin impenitently, and by
their Words or Actions give just cause of offense to those that fear God, 1
Cor. 5.11.

Q. 104. Why should such vicious persons be kept off?

A. Because they, in presuming to touch such holy things with unholy hands and
hearts, would dishonor and provoke God, pollute and profane his Ordinance,
grieve the Godly, contract the guilt of Christ's Blood, and eat and drink
Judgment to themselves, 1 Cor. 11.27, 29. Matthew. 7.26.

Q. 105. But may not the Lord's Supper be administered to vicious persons in
order to their Conversion?

A. No. For we do not find that Christ appointed this Ordinance to convert
sinners, but to confirm and comfort Saints; it is not to work grace, where it
is wanting, but to increase and strengthen grace where it is.

Q. 106. Who have an inward invisible Right to this Ordinance?

A. All such who are indeed Heart-covenanters with God, or do believe in Christ
with their hearts, and obey him in their lives.

Q. 107. Who are Heart-covenanters with God?

A. Those, who truly repent of their sins against God, Renounce the World, the
Flesh, and the Devil, and take God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost for
their only God, and chief Good, their Father, Redeemer, and Sanctifier, and
give up themselves to fear, love and obey him, according to his Word, and this
unto the Death, Isa. 44.5. and 56.4.

Q. 108. How may we know, that we are in Covenant with God?

A. We may know it by these three things.

1. By our sincere consenting to the Covenant, or choosing the living and true
God to be our God, and giving up our selves to be his People.

Q. 109. How else?

A. 2. By our holy care to keep Covenant with God, and to perform the Duties
which he requires of us therein.

Q. 110. How else?

A. 3. By God's gracious performance of the Promises of his Covenant to our
Souls, in giving us the Saving Blessings promised to his Vovenant People.

Q. 111. What are the Blessings which God has promised in the Covenant of
Grace?

A. God has promised grace and glory, all that is needful and good, both
temporal, spiritual, and eternal Blessings, Psalm. 84.11. 1 Timothy 4.8.

Q. 112. What he the Spiritual Blessings that God has promised to them in this
life?

A. These especially God has promised to give them.

1. His Holy Spirit, to teach, sanctify, assist, guide, and comfort them,
Ezekiel. 36.27. John 14.16, 17, 26.

Q. 113. What else?

A. The enlightening of their Minds with Saving Knowledge, Isa. 54.13. Heb. 8.11.

Q. 114. What else?

A. The renewing of their Wills or Hearts, Ezekiel. 36.26. and 11.19, 20.

Q. 115. What else?

A. The putting of his Law in their inward Parts, and writing it in their
hearts, Heb. 8.10.

Q. 116. What else?

A. The putting his Fear in their hearts, to keep them from departing from him
Jer. 32.40.

Q. 117. What else?

A. The Justification of their Persons, pardoning their Sins, and Accepting
them as Righteous in Christ, Isa. 53.11. Jer. 31.34. Romans 3.24, 25, 26.

Q. 118. What else?

A. The Sanctification of their Natures, Ezekiel. 36.25.

Q. 119. What else?

A. Adoption to be the Children of God, 2 Cor. 6.18.

Q. 120. How may we know whether we have the Spirit of God, or no?

A. We may know it by the Operations, Fruits, or Effects of the Spirit in us,
which are such as these, Light, Life, Love, Liberty, Joy, Peace,
Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Repentance, Hope, Meekness and
Temperance, 2 Cor. 4.6. 2 Cor. 3.6. Gal. 2.20. and 5.22, 23.

Q. 121. How may we know whether we have a new Heart?

A. 1. By the uprightness, singleness, and sensibleness, or tenderness of our
hearts, Psalm. 7.10. Ezekiel. 11.19.

2. By the Conformity of our Hearts to the Law of God, when it is the bent
desire, and delight of our Hearts to do the Will of God, and please him in
every thing, Psalm. 119.6, 8, 16. Acts 13.22. Psalm. 40.8.

Q. 122. Who must judge of this inward invisible Right to the Lord's Supper?

A. Every particular Christian ought to examine and judge of his own inward and
invisible Right by the help of God's Spirit, and the Rule of his Word, 1 Cor.
11.28. 1 Cor. 2.11, 12.

Q 123. What is a Gospel-fitness, or preparedness for this Ordinance?

A. There is a twofold Gospel fitness for it. 1. A fitness of our State or
Condition. 2. A fitness of our Frame or Disposition. Both these must be had to
make us worthy Guess at this Holy Table of the Lord.

Q. 124. Who are in a fit State or Condition for this Ordinance?

A. All such, and only such as are in a state of Saving Grace, or the Childern
of God by Regeneration, and so qualified with those Graces that are needful and
useful for a right receiving of this Ordinance, and a spiritual profiting by
it, 2 Cor. 13.5.

Q. 125. What is Saving-Grace?

A. Saving Grace is a Principle of Spiritual Life wrought in the Hearts of
God's Elect by the Holy Spirit, and (usually) by the Ministry of the Word,
whereby they are effectually inclined and enabled, and do sincerely endeavor
to obey the whole revealed Will of God in Heart, Lip, and Life, 2 Pet. 1.4.
Ephesians. 4.18. Col. 3.16. Heb. 12.28. John 17.17. Romans 15.16. 1 Cor. 4.15. Heb.
13.12.

Q. 126. How may we know that we have Saving-Grace?

A. We may know it by the good Fruits and Effects of it, which are especially
these two:

1. Saving Grace turns the Heart from all sin, and sets it against sin, so that
such a Man does not only forbear sin, but hates it, and seeks the utter
destruction of it in his Heart and Life, by all good means. Ezekiel. 18.30. Psalm.
119.104. Matthew. 26.41. Col. 3.5.

2. Saving Grace turns the Heart unto God and Godliness, strongly and
constantly inclines it to that which is good, and makes us fit and ready to,
and active in good Works, enables us cheerfully to obey the Will of God's
Precept, and patiently to submit to the Will of his Providence, Ephesians. 2.10. Isa.
55.7. Psalm. 119, 112. Tit. 3.1. Acts 21.13. Tit. 2.14.

Q. 127. What are the particular Graces, or gracious Qualifications, that fits
us for a worthy partaking of the Lord's Supper?

A. They are especially these seven; Knowledge, Faith, Repentance, Love, New
Obedience, Thankfulness and Holy Desire, or a Spiritual Appetite to this
Ordinance.

128. What Knowledge should we have?

A. A competent measure of Knowledge of the Fundamental or Principal Truths of
the Christian Religion, or of such things as are revealed in the holy
Scriptures, necessary to make us wise unto Salvation, Prove. 19.2. Ephesians. 1.17.
Col. 1.9. and 3.10.

Q. 129. What are the Truths that we should especially know?

A. Some Truths concerning God, some concerning Man, some concerning the
Covenant between God and Man, and some concerning the Sacraments, or Seals of
the Covenant.

Q 130. What should we know concerning God?

A. We should know something concerning his Essence or Nature, something
concerning his Will, and something concerning his Worship.

Q. 131. What should we know concerning the Essence, or Nature of God?

A. These four things.

1. That God is, or that there is a God, Heb. 11.6.

Q. 132. What else?

A. 2. That God is One; or that there is only One true God, and no more, Deuteronomy.
6.4. Jer. 10.10.

Q. 133. What else?

A. That this One God subsisteth in three distinct Persons, called by distinct
Names in Scripture, The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, or Spirit, Matthew.
28.19. 1 John 5.7.

Q. 134. What else?

A. 4. That this One God is a most pure invisible Spirit, or a Being that
cannot be seen by our Eyes, John 4.24. 1 Timothy 1.17. and 6.16.

Q. 135. By What has God made himself known to us?

A. God has made himself known to us two ways.

1. By his written Word. 2. By his Works.

Q. 136. What does the Word make known to us concerning the Nature of God?

A. The Word makes known to us the Names, Titles, and Attributes of God, by
which his Nature is in some measure discovered.

Q. 137. What are the Names or Titles of God?

A. He is called Jehovah, Jah, and in Scripture, which signifies his Essence,
or Self-existence; that he has his Being in and of himself, and gives Being to
all other Beings. He is the Eternal, I am. He is called God Almighty, or
All-sufficient, The most High God, Possessor of Heaven and Earth, The Lord of
Hosts, The God of Gods, The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. These, and many
other Titles are given to God in Scripture, Exodus 6.3. and 34.6. Genesis 17.1. and
14.19. Exodus 3.1. Isa. 14.27. Deuteronomy. 10.17. 1 Timothy 6.16.

Q. 138. What are the Attributes of God?

A. God's Attributes are certain Properties, Perfections, or Excellencies in
his Nature or Essence, whereby he is distinguished from all other Beings.

Q. 139. How are God's Attributes distinguished each from other?

A. They are distinguished into two sorts; his Absolute, and his Relative
Attributes.

Q. 140. Which are God's Absolute Attributes?

A. Such as are only in God, and of which there is no Resemblance in any
Creatures.

Q. 141. Which is the first?

A. His Simplicity, or Freedom from all Composition. He is a most absolute,
simple, and pure Spirit, without Body, Parts, or Passions, Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16. Luke
24.39.

Q. 142. Which is the second?

A. His Infinity. God is infinite, that is, without Bounds of Place, Time or
Perfection. He is in all places at once, and yet not comprehended in any place.
He was before all Time, is in all Time, and will be when Time shall be no more.
And so perfect, that he cannot be more perfect, in all Excellencies. And
therefore no Man nor Angel can fully understand and comprehend what God is,
Psalm. 147.5. Jer. 23.23. 1 Kings 8.27. Psalm. 139.7. etc. Psalm. ^0.2. and 145.3.
Job 11.7, 8, 9.

Q. 143. Which is the third?

A. His All Sufficiency. God is sufficient or himself, and for all his
Creatures; and ^ust needs be so, seeing he is infinite in Wisdom, Power,
Goodness, and in all Perections, Genesis 17.1. 2 Cor. 11.8. and 12.9.

Q. 144. Which is the fourth?

A. His Independency. God has no ^ependence on any other Being, but all other
Beings have their whole dependence on him, both for Subsistence, Supplies,
Powers, and Actions, Acts 17.25. Neh. 9.6. Romans 11.36.

Q. 145. Which is the fifth?

A. His Immutability, or Unchangeableness. God is always the same, and subject
to no Change, Mal. 3.6. Jam. 1.17. Heb. 13.8.

Q. 146. Which are God's Relative Attributes?

A. Such, of which there is some Resemblance in the reasonable Creatures,
Angels and Men.

Q. 147. Which be they?

A. 1. His Life. He is the Living God, Psalm. 42.2.

Q. 148. Which is another?

A. 2. His Will. He works all things according to the Council of his Will
Ephesians. 1.11.

Q. 149. Which another?

A. 3. His Wisdom and Knowledge. H^ is the only wise God, 1 Timothy 1.17.

Q. 150. Which is another?

A. 4. His Power. Which signify both. 1. His Authority, and Dominion ove^ all
his Creatures, Psalm. 103.19. Dan. ^ 34, 35. Jude v. 25.

2. His Strength or Might. He can do what ever he will, Job 42.1, 2. Matthew.
19.26.

Q. 151. Which is another?

A. 5. His Holiness. He is most holy and pure, Psalm. 23.3. Isa. 6.3.

Q. 152. Which is another?

A. 6. His Justice. He is most Just and Righteous, Deuteronomy. 32.4. Psalm. 11.7. and
92.15.

Q. 153. Which is another?

A. 7. His Goodness. He is most good. This comprehends both, 1. The Love, 2.
The Graciousness, 3. The Mercy, 4. The Patience of God, Psalm. 119.68. Exodus
34.6. 1 John 4.8. Psalm. 103.8. and 145.8.

Q. 154. Which is another?

A. 8. His Truth and Faithfulness, He ^s most true, both in Himself, his Word,
and Works, John 17.3. Deuteronomy. 32.4. John 17.17. Psalm. 33.4.

Q. 155. Are these Relative Attributes ^n God, as they are in Man?

A. No. In God they are his very Es^ence, or Nature; for whatever is in God, is
God. But in Man they are Quaties. In God they are most perfect; he (...) so
merciful and just, that he cannot be ^ore so. But in Man they are imperfect.
are but some degrees of Mercy and Justice in him, 1 John 4.8.

Q. 156. What are the Works of God whereby he makes himself known?

A. They are either, 1. His Works before time, called his Decrees, whereby he
purposed in himself from all Eternity what he would do in time. 2. His Work in
time, which are the Executions, o^ Performances of his Decrees; which
comprehend both his Works of Creation and his Works of Providence, Ephesians. 1.11
Heb. 11.3. and 1.3. Psalm. 103.19.

Q. 157. What may we learn of God b^ his Works?

A. By the Works of God we may lear^ somewhat of the glorious Perfections (...)
his Nature, his Wisdom, Power, Holine (...) Justice, Goodness, and Truth; but
h^ Holy Word discovers them more clea^ly and fully to us, Romans 1.20. Ps. 104.2

Q. 158. What is a Person in the Divi^ Nature?

A. A Person in the Divine Nature is distinct Subsistence, or Being, having t^
whole Nature of God, but distinguish^ each from other by their order, incon^
municable Properties, and manner (...) working, John 14.9, 10. Heb. 1.3.

Q. 159. What is the Order of the Holy Trinity?

A. God the Father is the first Person, God the Son is the second Person, and
God the Holy Ghost is the third Person.

Q. 160. What are their incommunicable Properties?

A. It is the Property of the Father to beget the Son, the Property of the Son
to be begotten of the Father, and the Property of the Spirit to proceed from
the Father and the Son, Joh. 1.14. and 15.26.

Q. 161. What is their manner of working?

A. God the Father works from himself; God the Son works from the Father;
God the Holy Ghost works both from the Father and the Son, John 5.26.

Q. 162. What should we know concerning the first Person in the Trinity?

A. Four things especially.

1. That he is called God the Father, because he is the Father of the Lord
Je^^s Christ by an inconceivable Generati^n; and because he is the Father of
all ^ther Beings by Creation, John 20.17. ^eb. 12.9. Romans 11.36.

Q. 163. What else?

A. 2. That he created all things in the beginning of time, and having made man
after his own Image, he covenanted or promised to continue him in his
happiness, provided man continued in his Obedience, Genesis 1.27, 31. and 2.16, 17.

Q. 164. What else?

A. 3. That Man breaking that Covenant by his Disobedience, and so making
himself liable to Death, it pleased God to pity his fallen and sinful
Creature, and to contrive a way of Salvation for him, by virtue of a second
Covenant in and through the Lord Jesus Christ, as a Redeemer, Genesis 3.15. John
3.16.

Q. 165. What else?

A. 4. That God the Father first promised, and in the fullness of time sent
forth his only begotten Son the Lord Jesus, Christ into the World, to be Man's
Redeemer and Savior, Genesis 3.15. and 12.3. Isa. 9.7. John 3.16. Gal. 4.4.

Q. 166. What should we know concerning the second Person in the Holy Trinity?

A. These four things especially:

1. That he freely undertook this great Work of Man's Redemption, and engaged
himself by Covenant to God the Father for the faithful performance of it, Isa.
49.1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8. etc. and 42.6, 7. Ps. 40.7.8.

Q. 167. What else?

A. 2. That in order to the performing of this Work, he took our Nature into
Union with his Divine Nature, and so was and is both God and Man in one Person,
John 1.14. Romans 9.5. 1 Timothy 2.5.

Q. 168. Was it needful that the Redeemer should be Man?

A Yes, because Man had sinned, and so it was just that the Nature which had
sinned should suffer, and satisfy for Sin, Heb. 2.14.

Q. 169. Was it needful that the Redeemer should be God also?

A. Yes. Because he could not else have been able to undergo the Wrath of God,
due to us for sin; nor would his Sufferings have been of sufficient value and
virtue to procure Salvation for us.

Q 170. What else should we know of this second Person?

A. 3. That he, as our Redeemer, performs the Offices of a Prophet, Priest, and
King, to deliver sinful Men from their Ignorances, Sin and Slavery, and to
bring them to complete and eternal Salvation, Acts. 3.22. Heb. 5 6. Psalm. 2.6.

Q. 171. What else?

A. 4. That he procures by his Blood and Merit many precious Benefits for his
Redeemed ones; to be enjoyed, some in this World, and others in the World to
come, Ephesians. 1.3.

Q. 172. What are those Benefits or Blessings?

A. The Principal Benefits procured by Christ for his Redeemed Ones, are
Justification, Adoption, and Sanctification, with many others, that do either
accompany or flow from them, or certainly follow them, sufficient Grace on
Earth, and eternal Glory in Heaven, 1. Cor. 1.30. John 1.12. Romans 5.1, 2, 5.
Mat. 10.32. 1 John 3.2. 1 These. 4.17.

Q. 173. What should we know concerning the third Person in the Holy Trinity?

A. These four things especially:

1. That he inspired all the holy Prophets and Apostles, revealed God's Mind
and Will to them, and by them to the Church, and assisted all the Penmen of the
Holy Scriptures in Writing them, both as to Matter and Words, 2 Timothy 3.16. 2
Pet. 1.21.

Q. 174. What else?

A. 2. That he was first promised by Christ, and after his Ascension, sent both
by the Father and the Son, to supply the Churches spiritual Wants in Christ's
bodily Absence from it, John 14.16, 17. and 16.7. Acts 2.1, 2, 3, 4.

175. What else?

A. 3. That he does bless the Word and Ordinances of Christ, and make them
effectual Means of Grace to the Elect, working Faith in them, and thereby
uniting 'em to Christ in their effectual Calling, and so applies to them the
Redemption purchased by Christ, with all the Saving Benefits of his
Mediatorship, 1 Cor. 3.7. Psalm. 19.7. Romans 1.16. Ephesians. 2.8. Tit. 3.5. Romans 8.30.

Q 176. What else?

A. 4. That he does dwell in all that are effectually called and drawn to Jesus
Christ, leading, quickening, and comforting them, and carrying on the Work of
Grace and Sanctification unto Perfection, to prepare them for Glory, Romans
8.9.11, 13, 14, 15, 16, John 14.16.

Q. 177. What should we know concerning the Will of God?

A. We should know that God has fully revealed his Holy Mind and Will to us in
the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be the only perfect and
perpetual Rule of our Faith and Obedience, which therefore we ought to know,
believe, and obey in order to the pleasing and glorifying of God, and the
saving of our own Souls, Mich. 6.8. Gal. 6 16. Deuteronomy. ^2.46. Matthew. 28.20. Deuteronomy.
12.32.

Q. 178. What should we know concerning the Worship of God?

A. We should know that this one God is to be worshipped and served by us both
publicly, in the Church, privately, in our Families, and secretly, in our
Closets. And that his Worship is to be performed from a right Principle, Grace
in our Hearts, by a right Rule, the written Word of God, to a right End, the
Glory of God in our Salvation, and through the Mediator Jesus Christ, Matthew.
4.10. and 6.6. Jer. 26.2. Josh. 24.14, 15. John 4.24. Heb. 12.28. Col. 3.17.
Heb. 13.15.

Q. 179. What should we know concerning Man?

A. His fourfold Estate, (viz.) 1. His good Estate by Creation. 2. His evil
Estate by Transgression. 3. His Holy Estate by Regeneration. 4. His happy
Estate by Glorification.

Q. 180. What was Man's Estate by Creation?

A. Man was created after the Image of God in Knowledge, Righteousness and
Holiness, had Dominion over all the Creatures in this lower World, and enjoyed
many other Privileges and Blessings, which made his Condition truly happy,
Genesis 1.26. Col. 3.10. Ephesians. 4.24. Psalm. 139.15. and 8.4, 6, 7, 8. Eccl. 7.21.
Genesis 2.9, etc.

Q. 181. Were all Mankind concerned in the state of Adam?

A. Yes. Adam being a public Person, the general Parent, or Root of all
Mankind, the Blessings bestowed on him were also bestowed on them, as being his
Children, and then in his Loins, Heb. 7.9, 10.

Q. 182. What is Man's Estate by Transgression?

A. Man by transgressing the Command of God in Eating the forbidden Fruit, lost
the Image of God, and all the Privileges and Blessings of the state of
Innocence, and brought himself into a guilty, filthy, and accursed state, Romans
3.9, 10, etc. Psalm. 5.3. Romans 3.19. Ephesians. 2.3. Gal. 3.10.

Q. 183. Are all Mankind concerned in this state of Adam?

A. Yes. All Mankind being in Adam's Loins, and under the same Covenant with
him, sinned against God in him, and so fell with him in his first
Transgression, Romans 5.12, 18, 19.

Q 184 What is Man's Estate by Regeneration?

A. Man by Regeneration is recovered out of his sinful and miserable state into
a state of Grace and Mercy, has the Image of God renewed upon him, is brought
under the Covenant of Grace, and has thereby a right to all the Privileges
and Blessings of the Children of God, Acts 26.17, 18. Col. 3.10. Ephesians. 4.24.
Heb. 8.8, etc. Ephesians. 1.2.

Q 185. Are all Mankind brought into this state of Regeneration?

A. No. Only those are brought into this estate that are chosen of God from all
Eternity, and given to Jesus Christ, as to their Redeemer and Savior, Ephesians.
1.4, 5. 1 Timothy 1.9. John 6.37.

Q. 186. What shall Man's Estate by Glorification be?

A. Man shall be made perfectly Holy and Happy both in Soul and Body, in the
full Enjoyment of God in Heaven, and that to all Eternity, Heb. 12.23. Phil.
3.21. 1 John 3.2. 1 These. 4.17.

Q. 187. Shall all Mankind be brought into this state of Glorification?

A. No. Only those that are made truly gracious here, shall be made glorious
hereafter, Matthew. 25.46. Heb. 12.14. Romans 8.30.

Q. 188. What should we know concerning the Covenants between God and Man, and
the Sacraments or Seals of the Covenants?

A. We should have a competent Knowledge of the Divine Institution, Spiritual
Nature, holy use and ends of them. [But these things have been already opened.]
Thus much of Knowledge.

Q 189. What is that Faith which a worthy Partaker of the Lord's Supper should
have?

A. A Saving Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.

Q. 190. What is a Saving Faith in Christ?

A. Saving Faith in Christ is a special Gift of God to his Elect, whereby they
knowing and assenting to the Truth of God's Record touching Christ in the Word,
do Receive the Lord Jesus Christ for their only Savior, and trust in him for
Salvation on his own Terms, Ephesians. 2.8. John 17.3 1 John 5.10, 11. John 1.12.
Ephesians. 1.12. Luke 9.23.

Q. 191. Why is Faith needful to a worthy partaking of this Ordinance?

A. Because Faith must be the Eye of the Soul to see Christ in it, the Hand of
the Soul to Receive, the Spiritual Mouth and Stomach to feed upon him and
digest him, as our Spiritual Food, for our Nourishment and Growth in Grace.

Q. 192. What is that Repentance a worthy Partaker should have?

A. True Repentance is a special Gift of God to his Elect, arising from a clear
sight and deep sense of sin, and a knowledge and belief of the Mercy of God in
Christ, whereby they do both confess their sins to God, with shame, and sorrow
for them, and hatred of them, and turn from them unto God, both in Heart and
Life, Acts 11.11. and 5.31. and 2.37. Acts 3.19, 26. Prove. 28.13. Joel 2.12,
13. Psalm. 119.104.

Q. 193. Why is Repentance needful to a worthy partaking of this Ordinance?

A. Because in this Ordinance we come to renew our Covenant with God, and to
receive a sealed Pardon of our sins, which none can do but true Penitents.

Q. 194. What is that Love a worthy Partaker should have?

A. Holy Love is a Spiritual Affection whereby the Souls of God's People are
carried out toward God, and toward one another, and toward all that is good,
Matthew. 27.37.39. John 13.34. 1 John 2.15. 2 Cor. 5.14. Romans 15.30. 2 Thessalonians.
2.10.

Q. 195. Ought we not also to Love our very Enemies, and such as hate us?

A. Yes. Christ has commanded us to Love our Enemies with a Love of Goodwill,
so as to forbear revenging our selves on them, and to desire and endeavor
their good, though not with a Love of Delight, Matthew. 5.44, 45. Romans 12.19, 20.

Q. 196. Why is love needful to a worthy partaking of this Ordinance?

A. Because this Ordinance is a Lovefeast, and a Love token between Christ and
his Church, in which they do as it were seal their Affections each to other,
appointed to keep in memory Christ's Love to Believers, and to increase their
Love to him; and the want of this Love brings Men under the severest Curse,
Rev. 1.5. 1 Cor. 11.24. 1 Cor. 16.22.

Q. 197. What is that New Obedience that is needful to a worthy partaking of
this Ordinance?

A. New Obedience is an unfeigned desire and purpose of the Soul, seconded with
a careful endeavor of Life (in and by the grace and strength of Christ) to
yield sin^ere, constant, and universal Obedience to ^he whole revealed Mind and
Will of God, ^^yned with an humiliation for our Failings and Defects, a desire
to be found in the Righteousness of Christ, and to be accepted of God only in,
for and through the perfect Obedience of Christ, Psalm. 119.5, 8, 30, 31, 32.
Phil. 4.13. Psalm. 119.6, 104, 112. 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19. Phil. 3.9.

Q. 198. Why is it called New Obedience?

A. Because it is only performed by New Creatures, that is, by such as are
renewed after the Image of God, and by new strength from Christ; and because it
is required by the New Testament or Covenant, 2 Cor. 5.17. Romans 12.2. Phil.
4.13.

Q. 199. Why is this New Obedience needful to a worthy partaking of this
Ordinance?

A. Because this Ordinance, being a Seal of the New Covenant, binds us to this
New Obedience, so that without it our partaking of this Ordinance would be but
dissembling; and because without this Obedience all our Profession of Religion
and outward Performances, will be rejected of God as vain and hypo^ritical and
abominable, Ezech. 11.19, 23. Jer. 31.33. 1. Sam. 15.22. Tit. 1.16.

Q. 200. What is that Thankfulness that is needful to a worthy partaking of
this Ordinance?

A. Thankfulness is a due and heart-affecting sense of the Love of God in
giving Christ to us, of the Love of Christ in giving himself for us, and of the
Love of the Spirit in revealing Christ in us, with a cheerful acknowledgment of
the same with our Lips and Lives, John 3.16. Gal. 2.20. 2 Cor. 9.1^. 1 Timothy
1.17. Romans 15.13. Ephesians. 1.17.

Q. 201. What should Believers be especially thankful for at this Ordinance?

A. They should be especially thankful for the Lord Jesus Christ, and for the
Covenant of Grace, together with all the Blessings and Benefits given in and
with them to Believers, Ephesians. 1.3. 2 Cor. 9.15.

Q. 202. Why is this Thankfulness needful to a worthy partaking of this
Ordinance?

A. Because Christ himself gave Thanks to God in the Institution of this
Ordinance; and because the very matter, use, and ends of this Ordinance engaged
us to Thankfulness, in that it represents, seals, and applies Jesus Christ
to us as the Spiritual Food of our Souls, 1 Cor. 11.24. Deuteronomy. 8.10. 1 Thessalonians.
5.18.

Q 203. What is that holy Desire, or spiritual Appetite that is needful to a
worthy partaking of this Ordinance?

A. Holy Desire is a spiritual hungering and thirsting after the Lord Jesus
Christ as the Food of our Souls for our Nourishment, and Growth in Grace, Isa.
55.1. Hagg. 2.7. Isa. 26.8, 9. Matthew. 5.6.

Q. 204. Why is this holy Desire or Appetite needful to a worthy partaking of
this Ordinance?

A. Because this Ordinance (being a Spiritual Feast or Supper) cannot profit us
without a spiritual hunger or thirst after the Provisions set before us
therein; neither shall we taste any spiritual sweetness in it, nor get
Refreshment and Nourishment by it; for this is promised only to those who have
this Appetite. Matthew. 5.6. Luke 1.52.

Q. 205. Who are in a fit frame or disposition for this Ordinance?

A. Such who being truly gracious, have some Scripture-Evidence thereof, and
have got their Souls into a serious, humble, and holy disposition to draw near
to God, and to hold Communion with him, James 4.8, 9, 10.

Q. 206. How may we get into a new frame or disposition?

A. We may get into a sit frame or disposition of Spirit for this holy
Ordinance, 1. By examining our selves. 2. By quickening and stirring up our
Graces. 3. (...) praying for Spiritual Blessings. 4. By hoping for them, and
expecting of them from God through Christ.

Q. 207. Concerning what should we examine our selves?

A. We should examine our selves, both concerning our Sins, and concerning our
Graces, 1 Cor. 11.28. Lam. 3.40. 2 Cor. 13.5, 28.

Q. 208. What should we examine concerning our Sins?

A. We should examine both what our Sins are, and how they are aggravated by
their several Circumstances? Jer. 8.6.

Q 209. How may we come to know our Sins?

A. We may come to know our Sins,

1. By comparing our Hearts and Lives with the Laws of God, which show us both
the Duties we should perform, and the sins we should avoid, Romans 3.20. and 7.7.

2. By praying to God to discover our sins to us, Job 13.23.

Q 210. What should we examine our selves concerning our Graces?

A. We should examine our selves, both touching the Grace we have, and touching
the Grace we want, 2 Cor. 13.5.

Q. 211. What should we examine ^^ching the Grace we have?

A. We should examine both the truth of our Grace, and the growth of it.

Q. 212. How may we know whether our knowledge of spiritual Truths, be a true
saving knowledge?

A. By the Properties, Effects, and Companions of it in the Soul.

Q. 213. What be the Properties of it?

A. It is joined with an high prizing of this knowledge it self, and the things
that we know, 1 Cor. 2.2. Phil. 3.8. Romans 7.12.

Q. 214. What is another?

A. It is joined with an humbling sense of our own Ignorance and Sinfu^ness,
Job 42.5, 6. Prove. 30.2.

Q. 215. What is another?

A. It is joined with a Love to, and Delight in the Spiritual Truths known,
Psalm. 119.97. Romans 7.22.

Q. 216. What is another?

A. It is accompanied with earnest Desires and diligent Endeavors after more
Spiritual Knowledge, Psalm. 119.33, 34, 40. Prove. 2.3, 4. 2 Pet. 3.18.

Q. 217. What is another?

A. It is accompanied with an Experience or spiritual Sense of those Truths
that are to be experienced; as of the convincing. converting, comforting,
quickening and confirming power of the Word and Spirit of God, Phil. 1.9. Psalm.
34.8. 1 Pet. 2.3. Heb. 5.14. Psalm. 19.7, 8. and 119.50. Acts 20.32.

Q. 218. What is another?

A. It changes the Soul into the same Image of Holiness that is in the Word of
God, 2 Chronicles. 3.18. Romans 12.2.

Q. 219. What is another?

A. It is joined with the practice of known Duties, and the forbearing of known
sins, John 13.17. 1 John 2.3, 4. Psalm. 119.100, 101.

Q. 220. What is another?

A. It is joined with a readiness to teach others the knowledge of spiritual
things, Psalm. 34.11. John 1.41, 45, 46. John 4.28, 29.

Q 221. How may we know whether our Faith be true and saving?

A. By the manner in which it is wrought, by its nature, and by its properties
or effects.

Q 222. How is Faith wrought in the Soul?

A. The Spirit of God ordinarily prepares the Heart for it by the Law of God,
and then works it by the Gospel?

Q. 223. How does the Spirit prepare the heart for Faith by the Law?

A. These several ways.

1. It shows and convinces the Soul of its sinful and miserable Estate by
nature, John 16.7. Romans 3.20.

2. It humbles the Soul under the serious consideration of its sin and misery,
2 Kings 22.19.

3. It works in the Soul a despair of getting out of this condition, by its own
power, or the help of any other Creatures, Acts 4.12.

4. It causes in the Soul a fear of the wrath of God, due to him for sin, Genesis
3.10.

5. It convinces the Soul of its need of a Savior, Matthew. 9.12.

Q. 224. How does the Spirit of God work Faith by the Gospel?

A. These several ways.

1. It shows to the Soul the Lord Jesus Christ, as an All-sufficient and only
Savior, provided by God, and offered to sinners, John 3.16.

2. It begets in the Soul an high esteem of this Savior, and earnest desires
after him, above all other things, Cant. 5.10.

3. It convinces the Soul that it is his duty to believe in, or close with the
Lord Jesus Christ for his Savior, 1 John 3.23.

4. It begets in the soul some hope of obtaining an Interest in this Savior,
Psalm. 119.116.

5. It works in the Soul a Resolution to seek after this Savior, and to be at
any care and cost to obtain an interest in him, Cant. 3.2.

6. It takes the Soul wholly off from resting on his own Righteousness for
Justification before God, Phil. 3.9.

Q. 225. Wherein does the Essence or Nature of Faith consist?

A. It consists in two things.

1. In a receiving of an whole Christ, or of Christ in all his Offices; the
Soul being made willing to be taught and ruled, as well as reconciled by him,
John 1.12.

2. In ^^^sting on Christ, or trusting in him a^^ for complete and eternal
Salvation, Ephesians. 1.12.

Q. 226. What be the Properties, Fruits, or Effects of Faith?

A. Faith helps to soften and melt the heart into godly sorrow for sin, Zech.
12.10. Isa. 53.5, 6.

Q. 227. What is another property of it?

A. Faith helps to purify or cleanse the Heart from the love of sin, by
arguing against it from the Word of God, and by applying the Blood of Christ to
the Soul, Acts 15.9. John 17.17. Zech. 13.1.

Q. 228. What is another?

A. Faith makes a Man obedient to the Will of God, and fruitful in good Works,
Romans 16.26. Gal. 5.6. Heb. 11.8, 9, 17.

Q. 229. What is another?

A. Faith maintains the Christian's spiritual Life, as it applies Christ and
the Promises to the soul, and helps the soul to live in an holy dependence upon
him and them, Romans 1.17. Gal. 2.20.

Q. 230. What is another?

A. Faith makes the Word of God profitable and effectual to the Soul, 1 Thessalonians.
2:13. Romans 1.16. Heb. 4.2.

Q. 231. What is another?

A. Faith helps the Soul to d^^^ nigh to God in holy Duties, with hum^^
^oldness and confidence of access to him, and acceptance with him through
Christ, Ephesians. 3.12. Heb. 4.16. and 10.22.

Q. 232. What is another?

A. Faith helps the Soul to bear the burden of Troubles and Afflictions, and
keep it from fainting and sinking under them, Psalm. 27.13. Heb. 11.35. Job
13.15.

Q. 233. What is another?

A. Faith helps the Soul to resist and conquer its spiritual Enemies, Sin,
Satan, and the World, Acts 26.18. 1 Pet. 5.9. Ephesians. 6.16. 1 John 5.4. Heb.
11.24.25, 26.

Q. 234. What is another?

A. Faith helps the Soul to spiritual Joy and Peace, Romans 5.1, 2 and 15.13.

Q. 235. What is another?

A. Faith is of a growing and persevering Nature, increases in Measure, and
endures to the end, 2 Thessalonians. 1 3 Romans 1.17. Luke 22.32. Heb. 10.39. Rev. 2.20.

The Examination of Repentance.
Q. 236. How may we know whether our Repentance be true and saving?

A. By the manner of its working, by its Nature, and by its Fruits, Effects,
and Companions.

Q. 237. In what manner is Repentance wrought?

A. The Spirit of God ordinarily works a sight and sense of sin in the Soul
by the Law, and an apprehension of the Mercy of God in Christ offered to
sinners by the Gospel, and herewith powerfully affects the Heart, and
effectually inclines it to turn from sin unto God, Romans 3.20. and 7.7. 2 Cor.
5.19. Acts 2.37. and 26.18. Jer. 31.18.

Q. 238. Wherein does the Nature of true Repentance consist?

A. In these three things: 1. In a deep Conviction of sin. 2. In an hearty
Contrition, or godly Sorrow for sin. 3. In a through Conversion or Turning from
sin to God, Acts 2.37. Psalm. 38.18. Ezekiel. 18.30.

Q. 239. When is our Conviction of sin such as it ought to be?

A. When we understand and are duly sensible of the greatness of the Evil of
sin, Genesis 37.9.

Q. 240. Wherein does the evil of sin consist?

A. 1. In its odious Nature, as being contrary both to the Holy Nature Revealed
Will, and Righteous Law of God, Ephesians. 4.18. Col. 1.21. Romans 8.7. 1 John 3.4.

2. In its hurtful Fruits and Effects, as bringing the Soul under guilt, filth,
and slavery, and making it liable to temporal, spiritual, and eternal
Punishments, Romans 3.19. Job 15.16. 2 Pet. 2.19. Romans 6.23.

Q. 241. When is our Contrition or Sorrow for sin such as it ought to be?

A. 1. When it is a sorrow for sin, as sin, or as it is contrary to the Nature
and Will of God, Psalm. 51.4.

2. When it is universal sorrow for all sins, and at all times, Psalm. 38.18.
and 119.136.

3. When it is the greatest sorrow we have, both as to degree and continuance,
Zech 12.10.

4. When it works repentance or forsaking of sin, 2 Cor. 7.10.

Q. 242. When is our Conversion from sin unto God such as it ought to be?

A. When we are turned from all sin unto God, both in heart and life, Ezekiel.
8.31. Romans 6.4.

Q. 243. When is the heart turned from sin to God?

A. When the Heart is turned from the Darkness of sin to the light of Grace, or
from ignorance to knowledge in the things of God, Acts 26.18. Ephesians. 5.8.

2. When the Heart is turned from a Death in Sin to the Life of Grace, Ephesians.
2.1, 2.

2. When the Heart is turned from the love of sin to the hatred of it, Ps.
119.104.

4. When the Heart is turned from the reigning power of sin, and brought under
the Government of God, Acts 26.18, Romans 6.17, 18.

Q. 244. When is the life turned from sin unto God?

A. When we do in our practices and course of life, deny all ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world,
Tit. 2.12.

Q. 245. What are the Fruits and Companions of true Repentance?

A. Such as these.

1. A free and full Confession of sin, with its aggravation unto God, and also
unto Men, when duly called to it, 1 Timothy 1.13. James 5.16.

2. A Judging and Condemning sin, and our selves for sin, Dan. 9.7, 8.

3. A Loathing of sin, and of our selves for sin, Ezekiel. 20.43.

4. An holy shame upon the remembrance of sin, Ezekiel. 16.61.

5. A just Indignation against, and zealous Revenge upon sin in mortifying of
it, 2 Cor. 7.11.

6. Making Restitution or Satisfaction for sin (though not to God, yet) to Men,
(if it be in our power) for the wrong we have done to them, either in Souls or
Body, Estates, or good Names, Luke 19.8.

7. An holy desire and carefulness to avoid sin, and please God, 2 Cor. 7.11.

8. A holy Fear and Watchfulness against sin and temptations for time to come,
2 Cor. 7.11.

The Examination of Love.
Q. 246. How may we know whether our Love to God the Father, Son and Spirit be
true?

A. By the Rise or Grounds of it, by the Nature of it, and by the Properties of
it.

Q. 247. Whence does our Love to God arise?

A. 1. From a fight or discovery of the Loveliness of God, or the surpassing
Excellencies of his Nature, apprehended by Faith, Psalm. 8.1. and 45.2. Cant.
5.10.16.

2. From a Taste or Experience of the Goodness and Mercy of God, and
Manifestations of his Love to our Souls, Cant. 1.3. and 3, 4, 5. Luke 7.38.

Q. 248. Wherein does the Nature of this Love of God consist?

A. In the Soul's going out toward God as the chief Good, by several steps or
degrees. As, 1. In a Love of Good Will to him. 2. In a Love of fervent Desires
after him. 3. In a Love of sweet Delight and full Satisfaction in him, John
3.27. Cant. 1.2. and 8.14. Psalm. 16.5, 6.

Q. 249. How may we know that we love God the Father as our Father?

A. By our desires and endeavors to carry it toward him like dutiful Children,
fearing to offend him, harkening to him, obeying him, seeking to him, and
depending on him for all needful Blessings, 1 Pet. 1.14, 15. Mal. 1.6. Romans
8.15. 1 Pet. 5.7.

Q. 250. How may we know that we love the Lord Jesus Christ as our Mediator and
Redeemer?

A. 1. By our renouncing all other Mediators and Redeemers, and thankfully
accepting of him in all his Offices, as our only Mediator and Redeemer, Isa.
26.13. Psalm. 73.25.

2. By our learning of him as our Prophet, obeying him as our King, using of
him, and trusting in him as our Priest, for the Benefits of his Satisfaction
and Intercession, Matthew. 11.29. Heb. 5.9. and 4.15, 16. Ephesians. 1.12.

Q. 251. How may we know our Love to the Holy Spirit as our Sanctifier, Guide,
and Comforter?

A. 1. By our love to, frequenting of and delighting in the holy Ordinances of
Christ by which the Spirit works, Ps. 27.4. and 81.1, 2, 10. and 122.1.

2. By our harkening to, and obeying his Call, cherishing his holy Motions in
our Souls by the Ordinances of Christ, and resisting and rejecting the evil
suggestion and temptations of our spiritual Enemies, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. Isa. 30.21.
1 Pet. 5.9.

3. By our setting upon Duties in the strength of the Spirit, living under his
influence, and walking in God's holy ways under his guidance, Ephesians. 3.16. Gal.
5.25. Romans 8.14.

Q. 252. What are the properties of Love to God?

A. It is a most hearty and fervent Love, exceeding our Love to all our
Friends, Relations, Enjoyments, yea to our very Lives themselves, Matthew. 22.37.
Luke 10.27. and 14.26, etc. Acts 21.13. Rev. 12.11. Cant. 8.6.

Q. 253. What is another?

A. It is an obedient Love, or makes the Soul obedient to the Will of God, and
of Christ, John 14.15, 21. and 15.10, 14. 2 Cor. 5.14. 1 John 5.3.

Q. 254. What is another?

A. It makes the Soul desirous of likeness to God, Communion with him, and of
gracious Communications of Love and Mercy from him, 1 Pet. 1.1, 15. Ps. 17.15.
and 42.1, 2. Cant. 1.2.

Q. 255. What is another?

A. It helps the Soul patiently and submissively to bear God's Rebukes and
Corrections, John 21.15, 16, 17. Mich. 7.9.

Q. 256. What is another?

A. It is an abiding and constant Love, Ephesians. 6.24. Cant. 8.6, 7.

Q. 257. What is another?

A. It causes the Soul to love what God loves, because he loves it, and hate
what he hates, because he hates it; and to grieve for the dishonours done to
him by our selves, or others, Psalm. 11.5, 7. and 146.8. and 87.2. and 26.8. 1
John 5.1. Ps. 119.14. and 97.10. and 139.21, 22.

Q. 258. How may we know whether our love to other Christians be true?

A. By its Grounds or Causes, and by its Properties and Effects.

Q. 259. What be the Grounds or Causes of Love to other Christians?

A. Such as these.

1. The Command of God and Christ requiring it, John 13.34. 1 John 4.21.

2. Our Love to God and Christ inclining us to it, 1 John 5.2.

3. Their Relation unto God as his Children, and to Christ as his Members, and
to us as our Brethren and Fellow Members. 1 John 5.1, 2. Ephesians. 5.30. 1 John
3.14. Ephesians. 4.25.

4. Their likeness to God and Christ in Holiness and Righteousness.

5. Our Communion with them, and spiritual Benefits by them, Psalm. 16.3. 1 Cor.
12.25

Q. 260. What are the properties of this Love?

A. Such as these.

1. It is Spiritual. A Love that flows from spiritual Causes, as when we love
Christians for God's sake, for Christ's sake, and for Graces sake, and aims at
spiritual Ends, the Glory of God, and our mutual Good and Comfort, Phil. 2.1.

Q. 261. What is another?

A. It is Universal. To all Christians, as such, whether high or low, rich or
poor, bond or free, male or female, Col. 1.14.

Q. 262. What is another?

A. It is strong and Fervent, 1 Pet. 1.22.

Q 263. What is another?

A. It is Sociable, or makes us desire after, frequent and delight in spiritual
Society with other Christians, Psalm. 119.63. and 16.3.

Q. 264. What is another?

A. It is active and laborious, for the good of other Christians, 1 Thessalonians. 1.3.
1 John 3.18.

Q. 265. What is another?

A. It is self-denying, Condescending and Humble, Romans 12.16. John 13.14. 1
Cor. 13.5.

Q. 266. What is another?

A. It is sympathizing, or a fellow-feeling affection, making us sensible both
of the Joys and Sorrows of other Christians, Romans 12.15. 1 Cor. 12.26.

Q. 267. What is another?

A. It is Patience in bearing Wrongs and Injuries from others, long suffering,
slow to anger, and not easily provoked, 1 Cor. 13.4, 7. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14.

Q. 268. What is another?

A. It is Kind, Courteous and Compassionate both in Words and Actions,
inclining us to relieve the Wants of others Souls and Bodies, according to our
Ability and their Necessity; to forbear revenging our selves for wrongs, and to
forgive them, and be reconciled, 1 Cor. 13.4, 5. 1 Pet. 3.8, 9. Romans 12.10, 17,
18, 19 20. Luke 6.36. Ephesians. 4.32. Gal. 6.10.

Q. 269 But if another do me wrong, am I bound to forgive, and be reconciled to
him, though he make me not satisfaction, profess repentance, nor seek
reconcilation?

A. 1. You are bound so far to forgive him as to cherish no wrath, malice,
desire, or purpose of revenge against him; for these are sins, and all sins not
repented of, unfit you for this holy Ordinance, 1 Pet. 2.1.

2. You are not bound to testify your forgiving him, until he profess his
Repentance of the wrong done to you; but then you must do it, Luke 17.4.

3. You are not bound to receive him again into your familiar converse, till he
has made satisfaction for the wrong done, or declared a purpose to do so, (if
he be able) if not, at least till he profess a willingness to do so, and a
desire of reconciliation, Luke 19.8.

Q. 270. Which Party then is to keep off from the Lord's Supper, in case of
wrong done, till they are reconciled?

A. The Party that has done the wrong only, not he that has suffered wrong;
for that would be to punish the Innocent, for the Offense of the Guilty, Matthew.
5.23.24.

Q. 271. What is another property of this Love?

A. It envieth not at the prosperity, or better condition of others, 1 Cor.
13.4.

Q. 272. What is another?

A. It rejoices not in Iniquity, but rejoices in the Truth, 1 Cor. 13.6.

Q. 273. What is another?

A. It is a constant and continuing Love, Heb. 13.1. 1 Cor. 13.8. Ruth. 1.16.17.

Q. 274. How may we know whether our Love to our Enemies be true?

A. By the Ground or Reason of it, and by the Fruits of it.

Q. 275. What is the Reason of Love to our Enemies?

A. 1. The Will of God made known to us in his Word, Matthew 5.44. Romans 12.14.

2. The example of God in loving and forgiving us who were his Enemies, and the
example of Christ in loving and dying for us, Ephesians. 4.32. Col. 3.13. Romans 5.8.10.

Q. 276. What are the Fruits of this Love?

A. 1. It makes us to will and desire their good, Prove, 11.23.

Q. 277. What is another Fruit of it?

A. 2. It keeps us from revenging our selves upon them, Romans 12.17, 19.

Q. 278. What is another?

A. 3. It inclines us to forgive them the Injuries done to us.

Q. 279. What is another?

A. 4. It helps us to return good to them for their evil done to us, by praying
for them, and relieving of their wants, Romans 12.20, 21. Psalm. 35.12, 13, 14.
Acts 7.60. Luke 23.34.

Q. 280. What is another?

A. 5 It keeps us from rejoicing in their hunt, Prove. 24.17, 18.

The Examination of Obedience.
Q. 281. How may we know whether our Obedience be true?

A. By the Reasons, the Principles, the Properties, the Rules, and the Ends of
it.

Q. 282. What be the Reasons of it?

A. Two.

1. The Will of God signified by his Commands; for he having the supreme and
absolute Authority over us, we are therefore bound to obey him, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3.
and 5.18. Psalm. 119.4, 5.

2. The Example of Christ, which we are required to follow, Heb. 5.8. Phil.
2.8. 1 Pet. 2.21. 1 John 2.6.

Q. 283. What be the Principles of Gospel-Obedience?

A. The Principles of it are the saving Graces of the Spirit of God wrought in
the Heart of the Godly, especially Faith, Love and Fear, Romans 16.27. Heb. 11.7,
8. 2 Cor. 5.14. 1 Timothy 1.5.

Q. 284. What be the Properties of this Obedience?

A. Such as these.

1. It is a cordial and willing Obedience, discovering it self, 1. By the
cheerfulness of the Heart in obeying God. 2. By the grief of the Heart for
disobedience to God, both in our selves, and others, Psalm. 110.3. Isa. 1.19.
Psalm. 40.8 Romans 6.17. and 7.21, 22, 23, 24. Ps. 119.136.

Q. 285. What is another?

A. 2. It is universal and complete, i. e. the Obedience of the whole Man, both
Soul and Body; an Obedience to the whole Law of God, though attended with some
sinful Imperfections, Ps. 103.1. and 119.34. 1 Cor. 6.20. Psalm. 119.6.

Q. 286. What is another?

A. It is a diligent and zealous Obedience, Deuteronomy. 6.17. Psalm. 119.4. Eccl.
9.10. Romans 12.11.

Q. 287. What is another?

A. It is a speedy and present Obedience, Ps. 119.60. Mark 1.18. Gal. 1.15, 16,
17.

Q. 288. What is another?

A. It is a resolved Obedience against all difficulties and discouragements,
Jos. 24.15. Psalm. 119.106.

Q. 289. What is another?

A. It is a constant and persevering Obedience, at all times, and in all
conditions to the end of our lives, Psalm. 119.20, 33, 112. Rev. 2.19.

Q. 290. What is the Rule of our Obedience?

A. The Rule of our Obedience is the Revealed will of God, contained in the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, Isa. 8.20. Gal. 6.16. Phil. 1.27. and
3.16.

Q. 291. When do we obey God according to this Rule?

A. When we obey God in the Faith of Christ, in love and thankfulness to
Christ, in the strength of Christ, and in the name of Christ, Heb. 11.6. Romans
14.5.23. 2 Cor. 5.14. Phil. 4.13. Joh. 15.3. Col. 3.17. Heb. 13.15.

Q. 292. What are the Ends of our Obedience?

A. The Ends which we should aim at in our Obedience, are 1. The Glory of God,
and of our Lord Jesus Christ; and 2. The good of our selves and others, 1. Cor.
10.31. Phil. 1.20. 1 Timothy 4.8. Phil. 2.4.

The Examination of Thankfulness.
Q. 293. How may we know our Thankfulness to be true?

A. 1. By our careful observing, owning and acknowledging unto God the
Blessings and Mercies he bestows on us, especially spiritual Blessings, 1 Chronicles. 29.13, 14, 16. Hos. 2.8. 2 Cor. 9.15.

Q. 294. How else?

A. 2. By our just estimation or valuing the Blessing and Mercies of God,
according to their worth, excellency and usefulness, Luke 1.46, 48, 49. Phil.
3.8. Cant. 3.10, 16.

Q. 295. How else?

A. 3. By our dutiful rendering to God according to the Blessings received from
him, Psalm. 116.12. 2 Chronicles. 32.15.

Q. 296. What should a thankful Soul render unto God?

A. 1. High Praises of his Wisdom, Power, Goodness, Truth, and of all his
Perfections, as also of all his Blessings and Mercies, Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3, 4.
and 106.1, 2. 1 Timothy 1.12, 15, 16, 17.

Q. 297. What else?

A. Hearty Affections, Luke 7.37, 38, 47.

Q. 298. What else?

A. Humble Obedience, devoting both our Selves and Services unto God, paying
our Vows, answering our Covenant Engagements to him, living to Christ, and
being willing and ready to dye for him, if we be called to it, 2 Cor. 8.5.
Psalm. 119.38. and 116.14. 2 Cor. 5 25. Acts 21.13.

The Examination of Holy Desires.
Q. 299. How may we know whether our Desire or Appetite to this Holy Supper be
true?

A. By the Causes, Objects, Properties, Companions, and Ends of it.

Q. 300. What are the Causes of these Desires?

A. Three.

1. A sight and sense of our want of this Ordinance, for the spiritual Benefits
thereof.

2. A sight and sense of the suitableness and fullness of this Ordinance, and of
Christ in it, to supply our want, Luke 15.17. Mark 9.24. Col. 1.19.

3. A taste or experience of the sweetness of Christ in his Ordinances, and of
spiritual Refreshment received by them, 1 Pet. 2.2, 3.

Q. 301. What is the Object of this Desire or Appetite?

A. The Object of it is not only, nor chiefly the Supper of the Lord, but the
Lord of the Supper, Psalm. 42.2. and 63.1.

Q. 302. What are the Properties of this Desire?

A. It is a strong desire, an holy longing after Christ in this Ordinance,
Psalm. 73.25. and 14.2.

Q. 303. What is another?

A. It is an industrious Desire, or puts the Soul upon pious Endeavors to
obtain the Mercies desired, Isa. ^6.9.

Q. 304. What is another?

A. It makes the Soul restless and impatient of Delays, Cant. 8.14.

Q. 305. What is another?

A. It makes the Soul glad of opportunities to enjoy Christ in his Ordinances,
and careful to lay hold on them, and improve them, Psalm. 122.1. Isa. 2.3.

Q. 306. What is another?

A. It makes Christ and his spiritual Benefits sweet and pleasant to the Soul,
^ant. 2.3.

Q. 307. What is another?

A. It causes the Soul to feed heartily on Christ in his Ordinances by Faith,
Matthew. 5.6.

Q. 308. What is another?

A. It makes the Soul willing to part with any thing to obtain Christ and his
Ordinances, Luke 5.11.

Q. 309. What be the Companions of this Desire?

A. 1. It is accompanied with an high esteem of Christ and his Ordinances, Job
23.12. 1 Pet. 2.7.

Q. 310. What is another?

A. 2. It is accompanied with a retention, or keeping of our spiritual Food in
the Soul, a digesting of it, and getting spiritual strength by it, Ephesians. 3.17.
Cant. 3.4.

Q. 311. What is another?

A. It is accompanied with a readiness and care to lay out our spiritual
strength in the Service of Christ, from whom we receive it, 1 Cor. 15.10. 1 Thessalonians. 1.3.

Q. 312. What is another?

A. It is accompanied with love to Christ, delight, content and satisfaction in
Christ, though we want this Worlds goods, 1 Pet. 1.8.

Q. 313. What is the End of this Desire?

A. A gracious Soul desires this holy Ordinance, and Christ in it, for his
spiritual refreshment, nourishment and growth in Grace, that he may thereby be
the better able to serve Christ in his place and relation, Psalm. 119.25, 28, 32.

The Examination of growth in Grace.
Q. 314. How may we know whether we do grow in Grace?

A. 1. By the increase of our spiritual Appetites to our spiritual Food; or by
the increase of our desires after Christ, his Word and Ordinances, 1 Pet. 2.9.
Ps. 42, 1, and 27.4. and 63.1, 2.

Q. 315. How else?

A. 2. By the increase of our spiritual strength, to perform Duties, endure
Afflictions, and resist our Souls Enemies, Ephesians. 6.10. 2 Timothy 2.1. Fhil. 4.13.
Ps. 138.2.

Q. 316. How else?

A. 3. By the increase of our spiritual stature, when we wax bigger and taller
in Grace and Holiness, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8. Matthew. 15.28. James 2.5.

Q. 317. How else?

A. 4. By the change of our voice and visage; when we speak more
understandingly, savourily and experimentally of God, and the things of God,
and look more like our heavenly Father, 1 Cor. 13.11. Ephesians. 4.29. Col. 3.6.
Eccles. 8.1.

Q. 318. How else?

A 5. By the change of our Carriage and Conversation; when we grow more
serious, humble, holy, circumspect and heavenly in our lives, Matthew. 5.16. Genesis
6.9. Ephesians. 5.15.

Q. 319. Why should we examine the growth of our Grace?

A. 1. Because God gives us his Ordinances, that we may grow in Grace by the
use of them, and expects our growth should be suitable to the means of Grace
which we enjoy, Acts 20.32. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.

Q. 320. What is another Reason of it?

A. 2. Because the growth of our Grace will be a good Evidence to us of the
Truth of it; for if we grow, we live, 2 Thessalonians. 1.3.

Q. 321. What is another Reason of it?

A. 3. Because the Discovery of our growth in Grace will quicken and encourage
us in our Attendance on the Means of Grace, 1 Pet. 2.2, 3.

322. What if we find that our Graces do not grow, but rather decay?

A. We ought to be deeply humbled for it before the Lord, beg pardon of it,
search out the causes of it, that they may be removed, and labor to improve
God's Ordinances better for time to come, Rev. 2.4, 5. and 3.1, 2.

Q. 323. What are the causes of Decays of Grace?

A. These two especially:

1. Neglect of Christ's Ordinances, the Means of Grace, or using of them
negligently and formally, or without a due care to improve them.

2. Complying with some Temptations to Sin, or indulging and nourishing some
Corruption in our Souls.

The Examination of the Grace we want.
Q. 325. How may we know what Grace we want?

A. By looking into our Souls, and seeing what Grace we have already, and
whether that be in a growing or decaying state.

Q. 325. What are the usual wants of gracious Souls.

A. Such as these. They usually want quickening Grace, and strengthening Grace to
enable them to withstand Temptations, mortify Corruptions, perform Duties,
bear their Burdens, the confirmation of the Covenant of Grace, and of their
mystical Union to Christ their Head, the Assurance of the Love of God, of an
Interest in Christ, and his Benefits, and of the Pardon of their Sins, and
Peace with God through Christ, Ps. 119.159.28.116. and 35.3. Matthew. 9.2.

Q. 326. Why should we examine our selves about our spiritual wants before we
come to the Lord's Supper?

A. Because it is needful that we should come with a due sense of our spiritual
wants, to this and other Ordinances, and with Desires and Prayers unto God for
the Supplies of them, John 5.6. Luke. 18.35, 36, 39, ^0, 41. Rev. 3.17, 18.

Q. 327. What other Duty should be performed to fit us for the Lord's Supper?

A. We should endeavor to get our Graces quickened and stirred up in us, or
prepared to be acted and exercised on their proper Objects, 2 Timothy 1.6.

Q 328. Why should our Graces be quickened, and stirred up before this Ordinance?

A. Because our Graces are to be acted and exercised in partaking of this holy
Ordinance, and so need quickening to it.

Q. 329. How may our knowledge be quickened?

A. 1. By laboring for a more clear distinct and full Knowledge of spiritual
things.

2. By meditating on those spiritual things that we do know, their Excellency,
Necessity and Usefulness to us.

Q. 330. How may Faith be quickened.

A. 1. By feeding on Christ in a Promise, and meditating on the freeness,
fullness, firmness and sweetness of the Promises.

2. By considering and believing Christ's gracious Invitations, and assurance
of refreshment and benefit to those that come to him in his own way, Matt.
11.28. John 7.37.

Q. 331. How may Repentance be quickened?

A. By searching out our special Sins since the last Sacrament, confessing them
to God with shame and sorrow of heart, judging and condemning our selves for
them, and begging pardon of them, and power against them through Grace for time
to come, Prove. 28.13. James 4.9.10. Psalm. 51.1, 2, etc.

Q. 332. How may our Love to God, Father, Son and Spirit be quickened?

A. By meditating on the infinite Love of God the Father, in giving Christ; the
Love of Christ, in giving himself to dye for us; and the Love of the Holy
Spirit, in revealing Christ to us, and in us, John 3.19. Gal. 2.20. Romans 15.30.

Q. 333. How may our Love to other Christians be quickened?

A. 1. By remembering the New Command of Christ requiring it. 2. By considering
our near and spiritual Relation to them, as being our Brethren, and
Fellowmembers of Christ's Mystical Body. 3. By beholding the Image of God upon
them, John 13.34. Hebr. 13.1. 1 Cor. 15.49. 1 John 5.1.

Q. 334. How may Love to our Enemies be quickened?

A. 1. By considering the Command of Christ requiring it. 2. By considering the
Example of Christ, who loved us, when we were his Enemies, so as to dye for us,
Mat. 5.44. Gal. 2.20. Romans 5.8.10.

Q. 335. How may our Obedience be quickened?

A. 1. By considering the Holiness, Justice and goodness of Christ's Commands.
2. By considering the Blessings promised to the Obedient, and the Punishments
threatened to the disobedient, Romans 7.12. Job 36.11, 12. Jer. 7.23.

Q. 336. How may our Thankfulness to God be quickened?

A. 1. By considering the many, great and rich Blessings which he has bestowed
on us in the Covenant of Grace. And 2. Our own great unworthiness of the least
of them, 1 Cor. 3.22. Romans 8.32. 1 Cor. 2.9. Genesis 32.10. Ephesians. 3.8.

Q. 337. How may our holy Desires, or spiritual Appetite be quickened?

A. By considering our want of spiritual Food, and of refreshment and
Nourishment by it.

2. By considering the sweetness, suitableness and sufficiency of the spiritual
Provisions, which Christ has made for us in this Ordinance.

3. By considering the Promises which God has made to refresh and satisfy
hungry and thirsty Souls, Psalm. 40.17. John 6.55.56. Psalm. 81.10. and 107.9.

Q. 338. What other Duty should be performed to fit us for the Lord's Supper?

A. We should solemnly seek the Lord by Prayer,

1. For the pardon of former Neglects of this Ordinance, and sinful Failings in
our partaking of it, and of present unfitness for it.

2. For the holy Preparation of our Hearts for this Ordinance, Communion with
God in it, and Communications of Grace, and spiritual Nourishment from him by
it, 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19, 20. Prove. 16.1.

Q. 339. Why should we thus solemnly seek the Lord before this Ordinance?

A. 1. Because it is needful both to sanctify our selves for this Ordinance,
and to have this Ordinance sanctified to us; for Prayer is the means to both, 1 Samuel 16.5. 1 Timothy 4.5.

2. Because the spiritual Benefit of this and all Ordinances comes alone from
God, which is to be obtained by Prayer, James 1.17. Matthew. 7.7.

Q. 340. What other Duty should be performed to fit us for the Lord's Supper?

A. We should hope for and expect God's gracious Answer to our Prayers in his
meeting and blessing us in this Ordinance, Ps. 42.5. and 119.166. and 62.5.

Q. 341. What ground have we for this hope?

A. God's holy Word, wherein he has freely promised to meet and bless his
People in his Ordinance, Exodus 20.24. Matthew. 18.24. Psalm. 130.5.

Of our Duties in partaking.
Q. 342. What is required of us in partaking of the Lord's Supper?

A. Two things especially.

1. A sober and reverent behavior of the Body.

2. A serious and gracious disposition of the Soul, Romans 12 1. 1 Cor. 6.20.

Q. 343. What gesture of Body should we use in the Act of Receiving, standing,
sitting, or kneeling?

A. Sitting seems to be the most proper Gesture of the Body in the Act of
Receiving, as being most agreeable to the Example of Christ and his Apostles,
(who sat, or sate-leaning) which was then the Table Gesture amongst the Jews.
But Christians should not rigidly impose any gesture on each other, nor
uncharitably Censure each other for difference of Persuasion, or Practice in
this or such like Circumstances, if a due Reverence be observed, Matthew. 26.20.
Luke 14.18, 22. Romans 14.2, 5, 23, 19. 1 Cor. 14.40.

Q. 344. Wherein consists the gracious disposition of the Soul in partaking of
this Ordinance?

A. 1. In coming to this holy Ordinance with a deep, self-humbling sense of our
own vileness and unworthiness of so great a Privilege, because of our sins,
Ephesians. 3.18. Tim. 1.15. Luke 15.19.

Q. 345. Wherein else?

A. 2. In animating at right ends in the use of this Ordinance, such as the
preserving of the Remembrance of Christ, our spiritual Nourishment, and growth
in Grace; the confirming of the Covenant of Grace; the testifying of our
Thankfulness to Christ; and the strengthening of our Union to him and Communion
with him, and with one another.

Q. 346. Wherein else?

A. 3. In using this Ordinance according to Christ's Institution in order to
these Ends; that is, using the same Elements of Bread and Wine, and the same
Words and Actions about them, and to the same significations and ends that
Christ used them for.

Q. 347. Wherein else?

A. 4. In holy Meditations on the Elements, Words, and Actions that are used in
the Celebration or Administration of this holy Ordinance, and especially on
Christ himself, who is signified and represented by them, Prove. 23.1. John 1.29.

Q. 348. What good Meditations may our Souls raise from these?

A. 1. When we see Bread and Wine prepared for this Ordinance, we should
meditate on the Resemblance that there is between them and the Body and Blood
of Christ signified by them.

Q. 349. How does Bread resemble the Body of Christ?

A. In three things especially.

1. As Corn is prepared by grinding, moulding and baking, to make it Bread for
our Bodies, so Christ was prepared by exquisite Sufferings to be Bread for our
Souls, Isa. 53.10.

Q. 350. How else?

A. As Bread is the Staff and strength of our Natural Life, so is Christ the
Staff and Strength of our spiritual Life, Psalm. ^05.16. and 19.14.

Q. 351. How else?

A. 3. As Bread is but one Body, though it be made up of many Grains, so Christ
mystical (that is the Church) is but one Body, though made up of many Members,
1 Cor. 12.12.

Q. 352. How does the Wine resemble the Blood of Christ?

A. In three things especially.

1. As Wine quenches the Thirst of the Body, so does the Blood of Christ
quench the Thirst of the Soul, John 6.35.

Q. 353. How else?

A. 2. As Wine is of a cheering Nature, making the Heart glad; so the Blood of
Christ, applied by Faith, cheers and makes glad the Souls of mournful sinners,
Psalm. 104.15.

Q. 354. What else?

A. 3. As Wine is of a purging and cleansing quality, so the Blood of Christ
does meritoriously purge and cleanse us from sin, Heb. 9.13, 14. 1 John 1.7.

Q. 355. What other Meditation may we raise from this Ordinance?

A. When we see the Bread and Wine blessed, sanctified, or set apart from a
common to an holy use, by the Ministers pronouncing the words of Institution,
and Prayer, we should meditate on God the Father his sanctifying, and setting
apart his Son, the Lord Jesus Christ, from all Eternity, to be our Redeemer,
Isa. 42.1.

Q. 356. What other Meditation?

A. When we see the Bread broken, we should meditate on the Breaking of
Christ's sacred Body on the Cross, and all the Sufferings, Pains and Torments
which he endured both in Soul and Body for our sakes, on the heinous nature of
our sins, that could not be done away, but by the shedding of Christ's Blood;
and the impartial Justice of God the Father in punishing his only begotten Son,
when he stood as our Surety.

Q 357. What other Meditation?

A. When we see the Minister offering and giving Bread and Wine to us, we
should meditate on the infinite Love of God the Father in Giving Christ, and of
Christ in Giving himself to be a Sacrifice for us, and of the Spirit in
revealing and applying Christ to us.

Q. 258. What other Meditation?

A. When we Receive the Bread and Wine from the hand of the Minister, with the
hand of our Bodies, and eat and drink them with our Mouths, we should meditate
on the spiritual Receiving of the Body and Blood of Christ, and feeding on him
by Faith in our Souls.

Q. 359. What other Meditation?

A. We should meditate on the precious Benefits that redound to true Believers
by a right receiving of Christ in this holy Ordinance, which are Redemption
from all Enemies and Evils, Reconciliation to God, Pardon of Sin,
Justification, Adoption, Sanctification, Victory over our Souls Adversaries,
Increase of Grace, and a Title to Glory.

Q. 360. Wherein else does this gracious disposition of Soul consist?

A. 5. In a lively acting or exercising of saving Graces, and using our bodily
senses of seeing, touching, and tasting to help our spiritual Senses and Graces
in their Actings, John 20.27.

Q. 361. What Graces should we exercise in partaking of this Ordinance?

A. We should especially exercise these four, Faith, Repentance, Love and Joy.

Q. 362. How is Faith to be exercised in it?

A. Faith should be exercised as the Eye of the Soul, to discern Christ in this
Ordinance, as the hand of the Soul, to Receive him, and as the Mouth of the
Soul, to feed upon him, or apply him with all his Benefits to each Believer in
particular, Job 20.28. Gal. 2.20.

Q. 363. How is Repentance to be exerc^sed?

A. Repentance should then be exercised in remembering our sins, confessing them
with shame and sorrow, hating of them, judging and condemning our selves for
them, and turning from them unto God in Christ, Isa. 53.4, 5.6. Zech. 12.10, 11.

Q. 364. How is Love to God then to be exercised?

A. Love to God; both Father, Son, and Spirit should then be exercised by the
fervent out goings of the Soul to God, and to each Person in the God head, and
by the firm cleaving of the Soul to him, as to the chief Good, and our
All-sufficient Portion, Psalm. 63.8. Acts 11.23.

Q. 365. How is Love to other Christians then to be exercised?

A. Love to other Christians should then be exercised by our cleaving to them
in heart, as to our Brethren, by praying with and for them, by forgiving their
Trespasses against us, and by a readiness to give to those that want, according
to our Ability, and their Necessity, Heb. 13.1, 2, 3. 1 Pet. 2.17. Ephesians. 4.32.

Q. 366. How is Joy then to be exercised?

A. Joy is then to be exercised in the Soul's being cheered, revived, and
lifted up in the believing apprehension, or assurance of its interest in God,
as his own God in Christ and Covenant, and so in all the Blessings promised in
the Covenant of Grace, of which this Ordinance is a sign and seal, Psalm. 16.5.
Phil. 4.4. 1 Pet. 1.8. Romans 5.2.

Q. 367. How is this Ordinance to be elosed up?

A. It is to be closed up in singing some Spiritual Hymn to the praise of God
our Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier, Matthew. 26.30. Mark 14.26.

Of our Duties after partaking.
Q. 368. What is required of us after partaking of tho Lord's Supper?

A. Two sorts of Duties, some more public, and others more private.

Q. 369. What are the public Duties?

A. Such as these.

1. A solemn and hearty Thanksgiving to God for his love in giving Christ, for
Christ's love in giving himself, and for the love of the holy Spirit in
revealing Christ to us, and in us, with all the blessed Fruits of this Love. As
also for the Covenant of Grace, the Seals of it, and Spiritual benefit by them,
Ephesians. 1.3. 2 Cor. 9.12.

Q. 370 What is another public Duty?

A. 2. A sincere renewing our Consent to the Covenant of Grace, and yielding
our selves to the Lord as his Covenant-Servants, with holy purposes of new and
better Obedience to him in the strenght of Christ for time to come, 2 Kings
23.3. 2 Chronicles. 15.12. Romans 6.13. c. 12.1. Ps. 119.8, 32.

Q. 371. What is another public Duty?

A. A cheerful giving some Relief to the poor Members of Jesus Christ, in
testimony of our Love and Thankfulness to Christ for the Mercy we have received
from him, and of our Love to them, Gal. 6.10. 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. Matthew. 25.40.

Q. 372. What are the private Duties after the Lord's Supper?

A. They are two especially.

1. A diligent Inquiry, Whether we have received any spiritual Comfort or
Benefit by this Ordinance; i. e. Whether our Graces have been strengthened, our
Souls refreshed, nourished, revived, and cheered, our Consciences pacified, and
our Assurance of the Love of God increased, etc.

Q. 373. What if we cannot find any of these Spiritual Benefits?

A. We should search out the Cause, whether it was not want of due preparation
before, or want of a right disposition in the partaking of it; and if so, we
should confess it unto God, and be humbled for it, endeavoring by after pains
in Humiliation and Prayer, to obtain the efficacy and benefit of it.

Q. 374. What if we did our best in preparing for it, and in partaking of it,
and yet are not sensible of any real Benefit or Comfort by it?

A. We should pray earnestly to God, and wait patiently on him for the Benefit
and Comfort of this Ordinance, because as Physic does not presently work, nor
Meat presently nourish, so neither does this or other Ordinances always
presently benefit our Souls, but in God's time they shall.

Q. 375. What if we do find present Benefit and Comfort by it?

A. We should thankfully acknowledge it to God, and labor to preserve it by an
holy, humble, and watchful Conversation, 1 Thessalonians. 5.18. Ephesians. 5.15.

Q. 376. What is the other Duty after the Lord's Supper?

A. A faithful keeping Covenant with God, yielding a ready, cheerful and
constant Obedience to all his Commandments in Heart, Lip and Life, watching and
praying against sin, resisting its motions and temptations, exercising Grace,
laying hold on Opportunities of honoring God, in doing or receiving Good,
endeavoring to be perfect in every Good Work, to do his Will, that our Fruit
may be unto holiness, and the end Eternal Life, Deuteronomy. 29.9. Psalm. 103.18. Heb.
5.9. Luke 1.6. Heb. 13.21. Romans 6.22.

Q. 377. Why should we be thus careful to keep Covenant with God?

A. 1. Because we cannot otherwise justly expect God should keep Covenant with
us, or that he should give us the Blessings promised, unless we give him the
Obedience commanded, Deuteronomy. 7.9, 10, 11.

2. Because else we should but mock God in making Covenant with him, and in
receiving the Signs and Seals of it, and deceive our own Souls, Isa. 66.30.

3. Becanse we should else deprive our selves of the spiritual Benefits of this
Ordinance, and expose our selves to God's just Displeasure, 1 Cor. 11.29, 30.
Eccles. 5.4, 5.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of BOOKS sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns,
near Mercers Chapel in Cheapside.
OF Thoughtfulness for the Morrow; with an Appendix concerning the immoderate
Desire of fore-knowing Things to come. of Charity, in reference to other Men's
Sins. A Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Rich. Adams, M. A. sometime Fellow of
Brasen-Nose College, in Oxford. The Redeemer's Tears wept over lost Souls; in
a Treatise on Luke 19.41, 42. with an Appendix, wherein somewhat is
occasionally discoursed, concerning the Sin against the Holy Ghost, and how God
is said to will the Salvation of them that perish. A Sermon directing what we
are to do after a strict Enquiry, whether or no we truly love God. A Funeral
Sermon for Mrs. Esther Sampson, the late Wife of Hen. Sampson, Doctor of
Physic, who died Nov. 24. 1689. The Carnality of Religious Contention. In two
Sermons preached at the Merchants Lecture in Broad-street. A Sermon for
Reformation of Manners. A Sermon Preached on the Day of Thanksgiving, December.
2. 1697. To which is prefixed Dr. Bate's Congratulatory Speech to the KING. A
Calm and Sober Enquiry, concerning the Possibility of a Trinity in the Godhead.
A Letter to a Friend, concerning a Postscript to the Defense of Dr. Sherlock's
Notion of the Trinity in Unity, relating to the calm and sober Enquiry upon the
same subject. A View of that part of the late Consideration to H. H. about the
Trinity; which concerns the sober Enquiry on that Subject. The Redeemers
Dominion over the Invinsible World. Dr. Bates Funeral Sermon. Mr. Matthew Meads
Funeral Sermon. All 15 by the Reverend John How. The Fountain of Life opened,
or a Display of Christ in his Essential and Mediatorial Glory. Containing Forty
two Sermons on various Texts. A Treatise of the Soul of Man, wherein the Divine
Original, Excellent and Immortal Nature of the Soul are opened, etc. The Method
of Grace, in bringing home the Eternal Redemption, contrived by the Father, and
accomplished by the Son, through the Effectual Application of the Spirit unto
God's Elect. Being the 2d. part of the Fountain of Life. The Divine Conduct, or
Mystery of Providence, etc. Navigation Spiritualized: Or, a new Compass for
Seamen, etc. Two Treatises, the first of Fear; the second, the Righteous Man's
Refuge in the Evil Day. A Saint indeed: The great Work of a Christian. A
Touchstone of Sincerity: Or, Signs of Grace, and Simptoms of Hypocrisy: Being
the Second Part of the Saint indeed. A Token for Mourners: Or, Boundaries for
Sorrow for the Death of Friends. Husbandry spiritualized; or the Heavenly Use
of Earthly Things. All these 10 by Mr. John Flavel. Sermons and Discourses on
several Divine subjects, by the late reverend and learned Divine Mr. David
Clarkson B. D. sometime Fellow of Clare-hall, Cambridge. Mr. Pool's Annotations
on the Bible, 2 Vol. 3d Edit. with an Addition of a Concordance and Contents to
each chapter; by Mr. Sam. Clark. Catholic Theology Methodus Theologica, both
by Mr. Richard Baxter A sacred Poem on the Glory of Heaven. Strong on the
Covenant Burgess on the Corinthians Tailor on Christ's temptation A Dialogue
between Timothy and Titus, about the Articles of the Church of England
Gurnall's christian Armor Dr. Horton's 100 Sermons Nostredamus's Prophecies
Melvill's Memoirs Marve^'s Poems Daille on the Collossians Clark's Martyrology
The Acts, Decisions, Decrees, and Canons of the reformed Churches, in France;
being a most faithful and impartial History of the Rise, Growth, and Decay of
the Reformation in that Kingdom; their confession of Faith, Speeches, Letters,
cases of conscience, etc. By John Quick Minister in London. Baxter's
Church History and Councils. -- History of councils enlarged and defended --
Apology for Nonconformists -- Second Defense of Nonconsormists -- Apology
against Eight Men -- Treatise of Episcopacy -- Disputations of Church
Government. -- Life of Faith; first of the Sermons preached before King Charles
the second. -- English Nonconformity -- Naked Popery -- against Dodwell and
Sherlock -- Which is the True Church -- Catholic communion, against both
Extremes, in six several controversies. -- Moral Prognostication -- Search for
English Schismatics. -- Farewell Sermon, published by himself. -- Mr. John
Corbet's Funeral Sermon -- Glorious Kingdom of Christ -- Reply to Mr. Tho.
Beverly's Answer. -- National churches -- Church-concord -- Penitent
confession, and necessary Vindication -- Power of a christian Magistrate --
Disputations of right to Sacraments. -- Disputation of Justification Ark on the
Covenant Brown's Gospel churches Bulley on the Covenant -- Critical Enqui^ies
Chariton's Enquiries into humane Nature Clarks^n's practical Divinity of
papists -- No Evidence for Diocesan churches C^rbet's Nonconformist's Plea A
Dialogue between a Protestant and a Jew, and a Papist and a Jew. ^oolittle's
Protestant's Answer to, Where was your Church before Luther. Elton on the
Commandments. Fryfell's Sermons of Grace and Temptation. Humphry's Mediocria
complete -- Peaceable Disquisition Hales of Religion Hudson on the Church
Hierome's Life Laroque on the Eucharist Lewis's Education of Gentlewomen
M^rgan's Dyalling Manning of Predetermination Mead's Vision of the Wheels. --
Sermon at the Union Morning Exercise against Popery Muse's Alphabet Owen's
seasonable Words for English Protestants. Present Nonconformists Vindicated
Pool's Apology for Religion Owen of being spiritually-minded Mr. Rowlandson's
captivity Wadsworth's Separation no Schism Swi^nock of Regeneration True Cess,
or intrinsic Value of all real Estates. Officium Cleri desiderium Populi
Troughton's Apology for Nonconformity. Yarranton's England's Improvement
Hodges's two Sermons Phelps Innocence rewarded Mall's Axe at the Root Smith's
christians Work, at Sorrell's Funeral. State of blessedness Vincent at Bakers
Funeral -- at Jaueway's Funeral Hudson at Shute's Funeral Lloyd's Death of
God's Moses Whittaker's Funeral Sermon Scot's Saint's privilege by dying
Wadsworth's Funeral Sermon Barre^'s Answer to Stilling fleet Remarks on Affairs
of Trade Waller's Effays Claud^'s Defense of Reformation Wallis's Theological
Discourses on several Occasions in two Parts Jacksons's Annotations on the
Bible -- on Isaiah Woodward's Call to Humiliation, for the grievous Sin of
Persecution Boyse's Sermons against Quenching the Holy Spirit Vanity, Danger,
etc. of continuing Ceremonies in the Worship of God. Ecclesiastical History of
France Ellis's English School Grew's Parable of the prodigal Present State of
New England Hayter on the Revelations Lightfoot in Lucam Phelps on the
Revelations Grace and Duty of Heavenly Mindedness. The Causes, Ways and Means
of understanding the Mind of God revealed in his Word. A Treatise of Apostasy
An Answ^^ to Dr. Parker Humble Testimony -- of Temptation -- of the Trinity.
These 7 by Dr. Owen. Discourses concerning the actual Providence of God; in
three parts. The first, treating concerning the Notion of it, etc. The second,
concerning the Specialities of it. The third, concerning the hard chapters of
it. In 53 Sermons. Intercourses of Divine Love betwixt Christ and the Church;
in two Vol. The first, containing fixty one Sermons on the first chapter of the
Canticles. The second containing about 47 Sermons on the second chapter of the
Canticles. A Reasonable Account, why some pious Nonconforming Ministers in
England, judge it sinful for them to perform their Ministerial Acts in public
solemn Prayer, by the prescribed Forms of others. -- His Supplement to his
reasonable Account. A Discourse against Transubstantiation. The Vindication of
Litur^^^^, lately published by Dr. Faulkner^^ ^oved no Vindication. Defensative
Armor against four of Satan's most fiery Darts, viz. Temptations to Atheistical
and Blasphemous Thoughts, Self-murder, Despair and Presumption. The above 8 by
Dr. John Collings. Allen's Alarm to unconverted sinners. Bury's Husbandman's
companion -- Help to Holy walking Corbet's Kingdom of God among Men Clarkson of
saving Grace -- A Discourse concerning Liturgies Calamy of Meditation
Doolittle's Catechism Chorley's Memorial of the Bible Ellis's Kingdom of God
Farthing's short Hand Aesop improved, or 300 Fables paraphrased. Finch's Answer
to Tho. Grantham's Dialogue between a Baptist and a Presbiterian. Grotius of
Christ's satisfaction, translated into English by W. H. Green's Corruption of
Man by Nature Burkit of Infant Baptism -- Sure Mercies of David -- Baptismal
bonds renewed Hurst's Revival of Grace Hugh's Summons to Sinners to think and
turn. Bishop Kidder on the Saerament Lorimor's Diseourses on the Five Books of
Moses, Laurence's Interest of Ireland Lewis's Grammar -- Vestibulum Technicum
Nomenclatura Mundi Mead's Good of early Obedience Ross's Mystagogus Poeticus
Whittaker's 18 Sermons Steel, of Old Age Dr. Staunton's Life, with his
Dialogues. Roberts on the Sacrament Swinnock on the Attributes Norman's Cases
of Conscience Whole Duty of Man: Second Part. Barret on the Covenant Wilson's
Scripture-Genuine-Interpreter Wase's Grammar Shaw's true Christian's Test, or
Meditations. Watson's Sermons on Malachy Sir Charles Wolsely's Mount of Spirits
Vincent of Conscience -- Touchstone of Grace and Nature -- Conversion of the
Soul -- Christ's sudden appearance to Judgment. Burgess's Characters of a
Godly Man Ottee's Sermons Melius inquirendum, by Mr. Alsop Wadswoth's
Immortality of the Soul -- Faith's Triumph History of Cardinal Ximenes Stedman
of Union -- Sober singularity Ars Sciendi, sive Logica Venning of Sin Polwheel
against quenching the Spirit Marshal's Gospel-Mystery of Sanctification.
Mason's Spiritual Songs, or Songs of Praise. -- his Penitential Cries A Funeral
Sermon at the Death of Mr. Joseph Barret; with his Life and Remains.

