A DECLARATION AND RESOLUTION OF THE SHERIFFS, Justices of the Peace, and
other of His Majesty's well affected Subjects, in the Counties of Flint and
Denbigh, at a general meeting in Wexham, the 9. of this instant May, 1648.

WHEREIN, They declare their Resolution, touching the solemn League and
Covenant, and to oppose all forces whatsoever, that shall enter the said
Counties, for the disturbance of the public peace of England and Wales.

REsolved and agreed upon, that this Declaration be published throughout the
six Counties of Northwales, together with our desires, concerning the peace of
the Kingdom.

LONDON, Printed for R. W. MDCXLVIII.

THE DECLARATION and Resolution, Of the Sherriffs, and Justices of the Peace in
Flint Sheere. etc.
FIrst, It is resolved that the presint distemper of the times and danger
imminent upon this Country, does necessitate the putting of the same into a
posture of defense against any that shall be in Arms against the Parliament.

Secondly, it is resolved, that we shall in pursuance of the Solemn League and
Covenant in all just ways, resist and suppress all Forces whatsoever, either
Nati^e within th^se Counties of Northwales, or or those that shall from
Foreign Countries, invade these parts, contrary to the Authority of both
Houses of Parliament to the contempt thereof, and the disturbance of the publik
peace, in order whereunto it is further resolved.

Third^y, that the D^claration of this Resolution be published throughout the
six Coun^^^s of North Wales, wi^h ^^^^mation of our desi^es: That all we^l
affect^^ pers^ns therein will join and subscribe with us, wi h whom we obliege
our selves to a mutual defense of each other in this engagement and the taking
of subscriptions is refer^ed to he Commissi^ners of the ass^sm^nt of 6000 l.
per mensem, of the said espective Counties, and to such as they or any of them
shall appoint.

Fourthly, that those persons that shall subscribe these resolutions, shall
improve their interests in their several limits, to engage all persons
well-affected, both Horse and Foot to be ready with their Arms for defense,
and preservation of the peace of the Country, in the obedience of the
Parliament. And to yield their assistance in the suppression of any
insurrection, or unlawful tumultuary meeting of such as have been in Arms
against the Parliament.

Fifthly, that the names of such persons as shall be engaged to be in readine
ein the County of Denbigh be returned to the governor of Denbigh, who with the
advice and and assistance of the high Sheriff of that County Sir Thomas
Middleto^, Simon Thelmall Esquire, the elder of place and ward the
Commissioners for the 6000 l. P^r mensem, the Committees of North Wales, or any
four of them, shall have power to appoint fit men to daw together, and
conduct such persons for the service aforesaid as occasion shall require, And
as they shall receive orders from the said Governor, and any four of the
persons aforesaid.

Sixthly that the names of such persons as shall be engaged to be in the
readiness for the same service in the county of Flint, be returned to the
Governor of Denbigh, who with the advice and assistinance of the high sheriff
of that county, Col, Thomas Ravenscroft, Col. John Aldersey, John Salisbury of
Bathgrage Esqr. Capt Luke Loyd the Commissioners for the 6000 l. per mensem,
the committee of North Wales, or any four of them, as occasion shall require
and they shall receive Orders from th, s^id Govenour, and any sore of the
persons aforesaid.

Seventhly, that the Arms of the Inhabitants of the Counties of Denbigh and
Flint, that have been in hostility against the Parliament, be by warrant called
in, and brought to Denbigh Castle, for the use of the said Counties
respectively. And that there be intimation in the said Warrants, that such
persons as shall qui^tly and readily su^render up their Arms, shall be taken
notice of, as persons not inclinable, to disturb the public peace, And that
such persons as shall refuse to deliver up their Arms, or conceal the same,
shall be esteemed prone, and ready to entertain new Commotions and not persons
well affected to the peace of their Country, giving further to understand, it
is not our intention by the seazure of Arms to add fear, or molestation to
any that shall conform. But on the contrary, we sh^all cherish such, and all
others, who shall not contrive practice, or act something to the disturbance of
the Countries Peace.

Eighthly, That the Castle of Ruthin and Ruthland, be in pursuance of the Order
of the honorable House of Commons, forthwith made more untenable, and that
Warrants be immediately sent forth, under the hands of the Justices of the
peace, and Commissioners of the respective Counties, or any three or more of
them for that purpose. And the care of the demolishment of Ruthin Castle is
referred to Simon Thebw^ll, of place and ward Esquire. And the present
Governor of Denbigh. And for Ruthland Castle to Ruge* Hummer Esquire, High
Sheriff of the County of Flint.

SIR,
THe Report that spread abroad of re-uniting the Wesh forc^s, and a supposed
defeat given to our forces is false; but the contrary you may be assured of;
and the great victory obtained by Col. Horton against them. Here follows a
List of the prisoners taken and in custody, viz. 25 Majors, and Captains, 32
Lieutenants, 27, Ensigns, 10 Private Gentlemen, and about 2600 private
Soldiers. We want room to enlarge further the perticulers, but the whole
business will be published at large by it sell e.

A declaration of the Taking of Harbottle Castle, for the King, by Sir, Gilbert
Errington.
Sir.
CAptain Ball, with a ship of 32. Guns keeps provision from Barwick, but
Langdale gives out that 3 ships are coming from Leath to fight with him. The
Irish take ships within two or three leagus of the Coasts. Sir, Gilb. Errington
has taken Harbottle Castle in Northumher land for the King; Major Genesis Lambert
has sent to secure the Garrisons, and to fortify Appleby, in westmerland, Raby
in the Bishopric, and Walton hall in Yorkshire. Sir. Philip Musgrave is
marching toward Perith with 500 Horse, intending to possess Appleby, and
other places.

FINIS.

