SPECIAL NEWS FROM IRELAND.

Newly received in a Letter from a Gentleman of good worth in Dublin to a
Friend in LONDON.

Showing the present condition of that poor Kingdom, and the manner of the
late great Victory, which God (most miraculously) has given to the poor
PROTESTANTS there.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Overton, 1643. The first of March.

SIR,
IN my last letter I wrote to you of a Commission that came hither, and brought
by one Thomas Bourke a Papist, who was of the House of Commons here, and one of
those Committees sent over by the House of Commons here into England, mine time
of the Earl of Straffords trial; the substance of which Commission for ought I
can hear is no other then that I wrote you word of before, to receive the
Demands of the Rebels: the Marquess of Ormond, the Earl of Clanrickard, the
Earl of Rascommen, my Lord Moore, Sir Thomas Lucas, Sir Maurice Eustace, the
Kings Sarjeant, and this Bourke being Commissioners, though this be all in the
Commission that I can learn, yet the Papists do much rejoice here, and brag
that they shall have their wills and what they please (so foolishly I hope are
they abused by their Priests and others who tells them of wonders, when I doubt
not, but it will be but ridiculus mus) for sure His Majesty is sensible of the
blood of his English Subjects so barbarously spent and spilt by those Rebels
here, which by a remonstration given in here unto the State is no less then an
hundred forty four thousand in the Province of Vlster, only which by the
Rebels have been hanged, killed, drowned, stoned, and now missing there. And
if so many in one of the four Provinces, what are there in the other three
Provinces? The place appointed by the Commissioners to receive what the Rebels
offer, is Troudaish; the time I hear which is appointed is the 23. of this
instant: they are to come thither not above thirty, and of them none to be of
their Clergy; They have a safe conduct sent them unto Kilkenny, and are to
have a Convoy for to secure them in their passage if they doubt any thing. What
will be the issue of it time will show, but you must not look for such constant
Intelligences as heretofore; for it is reported here, that Captain Bartlet who
commanded the Pinnace, and served the State upon these Coasts, and to run
between Chester and Dublin, have delivered his Ordnance out of his ship, being
sixteen in number, to fortify Westchester, and have moored up his ship there
as it is given out, and for his excuse does say, he has done it by the command
of those who have power to do it.

For our estate here it is much after the old manner, we cannot stir out of
Dublin but the poor English are swept up, if they go not out strongly. On
Monday was a seven night at noon day, an hundred and forty of the Calves
which the poor English that dwelt in Dublin had, were swept all away by the
Rebels from the Green of Dublin, and Oxmanton Green, and carried clean away
without resistance, which will add to our scarcity, it being too much
already, and which if we be not soon relieved. I fear we must abandon this
Kingdom for want of victuals; and whither we poor few that are left should go
to beg, if England be not quiet, we do not know only our eyes wait upon that
great providence which yet has been wonderful toward us in goodness.

On Friday was seventh night Sir Francis Willoughby went with 1500. Foot, and
three Troops of Horse to Mennooth, where the Rebels were in great multitudes;
but upon his approach they fired the town, and some of them betook themselves
to the Castle, where they endured about ninety great shot from our Ordnance,
and then in the night stole all away. Such ill luck has Sir Francis still,
that the Rebels slip away from him when he should come to execution: and for
the present there is a garrison of two hundred men put into it, whether they
shall continue there, or how long we know not, but the rest of the soldiers
are come home.

I wrote to you also in my last of a Convoy of a thousand foot and about two
hundred horse, sent to Athlowe in Connaught, from hence with Ammonition and
provisions for relief of the Soldiers there, amongst which were some clothes
for the Soldiers, what the state here could spare, and that very hardly, they
went safely thither, but in their coming back about two miles of this side of
Mullingare, in Westmeath, at a place called Rawnnell, their way was through a
pass or cawsey over a bogge, the bogge being on both sides the cawsey, which
the Rebels had purposely so cut and spoiled, that neither horse nor foot could
possibly pass over it: and at the hither end toward Dublin the Rebels had
made works and trenches to lie in, to cut off our men in their return; In
those trenches and that side, they had (as the certainest reports are of them
that were there) 2500. men, and on a hill a little from the bogge, a thousand
men more, and in another place 700. more, and the countries thereabout rising
and making toward them, their Generalissimo Preston had sent his eldest son,
who was a Colonel amongst them, with many of his best men unto that place to
their help. Our men seeing the straight that they were in, and having no other
way to pass but that way through the bogge, sent Sergeant Major Morris a young
man, who sometimes was the late Earl of Straffords Page, with the forlorn Hope
to try the bogge, he commanded his man to lead his horse after him: and finding
that the bottom of the bogge was gravelly, though they went up to the ankles,
and sometimes to the knees, yet resolvedly he went on and got over, and then
called to our horse to follow, which they did with what speed they could: and
so soon as some few of them were got over they were charged by one Captain
Bryan (whom I formerly wrote to you ran away from us, he being then Cornet to
Sir Thomas Lucas, and whose plot was to have carried with him two or three
troops of our horse, (they were received bravely by our men, though but newly
got out of the mire) and though Bryan gave them three charges with great
courage and fierceness, yet his men could not endure the face of our horse,
but presently fled and ran away. When Bryan was slain, and his head carried
to Droggedah, our foot likewise waded through the bogge with great courage, and
were no sooner got through, but they charged the Rebels in their very trenches,
and with such fury and resolution, that they came up to the very loopholes
where they put out the nuzzels of their Muskets, and so courageously beat them
out of their trenches, and made them to betake them to their heels, and they
followed the chase about 6. miles. How many of the Rebels were killed is
uncertain, for none can tell that were there but by guess: some think 400. at
least, and many of good note, and their best men, amongst whom was Adam
Cusacke, one of our great speakers in our Parliament. There were taken
Collonell Preston, the General Prestons eldest son, who is now in the Castle
of Dublin; and as some of them that were there say, and I hear it confirmed by
Sir John Sherlocke, that Betangh of Menaltagh his eldest son, and Garret
Otylemer the Lawyer, his eldest son, which two, they say, they left at Trim,
with some others of their best men. There were eleven of their Colors taken,
some say sixteen, but I saw but ten brought into Dublin, if I mistook not in
the telling them as they were brought.

This we account as great a Victory, as that of Killrush, considering all the
difficulties that were therein, and the advantages that the enemy had of us,
and we must not, nor ought we to ascribe it to any policy or strength of ours,
but to the immediate hand of our good God, who as in our former fights, so in
this, showed his own power and mercy to us, and even miraculously preserved
us, and gave us this victory. There were but four or five of our men killed in
all this fight, and some twenty hurt, but not mortally, that I can hear of
Sir Richard Grenvile commanded the Horse in chief, and Sir John Sherlocke the
Foot, Sir Michael Ernely was there also with them, who is accounted amongst
our Soldiers as brave a Commander, as we have any, and Sir Charles Coote, Sir
Edmund Povey, and the Lord President of Connaught, who are all come to Dublin,
but Sir Michael Earnely, who fell sick at Trim by the way, where he is. This
battle was fought yesterday sennight, and the News came to us on thursday,
and our Soldiers came home on Saturday last.

The beginning of the last Summer, there were sent into Connaught, with Sir
Michael Earnly, and other Commanders, two thousand men, which came to us from
Chester; of these there came up with our Convoy now from Athlew, only six
hundred men, and in that distressed miserable case, that it would pity any
man's heart, that had but one dram of mercy in him to see them; they are almost
starved, and some now dye coming to get a little fullness of meat, and I
fear many of them will follow that way. So ragged and naked are they for want
of clothes, as I never saw Soldiers in all my days: and some of them dyed by
the way, not being able to travail up, and almost all of the rest of the two
thousand that went down, besides these six hundred, are dead in Connaught, of
mere hunger and sickness, as the Soldiers say; For they do report that few
or none were killed by the enemy.

As I said before, our wants here increase very much, and if we have not
supplies speedily sent us out of England, what we shall do, or which way to
turn us, or whither to go, we know not, and if we have no help from you, we
cannot continue long; for if we wanted nothing but victuals, that were enough
to destroy us all.

They are preparing here to send out about two thousand men, horse and foot,
this next week, but whither they shall go, is kept secret; it was a motion
made by my Lord Lisle, which we think came originally from Collonell Munke;
both which, as we hear, are to go in the service: they carry Battering Pieces
with them, and Quernes for grinding of Corn, and if God bless them, we think
they will not hastily return; for in truth, we have no victuals for them. And
thus with my kindest respects to you, I rest

Your loving Friend, J. D.
Dublin 15. Feb. 1642.
FINIS.

