A DECLARATION OF THE ARMY, CONCERNING The Kings Majesty, the Prince of WALES,
and the Citizens of LONDON, Agreed upon by the Officers and Soldiers, under
the Command of the Lord Genesis Fairfax, to be read and published throughout the
respective Counties within the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales.

AND A Remonstrance thereupon, touching the proceedings of the King, and both
Houses of Parliament.

TOGETHER, With a Letter read in both Houses, containing a Charge against all
those who shall act contrary to the Laws of the Land, either against King or
Parliament.

SIgned by the Agents of the Army, in the name of themselves and the whole
Kingdom, and Commanded to be forthwith Printed and published. London, Printed
for R. Williamson, and are to be sold in St. Dunstons Churchyard, near
Temple-Barre, 1648.

A Declaration from the Northern Army, concerning the Kings Majesty, the Prince
of Wales, and the Duke of York, and their Demands and Resolutions thereupon.
Whereas we have lately seen a Copy of your Proposalls, presented by the
Agents of the respective Regiments, to our ever honored Genesis the Council of
the Army, we do therefore declare, that we do unanimously embrace the same, and
bless God, that he has made you Instruments of so happy a work, promising all
assistance therein, and protesting to live and dye with you for the
accomplishing of the same; we shall be no longer silent, in this great work,
but are resolved forthwith to send our Agents unto you, to the end, that our
sense and Resolutions, may appear visible, to the general Council, now
assembled by the voice of the Army.

And we do further declare, that we are resolved to stand and fall with you,
for the speedy executing of Justice upon all persons whatsoever, even from the
highest to the lowest, and in all other particulars whatsoever, now agitating
by you (our fellow Soldiers and Commoners) in the South, in relation to the
proceedings of the King, the Prince, and the Duke, etc.

Dated from their last general meeti^g near York, November. 10. 1648. Subscribed
by the Agents of the respective Regiments, throughout the Northern Brigade.

A Declaration of the further proceedings in the North concerning King and
Kingdom, Sent in a Letter to the Right Honorable, William Lenthall Esquire;
Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons.
Mr. Speaker,
LIeutenant General Crumwell upon conference with us Gnetlemen of the four
Northern Counties, conceives it necessary, that the standing Garrison of Barwick
be 1200 foot, and the Garrison of Carlisle 800, and that there be also two
Regiments of horse, consisting of 600 in a Regiment; to be ready upon all
occasions to resist and oppose any Invasion that may happen by Sea or Land, and
to quell Insurrections, that may rise amongst us, and to suppress the Moss
troopers, they being now stronger then ever, many of the enemies scattered
horse being gathered to them, we shall most readily and heartily endeavor to
do the utmost these poor Counties are able but sir, you know our intolerable
sufferings, not only this last Summer, but from the beginning of these
Kingdoms troubles, and our Petition does a little set forth the sad condition
that we are now in; we, therefore most earnestly entreat you to move the
House that these forces both of horse and foot, may be maintained by the whole
Kingdom, not only in respect of our ex^ream poverty and disabilities, but
because they are the frontier Garrisons between the 2. Kingdoms, and have ever
been maintained by the public, we press this the more earnestly, knowing the
necessity of a speedy provision, and the impossibility for these Counties to
provide for such a force, and to what general way the House please to appoint,
who shall willingly and freely contribute our proportion, and labor both in
that and all other things to show our selves, Sir, Your faithful Servant, etc.

A new Remonstrance from the North, concerning the King, and the Royal party,
read in both Houses of Parliament.
WHereas we had formerly some hopes that lenity toward those who had been in
Arms and otherwise active against the Parl. would so far have prevailed with
them, that we might have peaceably enjoyed our own habitations, but we have
lately found by woeful experience, that the permitting such persons, especially
those of interest in the Country to live amongst us, has brought most
unsufferable misery upon these Countries: Insomuch, as we may justly fear the
perishing of many F^milies this Win or for want of bread; Gentlemen of quality
and their Families having no other drink but water, and as an exceeding
addition to our former sorrows, suffered this Summer by imprisoning our pe
sons, dispeopling our Towns, compelling all able to bear Arms, betwixt the age
of 60. and 16. to assist against the Parl. and by destroying our corn and
goods, and killing our Neighbors and Countrymen, and driving away our Cattle:
And also by bringing into the Kingdom a foreign Nation, and by treacherously
surprising, and most basely delivering into the Scots hands, the two
considerable Towns of Barwick and Cartile, and by further aiding and assisting
of them, toward the subduing and enslaving of our Kingdom, that many of the
actors, contrivers, and assisters in that horrible and traitorous Design, not
only against our Countries, but the Parl. and Kingdom, are after all their
Summers abominable treason and outrages, now returned with much confidence and
boldness to their own houses, intending to hatch (as we have cause to believe)
now plots this Winter amongst us.

The premises considered, we pray that justice may be speedily executed on
such impl^cable enemies and declared Traitors to the Parliament, Kingdom, and
their Countries, and to that end a Commission of Oyre and Terminer, with
learned and faithful Judges may be forthwith sent down into these Northern
parts, or such o her legal Course resolved on as to your wisdom shall seem
best for their speedy trials in these Northern Counties where they have
committed the offenses, and that a Solicitor may be forthwith sent down into
these parts, that such as are fled out of the Kingdom, or gone yond Sea, may be
proceeded against according to Law, we know no other way under God to prevent a
new war, for many Delinquents late in Arms, are not only returned to their own
houses, but meet, and have already their private consultations, pretending
Articles for their peaceable living at home, and are thereupon so insolent,
that they ride armed to public places, and do not stick to say that they yet
expect a turn for all this, and we find by experience, that unless the House
do severely proceed against such notorious Delinquents, many of the people in
these parts will adhere to them, and justify their actions, and be ready to
rise up in Arms with them upon all occasions.

We press more earnestly the granting of this, knowing that the peace and
quiet of the North, if not of the whole Kingdom, depends upon it.

His Majesty's Remonstrance to the Parliament.

FOr a final answer to you, as to you paper of the first of this instant, and
the notes therein mentioned concerning the Church, His Majesty says, that his
Concessions expresses in that paper, and mis-apprehended in these particulars
following, viz. He never did, nor does intend to make any more new Bishops
during the term of 3. years, that the power of Ordination should be practiced
in the old manner as formerly, for that heretofore the Bishops were at liberty
to call what Presbyters they would to assist ordaining, but were not bound to
their Council or consent; but his Majesty does now intend, and will consent,
that Bishops shall not receive any into holy orders without the consent and
limited number of Presbyters, to be chosen i^ such manner as shall be agreed on
by his M^j. and his 2 Houses for that purpose. Neither did his Maj. intend that
a^^e the end of 3. years, n^^ certain way should be settled concerning Eccl
si^sticall Government; for that his Maj. did purpose du^ing the 3. years, to
have a consultation with the Assembly of Divines. 20. being added of his own
nomination; which if his 2. Houses shall resolve to entertain, i^ cannot well
be doubted, but upon the debate, such a Government will be agreed upon by his
Maj. and his 2. Houses, as shall be best for the pe^ce of the Church, and most
proper to prevent those distractions which his 2. Houses apprehend may ensue.

And as to that part of the proposition concerning the Book of Common Prayer,
for the satisfaction of his 2. Houses, his Maj. will not insist upon any
provision for continuance of the same in his Maj. Chapel for himself and his
Household; nevertheless, his Maj. declares, that he intends to use some other
set form of Divine Service.

And as to all other particulars in your paper mentioned, his Maj. having in
his former Answers consented so far as possibly he can, as he stands at present
persuaded in his judgment; does refer himself thereunto. And since his Maj. by
his Concessions has brought all differences concerning the Church into so
narrow a compass, that the chief visible obstruction is that, wherein really
in conscience he is not satisfied: He hopes his 2. Houses will not put further
pressures of so tender a nature upon him, when it is most likely the time and
Debate will happily reconcile all these differences.

Dated from his Majesty's Court at Newport, the 12. of November, 1648.
FINIS.

