A DECLARATION OF THE NOBILITY AND GENTRY OF THE COUNTY of WORCESTER Adhering
to the late KING.
HAving under our present consideration and prospect (though not without much
horror and amazement) the vast and wasting confusions under which these Nations
for many years have languished, out of which distressed and miserable condition
we judge it impossible to be redeemed without the only aid of that omnipotent
hand, which has justly sent these afflicting chastisements for our multiplied
offenses against his Divine Majesty.

And considering farther how the Divine Clemency by late and wonderful
Revolutions, (wherein his Excellency the Lord General Monck, being to his
perpetual honor most signally isntrumental,) has revived our hopes of
re-obtaining the blessings of Peace and Re-settlement, if we can become such
good Christians, as to have mutual mercy one for another, desiring no
otherwise to be our selves forgiven, then as we do freely and heartily forgive.

We therefore, the Nobility and Gentry of the County of Worcester, having as
deeply tasted of the sad calamities of these late Intestine Wars, as any
other of our neighbour-Counties, and to the increase of our unhappiness do yet
lie under the severe and heavy censure of some persons who asperse us as full
of Revenge.

Do nevertheless hereby declare before God and the world, that we neither do
nor will harbor any thought of Rancor or Revenge against them or any other
person which has been of a contrary judgment unto us, But are most readily
willing to lay aside all kind of Animosities whatsoever, and return into all
mutual Christian love and friendship; whereby we may with them Redintegrate
into the Unity of Mind, as well as of Nation: Presuming also, that all such who
have not totally strai'd from the paths of charity, will in this believe us.

And that we may not be wanting to give a full Testimony and Assurance of our
quiet and peaceable deportment for the future; with an humble and unwearied
patience, we wait for the blessing of our great and gracious God upon this
ensuing Parliament.

Subscribed by The Earl of Shrewsbury. Thomas Lord Windsor. Sr Jo. Packington
Barronet. Sr William Russell Barronet. Sr Ralph Clare Knight of the Bath. Sr
Rowland Berkley Knight. Sr John Winford Knight. Sr Edward Barret Knight. Sam.
Sandyes Esquire. Shar. Talbot Esquire. Tho. Savage Esquire. Henry Townsend
Esquire. Francis Finch Esquire. Tho. Hornyold Esquire. John Fortescue Esquire.
Tho. Wild Esquire Io. Keyt Esquire, William Sheldon Esquire. Phillip Brace
Esquire. Edward Barret Gent. Anthony Bushel Gent. William Sheldon Gent. Io.
Sandys Gent.


Printed for Charles Adams at the Talbot in Fleetstreet. 1660.


