A DECLARATION Of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax And his COUNCIL of WAR.

Delivered by Colonel Sir Hardresse Waller, and other Officers of the Army, to
the House of Peers, upon Monday the 17 of January, 1647.

With the Lords Answer thereunto.

Die Lunae, 17 Januarii. 1647.
Ordered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That this Declaration of the
General and his Council of War, with the Answer thereunto, be forthwith
printed and published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.


Imprinted at London for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1647.

The Declaration of the General and his Council of War, delivered by
Colonel Sir Hardresse Waller, and other Officers of the Army, at the Bar of
the House of Peers, the 17 of January, 1647. With the Lords answer thereunto,
delivered by the Speaker.

The General and his Council of War, taking notice of some unworthy
endeavors to asperse the integrity of their proceedings, as aiming at the
overthrowing of Peerage, and undermining of the Rights and Privileges of the
House of Peers, do unanimously Declare, That they hold themselves obliged in
Justice and Honor to endeavor to preserve the Peerage of this Kingdom with
the just Rights belonging to the House of Peers, and will really in their
places and callings perform the same. And as in the first place they look upon
the carrying on of this great common Cause, wherein both Houses of Parliament
stand engaged (which they hope no respect shall make them to desert) so shall
they to, and in the prosecution of those Public ends be very careful to
preserve and maintain the Right and Honor belonging to the places and persons
of the Peers of England.

By the appointment of his Exceltency, Sir Thomas Fairfax, and his Council of
War. Jo. Rushworth.

The Lords Answer.
Gentlemen:
The Lords receive with great satisfaction this Declaration which you have
presented unto them, as the unanimous engagement of the Counsel of War; and
they have commanded me to return particular thanks to the General and your
selves, and by you they desire their thanks may be returned to the Council of
War and the whole Army. And they further have commanded me to assure you,
That as they have hazarded their Lives and Fortunes in the maintenance of the
true Religion, and the Liberties of the Kingdom, and Privileges of Parliament
according to our former solemn Engagements, and for the procuring a just and
safe peace to this distracted and distressed Kingdom; so they shall still
pursue those ends from which no respects whatsoever shall either alienate their
hearts, or lessen their endeavors.

Die Lunae 17. Januarii 1647.
Ordered by the Lords assembled in Parliament, That this Declaration of the
General and his Council of War, with the Answer thereunto shall be printed
and published.

Jo. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.
FINIS.

