A Declaration of many thousand well-affected Persons, Inhabitants in and about
the Cities of London and Westminster, expressing their adherence to this
present Parliament; as also their sense of a Free Parliament, so much cried up
by the Cavaliers and others, that know not what it is; but go along in company
with them; Together with diverse other expostulatory Particulars.
WE should wonder at the late, and still brutish looseness of men's Tongues and
Pens, did we not (without much scrutiny,) know, that the spirit of the
unreasonable and unplacable Cavaliers (we mean (mostly) the sottish, profane,
beggarly, and spend-thrift ones) appear in all the sordid Pamphlets that daily
fly abroad without check or control; who by these means (we know) would put
upon us Bears skins, and when they should do it, would inflame the windy headed
vulgar to rend us to pieces, as Monsters not fit to converse amongst sober men.
We do therefore hereby declare, and let them and others know, that though we
have been hitherto silent, yet we are not sottish or afraid (through the
strength of Jehovah) of their fury; the Lord will in his due time rebuke them
again, after often former rebukes unheeded, and enable us to say, Where is the
fury of the Oppressor?

And although we shall not at all justify the late heady and faithless
expulsion of this Parliament in October last past, by the (once renowned)
Officers of the Army, who (we hope) do (as we are confident they ought)
bitterly lament their miscarriages therein, In pursuing good ends by indirect
and unjustifiable means, in breaking Gods Institutions in pursuit of his glory:
Or (in a word) In doing evil that good may come thereby, by reason whereof they
are for the present rejected, Because they rejected the word of the Lord, and
what wisdom is in them? Yet we cannot but sadly deplore, that they are
tolerated to be scandalously reproached almost every day by the Jer. 8. 9.
public and filthy gazets and pasquils of tinkerly brains, that scarce drop so
much common sense or modesty, as deserves the cursory perusal of a man that
has but a slender value of time; nay, that do nauseate men of mere honest
morals, for fear of being tainted with the contagion of their familiarnesse and
frequency.

And it is our sad observation, That the spirit of profaneness is now
triumphant every where in this Nation; yea so triumphant that Magistracy and
Ministry are debased even at the unhallowed feet of the rabble, and ready to be
kicked at by them upon the least pretended occasion; insomuch that none that
ought in duty, dares without danger punish or reprove things done, even against
the common light of men as men, even that of nature.

We observe also to our great grief an unparalleld Apostasy, from once common
and undeniable principles, among those that once encouraged themselves in their
God, and strengthened the hands of one another in the late sharp civil Wars,
so that now they cry up that which once they helped to pull down, and call back
exploded abominations, and lick up what they once vomited into the nastiest
corners they could find to discharge themselves.

We are aware and have considered who they are that with a wide, yet wry mouth
cry up a Free Parliament (a thing taken in some sense, that is very desirable
in times of a long continued peace) but where was it ever known in a prudent
State after a Civil War? Did the wise and politic State of Rome suffer free
Conventions without due qualifications after a Civil War? We say no; we know
this is the Cavaliers Trojan-horse lined within with rapines, murders, and what
not, of them that fought and acted against them? Nay, we boldly affirm, That
England in the vulgar notion of a Free Parliament never had any such, since
Magna Charta (and some of us are not altogether ignorant of the Laws of this
Nation) nor was Magna Charta neither free. Was not that a forced Charter in its
creation? (this cannot be denied us) Nay, in the continuance too; through
thirty Parliaments by the strict Rules of Law, who can give us instance of a
Parliament in England, where no armor were worn in or near the Town, or place
where the Parliament sat, but by Parliament men, and Officers of Justice
during their sitting? Or that no games and plays were used in or near the Town
or place where the Parliament sat, by men, women or children, during its
sitting? If not, which we are sure no man living can deny; then when was there
Coke 3d Inst. 160.
a Free Parliament by strict Rules of Law? if these free Parliamentiers mean
not this (which yet the intention of a Free Parliament includes) What do these
men mean? They must be ingenuous to confess, they mean three Estates of King,
Popish and other Lords, Archbishops, Bishops, etc. the prodigious concomitants,
and effects of such an Assembly, are too long, and too foul, as much as to
touch upon here, yet are easily discerned by men that have not made themselves
blind in the colors of good and evil. These, or most of these, they once
decried and crucified, and now they cry Hosannah to: Are not these things
abominable incosistencies? Oh where are you English men? And what, are you men
still? If you be not, the Lord bring you back from grass, like Nebuchadnezzar
again, and lift up your eyes to Dan. 4. 33, 34.
Heaven, and make your understanding to return to you, that you may praise the
most High, etc.

We may not also but take notice of the Cavaliers and malcontents publishing
without color of truth, diverse Declarations Subscribed with the names of
several Persons, who never knew of such Declarations, or of their names put to
them, till they saw them in Print, as diverse of the Persons whose names are to
the said Declarations, have told some of us: this is an old Artifice of the
Father of lies, and forged upon his infernal Anvill, and will prove (we hope)
to the Authors expectation but a broken reed, and a disappointment suitable to
the design.

Having thus far observed some of the raging evils of this day, and suspecting
the Devils chain to extend to a greater length then we have yet discovered, we
here openly Declare our Resolutions to stand to (whether it be unto life or
death) these Principles following.

1. That we do own this present Parliament, as it now sits as the Supreme
Authority of these Nations, and that we will adhere to them with our lives and
other dearest concernments, in pursuance of their settling a Free State, without
single Person, King, or House of Lords, and in pursuance of their Declaration
of the 7th of May last past.

2. That we will stand by a godly Gospel Ministry in these Nations, adheare to
them, and countenance them against all Opposers, together with a public
comfortable maintenance for them.

3. That we are not either for the Secluded Members (though we honor and
highly respect some of them, who have not been Advocates and Agents for Charles
Stuart) to sit in this Parliament; nor do we own a Free-Parliament in the
general unlimitted notion of it at all, nor for any Members to sit in future
Representatives without due and fitting qualifications to be agreed on by this
Parliament, without which we must necessarily set up our enemies, and the
enemies of God and Religion, to be Judges of our lives and dearest properties,
which neither reason, safety, nor yet prudence will prompt us to.

4. That we detest and abhor the wicked and profane Pasquills every day
uttered abroad against the Parliament, and diverse other eminent and worthy
Persons, as tending to the scandal of Magistracy, and the corruption of
manners; which we humbly conceive the civil Magistrates ought to withstand and
severely punish, these Pasquills being observed to be the griping of the bowels
of the Nation, and portending civil tempests and troubles.

5. That we shall willingly according to our abilities pay our proportion of
Taxes and other necessary impositions for maintenance of the Army and Navy, in
pursuance of the Authority of this Parliament, while it shall be thought
necessary to continue them.

6. That we do and will own the Universities, and Nurseries of Learning, as
very much conducing to reduce Men to purer Morals, and as Handmaids of the
Gospel of Peace.

7. That we do and will own the Laws of the Land as our Birthright, derivable
to our Posterities, and as the fences of our Lives, Liberties, and Estaes, and
make it our requests to this Parliament, that where they are defective,
oppressive, tedious, or chargeable, they may be in due time reformed.

8. That we shall and will assist the Parliament, their Army, one another, and
all other Persons in the three Nations, in pursuance of the particulars before
mentioned to the utmost of our power maugre the most stareing difficulties that
we shall meet withal, and will not be drawn therefrom by fear or favor, or
any other the plausible pretensions of any Man or Men whatsoever.

And now having unbosomed our selves to all Men; First, We desire our
Adversaries (we wish they were not so) to consider what it may cost them before
they invade our Lives, Religion and Liberties; and to consider what they now
enjoy, and yet may enjoy by a quiet submitting to the present Government, and
to the Hand of God, bowing themselves before his past fearful rebukes, before
they provoke him again; and to put these in Balance, and wisely to weigh which
will counterpoise; a present security, and enjoying more then they deserve, or
a hazard of more wrath as well as War. In the strength of God we dare say, we
fear them not; He that delivered us from the Lion and from the Bear, he will
deliver us still. Secondly, We desire our friends imbarqued in the same common
cause with us, to consider what salvations God has wrought for them; and now
to fear before him alone. Does not the Lord say, Who art thou that thou
should be afraid of man that shall dye, and of the son of man that shall be
made as grass; and forgettest the Lord thy Maker, that has stretched forth the
Heavens and laid the foundations of the earth, and have feared continually
every day, because of the fury of the oppressor, as if he were ready to
destroy? AND WHERE IS 51. 22, 23.
THE FURY OF THE OPPRESSOR? Lo, he appears, would destroy you and us, but
cannot, then he disappeares; If the enemies of God be vigilant to hurt you, be
you vigilant to defend your selves; if they be active for their Master the
Devil, be you more active 64. 1, etc.
for God your better Master. He will rend the Heavens, he will come down and
the Mountains shall flow down at his presence, etc.


