A Declaration of the Committee for the safety of the County of Southampton,
sitting at Winton the 9th day of June. 1648.
Southamp. County.
WHereas it is notoriously known, that diverse who have been in Arms against
the Parliament, and other persons ill affected to the present peace and
quietness, which by Gods blessing we have of late enjoyed, have upon a
specious pretense of Petitioning the Parliament for a speedy settlement and
ease against all Burdens and Taxes, drawn together great multitudes of People
in a riotous and warlike manner: And after they have once got into a
considerable Body, then led them on into desperate attempts, to the great
hazard of inflaming the Kingdom again into a new and fatal War, whereby
the Parliament is not only retarded and hindered in the settlement of the Peace
and Government of this Kingdom, but also very sad effects have lately happened
to the said Counties by such tumultuous and disorderly Petitioning by great
effusion of blood, as in Kent, and in other neighbor Counties. And we being
credibly informed that the like unlawful and dangerous practices are beginning
to be set on foot in some parts of this County bordering on Surrey and Sussex,
by sending Coppies of the said Petitions of Kent, Surrey, and Sussex, (in all
which is the same matter) unto such persons as are ill affected to the peace
and quiet of this County, thereby laboring and endeavoring to make the same
disturbance in this County, as they have so unhappily done in others, to the
almost undoing of the same, by making them the Seat of a War; besides their
spilling of so much Christian blood.

We do therefore according to the duty we owe unto God, and this our
County, hereby give notice and warning to all the Inhabitants of this County,
to take heed of, and forbear all Tumultuous meetings, whether upon pretense of
reading, setting hands too, promoting any such Petitions, or upon any other
pretenses whatsoever. And for farther prevention of such mischiefs and
unhappie accidents, we do hereby require all Mayors, Constables, and other
Officers to be careful and vigilant, to find out, and apprehend all such as
they shall find active in drawing together unlawful Assemblies of people to
any such or other pretense whatsoever. And to apprehend and bring them before
us, or some of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for this County, to be
proceeded against as disturbers of the Peace. We do likewise think meet to
advise all others whatsoever, as they desire the continuance of the Peace and
quiet of this County, to be ayding and assisting for the suppressing and
quietting any such disorders.

This is to be published in every Parish Church in the County of Southampton by
the Minister of every respective Parish on the next Lords day after the receipt
hereof.

Fran: Tilney Vic: Com: Robert Wallop. Henry Mildmay. Thomas Jervoise. Robert
Reynolds. John Feilder. John Wolveridge. Richard Moore. Richard Major. Nicholas
Love. Francis Rivet. William Jepson. Henry Bromfeild. William Pit. Thomas
Husey. Thomas Creswell. John Evelin.



