THE DECLARATION Of the COUNTY of OXON To His EXCELLENCY The Lord General MONCK.
We the Gentlemen, Ministers, Freeholders, and others of the County of OXON,
having a long time groaned under heavy Burdens, do now hereby Declare the
Resentments we have of our Grievances, and our just desires as the most visible
means of a happy Peace and Settlement of these Nations.
WHereas every Freeborn Subject of England is supposed to be present in
Parliament, by the Knights or Burgesses of the place of his Residence; and
thereby is presumed to consent to all things that pass in Parliament; it now
so happening, that many Counties are wholly left out, either by Death or
Seclusion.

I. We therefore desire, That all places vacant by Death, may be supplied, and
those that were Secluded in 1648, may be readmitted, that thereby we may be
taken into the Share of Government by our Representatives, We having at this
time but one of Nine, and him a Burgess, taken up with the Public Concern of
the Chair, from minding our particular Grievances.

II. That no unusual previous Oath may be put upon any that is to sit in
Parliament.

III. That no Tax may be put upon us without our Free consent in Parliament.

IV. That the Fundamental Laws of the Land, the Privileges of Parliament, the
Liberty of the Subject, the Property of Goods, may be asserted and defended,
according to the first Declaration of Parliament when they undertook the War.

V. That the True Protestant Religion may be professed and defended, a lawful
Succession of Godly and Able Ministers continued and encouraged, and the two
Universities, and all Colleges in or belonging to either of them, Preserved
and Countenanced.

These our Just Rights we lay Claim to, as Freeborn Englishmen, and resolve
to assert.

This Declaration was signed by above Five thousand considerable Inhabitants of
the said County, and delivered to Genesis Monk, on Monday Febr. 13. at his
Quarters at the Glass-house in Broad-street London, by the Lord Falkland, Sir
Anthony Cope, Mr. James Fiennes, Captain William Cope, Henry Jones, Edward
Hungerford Esqrs., and other Persons of Quality.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey, at the Miter, near the middle Temple-gate in
Fleetstreet, 1660.


