THE DECLARATION Of the Navy; with the Oath taken by all the Officers and
Common-men of the same. BEING, The true Copy of a Letter from the Officers of
the Navy, to the Commissioners: With their Resolutions upon turning out
Colonel RAINSBROUGH from being their Commander.
May, 28th. 1648.
Worshipful;
THese are to certify you that we the Commanders, and Officers of the Ship
Constant Reformation with the rest of the Fleet, have secured the Ships for the
service of King and Parliament, and have refused to be under the Command of
Colonel Rainsbrough, by reason we conceive him to be a man not well-affected to
the King, Parliament and Kingdom* and we do hereby declare unto you, that we
have unanimously joined with the Kentish Gentlemen, in their just Petition to
the Parliament, to this purpose following, videlicet.

First, that the Kings Majesty with all expedition be admitted in Safety and
Honor, to treat with His two Houses of Parliament.

Secondly, that the Army now under the Command of the Lord Fairfax, to be
forthwith disbanded, their Arrears being paid them.

Thirdly, That the known Laws of the Kingdom may be Established and continued,
whereby we ought to be Governed and Judged.

Fourthly, That the Privileges of Parliament and the Liberty of the Subjects
may be preserved.

And to this purpose we have sent our loving Friend Captain Penrose, with a
Letter to the Earl of Warwick, and we are resolved to take in no Commander
whatsoever, but such as shall agree and correspond with us in this Petition,
and shall resolve to live and dye with us, in the behalf of King and
Parliament, which is the Positive Result of us.

We humbly desire your speedy Answer. Officers of the constant Reformation.
Thomas Lisle, Lieutenant. Andrew Mitchel Boats. James Allen, Gunner. Tho.
Best, Carpenter.
Officers of the Swallow.
Leonard Harris, Capt. Jo. London, Mr. Nich. Laurence, Lievet. Andr. Iackson,
Gunner. Io. Short, Carpenter.
Signed likewise by the Captain of the Roebuck, Hind, and several other
Officers of these and other Ships.
THE OATH.
WE the Officers and Common-men belonging to his Majesty's Ships, the
Constant Reformation, the Swallow, the Roebuck, the Hind, etc. Do in the
presence of God and this Company, freely, and unconstrainedly declare, That we
will with our Lives and Fortunes, and to the utmost of our abilities endeavor
to maintain the Glory of God, the Purity of that Religion which is most
agreeable to the Word of God, the Honor, Freedom, and Preservation of His
Majesty, the Privilege of Parliament, and the Liberty of the Subject: So help
us God.




