A DECLARATION Of the GENTRY of the COUNTY of SALOP, Who were of the late KINGS
Party.
WHereas, there is come to our hands, a Declaration of the Gentry of
Somersetshire, who where of the Late KING'S Party, In these words following;
Whereas God, by many Gracious Appearances, has raised the Hearts of this
Nation to a great Confidence, that their Tottering Condition draws near to an
Establishment, by the Resettlement of their Ancient, Just, and Solid
Foundations; We do declare, That in thankfulness to our great and good God, we
hold our Selves bound to look upon, and with humble Longings to wait for, the
Accomplishment of this great work, as the largest National Blessing we are
capable of, (being presented to our Hope without Blood and Ruin) And likewise
that we set up Pillars in every of our Hearts, to the Honor of his Excellency
the Lord General MONCK, who has not as others, either feared, or affected, the
Tyrannical greatness of our Oppressors; But as he undertook the Redemption of
his Country, with singular Resolution, and has carried it on hitherto, with
Vnparallell'd Prudence, So we do not in the least, doubt, but that by the good
hand of God, he will perfect it with Shining and Glorious Sincerity. And
because we find (as we hope) the last Engine of the Enemies of our Peace, now
set on work, for embroyling of the Spirits of the well meaning people of
England, by Suggesting an unchristian Inclination remaining in us, of waiting
Opportunities of Revenge, We do here in the sight of God, and to all the World
disown, and abhor all Animositie and Revengeful Remembrance of Sides and
Parties in the late War, And do promise and resolve to Cooperate within our
Sphere, toward the Public Settlement with such Faithfulness and Constancy,
as neither to occasion or entertain the least Jealousy, upon the Account of
any past difference whatsoever, fully resolving to submit to the Determination
of the Parliament both in Ecclesiastical and Civil Affairs, which we hope will
Remove all occasion of Jealousy and Distinction for the Future.

We Do fully consent and agree with those Worthy Gentlemen in the matter of
their Declaration, that we do unfeignedly join even in every Expression hereof,
And in Testimony of the same have subscribed our Names, Francis Lord Newport
Christopher Roper Esquire Sir Tho. Edwards Baronet Sir Will. Owen Knight Sir Rich.
Prince Knight Sir Jo. Weld Junior Summerset Fox Richard Screuen Francis Thorns
Charles Baldwyn James Lacon Robert Sandford John Blodwell Tho. Acton Tho.
Smalman Edward Lloyd Will. Owen Jo. Straingewaies Tho. Owen Arthur Weaver Edw.
Owen Will. Owen Will. Montgomery.


London Printed for Daniel Pakeman at the Rainbow in Fleetstreet 1660.


