A DECLARATION OF THE Commanders and other Officers OF Colonel HUMFREY'S
Regiment, IN Vindication of Themselves from these Aspertions and Scandals cast
upon them, OF Plotting and Fomenting Discontents, and obstructing the
Disbanding of Supernumeraries.

Imprimatur. Gil. Mabbot.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Tyton at the sign of the three Daggers near the
Inner-Temple-Gate in Fleet Street, 1648.

A DECLARATION Of the Commanders and other Officers of Colonel HUMFREY'S
Regiment, in Vindication of themselves from these aspertions and Scandals cast
upon them, Of plotting and fomenting discontents, and obstructing the
Disbanding of Supernumeraries.
ACcused Innocence may crave so much liberty as to speak for it self, and we
hope a just Vindication of our late proceedings is both convenient and
necessary. Were not our Enemies powerful, and the accusations guided over with
pretended truth, we had not appeared in public; but things falling out as
they do in the fomicture of time, our expectations being raised for a better
construction of our actions our silence had been our sins, and we justly
culpable of so gross a neglect.

We therefore in behalf of our selves and Regiment declare as follows.

I. Whereas we understand that diverse suggestions of an high nature to the
Honorable Committee of Lords and Commons at Darby-House have been transmitred
against us, and from them to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, of obstructing
the business of disbanding, as if we had plotted a combination to the
fomenting an ill spirit amongst our Soldiers. We in the sincerity of our
hearts affirm to the World our ready submission to the Authority of
Parliament, and Commands of his Excellency. We were not so unwise, having by
the blessing of God so many years with all humble subjection owned the
Commands of the State, now at one Exit to stain the honor of that
faithfulness with a non-obedience.

II. Although we hear of a discontented party, men who love to fish in
troubled waters, yet as formerly they dissented from the Army and us in our
concurrance with it, so none can remonstrate our dislike of their proceedings,
though neighboring to us, and that we are so far from entertaining their
design, which if it had been mentioned to us, they should have had nothing but
discovery and opposition from us, and this our last Summers actions
sufficiently taught them as the Parliaments Call gave both edge and action to
our swords, so we shall willingly sheathe them at their command,
notwithstanding any invitation to the contrary.

III. That although some dissatisfaction has met us in the way of disbanding
(fire being struck supposing us a tynder, thereby to reduce us to ashes) yet
the Eagle stoopes not to Flies, and such rebbes shall not turn us out of the
way of our obedience, by which we shall serve the public, which is our maine
end, and frustrate some ends of our contriving Enemies, though it may be
advantageous to them in their private Interests.

IV. We are in a ready way of disdanding, our Accounts are stating, Orders
have been and shall be observed to the very last, and we hope 'twill not be
long ere the work be finished, Peace being brought home upon the wings of
Victory, and it is one comfort to have a share in that Peace, in the obtaining
of which God has been pleased to make use of our blood and labor. If ever the
Clouds gather again, and that spirit begins to work which we have now laid, or
any other in opposition of the Parliaments Authority, and his Excellencies
Commands, though disbanded, yet upon a call from the Parliament we shall
willingly engage again, being very ambitious of the houour to be styled the
Faithful Servants of our English Parliament.

January 30. 1647. Colonel John Humfery. Liev. Col. John Blackmore. Major
William Piggit. Captains
William Brown. Anth. Gardner. Jonathan Humfrey. Edward Tyson. Anth. Basket.
Tho. Prichet. William Jones.



FINIS.

