THE DECLARATION Of the Citizens of LONDON, In Answ^r To the Demands and
Proposals of the Committee of the House of COMMONS, con^erning a Personal
Treaty with the KINGS MAJESTY.

And their Resolution touching the disposing of H^^ MA^ESTIE^ Royal Person, in
case the King and Parliament does not agree.

Likewise, the Acts and Resolutions of the Honourab^e Count a^ Guil^-Hall,
c^ncerning the Cities Engagement to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's
Royal Person.

REad in the Honorable Court at Guild Hall, and appointed to be forthwith
pri^ted and publ^shed.

MICHEL.



blazon of the City of London, consisting of a shield bearing the cross of St.
George (patron saint of England) with a sword (emblem of the martyrdom of St.
Paul, patron saint of London) in the first quarter of the shield

July 15 London, Printed for G. HORTON, MDCXLVIII.

The Declaration and Propositions in the name of the Commons of England, to the
Committee of the Common Council of the City of London, concerning an Agreement
between the King, Parliament, City, and Kingdom.
THe Commons of England assembled at Westminster, having received several
Petitions from the City of London, and the Counties adjacent, for a safe and
wel-grounded peace between the King and His People; for the effecting whereof a
Committee was appointed to treat with a Committee of the Common Council of the
City of London, for bringing of the Kings Majesty to a Personal Treaty, to the
end, that all differences may be composed, and this distracted and languishing
kingdom, settled in a peaceable and flourishing condition; the Debates, Results,
and proceedings at Guild Hall, between the Members of the House of Commons, and
the Common Council of the City of London, are here inserted verbatim, Viz.

The said honorable Committee did desire that the Military Forces, and the
Court of Common Counsel, would satisfy them what they intend and mean by
those words in the Petition of the Military-Officers, wherein the petition of
the Common council to the Parliament do concur, viz. That the King and Parl.
may meet and treat with honor, freedom honor, and safety, according to the
ancient fundamental constitutions of this Kingdom.

To this the Committee of the Common council made answer as follows, viz. By
these words, we m^an, That the King and Parliament may meet and treat free from
force or violence, which we conceive to be according to the ancient Fundamental
constitutions of this kingdom.

The said honorable Committee did further desire, that ^he Committee of Common
council would satisfy them, what is meant by these words, viz. That they will
defend His Maj. Royal Person and the Parl. during the Treaty, according to the
Covenant.

The Committee of Common council did give Answer thereunto as follows, viz.
By those words To defend the King and Parl. according to the Covenant) we
mean, That during the Treaty, we will defend the King and Parliament (as much
as in us lies free from all force and violence.

The said honor^bl^ Committee did further desire, that the Committee of Common
counce^l should satisfy them what they intend and m^an in the petition of the
Military Officers, by the word [Freedom] in the last clause, and likewise what
they mean by these words otherwise interrupt.)

To this the Committee of the Com^on council gave the several answers
following, viz. By the word (Freedom) we understand free from force and
violence, and by the words (otherwise interrupt) we mean all hostile forces
what; soever; the which answers were approved of by this Court.

The said honorable Committee did further propound, that in case the Parliam.
shall make choice of this City to be the place of the Treaty, and that the
Common council on the behalf of the City, do engage themselves to defend both
King and Parl. from violence during the Treaty, Whether the City will maintain
their Guards at their own charge.

To which the Com^ittee of Common Counsel did answer, that the same being a
matter of charge, must be resolved by Common council, and that they would
acquaint the Common Council therewith; concerning this question, this Court
did take the same into their serious consideration, and after some debate had
thereupon, this Court declared, that if the said intended Treaty be in London,
that then the City will for the present defray the charge for the maintaining
of the Military Guards for the purpose aforesaid, du^ing the Treaty, and
afterward refer themselves to the King and Parliament for satisfaction thereof.

The said H^nour^ble Committee did further propose, that in case the King shall
not consent and agree to such things as shall be propounded and insisted on by
both Houses of Parliament, in this Treaty for a sa e and well grounded Peace,
[whether they will undert^ke and engage that the Person of the King shall be
disposed of, as both Houses of Parliament shall think fit.]

To which the said Committee of Common Council did answer as follows, viz.
Under the favor of this Honorable Committee, we c^nnot understand by the
Order of the Honorable H^use of Commons, which was delive^ed unto us for this
Treaty that there is any thing the^ein men^ioned, tending to that which is by
this Honorabl^ Committee propounded, concerning the delivery up of the King in
case the King and Parliament did not agree.

And the said Honorable Committee did further declare, That they were not
satisfied with this answer concerning the disposing of the Kings person in case
the King and Parliament did not agree; and did expect a further answer.

To which the Committee of Common council did answer and say, That they would
acquaint the Common council therewith; concerning which prop^si^ion, this
Court did take the same into their serious consideration, and upon a full and
large debate thereupon, did declare, that in case the said intended Treaty
shall be in London, and that His Majesty and His Parliament should not agree
(which God forbid) then they conceive themselves bound to submit to the wisdom
of both Houses of Parliament.

The said honorable Committee did likewise desire, That the Committee of Common
Council, and the Military Officers, should satisfy them in what manner, and
by what means they will make good their engagement, by defending the King and
Parliament against all violence.

To which the Committee of Common Counsel made answer and propounds as
follows, viz. We do declare, and we are ready according to our Engagement,
(as much as in us lies) by the Trained Bands of the City, and the late Lines
of Communication to guard and defend the King and Parliament from all force and
violence. And to the end that we may be enabled to perform the same, we do
humbly offer, That the Ordinance for the uniting of the Military Forces within
the late Lines of Communication, and the Parishes of the Weekly Bills of
Mortality, to the Forces of the City, to be one entire Militia, may be speedily
passed.

That the Militia may be enabled to raise such other forces as they shall find
needful, to carry them through this service; And that no other forces may be
raised, or made use of within this City and late Lines of Communication, but by
Authority of the said Militia by consent of Common Council.

To consider that our dangers are either from without or within, and therefore
propounded, viz. For those without, that for our better security in guarding
the King and Parliament, we desire that some course may be taken as shall be
thought fit by Wisdom of Parliament, that no Forces in Arms may come within
30. miles of London during the time of the Treaty; And for those within, that
what person or persons soever shall make any Tumult, Insurrect on or
disturbance, during the time of this Treaty, after Proclamation made, it shall
be death.

That if the wisdom of Parliament shall think fit, that none that have born
Arms against the Parliament, or have or shall contribute thereunto, shall be
permitted during the said Treaty to come within 30. miles of London, without
leave of the Parliament had or to be had.

Concerning this desire or proposition of the said Honorable Committee, this
Court does approve of the Answers thereunto and Propositions made touching the
same, And this Court does Order that the said Committee of Common council
shall communicate unto the said Honorable Committee, the aforesaid Answers and
Propositions of this Court to be by them presented unto both Houses of
Parliament. And also to d^clare unto them, that it it is the humble desire of
this Court, that the said Treaty may be with all expedition, for the preventing
of further inconveniences. And likewise that this Court will do their
endeavors (if the s^id Treaty be in London) for the finding out of some
convenient place within the City for that purpose, and such other accomodations
as shall be fitting.

It is ordered by this Common council, That the Common-councel-men and
Commanders, or such as they shall appoint, shall within their several
Precincts, either by calling all the Inhabitants before them, or by going from
hou^e to house receive their concurrence to the said Engagement by subscription
of their Names.

MICHEL.

Commune Concilium tent. in camera Guildhald. civit. London, duodecimo die
Julii, 1648. Annoque Regni Domini nostri Caroli nunc Regis Angliae, etc.
Vicesimo quarto.
IT is Ordered by this Court, That the Committee appointed by the Common
Council the 6 day of this instant Ju^y, to confer with the Commit^^e assigned
by Order of the House of Commons, concerning the engagement of this City for
the safe^y of King and Parliament, during the intended Tr^aty, shall forthwith
take care to disperse unto the Aldermen, Deputies, Common Counsel men, and
Commanders in the respective Wards within this City, the Acts and Resolutions
of this Court touching the same Engagement passed the 11. day of this Month,
etc.

Michel.

FINIS.

