A DECLARATION OF The gallant Service performed by the thrice worthy and
faithful Minister of the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST, Mr. HVGH PETER'S, In the
West of England: Concerning The bringing in of the IRISH Army, to the
obedience of the PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND.

ALSO, Another DECLARATJON sent from the Marquess of ORMOND, to the Lord
INCHIqVIN, General of the Parliaments Forces in Ireland; concerning the CROWN
of ENGLAND.

With a more full and exact Relation of the several Victories obtained by the
Marquess of Ormond, the L. Inchiquin, Sir Charles Coot, and General Monroe,
against General Preston, Genesis Machart, and Genesis Oneal, since their besieging of
the City of DVBLIN.

Brought over by the last Post.

London, Printed for Richard Woodnoth, and are tobe sold at his shop at the
Sign of the Star in Cornwall, 1646 Nou: 27

A DECLARATION OF THE Gallant service performed by the thrice worthy, And
faithful Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, Mr. Hugh Peter's at Chester.
SInce the beginning of Englands great Divisions, and her intolerable
sufferings and calamities, it is not to be forgotten, nor buried in oblivion,
but to be kept in everlasting Memory, the infinite and wonderful mercies of
GOD, continually made manifest to Englands Inhabitants; for when this Kingdom
were almost overrun and destroyed by the Malignants, Papists, and their
Adherents; yet it so pleased the great God of Heaven (that in the height of
their pride and ambition, when their inveterate sword were drawn, and their
potent Army raised) to take his Cause into his own hands, stirring up some
Heroic Champions, and undanted* Spirits, that in a short time he were pleased
to crown them with victory, and make them Instruments of a blessed and happy
peace, by sheathing the sword, and stopping the effusion of blood, which has
for many years run down in streams through the Bowels of this bleeding
Kingdom.

But, because I will not deviate too far from my ensuing Discourse, nor
trespass too much upon the Readers patience, I will proceed to the main
Branch, and give you a hint of the thrice worthy, and gallant Example of our
Times, Mr. HUGH PETER'S, that unparalled and faithful Minister of the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, whose prayers for England Were acceptable in the sight of God,
that from the beginning of these unhappy Wars, to the very end and period,
he never ceased, but with a resolute and undanted spirit hazarded both life
and lmbes for the advanecment of the Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, and the utter ruin and extirpation of the Church of Rome.

For when he had performed his utmost endeavors for the establishing of this
afflicted Kingdom in peace and unity, he had an earnest desire to persist
still in the same cause, and not to leave off (so long as possible he could)
till he had seen a final end of the Enemies of the Church of COD.

And therefore with a Gallant Resolution, betook himself toward the West of
England, where nothing was wanting (that in him lay) for the expediting of that
happy Work, but with all vigilance and industry moved and stirred up the
People to lend their aid and assistance toward the relief of their poor
distressed Brethren in Ireland.

And at the last pleased God to move the Peoples hearts to comp^ssion, and to
contribute the sum of fifteen hundred pounds toward the relief of bleeding
Ireland.

He were not only vigilant and industrious in this Work, but also very careful
in getting of the Soldiers together, and all other provisions and necessaries
for their transportation; but also stirred them up to faithful service,
putting them in mind, that it was the Cause of CHRIST, which they had now
engaged themselves in, desiring them to be true and faithful to the Trust
reposed in them, and to go on with undanted spirits, and gallant resolutions,
that so they may become victorious and tryumphant, by routing the Armies of the
Mighty, and quelling the pride of the most insolent and bloud-thirstie Papists.

Thus having gathered a gallant number of horse and foot together (consisting
of four hundred horse, and two Regiments of Foot) and waiting a long time in
expectation for wind, intended to cross over to Dublin with them.

But the wind being cross, he went back from the water side to Chester, where
he declared himself to the Major, Alderman, and Recorder, in this mannet; viz.

That it was his earnest desire, that there might be a Day of Humiliation set
a part, for Fasting and Praying, humbly beseeching the Lord, to hearken to
their requests and desires, for a fair gale, that so their present Design
might be no longer detarded, but that they might have a free and speedy passage
to Dublin, for the relieving of the distressed Protestants.

Whereupon a day being set a part, and with one unanimous consent joining all
in prayer together, it pleased the great God of Heaven to hearken to their
prayers, and grant their requests:

For, whilst they were in prayer, it pleased the great Jehovah of Heaven to
send them a fair wind, where the Commanders and Soldiers took their
opportunity, and hoysted sail, and are now landed safe at Dublin. But the said
Mr. Peter's were left behind, for the performance of some good service in
England, and expediting the work in Ireland.

But because I will not leave you altogether unsatisfied of the affairs of
that Kingdom, I shall here insert the state and condition of the British
Army, as follows.

Sir Charles Coote with a gallant party, has joined with some of the Marquess
of Munrowes horse, General of the Scottish forces, and it is supposed, will
forse their passage through the Rebels quarters, and join with the Lord
Jnchequeen, who has also a gallant party; which if they do, they will much
endanger Prestons, and Macharts Armies, that lies at a distance from Dublin;
for since the landing of the English at Dublin, they have been somewhat
discouraged, and dare not make their near approaches, as they did formerly.

The Rebels are about 12000. strong, and now keep their randezvouzes some 10.
miles from Dublin.

They have as yet 11. Counties in their possession, that have not tasted of
this War; but Sir Charles Coote with his forces makes a near approach
toward them, and is thought will be amongst them very suddenly.

Since the Rebels besiegeing of the City of Dublin, the Protestant forces have
been very active abroad in the Rebels quarters, and has taken diverse Arms,
and Ammunition, with great store of Cattle, viz. The Lord Inchiquin, has been
amongst the Rebels in the Province of Munster, and has forced them to
contribute great sums of money, to him, for the payment of his forces, having
the compleatest and greatest Army on foot for the Parliament, then any other
Generals.

The Marq. of Ormond has declared himself to the L. Inchiquin, That he is now
resolved to prosecute the war against the Irish, for preservation of that
Kingdom to the Crown of England.

Sir Charles Coot, and General Monroes Horse have joined together, and has
performed gallant service in the North of Jreland, since the Rebels advance
toward the City of Dublin. The Marquess of Ormond has not been backward, but
continually in actual service: for since the Rebels near approach to Dublin,
he has made many sallies out, and has not returned in but with great Prize.
Their Horse skirmish daily. The Enemy sometimes retreats, and at other times
gains ground. They have taken the Nasse, but have lost many other Garrisons
in several Counties.

FJNJS.

