THE DECLARATION OF THE COUNTIES OF YORK AND LANCASTER, CONCERNING, The KINGS
MAJESTY, and both Houses of PARLIAMENT, and their unanimous Resolutions,
touching the proceedings of the Essex, Surrey, and Kentish-men. As also
touching the Northern Army.

WITH, The proceedings of Sir MARMADUKE LANGDALE, and his advance from BARWICK,
and joining with a body consisting of 8000. in WESTMERLAND.

AND, The Votes of the House of Commons concerning a Treaty with His Majesty,
and the manner thereof.

LONDON, printed for W.R. 1648.

AN EXACT RELATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF The KENTISH Men.
SIR,
I Am sorry that I have no better news to salute you with, then our sad
divisions, by which we are much distracted, you may make as slight of it as you
will in London, but I can assure you, I fear the conclusion will carry sorrow
enough.

The Petition is daily signed by additionall hands, the number is great that
have joined in it.

Since their seizing of Rochester, and the Magazine, (which it was thought had
been well over on the last Lords day at night, and that they would have been
satisfied) they have increased, diverse, both Gentlemen, Servants, Soldiers,
and men of all sorts come in; and stand upon their defense.

There are also diverse others, gathered at Maydstone, and in several other
places of this County. And many or them are armed.

They say that they will have the King to come to London, and a Treaty. And the
Army of Sectaries (as they call them) disbanded.

They have seized on a packet of Letters, that came from the Committee of the
N^vy; and other Letters that were sent from the Vice Admiral Rainsborough, to
the Parliament, caused them to be opened, and read them; and delivered many of
the Letters back again.

They stop diverse p^ssengers, and examine them, but let them go again, without
doing them hurt.

But for Soldiers they put all out of the Country, and permit none except only
such as comply with them.

And they have prevailed so fair with the Horsemen of the Country, that they
are almost all the Troop gone in to join with them. And the Trained Bands are
too cold to oppose them. And they will grow now (for ought I see) too numerous,
if speedy course be not taken.

They intend their randezvous, as is given out in these parts, next week at
Black heath, and the Committee know not what to do, nor where to sit in safty.
Upon the rumor of Prince Charles his being come to Sa^wich, (which was at first
believed, and many labor still that it may carry credence) many came in out of
a pretended affection to them, and it was rumoured that he was come over to
join with them to release the King, and bring him safe to London.

But we are since satisfied that it is not Prince Charles but a poor rascally
fellow, not fit for Gentlemen's company, The Officer of the ship that carried the
Prince away, was to see him, and saying he was not the Prince, the fellow told
the Mayor that he came to kill him, and desired he might be secured, which was
done accordingly, and others are committed also for saying that he is not the
Prince.

A great deal of money is sent in by several persons of the County to him,
And he fares like a Prince, And still stands stiffly in it, that he is prince
Charles. He cam^ hither with poor clothes, and a course dirty shirt, but he
had other apparel provided presently.

If the Parliament sent for him, I know not whether those who are risen in this
County will let him go, for (so far as I can understand) he was appointed by
the Royalists, to encourage the Country, and join with them to disturb the
Parliament.

There are in Rochester, and the parts hereabouts (I do verily believe) at the
least a thousand that are risen, besides their interest in some Seamen; and
others at Maydstone, and other parts.

Here are abundance of Ordinance, and many ships, a great number of Arms,
much powder in the Ships, the Sovereign near, if some speedy course be not
taken herein, it may be repented when it is too late. God send us all well
settled.

Chattum May 23. 1648.
A Declaration of the Counties of York and Lancaster.
SIR,
HEre has been several meetings in these parts, and the Inhabitants of the
County, have unanimously declared, that they will stand firm to their first
principles, for the defense of King and Parliament, and that they will use
their utmost endeavors, for the preservation of their peace and liberties, and
that they will oppose all forces whatsoever, that shall attempt the obstructing
thereof. We hear also that the West Riding of the County of York, have
declared to the same effect, and that they are resolved to proceed in
pursuance thereof. Here is no little admiration of the proceedings of the
Essex, Surrey, and Kentish men; but notwithstanding all which, the well
affected party are resolved to maintain their first grounds and principles. We
hear that the Parliament of Scotland adjourned the 11. Instant. D Hamilton,
etc. are gone into their several Principalities to raise men. Forty days pay
at the Randezvouz, and then shift for themselves. It continues that Fife and
Angus are as resolute to give non assistance (as the honest Zealanders are
against the peace with Spain) and will not raise one man, whereupon it was
ordained that every footeman that refused should pay 10. l. and every one
charged with a horse refusing, 20. l. whether Scots or Sterling we know not.
They talk of raising the 4th man through the Kingdom. A list of all the
Officers intended for the Scots expedition might be inserted; but until its
known who will hold, its no great matter, June 1. the Parliament sits, and by
that time their Army is to be ready, at least they give out so, to make you
come off from your high demands of the Kings Majesty. The 11. Sir Marmaduke
Langdale, with about 160. horse went from Barwick, all along the Scottish side
of Tweed to Carlisle, neither hurting, nor was hurt; leaving in Barwick only
500. foot: He is to join with Sir Phillip Musgraves forces in Cumberland and
Westmerland, who are already 8000. which with Sir Marmadukes will make as great
an Army as was in Wales, and no doubt stand together; for Sir Philip is so
popular, that men fl^cks to him from those par^s, and all about; he does what
he pleases yet. The Sheriff of the County is fled to S. Forbrits Island
(which is sir Watfort Lawsons) with the Magazine, where also is 20 p^eces of
Ordinance formerly removed from Carlisle; there is no passing to the Island but
by B^a^, the water being 5. or 6. fathom deep, and they have taken the Boat
with them, yet its b^lieved they will one way or other gain it before relief
can come; the Sheriff has sent hither for relief, but how we shall be able
to send it [so long are you before you send any to us] we know not. The news
of Laughorns defeat came seasonably to those parts, not only to raise the
spirits of the Parl. friends, but to daunt the disaffected, which was declared
with Thanks in Pulpits; with ringing of bells after, and other expressions of
joy. We are also comforted a little by the resolutions of Lancashire, who have
no mind to let in any of the Musgrave or Langdale party, and for that end have
made good all their straits and passages.

They of Barwick have put men into Hagerston Tower. The County of
Northumberland is indifferent quiet having no enemy in Field. Two Troops of
horse lie at Anwick, and two Companies of Foot; Capt. Pie is in Warkworth
Castle with a considerable force: Cartington being not tenable, the men in it
were called of, and the house dismantled: the Royal party had a design upon
Hartle-Poole but were prevented; and we have Garrisoned it. Mr. Barwise, and
Mr. Cholmsey are prisoners in Carlisle still Mrs. Barwise and the Sheriffs wife
are come on foot hither, being plundered of all: this Town will not be got to
act for Par. what ever they may against it. The enemy begin their old way of
plundering and where ever they find any Ministers put in by Parl. they leave
them as bare as they can, being resolved if ever it lies in their way to pay
that Tribe to the full. The papists rise also in all places, and though they
can have no command, yet they will be Volunteers. There is 4 Regiments of horse
to be raised in these parts, but if forces come not with the Genesis to encourage
the Countries, they will not dare to proceed with any vigor. Col- Charles
Vane, son of Sir. Hen. Vane raises a Regiment of horse, and secures Rabie
Castle, he has 4 good Troops already, The great comfort and support of the
Parliaments friends in all these parts, by our Governors coming, is
wonderful; and truly so honestly and resolutely does he carry himself, that if
forces once come, there is no doubt many will show their good affection, that now
mean it, but think it not discretion to show is.

The Commons considered of a Treaty with his Majesty, and voted, That if he
grant the Militia, settle Religion, and recall all Proclamations and
Declarations against them, they will treat with him for other things.

Colonel Whaleys Regiment is commanded back from the North, and are to quarter
about Stains.

Imprimatur

G. M

FINIS.

