A DECLARATION OF THE ARMY CONCERNING Lieut. Colonel JOHN LILBURN; AND Their
Resolution to establish the People in all their just Rights, Liberties,
Privileges, and Freedoms.

With the Remonstrance, and Petition, of the Officers and Soldiers, Citizens
and Contrymen, Rich and Poor; With all the distressed and oppressed People
of England; To the Parliament.

Together with their Propositions and Desires; And a gallant way propounded,
for the taking off all Taxes, a time prefixed; the uniting of all Parties; the
establishing of Peace; and making Trade free.

Imprinted at London, for G. HORTON, 1652.

A DECLARATION OF THE ARMY
To the Parliament of England; concerning Lieut. Col. John Lilburn; And the
humble Petition of the Citizens of London, the freeborn Denizens in the
respective Counties, Poor and Rich; and all sorts, with all the Distressed and
Oppressed People of England.
THe Officers and Soldiers in the Army, having received Advertisements of the
heavy Censure which L. Col. Lilburn (at present) lies under, a Council was
called, and after a large Dispute, many declared their ardent affection, To
stand and all with so great and faithful an Assertor of England's Liberties.
Others resolved, To submit their Wills, to the Will of the Power that imposed
the Sentence, declaring, That they will leave no means nor dangers unattempted,
to establish the People in the fullness of their Liberties and Freedoms. Which
cordial Result, re-minds me of that most excellent and emphatical Petition of
the freemen of England, to the Parliament; A Copy whereof follows:

The humble Petition of Officers and Soldiers, Citizens and Contrymen, Poor
and Rich, and all sorts, etc.
SHOWS,
THat it being the work of Nature, Reason and Christianity, by which we shall
be judged in the last Day, ( Mat. 25.) And the very bottom of all pretenses in
all Corporations and Councels, To cloth the naked, feed the hungry, visit the
sick, and relieve the oppressed: All former Laws, statetes, and consultations
having been of small effect hitherto: houses of Correction being more apt to
make men (from being poor) to become Vagabonds and Beggars, by taking from them
the Repute of so much Honesty, as not to be entrusted with employment; and
conveying into them a further impudency, or desperateness (as by experience is
manifest) and many having of late years perished for want of Necessaries: The
Lord having now put into your hands a present opportunity, of adding this great
Work to all the mighty works which he has done by you.

May your Honors be pleased to grant to your Petitioners (all due respects
being first had to your great losses and damages, out of Delinquents Revenues)
or so many of them as shall be thought sit, and to all the poor of England, the
remainder of what is due upon public Accounts. 2 All or so much of the
Commons, Forests, Chaces, etc. as is due unto the Poor. 3 All Mines not wrought
on at present, all drowned lands, lands deserted of the Sea, or the like, they
agreeing for what is due to any Owner. 4 The sole benefit of all Manufactures,
Engines and Inventions either by Sea or Land, by your Petitioners brought into
Use in England. 5 All Parish Collections, and concealed or abused Charities,
with power to search all Records, Wills, Church-books, and books of Accounts to
that purpose, gratis: to be as a public Treasure of the Land, for all
public Designs, in one common joint Stock.

And some of your Petitioners will put in sufficient security; 1 To provide all
necessaries for the Army. 2 To pay the Arrears of the Army within 5 years. 3 To
take off all Taxes within one year, except Customs. 4 To pay all the debts of
the public Faith which remain due at 6. per Cent, within 10 years. 5 To set
up a public Banck, as in Amsterdam, Venice, and other places. And if your
Honors shall think good, to grant the Fishings, Customs, and Revenues of the
Navy, ando. then your Petitioners will undertake to maintain a constant Navy at
Sea, and to secure the Merchants at 1 per Cent, a month, for the narrow Seas. 2
To take off the Customs from unwrought Materials and Commodities, and Food and
Ammunition imported, and lay them upon unwrought Materials and Commodities, and
Food and Ammunition exported. 2 To take off all Customs from Manufactures
exported, and lay them upon Manufactures imported.

Thus may your Honors be eased of great Burdens; be free to other great
affairs; Take away all Taxes and Groanings of the people; Reconcile all
parties; Gain the love of the people; Make Trade free; Establish the peace of
the Nation; Establish your own peace before God and Man; And bring down the
blessings of God abundantly upon all your faithful Endeavors.


The Freemans Appeal.
As for my own part I am a freeman; yea, a free Den^zen of England; and I have
been in the field with my sword in my hand, to adventure my life and my blood
(against Tyrants) for the preservation of my just freedom; and I do not know
that ever I did an act in all my life, that disfranchised me of my freedom; and
by virtue of my being a freeman (I conceive) I have as true a right to all the
privileges that do belong to a freeman as the greatest man in England
Whatsoever he be and the ground and foundation of my freedom I build upon the
grand Charter of England, which is published and expressed in the 9 of HEN. 3.
Chap. 29. which I humbly crave leave to illustrate as follows, viz. That to
freeman shall be taken or imprisoned; or be diseised of his freehold or
liberties; or free Customs; or be outlawed or exiled; or any wise destroyed:
Nor we will not pass upon him, nor condemn him; but by lawful Judgment of his
Peers; or by the Law of the Land; we will sell to no man; we will not deny; or
defer to any man either Justice or Right. And the privileges contained herein
are my birthright and inheritance; which privileges have been ratified and
confirmed to the free people of England by the Parliament assembled at
Westmidster; and many Declarations put out against the late King for violating
of them.

And truly, I cannot choose but remind you, That the Law of England is the
birthright and inheritance of the people of England; yea of the meanest as
well as of the richest: And although the Law of England be not so good in every
particular, especially in the administrative part of it, as I could wish it
were; yet till I can see a better, I (for my part) will make much of that which
we have, as the principal Earthly preserver and safeguard of my life, liberty
and property for it, viz. Magna Charta Chap. 29. says, No freeman shall be
taken or imprisoned, or be disseised of his freehold or free Customs, or be
outlawed or exiled, or any otherwise destroyed; nor past upon, nor condemned,
but by lawful Judgment of this Peers; or by the Law of the Land; and that
Justice and Right shall not be sold denied, or deferred to any man. See Sir
Edw. Cook's excellent Exposition upon this in his 2. par. Instit. fol. 46, 47.
etc. Printed by the late forcibly dissolved Parliament for good Law. And
positively declared, To preserve unto the people inviolably their fundamental
Laws and Liberties, in reference to their Lives, Estates, and all things
appertaining thereunto.

A Charge of High Treason is preparing to be exhibited against Mr. Ainslow, a
learned Professor of the Law, and now prisoner in the Presse-yard at Newgate,
for writing and divulging a Treasonable Book against Mr. Attorney General
Prideaux, and diverse other Honorable Members: His Trial is ordered to be upon
Friday the 30 of this instant January. At which time, the Articles of
Impeachment are to be read; which (its believed) will produce an immediate
Sentence, answerable to his demerits, being a matter of great and incomparable
consequence.

FINIS.

