A DECLARATION OF THE HOLLANDERS TOUCHING The late King, and the Commonwealth
of England: With the granting forth new Letters of Mart by the States General
against all English ships whatsoever: And the beating and reviling of diverse
English Gentlemen at the Hague.

Also the Motion of the Dutch Fleet Northwards with an hundred and seven Sail
of Men of War, to find out the English Navy; their taking of two English ships,
and burning another near Scarborough.

LIKEWISE, The Condition of Affairs in France, and the taking of Two hundred
Men and Horse of the Prince of Conde's forces, near St. Clow: With the march of
General Thurenne against the Spanish Army.

July 23 LONDON: Printed for D. G. 1652.

THE DECLARATION Of the HOLLANDERS Touching The late King and the Commonwealth
of England: with the States granting Letters of Mart against the English.
SIR,
SInce the burning down of the Townhouse in Amsterdam, nothing has been heard
almost but mourning and lamentation, with railing against the Governors; where
though the loss be not so much as was before conceived yet it will be great,
and much money will be lost. They know not now where to trust their moneys,
fire has consumed much at home, and the English play their parts abroad; yet
do they wish the English did no more mischief to them then the fire; however so
many losses one upon another makes many of our Merchants to break. Trading
begins to decay, and will undoutedly cease, if there be not a sudden remedy;
for those that having any thing to lose will forbear to trade, and no Goods are
entered, but all is still, and is not poverty and misery the end of this? This
makes the people tumultuous and outrageous threatening death to their Governors
for their tediousness in the public affairs, and say, they have had an
opportunity and would not lay hold thereon. To add to this dejection of their
spirits, reports fly about the Town, and indeed about all the Country, that the
English are gone Northwards, with 70 sail of ships manned with 16000 men, so
that now they fear their Herring Busses, and East India Fleet, not only
poverty, but scarcity two. Now they begin to set all out to sea they can get
together for defense. Many wish for peace, and say, That it were better to
yield to something, then to enter into a war with England, and lose all. But as
many are of a contrary temper, and roar out revenge; we hope (say they) Holland
shall bring forth that rod that shall revenge the innocent blood of the late
King Charles, and be the scourge in the Hand of God to punish the insatiable
covetousness of the English Commonwealth for superiority, for which we are
making great preparations at Sea. And not only their tongues, but their pens
are busy in railing against the English (not only in prose, but in verse too)
calling them Devils, Wolves, Murderers, Bastards, Dogs, and what not?
Something they would be seen to do as well as to say; for the other day three
English Gentlemen walking out of the Hague in the ^vening, were set upon by
many of the Dutch, wh^^ (...) them up and down beating and reviling them, (...)
them Regicides, Serpent-tails, etc. a^^ which passes unreg^rded. It is noised
abroad that we shall have the Prince of Orange in play again; and that the City
of Amsterdam is most desirous, which is worthy of admiration, if we consider
how much that place had like to have suffered by the late Prince. They write
from the Dutch Fleet hither, that they had beaten the English, and forced many
to run a shore, and taken about forty ships, but these we look upon as mere
untruths. By reason of the burning of the Townhouse, the several Tribunals,
seats of Justice and Magistracy* sit in other places of the town for their best
accommodation.

The States General have granted forth letters of Mart a new unto many, whereby
those to whom the said Letters of Mart are granted, are given free and full
power, To fight with, seize upon, sink, burn, and destroy, in what place or
places soever they can or shall happen to meet with them, all, or any of the
ships, or vessels, whether men of war or Merchant men, and Goods of or
belonging to the Commonwealth of England, or any person thereof, coming from
thence, or going to any place whatsoever.

Given at the Hague, July the 20, 1652.

By this you may see what thoughts both Governors and people have of peace
with the English; I shall as often as I may have opportunity offered me, give
you the best intelligence I can of their proceedings, and remain,

Your assured friend, St. Richards
Hague July 24. still. nov. 1652.

A Letter from France.
SIR,
SInce the retreat of the Princes forces into the Suburbs of Saint Victor and
Marcelle (which they did seeing themselves not able to resist the King till the
Arch Du^es forces come) some of the King horse being come over the bridge at
Saint Clow, fell upon some of the Princes forragers, and took 200 horse and
servants (who were cutting Wheat for their Masters horses) together with about
as many soldiers that were for their Convoy, the Kings being two for one.

The Parliament have declared, that the King is a prisoner to the Queen his
mother, and the Cardinal, and that the Duke of Orleans shall be the Kings
Lieutenant General, and employ the Kings power, and his own, to set the King at
full liberty. Since which we hear that the King intends to return to St. Denis
again, that from thence he may go toward Burgundy, because the Normans refused
to accept of him, if not without Mazarine and forces; as for the Forces they
would not make difficult of as many as there be with him now, being but two
thousand, but as for Mazarine they will have nothing to do with him,

The King sent to all the Nobility of this Province, and the most of their
Commons to come together the first day of the next month, and consider how the
enemies of the Kingdom comes in upon them: As the Spaniards, to nothing else
but to t^^ir ruin, which if they do not oppose in time, they may when it is
too late repent it: whether they will obey or no, I know not yet. The Normans
also sent to his Majesty, signifying, that if he hinder their commerce with
Paris, that they will absolutely declare for the Princes. The Prince of Conde
is indisposed these five or six days past, which yet did not hinder him to be
present at the Assembly the last Saturday: He was let blood twice, Saturday and
Monday.

We hear that the Duke of Elboeuf, taken at Chauny, is out of prison upon his
parol to pay 120000 li. Ransom for the prince of Ligne, taken prisoner by the
French in the last battle given at Laus. The said prince was set at liberty
then likewise upon his parol to pay the said Ransom, which was not paid till
now:

Both the French and Spanish Army are marching one against the other, and it is
thought within two or three days they will be about Chaulny, the last place
taken by the Spanish Army as before. The Arch Duke has directed Lorraign to
give assistance to the Spanish Army. The Army in our suburbs here are disposing
to march toward Lagny, Carbeille, Meulun and Meaure, to keep the liberty of
the River for this City.

Turens Army is now near Campaign, having power to fight the Spaniards as he
shall think fit, and having at his departure from St. Denis, promised to ruin
that Army. The Duke of Guise arrived at Bourg near Bordeaux, being set at
liberty upon the Letters from prince Conde to the King of Spain. We expect
another Assembly, whereby an army shall be raised in Paris for the princes, and
money wherewith they shall be maintained, in case his Majesty will not be
advised by Orleance so as to join to Paris.

Paris July 24. 1652.

We have received intelligence that above seventy ships of the Hollanders,
attempted three Merchants ships in Robinhoods Bay, near Scarbrough, they
pursued them close, but two of them run ashore, one was burned, and then the
Dutch steered away Northward with all speed. One of our Scouts sent out to sea
has returned, and says that he was informed by an Hamburger whom he met,
bound for Roan, that upon the North o^ England off Whitby, he the said
Hamburger met with the Dutch Fleet, who called him aboard some of them, where
he remained four hours, their intent was to have gained intelligence from him
of the motion of the English, but he could give them none for that he had not
seen any of them: He says that that they were in all about 107 sail, sixteen
whereof are fireships, ten small Frigates some 8 guns, some ten a piece, above
twenty of them are good firm ships, about thirty or forty guns a piece, all the
rest are of middle size. About twenty of them coasting up and down about
Southwold have taken one or two ships notwithstanding the guns of the town
played against them* Zealand provides more for them, but Corn is very dear
there, it is said that Wheat is at thirteen shillings the English Bushel,
containing eight gallons, yet are they divided some for war, some for peace.

FINIS.

