A DECLARATION Of the further PROCEEDINGS OF THE English Fleet upon the Coast
of Holland, with their falling upon the strong Town of Flushing, the playing of
their great Ordnance upon the Forts and Bulworks; the event and success
thereof, and the drawing their land forces to the seacoast.

Likewise the blocking up of the Texel, by Vice Admiral Pen, the taking of the
great Admiral, wherein was Vantrumo, the plucking down of the Dutch Colors,
and setting up of the English Standard. With the Orders of the States of
Holland thereupon, published throughout the United Provinces.

Together with a Narrative of the last great and lamentable Fight, and the
number killed and taken prisoners on both sides.

LONDON: Printed for Geo. Horton, 1653.

Right Honorable,
SInce our first days Engagement with the enemy, it has pleased the great
Omnisciency of Heaven still to crown every days Action with a more glorious
Victory; and, truly, very opportunely came in his Excellency Genesis Blake to our
assistance, who charged quite through the enemies fleet, on Friday, and made
such an intervale amongst their men of war, that many were seen to sink before
six in the evening: The dispute was very hot, and performed with great
gallantry from ten in the morning til ten at night, by which time, We had taken
1350 prisoners, whereof six Captains, 11 ships, sunk six, and fired three; but
in all the several Engagements we have sunk taken, and burnt about 40, amongst
the rest, the great Admiral of Holland, called he Brederode, in which was
Vantrump, but he narrowly escaped out at one of the Port holes in a Cock-Boat.
We have taken down the Dutch Colors both from the Admiral, and the two Rear
admirals, and have set up the English Ensigns, with the States arms.

We have dispierced their great Armado, and beaten them into their own
Ha^bours, having alla^um'd the whole Country, so that we hear most of the
Boors are up in arms.

The States have Ordered that all the Maritine Towns be reinforced with sundry
companies out of the old standing Regiments, that so they may thereby prevent
the landing of the English. They have also ordered that the several Sluices be
forthwith put in a readiness, for the letting in of the seas, if necessitated
thereunto.

We hear likewise that the States have set forth a Declaration to be published
throughout all the United Provinces, inciting the Burgomasters, and others, to
a general Convention at the Hague, there to consult upon a way, for a
Reconciliation between the two Republics. O what is more wished or would be
more welcome then peace? What is better or sweeter then peace? what is more
splendid and beautiful then peace? Peace is that fair Astraea that linketh men
together in the golden fetters of mutual Amity, and makes them to live as if
their persons being many, their souls were but one. Peace is the harmony of
the world, the smile and ferenity of the earth, the hansel and image of our
happiness in Heaven, the tut^lar Saint of Kings and Princes, the very form or
soul of a Commonwealth, the Nursery of Arts, shortly, a Paradise where all
accommodations for this life and the next do grow.

From aboard the Speaker off of the Willings, June 8. 1653.
Another Letter from the Navy, touching the great fight on Sunday and Monday
last.
SIR,
HAving persued the enemy even to their own Coast upon Friday night, we rode at
anchor at six fatham Water, diverse of the Dutch rode between 3 and 4, and on
Saturday morning expected to have put into harbor; but the Winds were so
cross, that We were all forced to stand off to sea, and on the Sabbath day
about 6 in the morning, We Weather-gaged them, and came up again, letting fly
above 1000 shot at each other; in which dispute, We fired one, and sunk five;
but not without some loss; for it is impossible that such a Conflict should b^
managed with that felicity, as for the Conquerors to escape without any head
being broken. About 8 in the evening they bare up before the Wind for the
Tassel; but could not get in, for Vice Admiral Pen, with 30 gallant frigates
interposed, and so got between them and home. But night approaching, the
dispute ended, and the next morning early They tacked about, and thought to
have escaped; which General Blake perceiving, immediately came up to them again;
so that another desperate fight began, and for many hours it was furiously
disputed; but about three in the afternoon, it pleased God to make us absolute
Victors, and to deliver into our hands, many hundreds of the enemy; the rest
that escaped are miserably rent and torn, some flying toward Ostend. Others,
toward the Wielings, and not 12 left in a company. In the last days
engagement we sunk, seven, and took as many. We laid one of their Admirals
aboard five times, and at last carried her.

The death of General Dean is much lamented, he was shot with a Canon-bullet,
at the very first broad side given by the enemy, as he stood flourishing his
Sword at the head of his ship, having his Arm taken off by the shot, and his
body exceedingly rent and torn.

We are now riding upon the Dutch coast, and have sent many hundred shot into
the Town of Flushing, and Vice Admiral Pen still lies at the mouth of the Texel.

From aboard the Ruby off of the Willings, June 8. 1653.
FINIS.

