A DECLARATION OF SIR JOHN HOTHAMS Proceedings AT HVLL.

And how to prevent an Army coming against the same, he has drowned four
miles round about the Town.

Whereby he stands in opposition against all forces whatsoever, in defense of
the same.

As also a Relation how the County of Lincoln has sent in to their relief
fifteen Carts laden with victual, July 5. 1642.

Ordered that this be printed.

Hen. Elsyng Cler. Par. D. Com.



London, printed for George Thomas. July 8. 1642.

More strange News from Hull.
Being a true Relation of a marching toward Hull with a thousand Men.
SUch has been the Malignancy of evil affected persons about his Majesty,
that they have under many fair pretenses, in defense of his person, and
against all, as they say, that have stood in defiance of the Laws of the Land,
against the Kings Majesty, which they have very contemptuously, and against
both the Houses of Parliament, the City of London, and in fine all parts of the
Kingdom, who are opposers to their so cruel and witched Tyranny, which if not
prevented by the great mercy of God, we are like to undergo the hazard of all
that is dearest unto us; some ill affected persons have been so obvious to the
good of their Country, which has a long time flourished in gr^^ peace and
Tranquillity, which now is exposed to the hazard of ruin: they have sent to the
Lord Digby, the Lord Finch, Windebancke, Piercy, and Iermine, who are near to
York to fight, as they say, for their King, although it is probable they have
since their beginning of their promotion to preferment been the chief
disturbers and raisers of this combustion, which has already begun, and does
daily increase, to the terror and affrightment of all his Majesty's good
subjects: They are now grown to so insolent a head, and so bold aspiring
thoughts of honor and greatness, that they have wholly exposed themselves to
all danger whatsoever, so for their own private ends, though with the ruining
of this Kingdom, they gain their desires, they have already, as making no
doubt but to bring all men under their girdles, and to be at the commands
under a Tyrannical Government, disposed of all men's goods which they bare most
grudge to, and especially the Parliament men, their goods and Lands have they
shared, and most part of the City of London by nomination of their names,
swearing with bitter and damnable oaths, damn and sink them, they will have
their swords sheathed in the dearest heart bloods of all those men whom they
term Roundheads: and in this manner began they their divellish design,
seeing so many stratagems of their wicked inventions, to be frustrate of that
which they expected the event would have been, with a great deal of bloodshed
of their enemies; but it has fallen contray, by the great mercy of God, as
has plainly appe^red by their dealing in Lancaster, Leicester, ^orke, and new
Castle, and also many other adjoining Counties.

Yet for all these, their failing in their expectation, the Divill the arch
enemy to mankind, has not left their thoughts free from conspiracy against
their Country, as this week appeared by their design against Sir John Hotham,
and to have taken the whole Town of Hull, and to that end came 1000. strong
marching near to the Town, to the terror and affrightment of all the
neighboring places, but was by none opposed, for they marched not altogether,
but in several Troops for fear of any opposition, and was to have met near
the Town of Hull, where it was by them intended to have trenched the Town
round, and to have taken whom they thought good, and to have disposed of them
at their pleasure, but so it pleased the omnipotent providence of God, that
they were discovered by Sir John Hotham, and soon discomfited by his drowning
four miles round about Hull, which the Cavilleers soon perceiving, with a
great deal of amazement, ran immediately some one way, some another, some
thinking it were the immediate hand of God to punish this their heinous
offense, others swearing damn and sink them yet to be revenged without the
wonderful mercy of God, they had been both damned and sinked into the water,
which almost flowed upon them.

It is not yet certainly known whether any were drowned or no by reason of
their fleeing one from another in such a manner of distraction, but it is
thought that many of them never went to York yet, nor never intend more to
go, seeing nothing but destruction on all those that seek the desolation of a
whole Kingdom, which God in his good time open all their eyes that they may
see their own destruction either in this world or the world to come, desiring
also a happy union betwixt his Majesty and his high Court of Parliament, and
give him a sight of these, and all his wicked counselors, and the utter
desolation which come by a cruel war, of which we have had a reasonable
foresight of our neighboring Countries of late, Germany and others, which
loss there will not be recovered in a long time, if it please God to send
peace.

Such has been the love of the County of Lincoln to assist the good cause of
Sir John Hotham that since this assault upon Hull, they have sent in fifteen
Cart load of victual, with promises of their best aid and assistance with
their lives and estates to support him, against any opposition.

Whereas several Proclamations, Declarations and Papers, in forms of
Proclamations, have issued in his Majesty's name, commanding Parsons, Vicars,
Curates, Sheriffs, Majors, B^yliffes and other Officers, to publish and
proclaim the same, being contrary to Law, and to diverse O^ders, Ordinances and
Declarations of both Houses.

Be it Ordered and declared by the Lords and Commons in P^rl^^me^t, That no
^her^ff, Major, Bailiff, Parson V^car Curate, or other Officer, shall from
henceforth pub^^sh or procla^m, or cause to be proclaim^d (...) publ^shed, any
such ^rocl^mations, Declarations or Papers which are or shall be contrary to
any O^^^r, O^d ^d^nance, or Declarations of the s^id Houses of Parliament, or
tending to the scandal or d^rog^tion of their pro^e^d^ngs, but shall use all
lawful ways and means to restra^n and hinder the proclaiming and publishing
thereof. And all Sheriffs, Majors Bayl ffes, ^arsons, Vicars and Curates, or
other Officers that have forborne or refused, or shall forbear or refuse to
publ^sh or pr^claim any such Proclamations D^cla^ations, or P^pers as
aforesaid, or have or shall hinder the publication thereof, shall be protected
by the power and authority of both Houses of Parliament.

Ordered by the Commons in Parliament, That this be forthwith Printed and
Published.

Hen. Elsing. Cler. Par. D. Com.

FINIS.

