A DECLARATION Of the Faithful SOVLDIERS OF THE ARMY, To all the honest people
of the Nation, showing their Resolution to stand by the Good old Cause, And
maintain the Liberties and Privileges of the SUBJECT;

Formerly Printed in Canting Language, and now Reprinted with Explanations in
the Margent, for the better information of all such as desire to look to the
bottom of their DECEITS.

Numb. 16.13. And Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, gathered themselves together
against Moses, and against Aaron, and said unto them, You take too much upon
you, seeing all the Congregation is holy every one of them, and the Lord is
among them, wherefore then lift you up your selves above the Congregation of
the Lord?

1 Samuel 10.27. But the Children of Belial said, How shall this man save us? and
they despised him, and brought him no presents, but he held his peace.

To rant and mouth is not so near a way,
To cheat your Brother, as by yea and nay.
LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1659. May 5.

A Declaration of the Faithful Soldiers of the Army, to all the honest people
of the Nation, showing their Resolution to stand by the Good Old Cause, and
maintain the Liberties and Privileges of the Subject.
WHereas it has pleased God, out of his gracious Providence, to manifest to
the good people of this distracted Commonwealth, From which the Authors of this
Declaration have revolted.
his Rule and Government amongst us; we do now appeal to the great God, And who
holds them in a chain, that they can go no farther than he pleases to suffer
them.
whom we must own as the great Commander of our Armies, and General of our
Forces, acknowledging him to be the first Worker amongst us.

By many signal tokens it has been made apparent, Whilst they stood to their
first principles, and were obedient to their Governor.
that God has owned in a most especial manner the poor Soldiery of this
Nation, which must needs strike real reflections upon the Consciences of all
sober and honest men, That is, till they rebelled, and no farther.
who have adventured thus far, and have found Jehovah-Jireh, God in the Mount
among us all.

As God has made and appointed us for the general That is, either as a King
makes use of his Armies to destroy his Enemies, or as a Schoolmaster his rods,
to scourge his Scholars to make them more obedient.
good of the Nation, so we do most seriously, with real hearts own the As they
style them, that is, the Quakers and Anabaptists.
Godly of this Nation, and will be a Covert to them, although to the
destruction of our lives and fortunes, if God so pleases for the general good
of them all.

As for the breaches that are amongst us, we As the Authors of them.
claim an interest in them; for the Great God, for our sinful deserts, in our
backsliding from him And in violating the many engagements and protestations,
which they themselves have at sundry times made to their Governor.
, has laid this visitation upon us; and so we must own his most just dealings
with us. The consideration of which, does cause reflections upon our hearts
Which are very good, if they were in sincerity, which (their actions
considered) are much to be doubted.
humbly to own these his chastisements, and to consider these remarkable tokens
of his love: For if we consider the Both to God and the whole Nation in these
disturbances which they have lately made, whereupon (if God be not very
merciful) the inevitable ruin of Religion and all civil Government will
ensue.
unworthiness of our dealings, and the Which they have (to their great
disgrace) too often made, and as often broken.
specious pretenses which have gone along with us under fair glosses, we must
confess, that what distractions are amongst us Are occasioned by their
unnatural rebellion.
, are not answerable to our just deserts; But we know that the dealings of the
Almighty are not to be found out; therefore we confess that we have found God
Far beyond their deserts.
merciful, although we have transgressed, for with him is mercy, that he may be
feared; and he has thus dealt with us, that we might But as yet there is but
little probability that they do ever intend it.
take notice of his long suffering, and goodness to us; to his glory And their
shame and disgrace.
let us ascribe it, and with thankful hearts And with renewed lives, and
serious resolutions of better obedience for the future.
return hearty praise for these great mercies received by us,

And now to come to a further With as much dissimulation as ever.
serious considetation of Gods good dealing with us, we do desire to praise
They endeavor to persuade the people, that the Lord is the Author of their
Rebellions, who are no otherwise united, than as a Company of riotous persons,
who combine together to do some outrageous Act.
the Lord for his uniting of the Army with such unanimity and courage, to stand
for, and maintain the That is, their own private interest and advantage.
Good old Cause so long contended for, and which the Lord That is, when they
kept close to their first principles, which by their ^ebellion they are now far
wide of.
has formerly so much owned, Nothing more true.
although our backslidings might have given cause of a far greater judgment
than has yet befallen us, which we hope will be prevented by our Which must be
after another manner than they now do.
return, and owning our first Principles, with so much cordial affection as is
at this time declared amongst us, although And is very probable will be far
beyond their expectations.
great opposition might be expected: But that God that can throw down at a
blast the loftiest Cedars, can also raise out of the earth small And after make
fuel of them, as he did Nebuchadnezzar, to punish the disobedience of the
Children of Israel, and after punished him for so doing.
shrubs to glorify him, and to do his work; Hereby does plainly appear what
the ends and aims of these fellows are (which is) that all that are higher than
themselves may be thrown down, that so themselves may the better be exalted.
which with heart and mind is so much desired by the faithful Members of the
Army, as is at this day experienced amongst us.

Therefore we pray and hoped it will stir up the faithful of this Nation to
That are bound in Conscience both to God and man to oppose them in their
present undertakings.
this consideration, that although objections may be raised against, and Not so
much as they do deserve.
aspersions cast upon the That is, of Low and base birth.
poor despised instruments of this In English, Rebellion.
Work; yet are we As thieves when they join in a Confederacy to rob; for,
saevis inter se convenit Vrsis.
unanimously resolved to maintain our Which they never intend.
first good principles, and to own the Good old That is self exaltation.
Cause, as we have already testified; first, by our Addresses for the rooting
out of all That is, such as stood faithful to their first Principles and
refused to join with them in their desperate designs.
superfluous and ill affected Members of the Army: and secondly, by our real
desires and concordance with the That is, Hasehigge, Vane, and others of the
same metal.
faithful, known so to be, The only naming of them is Declaration enough to
satisfy any sober person, what their crimes were for which they were turned
out.
which were turned out without any just, or lawful account given therefore.

They take it for granted, that because God does permit them a while, to go on
in their pernicious Courses, therefore (of necessity) he must countenance and
allow them as good.
As God has been pleased to instruct us so far as to begin the work, so we
hope the Lord in his time will perfect the same, for the Which must be either
by their conversion or destruction.
general good and comfort of this Nation; not doubting, but the honest people
of this Commonwealth will take notice that we are not The contrary does very
clearly appear to all that have but one eye to see (except Hewson) but
Hypocrita cupit videri justus.
self-seekers, nor desire to be self-ended, but conscientious in these things;
Which if they did in reality but half so seriously consider, as they do here
seemingly pretend, I doubt not but they would soon give off the course which
they have now undertaken.
assuredly knowing that the Lord judges the most secret thoughts, and that no
practice nor thing formed against God shall prosper, who is able to do his own
work without any instruments at all.

If these fellows had any sparks of Conscience left in them, or did in the
least understand what they say, they would not dare to make such protestations
and invocations of the and of God, their actions being so odious; but I fear I
wrong them to speak of Conscience, to which they have bid farewell many years
since.
Therefore with serious reflections upon Lord to bless these our honest
desires, and to our consciences* we do most humbly implore the It has been the
practice of Rebels in all ages, to cloak their wicked designs with the names of
Religion, and the Glory of God, whose footsteps these men now follow.
go along with us in our hearty endeavors to glorify him: And truly, since
the Lord has been pleased to stir up our hearts in this great work, to the
glory of God be it spoken, we have likewise from the That is, Quakers and
Anabaptists.
Faithful of the Nation Like will to like, as the Devil said to the Collier.
received so great encouragement and concurrence in our desires, That is, in
doing mischief.
in one and the same thing, that it does greatly encourage us. And we hope we
shall with an unanimous courage show our selves for Or in English, for the
throwing down and destroying of Religion.
our good God, For their own private interests.
for the Good old Cause, and Their fellow Traitors.
for the good people of this Nation; to whom we do most As unfeignedly as they
have made all the rest of their protestations.
unfeignedly present these just They are still fixed in their resolutions to do
mischief.
intendments we are fixed upon.

And we likewise return most That is, full of insincerity.
sincere thanks to the The Abetters in their w^^ked designs.
honest people of this Nation, especially to our That is, Cobling Friends, as
Hewson and others.
Cordial Friends in this City, and the places adjacent, for their many Whoever
yet did any action how desperate or pernicious soever it was, that were without
exhortations and encouragements from those of their own opinions.
good exhortations, and the great encouragement we have had from them in these
our proceedings.

And truly we hope the Lord will That is, so far as he intends to use them is
instruments to punish this Nation for their sins.
bless our To do mischief.
real endeavors in these our In English, unhonest.
honest principles; for we are not only desirous to In English, to rebel
ag^^^^^ their Lawful superior, who (they fear) will bring them to condign
punishment for their offenses.
destroy any Arbitrary power that shall oppose us herein, but likewise to be
That is, faithful Brethren in Iniquity.
unanimous for a present applying of our selves to the performance of that we
do declare. And we desire to make these our Which is their shame, and in the
end will prove their confusion.
purposes apparent, hoping that the good people of this Nation will with
serious hearts That is, join together against them.
join with us, as they have begun; and do not question but those to whom we
have access will faithfully own us, and give us encouragement in the same.

These Pharisaical-like applaud their own ways, how repugnant soever they be
to the word of God.
honest Resolutions of ours we thought fit to That the World may see their
knavery.
declare to the good people of this Nation, not doubting but that they will
own, and stand by us, as long as we stand for the Good old Cause* ( Which if
they do expect, and seriously desire, as they do here pretend, let them
speedily forsake their wicked designs, and unfeignedly turn to the Lord with
their whole hearts, and obey the word of God which says, Let every Soul be
subject to the higher powers, for their is no power but of God, and the powers
that be, are ordained of God: whosoever therefore resists the power,
resists the ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation.
desiring the Lord to own us all, and to bring us to the wished effects of our
Spiritual and Temporal desires, for the public good of the Commonwealth; and
in the end to eternallize us in the blessed union and fellowship of himself in
glory, is the hearty prayer and desire of all the Honest and Faithful Soldiers
in the Army.

The Devil often for his servants does his best;
But now since Mortals have the Fiends possessed,
Seek Hell no more, but with worse men compact,
Would thou to life unheard of mischief act.

FINIS.

