THE DECLARATION OF THE LEVELLERS CONCERNING Prince Charles AND Their Treaty
with His Excellency the Lord General Fair-fax; the particulars of another
great Fight; the success thereof, and the number killed and taken prisoners.

ALSO, The Declaration of the Counties of York, Lincoln, Nottingham, Liecester,
and Warwickshire, concerning the Parliament, Army, and Levellers.

TOGETHER With a new Declaration from Scotland, touching Religion, KING and
KINGDOM.

Imprinted at London, for C.W. 27. May, MDCXLIX.

A great FIGHT Between The Parliaments Forces and the Levelers, on Monday last,
diverse killed and taken prisoners, and their Declaration touching Baistoll.
SIR.
COl. Reynolds with the Troops of horse that stuck to him, resolving to oppose
the Levellers, marched toward Banbury, and discovered a prrty commanded by
Captain Thompson marched up to them and the Scouts having met and parlyed,
Colonel Reynolds men brought word to him, that the Lrvellers, desired to know
a reason of their approach and what it was they desired; Colonel Reynolds sent
word he demanded their Cullers, and their Leader so him: this begat a short
parley, and Captain Thompson called a council, but in the mean while some of
the Soldiers slunk away, some one: way and some aanother, some with horses and
some without: They were all of horse both one party and the other; some moved
that Captain Thompson and the Cullers, might be delivered up, but his
Quartermaster said no, they were all equally engaged, and that as they had
joined together, so they might live and dye together: but at last, Captain
Thompson was advised to escape if he could, and accordingly he mounted, and
attempted, to be gone, with his Lieut. and some others; but by advertizement
from the rest, Col. Reynolds had notice thereof, and sent out his Lieut. with
two more after him, who approached near him capt. Thomson wheeled about, and
shot the Lieut. Party dead, the other two being some space behind, they came up
to them, and after a short dispute one of them was wounded, and the other
dismounted, and Thompson and the rest, who are about twenty are gone to those
that disserted col. Scroop. And those that would to come in to col Reynolds,
the rest to march away: and some 60 of them being ill armed went away, and 40
came in to Colonel Rsynolds, the colors were delivered, and Thompsons
corporal and another delivered prisoners, beside some other prison^rs that are
taken. But afterward the Oxford Troop, commanded by Lieut. Rawley. Capt.
Smiths Lieut coming up to join with Thompson (not knowing what was done, nor
of any approach of col. Reynolds against them, but expecting some from Rutland,
and other parts to have joined with them,) col. Reynolds sent out a gallant
Troop, commanded by his Lieut. who in a Parley with them, demanded whither they
marched; they answered to their friends, it was asked who they meant, it was
answered capt. Thopson: hereupon col. Reynolds men charged them, and they
answered them again, some were hurt on both sides, but the Oxford Troop took
some prisoners: After which another party was sent after to pursue them; and
have taken and dispersed them.

But Captain Everard has still a considerable party, and is marching Westward,
to join with the rest of their Brethren in those parts, who in his way on
Tuesday last met with some opposition by the Lord Generals Forces, and after a
sharp dispute many of the adverse party were dissipated and levelled, about
twenty taken prisoners, and almost as many killed.

The m^in B^^y are at Marlborough, whether the L. General sent a Message and
Declaration to them to offer indemnity if they would submit; and in order
thereunto some overtures has been made for a reconciliation, Major White, Major
Gibbons, and Captain Bayley being employed as Commissioners on the Lord
Generals part to treat with them: some progress has bin made therein, but the
Levellers stand upon high terms, and nothing will appease their fury but a new
Representative; their number increases, and many come in to them daily, yet
diverse of the Officers and old Soldiery deserts them. The Country is divided,
in reference to both parties; but that which takes the deepest impression and
influence upon the peoples affections, is, Their declaring for Magistracy,
Libety, and Freedom, their inviting the people into their assistance, under
fair pretenses for Charles the second, and that they intend nothing more then
the restoration of the Commonwealth of England to its just liberty, splendour,
and proprietyy, and to expel and dissipate all obstructive Clouds both in
Church and State; but it i^ apparent that the chief promoters of that des^gn
are Enemies both to Magistracy and Ministry, and that if once they should
become powerful, their little finger would be far more heavier, then the loins
of those who have bin entrusted before them.

Gloocester 14. May, 1649
Right Honored,
THis morning his Excellency the Lord General Fairfax, and Lieutenant General
Crumwell, randezvouzed with their Horse and Foot near Andover, where the Lieu.
Genesis rode to the head of each Regiment, declaring* That He was resolved to live
and aie with them, and that as he had often engaged with them against the
common Enemy of this Nation, so was he resolved still to persist therein,
against those Revolters which are now called by the name of Levellers; not
doubting but that they would as one man unite, and with unanimous spirits
follow him, for the subduing of them, and bringing the chief Ringleaders
thereof to exemplary punishment.

Many declared a great willingness to engage with him: Others rejected it,
saying, they would not fight against their friends: But they are now upon their
march toward Salisbury, for the reducing and bringing of those Regiments to
obedience and subjection that have declared against them: from whence we hear,
that they are resolved rather to die, then yield to any thing which shall
infringe their liberty, or pervert the freedom of their Nativity.

Many of the said party have agreed upon a Declaration, containing these
ensuing heads: First, they declare against the present Parl. and their
proceedings. 2 Against the Council of State. 3 Against the General Council
of the Army. And 4. against the proceedings of the late Court of Justices Their
chief Ring leader is one Capt. Tompson, who was formerly condemned by a
Council of War to be hanged, but by the, goodness and compassion of the Lord
Genesis he was spared: this is the man who draws all men after him, his number is
conceived to be about 400. and in his watch up and down he daily gains new
Proselites to him: On Wednesday last he marched to Coventry where he found
resistance, and the Gates shut against him (demanded if the Gates were so holy
that he might not enter;) and after the exchange of two or three Vollies, he
left the place, and marched thence to Tossiter, where coming in very late at
night, he seized upon captain Farmer the Post master there, who, after they had
carried him as a prisoner up and down with them, they were content to release
him upon his Parol to come up to London to the Council of State, to procure the
release of three of their Brethren, who were taken posting up of their papers
about Banbury; if he could not procure this he was to return as their prisoner
to Banbury.

Some blows have been already disputed near Banbury between 100 of the Lord
Genesis horse and 200 of the Levellers, and after a sharp conflict, the Levellers
declining engagement, retreated toward Oxford, but no great harm done on
either side: there is a body of horse about Oxford ready to join with them,
commanded by Mr. Everard, after uniting, its said they intend Westward.

Some difference has also been in the City of Worcester and the Levellers who
had entered the City forced to retreat out again with the loss of five men: the
General and the Lieutenant General has sent a Letter to the Agitators and
Commanders in chief of the said party, for preventing of the effusion of blood,
and healing of the present breach, and quenching those flames of Discord, which
are ready to break forth in several parts of this Nation; and its hoped a
happy and mutual reconciliation will be embraced, before the involving and
shedding of any more blood within the Bowels of this Nation.

Andover 14 May, 1649. May 15.
Letters from the North say, That the Counties of Yorkshire, Lincolnshire,
Nottinghamshire, Liecestershire and Warwickshire, have declared for the
parliament and Army, and are resolved to unite and associate against those
called Levellers.

The Estates of Scotland have likewise declared General Pluscarden and other
his Associates, and all such as shall join with them guilty of the crime of
high Treason, and prohibit all manner of persons whatsoever to give any manner
of assistance, or countenance the persons aforesaid, under the pain of being
esteemed Rebels, and enemies to Religion, King and Kingdom.

But the business is rather worse then better; for Ogleby, Pluscardy and
Middleton grow numerous, waving the Declaration of the States, and were the
last week at Athol; since which time David Lesley has randezvouzed with his
whole body of Horse and Foot, and is now marched after them.



FINIS.

