THE DECLARATION OF THE COUNTIES OF Worcestershire, Warwickshire,
Hereford-shire, and Sallop, concerning the raising of Forces there for the KING:

ALSO, A Declaration of the City of London, to give satisfaction touching their
atisfaction touching their Desires of a Personal Treaty with His Majesty.

With a List of the prisoners taken at St. Needs, and the names of the
Colonels, and other Officers taken since in the pursuit of the Duke of
Buckingham.

July 13 LONDON, Printed by B. A. 164^.

PROPOSITIONS OF Sir Marmaduke Langdale, to Duke Hambleton, and the rest of the
Scottish Lords, agreed upon at the grand Council, June 30. 1648.
I. TO acquaint their Lordships with the reasons that the Presbyterian party
join not with us, is their confidence we shall not be assisted by the Kingdom
to cleave with us, that they will please to let three Regiments join with us
speedily.

2. To desire that some person who is known to be faithful to Duke Hamiltons
family, may be employed into England to advertise their Lordships of our
proceedings.

3. To certify their Lordships there were nothing wanting on our parts, that
might have engaged Lancashire to join with us.

4. That Sir Marmaduke Langdale desires their Lordships they would contrive how
he may declare, that as the Presbyterian party be encouraged to join with us,
so the Royal party may not be lost.

The Scots Army are to randezvouz to morrow at Dumfreize, and prepare to march
for England the 12. instant, by which they expect to be 12000. besides Maj.
Genesis Monroes men, but I believe they will come short of their number.

Duke Hamilton has finished a Declaration to publish at his coming into
England, to declare for the King and Covenant.

A Letter from Major General Lamberts Quarters.
SIR,
SInce we came into these parts we have taken five Castles from the enemy, viz.
Appleby, Brougham, Graystoke, Rose and Sealby, Rose was taken by storm of 220
Foot, being a commanded party and taken within two hours, the place is strong,
had 40 men in it, the Governor stood and refused to summons, and yet quarter
was given, only one of the enemy slain and one hurt, not one of ours hurt or
killed, Sealby Castle was taken by a party of horse only, they fired but one
piece, and one Trooper going up to the walls, and showing his pistol to them
and threatening what he would do if they sired any more, and that they should
have no quarter, they presently yielded. On Sunday night last our Army coming
to Warwick Bridge four miles from Carlisle, the enemy kept a strong guard of
Horse and Foot there, we were uyon them before they were aware, they left their
gua^d and fled, our forlorn pursued them to the walls of Carlisle, we took 100
prisoners Horse and Foot, and 40 Horse, and gave them so hot an Alarm, being
in the night, that from all their quarters, they run both horse and Foot, to
Carlisle in so great confusion, that if it had been been day we had taken, at
least a thousand of them. They pretend they will not fight till the Scots come
in, and we have received credible information, that three Regiments of Scottish
horse are ready, to join with them, and I think they will do it, do what we
can but when that's done, we shall not refuse to fight with them though they
should be twice in number, we have had miserable marches, and most pitiful
quarters in this barren and undone Country.

We must be forced to remove our storm, neither of which, we would willingly
do, by the former we encourage our enemies, and discourage our Friends, by the
latter, we destroy our selves, in this miserable condition, we are as a
company, of forlorn men neglected and forsaken, having neit^er money clothes
nor victuals for Horse and man, hard marches, hard duty, and at night the high
Canope for our curtain,

Richarley near Carlisle, June, 29, 1638.
Bedford July 10, 1648. SIR,
I believe you have before this can come to your hands received intelligence of
the late action at St. Needs, on monday mor^ing last; therefore I shall be very
brief in that particular, and proceed to what happened afterward, Col Scroop
entered the town about 4 or 5 in the morning, after most of the wearied forces
with the Earl of Holland, had gotten 3 or 4 hours sleep, who being overcome
with sleep, and tired in their march, knowing themselves pursued were not so
vigilant in their quarters as they might have been which was a means to give
the more easy and facile entrance to col. Scroop and his forces, they took the
E. of Holland, sir Gilb. Garrand (a Gentleman which formerly had bin very
active for the King) with diverse other Gentlemen of quality, and about 300
prisoners, 320 horse, and store of arms and pillage, col. Dalbere is either
killed or very dangerously wounded, many were killed on the place, and the rest
fled in two parties, that which went with the Duke is reported not to consist
of above 60 or 70 horse, and about as many more gone with the E. of
Peterborough toward Huntington, and were so closely pursued by col. Scroops
horse that they have taken many prisoners since the first action, among which
is col. Leg, col. Pincher, capt. Hews, and others, and if any have escapt, they
may say gra-mercy horse, the prisoners are as we hear on their march for
London, or to the L. Genesis quarters, which is all for the present he can send
you that is

Bedford July 10. 1648. Your devoted servant, L.R.

A Relation out of Worcestershire of a design to have raised forces foo the
King, Warwickshire, Herefordshire, and what the Counties declared thereupon.
SIR,
IT cannot be imagined with what skill and policy the Cavalier party have acted
in several parts of the Kingdom for raising of forces to renew the first
quarrel, and put it into a new combustion, for which purpose many Agents have
bin employed not only in this county, but also in Hereforashire, Warwickshire,
and other parts of the Kingdom; and although they have bin very private in
their meeting, and listing of men, yet we bless God they are discovered and
some of those which were principal actours herein apprehended, their persons
feured, which may much conduce to the peace and quiet of these parts,
especially if our neighbor Counties do the like, one of the chief in this
County which is suspected to have a hand in this business, is the Lord Dudleys
son, there be also five more apprehnded but they shall be namelesse, till a
fuller discovery, be made of this business, some of them hahaving already
confessed that there was a general design to have raised forces, in all the
Counties of the Kingdom, these Gent. had many private meetings at Bromsgrave
and Kittermaster, and had gotten some forces in a readiness, but the whole
plot being now made manifest the well-affected in these parts declare
themselves against their proceedings, and do utterly abhor their actions, and
say their actions are destructive to the settled Government of this Kingdom.

(...) London July 12 1648.
At a Common Counsel at Guild-Hal it was agreed that the Common Counsel men of
every ward should meet Thursday next and in pursuance of their petition for a
personal treaty in London find out in their respective wards, who will show
themselves for this or other petition; and at a consultation by a Committee of
the Parliament, and a Committee of the City endeavored to satisfy the house
which way they will make good the perticulars, set down in their late petition
presented to the ^ouse for a treaty in London, and declared that they will not
only do their utmost endeavor for preservation of the Kings Majesty, royal
person and both houses of Parliament during the treaty, but in case the said
treaty prove not effective they will live and die with the Parliament according
to their solemn League and Covenant.

FINIS.

