A DECLARATION OF THE Kings Majesty's Army IN THE NORTH OF ENGLAND: CONCERNING,
Their present Design and Engagement for the King, and the re-investing of him
in his Royal Throane.

WITH, Their Resolution touching the late business in Wales, And the burning
of Commissions in the North.

TOGETHER, With the proceedings of Major General Laughorne, and the
Protestation of the British Forces in Wales.

LONDON, Printed for R. W. MDCXLVIII.

THE DECLARATION Of the Kings Majesty's Army in the North of England.
SIR.
SInce the last of the ninth of this instant, we have received exceeding good
news from Wales, that the dismal Cloud is now dissolved, and the insolent
Enemy, almost quit vanquished: for by a post from thence, to Major Genesis
Lambert, our Governor) it was advertised, that the Parliments Party wounded by
Collonell Horton, has given a great Defeat to the Enemy, and routed, and
scattered most of them; insomuch, that he is become Master of the greatest part
of the Principality of Wal^s; news did not a little elevate, and stir up the
hearts of the well affected, in these parts, who rejoiced and tryumphed at the
tidings thereof, looking upon it to be a thing of great consequence and high
concernement; and indeed so it was; for it was the chiefest original of the
now present distractions in the North of England, and the maine course of
moving them thereunto: but the great sticklers there, do now endeavor to make
invisible their former late actions and poceedings; for by intelligence from
those parts (as also the conformation of several parts) we are advertised, that
Col: Gray (formerly a great Commander in the Kings Army) upon the receipt of
these heavy tidings from Wales, changed his resolution from being Lieu: Gen: so
Sir Marmaduke Langdale, of the five Northern Counties, and utterly disserted
that design and service, protesting against the same, We hear also, that one
Lieu: Col: Foggin, has declared against the Designed and Engagement of
Langdale, Glemham, Tildsley, and Musgrave, notwithstanding the Commission
lately given him by sir Marma: Langdale, the design General (by the Prince)
and it is said, that in defiance to to Lengdale, he took the Commission, (in
the presence of diverse Northern Gentelmen,) and threw it into the fire,
saying, that if he had Langdale there, he would quell his fiery spirits, and
use his utmost endeavors for the suppressing of his insolent carriage, both
toward King, Parliament, and Kingdom. Sir, this is all for the present,

York 11. of April, 1648. From your assured Friend Tho: Higgins

The Declaration and Proposalls of Major General Laughorne, Colonel John
Poyer, Colonel Rice Powell, and the rest of the Officers, and Soldiers in
South Wales.
TO that we will use our best Endeavors to bring the King to a personal
Treaty with his Parl. with Freedom, Honor, and Safety; and that we will
endeavor to settle the just Prerogative of the King, Privileges of
Parliament, Laws of the Land, and liberties of the peope, may be all
maintained and preserved in their proper bounds; and the Protestant Religion,
as it stands established by the Law of the Land, restored throughout the
Kingdom, with such regard to be had of tender Consciences, as shall be allowed
by Act of Parliament.

YOu that will either give consent to this Declaration, and join with us in
effecting it; or if you shall not think fit so to do, then not to reveal or
prejudice our Oath: and if you do consent to it, then to join with us in
Council, not and to reveal our Secrets to any so long as they are Secrets, but
to those whom you think fit to reveal them to for the furthering of the
business, and those to be such as you do believe to be well-affected to us,
and will not betray or reveal our Secrets.

Two Letters from Major General Laughorne, to Colonel Thomas Horton, and the
Commissioners of Parliament, concerning their further proceedings in their
present Design and Engagement.
SIR,
I Desire you would let me know by what power you first came, and still remain
in these Counties of my Association, being Commissioned, Commander in chief of
these parts, by an Ordinance of Parliament and upon what grounds the Injury of
seizing on some of my Troop was offered, and the taking of the whole attempted,
without satisfaction rendered them in point of pay, according to the
Instructions of Parliament to the Commissioners for Disbanding such
Supernumeraries: I should gladly be satisfied in these particulars, otherwise
your perseverance in these Affronts to my self, and the Soldiery, and the
Country, will not be without some difficulty. Sir, if you please to withdraw
your forces out of this County, it may be a special means to prevent several
inconveniences, besides the necessary Resolutions which otherwise must be
forced upon,

Sir, your Servant, Row: Laughorne.
St. Nicholas, 4. of May, 1648.

Gentlemen,
J Cannot be ignorant how the sole Command of these Associated Counties was
conferred upon me by Ordinance of Parliament, nor of the injuries and affronts
put upon my men, in stead of receiving their pay allowed them by the
Parliament, and agreed upon by some of your selves. Truly, J was very confident
my past service for your Country, had merited much better of you, then that
such miscarriages should happen in my absence, and to your knowledge unrighted:
However, if you please to appear with your Country, and to continue your
endeavors in prevention of the slavery threatened it, you shall not fail of
the most effectual assistance shall lie in the power of,

Gentlemen, Your humble Servant, ROWLAND LAUGHORNE.
St. Nicholas, 4. May. 1648.

SIR,
SInce my last, concerning the proceedings in Wales Sir Marmaduke Langdale, and
the rest of the Commanders in the North, who now acts (under a pretense) for
the King, since the receipt of the said tidings from Wales, have declared, that
they will live and dye for the King, and use their utmost endeavors for the
re-inthroning of him, and restoring of him to his rights and priveledges, with
diverse other circumstances to this effect, and the better to accomplish their
designs, have summoned in the Countries adjacent; declaring that the late
rumor, touching the business of Wales is false, and that it is only raised for
the obstructing of the present proceedings of the Kings Army in those parts.

Sir I am, Yours to command, T. L.
York 11. 1648.

FINIS.

