A DECLARATION of the EARTHLY FLATFORM.

THe Center of the Earthly round is the North Pole, the circles that run round
about it, are the circircles of the breadth, who are taken from ten to ten
Degrees, which I do also place for the Climates and Parrelels, calling the
first, from the North Pole as far as on 80 degrees the Climate of the
North Pole, and the second which follows upon it, I call the Northern
Ice-Climate, and the third the Swedish-Climate, the fourth is called the
English or Dutch-Climate, the fifth is called the Italian or French-Climate,
the sixth the Asirian, the seventh the Egiptian, the eigth is called the Happy
Arabian-Climate, the ninth is called the Mores-Climate, the tenth being the
first that lies over against the South Side of the line I do call the
Brasilian-Climate, the eleventh which tends as far on 20 degrees over the
South Side of the Midle-line, I call the Peruvian, the twelfth I call the
Paraguayan-Climate, the thirtenth I call the Chilian-Climate, the fourtenth the
Wild-Climate, the fiftenth I call the Magelanian-Climate, the sixtenth the
Unknowne-Climate, the sevententh I call the Southern-Ice-Climate, the eightenth
being the last, tending unto the South-Pole, that I call the Climate of the
Southern-Pole, but the three last mentioned are needless, because the World is
there abouts unknown, and being also but a small part, the Climates then being
thus placed and circled out on the Eathly Flatform, then you can Immediately See
under what Climate every Land lies.

The lines rised from the Center to the out most side are the lines that show
the length of the Lands, they are likewise from ten to ten degrees, Placed on
the Meredian of Netherland.

The length begins from the Pyke of Cannaria. Al other circles are plainly
figured on the Earthly Flatform, so that I think it needleese to put them in
here.

On the Earth there are three forts of convenienees fore dwelling considered,
they are distinguished with those names, Paeriaeci, Antaeci, and Antipodes.

^he Periaeci are those that dwell over against on other, in the same Parallel,
and under the Meredian, with them ^^^^ve Common the Seasons of the year, as
Winter, Summer, etc. The temperatenesse of the air, the lengthe^^^ and
shortening of Days and nights, lying under one same Climate: but herein we are
differing from them, our noon ^^eir midnight, and their noon or midday is our
midnight.

The Antaeci are those that dwell under on same half Meridian, lying the one
toward the South and the other toward she North, and the one dwelling as far
from the midle-line as the other, with them we have Common the ^oon and the
midnight: but concerning the Seasons of the year we differ from them, fore our
Summer is their Win^er, and our longest days are their shortest ones.

The Antipodes a^e those that dwell right over against us on the other side of
the Earth-Globe, and going with their feet against ours. With them we have al
things turned or differing, the Seasons of the year, days and nights, when in
^ummer time the Sun affords us the longest days, then they have Winter and the
longest nights; we have with them (...) Horison, but it is contrariely fore
when the Sun, Moon and Stars do rise with us, then they go under with them.

Those three sorts of dwelling places you kan easily discern on the Earthly
Flat-form, the use thereof being verry ^^y. I will demonstrate it al by some
exemples: whereby you May easily understand it.

THE FIRST PROBLEM.
Fore to Measure the distance of all places of the Earth on the Heavens-Mirrour.
Fore this intention you may take upon the Earthly Mirror anny place you
desire.
I. EXEMPLE.
Desireing to know how manny Dutch leagues that our Neatherland^sh Antaezi, or
them that dwell over against us, are distant from us, they are those that dwell
52 degrees over the South side of the line according as we dwell 52 degrees over
the North side, that is from us to the Southward 104 degrees, multiply those
^04 degrees with 15 leagues, and there will be 1560 leagues fore the distance.
The Islands of Tristan de Cunha, and Gonkalo de Alvaris are our nearest Antaeci.

II. EXEMPEL.
Desireing to know how far Neatherland lies from its Antipodes, they are
those that dwell 180 degrees to the East and to the Westward from us, as also as
far to the South and to the Northward, which is near about Selandia nova, and
fore to know this distance, you must multiply 180 degrees with 15 leagues,
and there will be 2700 leagues fore the distance.

III. EXEMPLE.
Desireing to know how manny leagues our Periaezi, those that dwell 180 degrees.
due E. or Westward from us, upon the same Northern breadth of 52 degrees.

Here follo with the doing.

Lay the Dial A upon the circumferrence of the little Mile quadrant, and that
upon 52 degrees, and give then a sign or mark^ the Dial A, then turn the said
dial with the sign upon the diameter, and See then how manny leagues the figne
lies off from the Centrum, you shall find near enough 9 leagues, which is fore
on degree, the Parallel of 52 degrees you must multiply with 180 degrees, and
you shall find 1665 leagues fore the distance of our Paeriezi, them of Jedzo
Eastly from Japonia are almost our Pariezi.

IV. EXEMPLE.
Desireing to know farther, some certain distances (over the Awry strokes) as
by Exemple the distance between Rotterdam and Jerusalem, as also on what
compass stroke the City of Jerusalem lies from us; fore to do this, you find
Rotterdam on the Earth Mirror to lie near enough upon the 52 degrees N.
breadth, and 20 degrees. length, and Jerusalem on 32 degrees. breadth, and 61 degrees.
length.

Here follows the doing of it.
You must Place the on foot of the Compassis upon 32 Degrees, and the other
upon 52 degrees on the dial P, being the difference of the breadth, with this
opening you must place on foot of the compassis on the edge-side of the dial M,
(which lying upon the East-line) and that upon 41 degrees off from the Centrum
M, being the difference of the length, and the other foot rectangularly from
the edge-side M to the Southward; then you must turn the dial P to and fro til
the edge-side of the said dial comes to touch the foot of the Compassis (See
then how manny degrees the dial P lies from the East or Southward, you shall
find it to be 32 degrees 3 minutes, being near enough South-East by East that
the City of Jerusalem lies from Holland.

Fore to find the distance, then you must width the Compassis take the with of
latitude of 20 degrees. on the dial M being the difference of the Compassis with
this opening you must slide the compassis right Triangularly along by the dial
M ha^^ placed one foot upon the East line, til the other foot comes to touch
the edge-side of the dial P, (which lies upon the c^^^^se) and then you must
further place one foot of the Compassis upon the dial P on the touching point,
and open then (...) other foot unto the Centrum of the dial P, and then finaly,
you must place with this opening one foot of the Compassis in the Centrum of
the dial M, and the other downwards, and see then how manny degrees the
Compassis reaches upon the dial M, you shall find near enough 35 degrees. 30 m.
those you must multiply with 15 leag. and there will be 532 dutch leag. fore
the distance, which is between Rotterdam and the City of Jerusalem. Do so in all other occasions of this like.

Here follows now who to know by an appointed time and place how late it is
in all Lands and Towns of the whole Earth.

I. EXEMPLE.
Desireing to know who late it is on the Island Zeylan, when at the same time
at Rotterdam it is noon or 12 a clok.

Fore the doing of it, you must lay the dial A or P upon 12 a clok, being very
near our noon, and the dial B or (...) you must lay upon Zeylan see then on
what hour's and minutes the dial B or M lies, and that shall be the true time
the Island Zeylan.

II. EXEMPEL.
When it is at Rome 11 a clok in the fore noon, how late is it then at
Amsterdam?

Fore to know this, you must lay the dial A or P upon Amsterdam, and the dial
B or M over Rome, then you must turn both dials firmly, in such manner that the
dial B or M comes to lie upon 11 a clok, see then on what hour and minute the
dial A or P lies, which is the right time at Amsterdam.

II. EXEMPLE.
Desiring to know on the Southern breadth of 40 degr. being on the 21 of June,
at what time the Sun does there rise. Then you must place one foot of the
Compassis in the Centrum of the dial B, and the other foot downwards, as far
as on 23 degrees. 30 min. being at the said time the Declination of the Sun, with
this opening you must place one foot of the Compassis on the dial B upon the
complement of the Poles higth of 50 degr. and turn the dial B from the E. to
the N. til the other foot of the Compassis comes triangularly to touch the East
line of 6 a clock, see then upon what hour and min. the dial B lies, you will
find near enough in the morning 17 hours 30 min. being there the rising of
the Sun, the same is its going under in the evening at 4 a clock 35 min.

Nota. You must know that if you will, use the Heavens Flatform over the
South Side of the Equinoctial Line, then you must take the house contrary to
that as they are signed upon the Heavens Mirror, fore that which is over the
North-line 4 a clock in the morning, the same is Southly from the line 8 a
clock in the morning, and so is the rest accordingly.

III. EXEMPLE.
Desiring to know on the Northern breadth of 40 degrees, being the first of
August, what time the great Dog Syrius shall rise. Lay the Dial B over Syrius
and the Dial A upon the first of August, then you must place one foot of the
compassis upon the Center of the Dial B, and open the other as far as on 16
degr. 15 min. being the declination of Syrius, with this opening you must place
one foot the compassis on the Dial B, upon the complement of the Poles higth of
degrees. Then you must firmly turn both Dials alike from the E. to the S., till
the other foot of the compassis comes triangularly to touch the East line of 6
a clock. See then upon what hour and minutes the Dial lies, you will find near
enough 4 a clock 42 minutes. Fore to find its going under, you must firmly turn
both dials alike from the West to the Southward til the other foot of the
compassis comes triangularly to touth the West line of 6 a clock, see then upon
what hour and min. the Dial A lies, you will find 2 a clock 48 minutes.

III PROBLEM.
How to find at al set times the Declination of the Sun upon the Heavens
mirror. Which is indeed verry proffitable for all Sea men, fore it serves not
only fore this present Age, but also fore the future Age of 100 years; when al
Books that are made fore that purposse shall be of no worth.
Fore to find the Declination of the Sun upon the Heavens-Mirrour, you must
know that the Suns place is there set according to the two Jears, before and
after the Leape-yeare, and that especially upon the future Age, which does
almost differ a whole degree in the Sodiack with this present Age to the year
1700, and in the Suns Declination in March and September about 24 minutes. So
that al Tables of the Suns Declination which are reckened out with such a
difficult calculation, shall after the year of 1700 be of no use or worth to
anny Seaman; because the year of 1700 must be a common year. Defiring then to
know the Declination of the sun upon some certain or set day in this present
Age, then you must always lay the dial A one day farther then theset day, and
in the second year after the Leap-yeare you must lay the dial upon the midst
of the day, but being the third year after the Leape-yeare, then you must lay
the dial A on the first fourth part, being in the Sodiack about 15 min.
backward.

But being the first year after the Leap-yeare, then you must lay the dial
upon the third fourth part of the day, being verry near 20 min. farther in the
Sodiack, then in the third year.

And when it is a Leap-yeare, then you must lay the dial A upon the beginning
of the day, til to the 28 of February; but being after the 28 of February, then
you must all the year along lay the dial A upon the end of the day. And if you
do truly understand and perform this, thou you will at al times know the
Declination of the Sun so perfect and exactly, as the Navigation requires. This
is the Head thing I have to say of my Heavens-Mirrour.

I. EXEMPLE.
Desiring to know the Suns Declination on the 30th. day of April 1691 or 95
being the third year after the Leap-yeare, then you must lay the dial A upon
the first of May, to wit upon the fourth part of the parck of that day. See
then where the Dial dath cut or touch the Sodiack, you find it to be verry
near the 10th. degr. 15 min. (being at the ame time the true place of the Sun)
that is 40 degr. 15 min. of. Farther you must lay the Dial A over the 40 degr.
15 min. off from., in the degrees of the Equinoctial or hour cirkle, then you
must place one foot of the Compassis on the dial A upon the grearest
Declination of the Sun, being 23 degrees 32 min. then you must open the other
foot of the Compassis toward the Line of 6 a clock, to come triangularly with
this opening of the compassis. Then you must place one foot of it in the Center
of the Dial A, and turn the other downwards, and see where it falls, you find
it to be verry near 14 degrees 55 minutes, being at the said time the Suns
Declination.

II. EXEMPLE.
Desiring to know the Suns Declination on the 30th. of April 1688 or 92. being
the first year after the Leap-yeare. Then you must lay the dial A on the first
of May, upon the utmost of the days parck, see then where the dial A does cut
the Sodiack, you find it to be verry near the eleventh degree of Taurus, being
the true place of the set time, that is 41 degrees of. Then you must further
lay the dial A on 41 degrees of. as before, and place one foot of the Compassis
on the dial A upon the greatest Declination of the Sun, being 23 degr. 32 min.
then you must open the other foot of the Compassis, til it comes rect-angularly
to touch the Line of 6 a clock, with this opening of the Compassis, you must
place one foot of it in the Center of the dial A, and the other you must turn
downwards, seeing upon what degree and minute it falls, you will find it to be
verry near 15 degr. and 10 min. being at the set time the true Declination of
the Sun, differing little or nothing with the wise and artificial calculation,
do so at al other times, til to the year of 1700, but after that time you must
lay the dial upon the set day, considering that this use is principally (as I
told you) practiced and formed upon the future Age, where upon we shall also
give some exemples, which also will serve fore the better understanding of the
former.

III. EXEMPLE.
Desiring to know the Suns declination on the 30th day of April 1706. being
the second year after the Leape-yeare. Then you must at the same time lay the
Dial upon the middle of the parck of the said day, and see where the Dial A does
toutch the Sodiack, you will find it to be verry near the 9th degree and 30th
minute of Taurus, being at the said time the true-place of the Sun, differing
almost a whole degree with the Year of 1686, fore the Sun is 39 degr. 30
minut. of Then you must further place the Dial A on 39 degrees 30 minutes of.
upon the Dial, in the same manner as I told you before, and then you must place
one foot of the Compassis on the Dial A upon the greatest declination of the
Sun, being 23 degrees 32 min., then you mus^t open the other foot of the
Compassis, till it comes triangularly to toutch the Line of 6 a clock: with
this opening you must place one foot of Compassis in the Centrum of the Dial A,
and the other downwards, see then on what degree and minute the foot stands,
you will find it to be verry near 14 degrees 42 minutes, which is on the said 30
day of April about noon, the declination of the Sun, differing also in the Suns
declination with the Year of 1686 almost 18 min. So that by this exemple you
may see that al Boocks and Ta^^es concerning this matter which are formerly
made, will altogether be in vain, and of no vallue, as soon as ever the Year of
1700 begins.

IV. EXEMPLE.
Desiring to know the Suns Declination in the year of 1710. when the Sun is in
the 18th. degr. of. Then you must lay the dial A upon the 18 degr. you will also
see that the dial does then lie on the eleventh day of August, about on the
third fourth part of the parck of that day, being in the evening about 6 a
clock. Then you must further lay the dial A upon the 42th. degree, from. to
Cancer upon the hour circkle, being on the 18th. degree of, then you must
place one foot of the Compassis on the dial A upon 23 degr. 32 min. as before,
on then you must open the other foot, rectangularly unto the Line of 6 a clock,
with this opening you must place one foot of the Compassis in the Centrum of
the dial A, and then you must turn the other foot downwards, and see on what
degree and minute it falls, you will find it to be verry near 15 degr. 30 min.
being at the said time the Declination of the Sun.

FINIS.
III. EXEMPLE.
When it is noon at Batavia in the East Indies, what time is it then at Cabo de
bona Esperanca?

Fore to know this, you must lay the dial A or P upon the said Cape, and the
dial B or M on Batavia, then you must firmly turn both dials a like to the
Westward, til the dial B or M lies upon midday or noon, and see then where the
dial A or P lies, which is then the true time at the said Cape.

IV. EXEMPLE.
Lay the dial A or P upon midday or noon (under which Meridian the City of
Rotrerdam lies near enough) and the dial B or M over Japonia, and then you
must firmly turn both dials alike to the Eastward, til the dial A or P comes to
stand at one of the clok, see then on what hour and m. the dial B or M lies,
you shall find in the evening 10 of the clok and 24 m. to be then the true time
at Japonia.

V. EXEMPLE.
When at Rotterdam it is 11 a clok in the fore noon, what time is it then at
the Islands Amsterdam, Middelburg and Rotterdam? which do not lie far from one
Meridian, as you may see upon the Terrestre Planum.

Lay the dial A or P upon midday or noon, being near enough over the City of
Rotterdam, and the dial B or M over the said Islands, and then you firmly turn
both dials about, til the dial A or P comes to lie upon 11 a clok, see then
upon what hour and m. the dial B or M lies, you shall find it to be upon the
precedent day in the evening at 11 a clok and 36 m. By this exemple you may
easily understand an apprehend the question, how it can be, that two Persons
being born at one time, and died at one time, and that yet the one lived some
days longer then the other.

VI. EXEMPLE.
When at London is midday or noon, what time is it then at the outmost
West-corner of Tartaria?

Lay the dial A or P upon London. and the dial B or M upon the West corner of
Tartaria, and turn firmly both dial alike upon midday or noon, see then where
the dial B or M lies you shall find it to be 8 m. past 10 a clok. whereby you
may also understand the said question, and fore the better understandeng of it
you may yet take this following exemple.

Two ships being both bound to go out of Holland to new Sclandi^^ the one going
about by the Westward, and the other taking its course about by the Eastward,
and their difference shall be just one day, because the first that goes Westly
about has lost hall a day, and the other that goes Eastly about has won half
a day, fore that which goes about to the Eastward countenances the day, and
that which goes Westwardly about does countenance the night.

The Distiuguation of the Earth.

The Earth is distinguished into four parts, as Europa, Asia, Africa, and
America. The middle of the whole Earth contains in its roundnesse 360 degr. that
is 5400 dutch leagues. Every ones length and breadth is as follows.

Europa contains in its length 1200 dutch leagues, and in its breadth it
contains 675 d. leagues.

Asia contains in its length 1800 dutch leagues, and its breadth 1275 dutch
leagues.

Africa contains in length 1200 dutch leagues, and in breadth 1050 dutch
leagues.

^^erica contains in its length 1950 dutch leagues, and is its breadth 1200
dutch leagues.

^^^ing in the former spoken of the biggnesse of the Earth, so shall we here
speak of the biggnesse of the Sea.

(...) N. Sea contains in its length from Doevres and Calis to Hitland 200 d.
leag. and in its breadth 120 d. leagues.

^^e East Sea is long 300 dutch leagues and in its breadth in containg 135
dutch leagues.

^he Ice Sea from Hitland to Greenland, contains of 150 dutch leagues in
length, and in breadth 1200 dutch leagues.

The Atlantik-Sea, or great North-Sea from Ice-land to the unacquainted
Southland is 1800 dutch leagues, in its length and in its breadth 13500.

The Mediterranean Sea contains in its length 745 dutch leagues, and in its
breadth 150.

The Adriatik Sea or Gulf of Venice contains in its length 120 d. leag. and in
its breadth 35.

The Balck-Sea near Constantinople is in its length 210. d. leag. and in its
breadth 120.

The Persian Sea, from Cabo Bonne Esperanca to the Islands de las Velas is long
1875 d. leag. and the breadth, from the ^y of Ormus in Persia to the
unacquainted South-land, is 1200 dutch leagues.

The Red Sea is long 300 d. leag. and 45 leagues broad, the Persian Inham or
Bay near the city of Ormus is in its length ^^ dutch leag. and in its breadth
90

The Mardel Zur or Peacable Sea, being the biggest of al Seas, is in its length
from the Islands de las Velas to the City Arica in Peru 2100 d. leag. and in
its breadth from C. Houdo in the N. part of America to the unacquainted
South-land (...) contains of 1500 d. leagues.

And the Tartarian-Sea contains in its length 750 d. leagues, and in its
breadth it contains 450.

All the said Seas do join to one, as you may see in the Earthly round.

The Earth being in its four parts reckoned together contains of 10350 d. leag.

And all the Seas being reckoned together make out 15185 d. leagues.

Here we will in short terms communicate some notion, concerning the pressing or
force of the Sea, and the opassing Winds.

Between Brasil and Angola, about on 11 Degrees Southern Breadth, there is the
Sea from the 20th. of April ^o the 20. of July, forced toward the North-West.

And from the 20th. of July to the 20th. of October it is neither drive a to
the one nor to the other fide.

But from the 22th. of October to the 20th. of January is the Sea forced
toward the South-West.

And again from the 20th. of January to the 20 of April does the Sea there
drive neither to the one nor the other place.

And about the Strait of David ther^ is the forcing of the Sea from the East to
the Southward, this is the reason which makes them that Sail from th^^ce to
England or France to wonder, because their sailing is don sooner then they
exspected, according to their calculation.

Concerning the Passing-Winds.

From Netherland to the Cannarian Islands are the Winds changeable, Southly
from the Canarian Islands there you have communly a N. E. Passing-Wind, and in
the Months of January, February, and March, when you are upon 4 Degrees
Northern breadth, where the South East and Eastly Passing-Winds do begin, but
in summer time it runs quite Southly, and also somewhat farther to the
Northward.

The said North East Passing-Wind blows throng unto the West-Indys.

On the Coast of Angola there you have continually southly winds, and from Cabo
de bone Esperanca to St. Helena, and farther ^^to the Line, there you have
commonly the wind about Souht Easily, and on the Coast of Brasil does the wind
from S^ptember to March commuly blow Eastly, and from March to Semptemb. about
S. Eastly.

Between (...) and 35 degr. souther^ breadth there you do communly find the
Wind changeable, and southly from 35 degr, Southe^^ breadth, there you have
communly a Westly passing Wind throughout the whole year, but in the Months of
January, February and March it is somewhat variable, and the farther you come
the Southward, the harder the Westly Passing wind blows.

Eastly from Madagascar, about on 10 or 11 degrees. Southern breadth, there you
have communly throughout the whole Indian Sea, an Eastly passing Wind.

Between the Line and 10 or 11 degr. Southern breadth, there does the Wind,
from April to September ^^mmunly blow S. E. or Eastly, and in the other half
Year Westly, but in the Month of December and January it blows vehemently.

On the Coast of Arabia, Persia, Suratte, and God, and every where Northly from
the Line, there does the Wind from April to October, communly blow
South-Westly with rough wether, which they do there reckon f^^ their Winter,
and continning the other half Year does the wind communly blow North-Eastly,
being (...) Summer.

On the Coast of of Java and the Islands Eastly from it there does the wind,
from November to April, communily blow Westly, and in the other half Year
Eastly.

From Fava to the Northward along by the Eastside of Sumatra, and farther unto
Malacka, the does there wind communly blow S. Eastly from April to October,
and the other half Year N. Westly.

From Patama, and farther to Cina and Japan there does the wind blow Southly,
from April to October, and in the other half Year Northly.

Hereby you may in some manner understand and apprehend whence the pressing
force of the Sea rises, where neither ^^^e nor Flood goes, which is communly
attributed to the Moon. Where the wind concurs with the Ebb^ or Flood, there is
the pressing of the Sea so much stronger, and in the contrary, less, whereof
you may Easily tak notice.


