A DECLARATION of the NOBILITY, KNIGHTS and GENTRY OF THE COUNTY of OXON Which
have adhered to the late KING.
SInce after a bloody War, followed by its worst Effects, Confusion, Violence,
and Phanatick Fury, It has pleased Almighty God by unexpected Methods, to
bring us not only within hope, but even in view of Settlement: And that his
Excellency the Lord General Monck, the Glorious and Immediate Instrument of
Providence in this great work, through his Heroic Courage, Conduct and
Moderation, has brought Affairs to that pass, that there is scarce any thing
left for other hands, but to lay hold of, and receive their Happiness. And
unless we had bin misrepresented, as Bars to this Felicity, by false
Apprehensions, we should not at this Instant have appeared in public: So that
the Enemies of this Nations Peace, traducing us as Persons Implacable and
studious of Revenge, have at once laid an Obligation upon us to vindicate our
selves by renouncing so unworthy a Suggestion, and an Opportunity of serving
the public by removing those Pretensions for Diffidence and Jealousy, which
(as things now stand) are the only Hinderance of that perfect Union, which
cannot fail to bring the Nation to a Happy Settlement.

Upon which Ground, we have thought it fitting to declare, that we do disclaim,
and with perfect detestation disown, all purpose of Revenge, or partial
Remembrance of things past.

Likewise, we desire, that in whatever any of us have dis-oblig'd either the
Public, or any Private Person, we may partake from them that Oblivion which we
so readily dispense.

Moreover, we promise and engage to acquiesce in the Determinations of ensuing
Parliaments, resolving in our several Stations, to compose our selves thereunto
with Cheerful Vigorous Obedience.

Lastly, we are Resolved perfectly to forget all Names of Difference, excepting
those, which the more Active Endeavors of Charity and Peace shall give unto
us, who have this Strife alone to manage the Being outdone by none in
Friendship, Love, and Condescension.

Subscribed by Earl of Lyndsey. Earl of Down. Lord John Lovelace. Sir Bainard
Throgmorton, Knt and Baronet. Thomas Pope, Baronet. William Walter Baronet. Sir
Chichester Wrey, Knight. Sir Timothy Tyrril, Knight. Samuel Sandys, Esquire.
Brom Whorwood, Esquire. Thomas Whorwood, Esquire. Capt. William Whorwood.
Coll. Francis Lovelace. Capt. Henry Heylyn. William Sheappard. Major Francis
Moore. Capt. John Peacocke. Peter Langston. Francis Langston, Esquire. William
Walbanck, Esquire. Capt. William Gannocke. Richard Baily, D. D. Richard
Gardener, D. D. Thomas James, Gent. H. H. Corney, Gent. Richard Powell,
Esquire. William Hopton, Gent. Capt. James Aston. Samuel Jackson, M. D. John
Fell, M. A. John Machin, Gent. Thomas Lodge, Gent. John Lamphire, M. D. Capt.
John Smith. William Wickham, Esquire. William Knoweles, Esquire. John Dolben,
Gent. John Parsons, Gent. Capt. Walter Jones.


LONDON, Printed for Tho. Bassen in St Dunstans Churchyard. 1660.


