THE DECLARATION OF THE ARMY CONCERNING The City of LONDON; And a Letter to
the Royalists of the said City, touching their bloody and inhumane proceedings
against the ARMY.

WITH Their Resolution and Protestation, touching their Designs within the
City, and that if they put them into execution, they will put Hundreds of them
to the sword, and hang their quarters upon the gates, and set their heads upon
the Spires of Steeples.

ALSO, A great Plot discovered against the Kingdom and City, and a great
Overthrow given to the Danes upon the Scottish Seas.

Published for general satisfaction to undeceive the people of England.

LONDON: Printed for R. Williamson, 1648.

Terrible NEWS For the City of LONDON
THE great insolency of the Royal party within and about the City of London,
occasions much jealousy from the Army; the hatred and malice of the Royalists
being so great, that it over swayes their discretion so much; that they canno
keep themselves within the bounds of ordinary civitlity, and discover
themselves by seeking their privat-revenge; as appears by their late horrid
action executed upon certain Members of the Army near the Strand, who by some
of the bloody Conspirators were most barbarously murdered in their Beds. This
inhumane Design strikes terror to the well-affected party, who being much
perplexed thereat, acquaints the Army therewith; insomuch that some of the
commanders forthwith sends a letter to the City, the effect whereof follows.

The Armies Letter to the City.
WE are much startled at the insolency of the traiterous slaves in London, to
kill two Officers of our Army, one in his bed, and the other with a cowardly
stab, and of their intended attempt to pistol our General, besides many
assaults upon Members of Parliament, and their Design to have massacred
fourscore of them.

We do protest, if the Royal slaves continue their insolency, and put uny of
these Designs into execution, we will for every man's life take one hundred of
their owr party, and according to the quality of each massacred person, and
will hang up their heads on spires of steeples, that the world may see the just
judgment of God upon these Rebels and Traitors, which his Majesty contesses are
guilty of all the innocent blood of the four hundred thousand souls that have
perished in this War.

This Letter was thought fit to be published to the view of all persons
whatsoever, whereby all whom it may concern, may take notice of the sense and
resolution of the Army, and their real and candid Desires to prevent he
effusion of blood for the future.

And do further declare, That they look upon the city of London, with a tender
eye and affection, being resolved to engage both life and fortunes, for the
defense and preservation thereof, against all opposition whatsoever.

Further declaring, That it is the resolution and desire of the army, to use
their utmost endeavors for the supporting all those who have adhered to them,
even in the great and perilous times of War, and to act upon such principles,
that may tend to the public safety of this Kingdom.

The Danes Disign against the Kingdom of England.
ON Tuesday October. 3. By an Express from Scotland it was advertized, That the
Royalists of England have been very active in the Kingdom of Denmark, for the
arming of a party against this Kingdom, and after some consultation touching
the present affairs of this Nation, 10000 Arms were designed for them by the
Danes, and shipping appointed to transport them into Scotland, who accordingly
arrived in Lies Road, thinking to join with the Scots Royalists, but being
discovered by the Marq. of Argyle, a party were commanded our in several long
Boats, and small Vessels, who soon boarded the Danish ships, seized on all the
Ordnance, arms and ammunition, and secured the ships in the Harbor.

Oath Letters make mention, That

The Lieutenant General had no sooner set footing on the Scots ground, but
great acclamations of joy transcended from one part to another, amongst the
well-affected party of that Nation, throughout the Southern Climate; protesting
to assist him, with all that was near and dear unto them, for regaining of
their liberties, the gaining of a right understanding between both Nations, and
the vanquishing of the common Enemy of both Kingdoms.

And upon a general Council, in relation to the Affairs of our Neighbor
Nation; it was ordered, That the Parliaments two Armies of England and Scotland
should forthwith advance against Monro and his Forces, and the question being
stated who should command in chief the Van of the Army, to advance against
Sterling Bridge, the main Body of the Enemies Army having entrenched themselves
thereabouts, Lieut. Genesis Cromwell rose up at the Council Table, and declared
his great willingness to appear in the Van, and to advance and engage with
them, against the adverse party of peace and truth; which was unanimonsly
assented to, and upon the 26. of this instant (we herr) that the Lieutenant
General advanced with seven English Regiments of Horse and Dragoons toward
Sterling, to fight the Enemy; but being discovered, and information given to
(the young sparkish Royalist) Monro, he immediately drew out five old Regiments
of Horse and Dragoons that accompanied him from Ireland, and five new raised
Regiments under the conduct of the Earl of Lanerick, and advanced with the
said party, commanding forth his Scouts, who had no sooner traversed two or
three of the Scottish Hills, but they discovered the English Banners: whereupon
they made toward their Body, certifying that a small party of English were
ranging about the Country, and the rest of them had taken up their quarters in
several Villages adjacent:

Upon which tidings Monro advances, and coming near to the English Forces, the
Lieut. Genesis prepared to receive them, insomuch that both Armies engaged
disputing the ground with great resolutnesse and gallantry, the famous Sparks
of Chivalry (on each side) exchanging many a bullet betwixt the two Bodies,
firing at the very Breast, and counterchanging their ground, during which
Conflict, Monro appeared visible in the very Front of the Enemy, who upon a
sudden, endangered (much) our left Wing; but after a sharp dispute, the Lieut.
Genesis routed them, put them to a disorderly retreat, killed above 60 upon the
place, and took about 100. prisoners, with the loss of 20 men.

We hear that old Monro in Ireland has had a great Defeat by Col. Munk, and
all his Ordnance, arms, and ammunition taken.

Peatling upon Tweed, 28. Sep. 1648.
On Sarterday Sep. 30. the great Plot against the house of Commons were
discovered, wherein 80. of them should have been massacred by a party of
Royalists, who (as they said) opposed the Treaty in the House. Other letters
from France further intimate, That there was a great Conspiracy and Design
complotted by the Royalists against his Excellencies person, and that it was
resolved, to have the said Plot put in execution, during his residence at St.
Albans; the manner thus, viz. That two persons of most desperate and insolent
fortunes, were designed (by the Royalists) to give their attendance at the said
place, and to be resident at the Generals quarters, there to take their
opportunity, for the stobbing of the Lord General, either by Dagger or Knife.


By Letters further from the North it is advertized, That about one hundred of
the Reformado-Royalists have set up their Ensigns on the top of Cheviot Hills,
where the keep their Randezvouz; but Lieut. General Cromwell has sent 500
Horse and Dragoons to fight them, in case they will not submit, who we hear
are very resolute and obstinate, and resolved to sacrifice their lives on the
top of the high Mountains.

FINIS.

