THE DECLARATION Of the GENTRY of the County of KENT, Who have adhered to the
KING, and suffered Imprisonment or Sequestration during the late Troubles.
WHereas it has pleased Almighty God, after so many Trialls and so long
Distraction, to raise us to large hopes of Resettlement of this Nation upon
Just, Known, and lasting Foundations: We therefore desire from our Hearts to
render to God the glory of his Mercies, and a full tribute of Honor to his
Excellency the Lord General Monck, who has been so eminently Instrumental in
these beginnings of Deliverance.

And forasmuch as we understand that some malicious and desperate persons
(regarding neither the mercies of God nor the miseries of their Country) have
endeavored to beget a pernicious Jealousy, That those who adhered to the King
do still retein a spirit of Revenge against all that were of a contrary Party:
We do therefore declare in the presence of God, that we utterly abhor all
Revengeful Thoughts and Actions against any Party or Persons whatsoever. And as
we have great reason to wish those Divisions had never been born, so we hope
and will do our utmost they may never be remembered, and shall look on all
persons as the worst and Common Enemies of this Nation that shall offer to
revive them. In pursuance whereof we further Declare (as his Excellency's Army
has given us a noble Example) that we will thankfully acquiesce in the
Resolutions of the next ensuing Parliament for a due and just settlement of
Church and State.

Col. Richard Spencer, Esquire. Thomas Lennard, Esquire. Thomas Peyton, Knight
and Baronet. Roger Twysden, Knight and Baronet. Edward Hales, Baronet. Richard
Hardres, Baronet. William Man, Knight. Stephen Lennard, Knight. John Boys,
Knight. Col. Thomas Colpepper. Col. Edward Wilsford. Col. George Newman. Col.
Henry Norwood. Robert Barnham, Esquire. Daniel Treswell, Esquire. Thomas
Collepepper, Esquire. Thomas Herlackenden, Esquire. Francis Twysden, Esquire.
John Best, Esquire. Edward Barham, Esquire. Richard Master, Esquire. Francis
Clerk, Esquire. Edward Darell, Esquire. William Rook, Esquire. John Boys of
Hoad, Esquire. William Kingsley, Esquire. Richard Hulse, Esquire. James
Newman, Esquire. John Pownoll, Gent. William Somner, Gent.
LONDON, Printed for Gabriel Bedell, and are to be sold at the
Middle-Temple-gate in Fleetstreet. 1660.


