A DECLARATION OF HIS Highness the DUKE OF YORK His going away from St.
JAMSES. AND Concerning the Right Honorable the Earl of NORTHVMBERLAND, from
whom he went.

April 22. 1648.
Imprimatur

Gil. Mabbot.

Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, near the Queens-head
Tavern. 1648.

A DECLARATION OF His HIGHNESS the DUKE OF YORK His going away from St.
Jamses.
ON Friday night, April 21. 1648. The Right Honorable the Earl of
Northumberland, having been forth, returned to Saint Jamses about eight a
Clock at night, and found the Duke of York with his Brother in his chamber.

His Lordship waiting upon his Highness, entertained some discourse with him
for a time; and afterward withdrew.

The Duke (after that) went into his sisters chamber, and spent some time in
mirth with the young Ladies.

Between nine and ten of the clock, The Earl of Northumberland went to his
highness Chamber, to see him go to bed according as his Lordship used to do
about that time.

And finding the Duke not there, supposing that he might be playing with the
Gentlewomen, as he used to do His Lordship sent Mr. Sammon to see for the Duke.

But His Highness not coming, The Earl sent another Messenger, and a third,
and so more, to look in all places, supposing that he might perhaps have hid
himself somewhere; as he had often done in sport, to make them look for him.

Yet after all this no news could be brought to certify where the Duke was,

Then his Lordship made strict inquiry who had seen him last, and where he
was.

And is was advertised that he was within little more then half an hour
before, with the Gentlewomen playing and very merry.

It was also further certified, That a little before that time he had gone
down the back stairs, and was passing the entry toward the garden, where
Mr. Howard, and Mr. Owen, two of his Gentlemen that waited on him, then were
talking.

And that the Duke seeing of them there did presently return up the stairs
again.

Whereby it was (after he was gone) supposed that he came then down with an
intent to have gone away, but finding those Gentlemen there, was prevented.

It was also advertized that the Duke had that evening called to the Gardenner
for the key of a back door, that was a private way into the Garden, very
seldom known to be openned, whereupon it was supposed that he went away that
way.

Hereupon search was made in the Gardens, and all about the Park, but none
could give any Intelligence at all concerning him.

But in the Garden, by the said private door, There were the prints of men's
feet which seemed to have lately trodden there, And there were some of the
feet seemed very small, which they supposed to be the Dukes treading.

These feetings were trased through the Garden, and every way over the Park,
And on the other side of the park toward the Cherry-garden, And they found on
the other side of the Park (against the Garden) the like prints of such
feetings as were at the first door which was suspected in the Garden. But they
could here no further which way His Highness should be gone.

Then the Earl of Northumberland sent that night to all places from whence he
could suppose he might expect assistance, to the finding and bringing of the
Duke back.

His Lordship sent a Messenger to the Speaker of the House of Commons, and
another Messenger to the Lord General; He sent also to the Earl of Warwick,
To the Lord Mayor of the City of London, And to Collonell Barkestead, And
Colonel Rich, That so he might have all the assistance which might be for
the looking after him

His Lordship (also) caused a search to be made of his Servants, and the
Gentlemen, and all persons of the house to see who were missing, but found not
one wanting.

The Groom was called and search of the Horses made, and there were not one
Horse missing, but all safe in the Stables.

Also concerning the Duke, It was found that He went away without Cloak, or
Coat, and in His Hose and Shoes.

And although His Lordship had had as much strictness as could be, to keep
suspected persons from coming to the Duke, yet he made inquiry what persons
they could think of that might be suspected, that had lately been with Him
some few days before.

And upon inquiry, no account could be given of any that they could suspect.

Yet His Lordship was acquainted that there were (the day before) as the Duke
was crossing the way, two poor men that had kissed his highness hand, seeming to
be very poor mean fellows; But they had not time to speak much to him; only
some few words, the discourse being so short, that (it was thought) they could
not have time to do any thing in relation to this design, but what those men
were it is not known.

Herein his Lordship endeavored all that possibly he could for finding out the
business, but could not be satisfied in any thing.

Now it is so, that the Earl of Northumberland did never undertake to be
answerable for the Duke; And so much his Lordship did declare to the
Parliament, upon the former intercepted Letters, which discovered his
intentions to make an escape before.

But according to the desires of the Houses his Lordship has used the utmost
of his endeavors to prevent it.

FINIS

