A DECLARATION OF THE ARMY CONCERNING The apprehending of Major Genesis Overton,
and the rest of the Officers in Scotland, who had a Design to divide the
Forces, and stand in opposition against the Lord Protector, and the present
Government in England.

Likewise, a Remonstrance to the People, to be published in all Cities and
Market Towns throughout England and Wales; and their Resolution touching the
Laws of the Land, and the privileges of the people.

London, Printed for C. Norton, 1654.

A Declaration of the Army, concerning the apprehending of Major General
Overton, and the rest of the Officers in Scotland.
WHereas many in this Age, when they grow great in the World, are so puffed up
with pride, that they scarce know themselves; which is, as if the poor Ant the
higher she gets upon her hill, the bigger she could conceit her self to be: but
it is not so with many eminent Commanders in Scotland, who desire nothing more
then the enjoyment of those fruits, purchased by their indefatigable endeavors,
and great expense of blood: Yet notwithstanding, the discontents of many have
prevailed so far, as to lead some of the Officers to consultations and
correspondencies in design to withdraw the Army from their Obedience to the
present Government, being very much dis-satisfyed therewith; which has caused
the General, to secure Major Genesis Overton, and diverse other eminent Commanders;
declaring the Grounds and Reasons thereof to the rest of the officers and
soldiery: Upon which, many seemed to be very much discontented; but the major
part unanimously resolved to live and dye in defense and preservation of this
present Constitution.

But upon the sending Major Genesis Overton a shipboard, the Discontents of his
party appeared so far, that diverse of them, both of horse and foot, did declare
and manifest unto all Christian people whatsoever, that Sethos King of Egypt
growing mighty, grew so proud withal, that he made his tributary Kings, to
draw his Chariots by turns: till (on a time) he espied one of the Kings to look
earnestly on the wheel; and demanding the reason thereof, was answered by him,
That with much comfort he beheld the lowest spokes turn uppermost by course:
whereupon, the King beholding the moral, left off that barbarous and tyrannical
custom. In like manner, it is cordially desired, that all illegal ways and
actions may be reduced, and the peace, safety, and tranquillity both of our
Officers and all others inviolably preserved.

As touching the late Plot it is apparent, that many had entered into an Oath of
Secrecy, to list men privately, and to procure all such Arms as should make
them formidable, in case of any opposition; for which end, they had bought many
Blunderbusses, Muskets, Carbines, and Pistols, and had lodged them (as it is
reported) in several places both in London and Westminster, with a Resolution
to have put a period to the happy Constitution of this Government on Christmas
day, by surprising of the several Guards at White Hall, St. Jameses, the Mewes,
and other places. But one of the chief Conspirators being at last so extremely
haunted with the Furies of a guilty Conscience, took an occasion to reveal the
same: In which great Work, the true saying of a learned Author is verified;
That when the Conscience accuses, the Tongue confesses, the Eyes weep, the
Hands wring, the Heart aches, and the Voice cries; true it is, no part can be at
ease.

Upon which discovery, dtvers were apprehended, and the Arms beforementioned
seized and taken.

Since which time, many Ship-Chandlers have been examined; and some Gunsmiths,
who confessed the number of Arms sold within the space of such a time; but to
whom, and for what use they could not tell.

And upon sufficient Evidence of their Innocence, they were discharged.

Great is the care of our prudent State to make a clear discovery of the depth
of the Design; and to find out the chief Fomentors thereof; to the end they may
be brought to condign punishment and be made fit Objects of Justice.

The names of the chief prisoners now in custody.
Lieut. Genesis Norwood, Mr. Bagnal, sou to the Lady Terringham, sir John
Packington, sir Henry Littleton, sir Edward Vernons second son, Mr. Pryor, Mr,
Brown, Mr. Friar, M. Glover, Mr. Custis, and Mr. Bayley.

THese are to certify, that one Isaac Marlo of the Age of 14 years, a well
set Youth, of a ruddy color and brown hair, in a frize Coat and serge Doublet
and Breeches, and gray stockings and black Hat, ran away from his Master last
Thursday. about 11 or 12 of the clock in the morning, and took with him ten
pounds in money. If any one can bring word of him to Mr. Roberts shop, a
Sword-Cutler in Bartholmew-Lane, they shall have good content for their pains.

FINIS.

