THE DECLARATION OF THE COUNTY OF DORSET, Showing their consent to join with
other Counties in this Loyal work of redeeming his Majesty, and settling the
Kingdom.

June 15 London Printed in the yer^ 1648.

THE DECLARATION of the County of Dorset, showing their consent to join with
other Counties in this Loyal work of redeeming his Majesty and settling ^he
Kingdom.
WE the surviving Inhabitants of the much despised and distressed County of
Dorset, having like the rest of the Kingdom, long groaned under the oppressing
tyranny of those whom We deputed for our redeemers. And being formerly too
impatient, sought ways of redress, but proved unsuccessefull. Nor could We
now imagine any hopes of a Iubile; did We not see out fellow Counties (who have
formerly been too insensible of Our misery and their Own dangers) throwing down
their Issakers burden and unanimously lending their hands to wrest Our
Sovereign from the jaws of Rebellion and Treason; and vindicating Our gasping
laws and liberties, from the unrelenting tyranny of those that would bury Both
in the Golgoth^ of their lawless wills.

And though distance and remoteness hinders us from performing the Ceremony of
a Petition, to travel so far for a few dissembled thanks from a Member of the
house, of the ayery promises of (shall be.) Yet we think fit to certify our
fel^ow Subjects of our undoubted readiness, with life and estates to second
the Loyal endeavors of any that labor for the restitution of Protestancy,
there instatement of his Roy^ll Majesty unto his primitive splendour and
greatness; and the establishing an inviolable and well grounded Peace in all
his Majesty's Dominions.

It Is not to be expected that We sholud travel so ^^r with a formal petition
in our hands to see the two Houses, or to take Pains to be scoffed at, or
slighted, or cudgeld back. For experience has taught us, that we have been
fools too long to worship and deify those that are but our Trustees and
Deputies, by petitioning them for that which they know is our own, and those
insulters take pride either to delay or deny. Seeing therefore we perceive by
your fruitless examples; that they are inexorable, and will do nothing for us,
we thought fit to declare to the wo^ld what we m^an to do for our selves, and
the Kingdom.

1. Therefore, we demand a speedy retroduction of our imprisoned King, to sit
personally in the house of Peers, that the su^ream Court of the Kingdom may
not be any longer a Ludibruco to the people, and be called a Master without a
head.

2 That the government of the Church may ^e first settled by the advice of a new
assembly of Protestant Divines to be indifferently chosen* by the Clergy of
each County or Diocese, and thi^ Synod, that ^ave sat so long to so little
purpose, unless to ^ct the wills of those that pa^k'd them, may be sent home to
their Lectures. and the 4. sh. pe^ d^em, conferred on those that have more need
on it, and better deserve it.

3. That the Common birth right of us all, the Laws may be restored to their
former purity, and that we may enjoy them without the corrup Gloss^s and
Comments of their Arbitr^ry Po^er, or the unequal Ordinances and practices
between them and their Committees.

4 That our Liberties (the purchase of our ancestors blood) may be redeemed
^ro^ ^^l former infrin^em^nts, and preserved ^encefor^h inviol^ble, and t^^t
our ancient liberties may not lie at the mercy of those that have none, not be
enlarged and re^ealed by the votes and revotes of those that have taken too
much liberty to destroy the Subjects.

5 That we may have a speedy and just account of all our moneys, and estates
cheated or wrested from us; by loanes, contributions, taxes, fines, excise, or
plunder, and that the estates of Committees, Sequestrators and all State
officers, (being lately purchased and raised out of the ruins of honest and
loyal subjects) may be resequestred, and be made liable to give us and the
kingdom satisfaction.

6 That Our Knights and Burgesses may be recalled, as having broken their trust
reposed by Us, in them, and that we may have free power and liberty to make a
new choice of such Patriots, as We shall have just cause to repose things of
such moment, as Our lives and fortunes, and the power of making the Kingdom
happy, or miserable, into their hands.

7 That we may no longer subjugate our necks to the boundless lusts, and
unlimited power of beggarly and broken Committees, consisting generally of the
tail of gentry, men of ruinous fortunes, and despicable estates, whose
insatiate desires, hungry with their frequent wants, prompts them to continual
projects of pilling and stripping us, to repair themselves. Nor be awed by
their Emissaries; who are generally the most sherking, and cunning beggars that
can be picked out of a County.

8 That instead thereof we may be governed in Military affairs, and Civil, by
men of visible estates, and of unquestioned repute, welbeloved by us; such
whose degree and condition may make them assume places of authority and trust,
out of nobleness of mind and love to their Country, and not to reedifie their
delapidated fortunes.

9 That the late imperious Governor of Lyme and other of his office, and
broken condition, may be no more sheltred under the wings of a member-ship to
glory in the innocent blood of well-meaning Contrymen he has so unjustly
spilt; nor live upon the estates which they have thievishly taken from the
right owners, but that they may be exposed to the equal ^ust^ce of the known
Laws, that we may freely right our selves, and each of us fetch back a stolen
feather.

10 And lastly, that all those among us who have been sequestered, imprisoned,
plundered, or fined, or any way abused, and stripped of our estates, for our
allegiance and loyal adherence to his Majesty, may be restored to our
estates, without any more compositions, and may have leave to take any legal
course for due reparation.

These are our joint desires which we would have molded into a Petition, but
that we hear of the success, unnatural usage of our fellow Subjects on the
like occasion; of which the King cannot in duty but be sensible. This made us
turn our petitionary resolves into resolute demands and propositions of which
we expect satisfactory grants, and do hereby declare, that as heretofore on
less encouragement, we engaged our lives, liberties, and estates, on the same
grounds, under the slighted and unprosperous notion of club-men.
Notwithstanding our sufferings therefore, out ends are still the same, and our
endeavors shall be now vigorous and active, and we doubt not (by Gods and
your assistance) more prosperous and successful.

Subscribed by above 10000 Inhabitants of that County.


