A DECLARTION OF THE HEADS OF SEVERAL LETTERS, SENT FROM THE COMMITTEE at
YORK, UNTO THE HOUSE OF PARLIAMENT: RELATING All the Chief Passages and
Proceedings at YORK and HULL, the last WEEK.

Likewise, a Letter from Sir John Hotham to the House of Commons, concerning a
dangerous Plot against the Town of Hull, and how it was discovered.

With the Names of those Lords that came to the King from the Parliament.

Also his Majesty's Proclamation to the Sheriffs of several Counties.

London, Printed for I. T. June 3. 1642

A Letter sent from the Committees at York, to the House of Parliament, dated
the 25 of May, 1642.
WHerein they decl^red, That between one or two hundred Horse appeared before
his Majesty on Thursday last, being the 27 of May; out of which he chose fifty
to attend his Person, and dismissed the rest. There also appeared six hundred
Foot, but they were all of Sir Robert Stricklands Regiment: they likewise were
dismissed.

In the Letter sent from the Committee, there was a Paper from the High
Sheriff of York, wherein he showed, That he had received a Warrant and Charge
from His Majesty, to forbear the putting in Execution the Order of Parliament
concerning the Militia; and that he returned this answer, That to the best that
possibly he could, he would apply himself to do faithful service, according
to his Oath, both to King and Parliament.

The King has appointed, That on Friday next, Horse and Foot appear again
before Him.

Captain Dunkin, was reported in the House to be at York, a very stirring Man
in all the matters of the King, concerning the Parliament.

May the 26. a Report was made to the House, That the Lord Keeper was suddenly
gone away from London, and that it was thought to York to the King, and that he
carried the broad Seal with him. Thereupon, the House appointed Messengers to
go in Post after him, and if they could overtake him, to bring him back again.

There was also another report made from Sir John Hotham, that the Ships
wherein the Ordinance and Ammunition that was brought out of the Tower of
London to Hull, was Shipped; were under sail and gone out of the River;
withal, that Sir John Hotham desired that more Committees might be sent to
Hull, because those that were there last being gone, the whole burden lay upon
him only and his Son? which was too heavy for them to bear. That also he
desired 6. Canoneers, and one Engineere to be sent that if so be the Castle
should be beseiged, they might have some that had skill to use the Ordinance
that are there, that they might the better defend the place; also he desired
Money to pay the Soldiers that were there, and that allowance might be given
for keeping Horses to send out for Scouts from time to time, and in particular
he desired Sir John Meldron by name to be sent thither as a Committee.

May the 26. a Letter came from York, dated the 24. of May, which did signify
that the meeting of that County appointed by his Majesty, is put off till the
third of June, and the Messenger who brought the letter from the Committees who
came from York hither in 24. hours, relates a dangerous Plot against Hull,
which was this; one that got into the Town having put himself into the Habit
of a Soldier, did solicit diverse Soldiers to stand for the King, and
promised them, that they should have such and such rewards: and in particular
he signified, that on the 27 of May, two Lords would be at the backside of the
Town with some Soldiers, ready to enter at a Postern gate, if it might be
opened unto them: he prevailed with many, but before the time came, the Plot
was discovered, and so dis^ppointed.

The same Messenger declared, That he met the Lord Keeper at York on Tuesday
night, and that sundry other Lords were come to the King; as namely, the Earl
of Salisbury, the Earl of Northampton, the Earl of Southamhton, the Earl of
Davonshire, the Lord of Dover, the Lord Coventry, the Lord Capell, and others.

There was a Relation made to the House, that Sir Thomas Littleton, had sent
three pieces of Ordinance to his House; which passing by Alisbury at the time
of the Fast, were notwithstanding, there stayed by the Constable, and the Cart
that brought them sent away, the Ordinance being there detained. And an Order
was made, to prevent Ammunition from going to York.

Another Letter from Sir John Hotham was read, which punctually declared the
Plot against Hull, which was thus, one Becket, whose Daughter was married to
Foots a Soldier, sent for the said Foots his Son in Law, and offered him a
very large reward, if so be be would betray Hull: Foots discovered the matter
to Sir John Hotham, who advised him to hearken unto Becket, and so he did,
accepting the conditions; but propounding means for the performance thereof, he
giving him satisfaction thereabouts; Foots willed him, to declare what it was
that he expected from him? Becket answered, to let in some Lords with their
Troops at a back door, which particular project Foots Related to Sir John
Hotham.

Sir John Hotham wrote to His Majesty a Letter, wherein he gave him notice of
the several particulars, and that it was discovered, and humbly entreated His
Majesty, that care might be taken thereabouts, least damage and dishonor
might accrue to His Majesty.

The Letter which Beckett sent to Foots is sent to the Parliament, who have
sent for the said Beckett as a Delinquent.

A Letter from the Major of Beverly to Sir John Hotham was read, which
certifieth the care and diligence of the Major in maintainning a Watch, and
thereby they observed sundry comeing in at unseasonable hours, and amongst
others some Recusants.

Sir William Strickeland, is one of the new Committees appointed to go to
Hull, and Instructions for the Committees were sent with him. A Letter was sent
to the Speaker from Sir Frincis Worthley and others, which the Speaker making
known to the House, and asking whether he should read it, it was refused by
the whole House to be read, because they were Delinquents. Committees also were
sent to Lincolneshire with Instructions to look well to that County.

An information was brought to the House of Commons of 2. Cart-loads of great
Saddles that were carried to the Waterside to be Shipped for York.

A PROCLAMATION BY THE KING.
Our will and pleasure is, That the Ministers, Freeholders, Farmers, and
substantial Copyholders of this our county of YORK, do Assemble and meet
together at HEWORTH MOOR, near Our City of YORK, upon Friday in Whitson week
according to former summons by nine of the clock in the Morning. For that we
are informed there are diverse Fayrs to be keep in this Our County the day
following, at which time many of them may have necessary occasions to be
absent: and therefore, out of Our tenderness and care of Our good Subjects, We
have thought fit to give this early notice, to the end the said Inhabitants may
be put to as little prejudice as may be. And this Our pleasure We require to be
forth with Printed, And Copies thereof to be speedily published and dispersed
by the SHERIFF of this County: For which this shall be sufficient Warrant.

Given at Our Court at YORK.
FINIS.

