THE DECLARATION OF THE HOLLANDERS Concerning, The English Fleet now under the
command of General Blake; With the Rising of the people against their
Magistrates, and declaring for a war with England: And the States Proclamation,
prohibiting all Merchants and Seamen to touch upon the English Coasts.

Also, Vantrumps putting forth to Sea with one hundred and seven Men of War,
and his Orders and Instructions given to the Captains of his Fleet.

LIKEWISE, The State of affairs in France, and the Declaring of the Citizens of
Paris Rebels and Traitors, by the King and Council.

Together with the proceedings of the Parliaments Forces in Ireland: Sent in
several Letters from diverse personages of Honor to certain Member of the
Council of STATE.

July.9th. LONDON: Printed by B. A. 1652.

The DECLARATION Of the HOLLANDERS Concerning The English Fleet, and the States
Proclamation prohibiting Merchants and Seamen to touch upon the Coasts of
England.
SIR,
THe States of Holland find the people here to be so importunate and clamorous,
and in especial manner the Zealanders, (who as if they were in a frenzy, talk
high and rave) that they have been forced to publish in print the instructions
which they gave to the Lord Hemstead at his departure for England, (by which we
suppose our Ambassadors are near home) he was principally to demand of the
Parl. of England four conferences; therein, To excuse the carriage of Admiral
Vantrump toward the English Fleet upon the Downs, to desire a cessation of all
acts of hostility, and a restoration of all the ships taken by the English,
and to bring the final answer and demands of the Parliament, and in case of
delay upon the fourth conference to return back; this was the sum of their
instructions, by which it is plainly apparent, that he wanted power to conclude
the Treaty, so that from his return we can gather no hope of peace forasmuch as
he and his fellows have performed their task, in discovering the strength,
counsels, and resolutions of England.

The publishing of these instructions, seemed for the present to give some small
content to the people, allaying, but not extirpating their fury, which now
boils in their breasts more then before, insomuch that nothing will now content
them but a war with England, especially the Zealanders, who ever were, and
still are more violent then the others. Their rage is come to so high a pitch,
that they openly declare, that if their Deputies at the Hague return home,
without letters of Mart for them against the English, they will kill them: the
effects of their rage begins to break forth already; for as certain Officers
went about in Middleburgh beating of drums for soldiers in the name of the
States of Holland and Zealand, because the Prince of Orange was not also named,
a great tumult a rose among the people, who laid violent hands upon the
officers and drummers, and threw them into the water.

The Yonckers (alias Gent.) vapor much, and seem to set light by the power of
the English at sea, and have declared, That they have not yet showed how
formidable they are, because they judge the English Fleet at sea to be of small
force and scarce worth the regarding; but yet if they continue to take and
seize their ships as now of late they have done, they will rise up with all
their power, and sink, burn, and destroy them every one. This is their daily
talk, although they know, that if they had not had the help of the English,
they had been long ago swallowed up by their enemies.

The States in the mean while, are not insensible of the danger approaching
near them, as appears by their fortifying of Scheveling, and many other places
and building of forts round about them, to hin^er and impede the landing of the
English, in case they should prevail against their Fleet, and beat them; and to
s^cure the Hague, which is defended with nothing but a graft and draw bridge.
The Elector of Brandenburgh has promised to aid them with ten thousand men,
although I believe he will hardly make good his promise, which sprung only out
of a Bravado, by the persuasions either of the old Princess of Orange, his
mother in law, or Count William his brother in law; his small feats the last
summer against the Duke of Newburgh discovers of what temper he is.

The States have published a Proclamation throughout all the Cities in Holland,
wherein they prohibit all Merchants and seamen whose trade lies Westward, to
pass any more by the Cliffs of Dover and Callis; but to leave that narrow
Channel where they must needs be in danger of ships, Ports and Castles, and so
to steer about the Orkneys, not touching (if they can possibly avoid it) any of
the English coasts. But this is a very uncouth and far fetched passage, which
our men who have tasted the sweetness and convenience of your Harbors, are
very sensible of.

Vantrump is out at sea with three squadrons of ships consisting of about 70
sail, which are to secure our Coast and trade with the fishing, if there be
occasion; besides he has 24 ships which attend upon the East India Fleet, all
which, together with such as are c^ming to him are 107 sail, besides fire
ships, amongst whom he has given this order, That in case any one be attacht,
and that the next might have relieved him and did not, that offendour shall die
without mercy.

Hague, July 3. 1652.
A Letter from the Lord Broghil to a Member of the Council of State.
Right Honorable,
IN my last, I gave you a full account of all our treaty in Kerry, with the
Lord Muskerry and his party; since which I returned into the County of Cork, to
send all requisites to our forces in Kerry for reduction of Ross, and to attend
the Rebels in those Fastnesses, where they had six hundred horse, one Regiment
of Dragoons, and one of Foot embodied, and every day fresh forces marching to
join with them. This made me last Saturday night with five good troops of
Horse, and five foot companies march toward them, resolving to engage them in
their Camp, if providence should not offer a more promising place to do it in.
The last Sabbath in the morning, under the favor of a mist, after 22 miles
march, we fell into their Camp, where the Lord owned us, and by us dispersed
all their force; but our men were so tired, the country so bad, and the fog so
thick, that the execution was followed above two miles, yet it was not bloody;
they lost Mr. Herbert of horse, and others: We took near 100 horse, two Colors,
and a good quantity of arms, a prey of above 200 Beeves they had taken out of
our quarters to supply Ross with, which were returned freely to the Country
people. We took Lievt. Col. Supple, one of their three Commanders in chief; a
col. of horse, and some troopers, this submission of the Lord Muskerry will
probably restore this miserable country to peace: We have now received letters
that Slego is surrendered to Sir Charles Coot, and that Clenrickard desires some
terms for himself and party. Also we have letters that Col. Ingoldsby, has
routed Col. Graces horse, and surrounded his foot in a Bog.

Cork 25 June 1652. Broghil.

A Letter from Major Smith.
SIR,
WE hear that Col. Ingoldsby has lighted on Graces party in a great Fastness,
after he was beaten of from Lougreah, which he attempted to storm, but missed,
and lost there about 80 men, Col. Ingoldsbies men disputed the pass into the
Fastness near half an hour which was justified with 1200 foot, and 150 horse of
the enemies, but at length forced them, and killed upwards of 200, about 60
horse taken. Grace fled over the Shanon, Colonel Redman Seark, and Colonel
Mac Gawley are killed, and some other field officers, besides six or seven
Captains, some few prisoners were taken, which are with Colonel Abbot to
exchange, we lost but three men that we can hear of, and nine Dragoons wounded,
with some few Troopers. It is hoped 1500 Irish will be shipped for Spain.

Limrick. June 23. 1652.
A Letter from Paris, dated July the 11, stilo novo.
Sir,
In my last I acquainted you with the affairs here, and that an act of union
was agreed upon between the Princes, Parliament, and City, against the Cardinal
and his adherents, and consequently against the King, It is now signed by all
parties, and they have proceeded already to change many officers of State who
favored Mazarine, placing others of their own faction in their rooms, they are
now about to make the Duke of Orleans Regent of the Kingdom, as soon as the
Deputies of this Parliament are returned from the Court. All the great officers
of the City are fled in much fear, (being Mazarinists) to the Court; the King
and Cardinal seem not to be greatly moved at these things, but proceed to
reinforce their army which is much augmented by the addition of 3000 men under
Genesis Rosa, who has united himself to Marshal Thuren. It is reported that some
eminent persons have been executed at St. Dennis by the Kings command, who with
the advice of his Council has passed a sentence, declaring the City of Parts,
and all others that shall adhere unto the Princes, Rebels and Traitors, and
still keeps all provisions from coming to the City, so that bread is
excessive dear, but the Duke is providing 4000 horse to be a guard for
provisions, that so the wants of the City may be supplied.

FINIS.

