A Declaration of the Maids of the City of LONDON, etc.
WE the subordinate Subjects of this Commonwealth, do Declare our selves to
join with the Apprentices of this City, etc. by way of downright Honesty, for
the increase of the City force against this Army-fied Parliament:

And we do Declare, That to prevent all Hostile Incursion upon us, from this
Army or Parliament; that the said Apprentices shall enter us by way of Listing;
and if they do advance; we hope it will never be beyond the Line of
Communication.

We shall be ready to serve in the same Service with them, to maintain and
secure our Forts from the upstart Preachers, who without our call, will be
daring to thrust themselves into our Pulpits.

And therefore, first, We Declare against the Cobblers single-soul conscience,
which they call tender, with their Independent Pumps on; and against their
pretended Liberty, to leap into our Trenches; without we join in our Resolution
against them of an Upright Occupation: they may Underlay us at last: Kiffin the
Glover, had like even nigh to make us run mad with his Heretical Thimble: And
Can -- that Independent Ringleader, to set up the Fifth Monarchy, and his
followers, will never leave fluttering about our Sconces, in a way of a Spy.

Nay the Sly Anabaptist must needs pretend Dipping, and so sneak privileges
into us to cast our Water, that he may know where our strength lies.

And the poor Innocent Adamite, that is stripped of all fencing stratagems; yet
he is ever prepared to beat up our quarters; and having naked truth for his
Standard, will often be ready to enter our sensitive outworks.

The Seeker may disturb our night-watch; being sure groping in the dark; but
their weak judgments will reach no further.

The Quakers who are now flourishing without colors; and indeed even ready to
affright us with their dismal looks; yet we bid defiance to all such as quake,
before they scale our Wall.

And we further do Declare in spite of all this Crew of Vermin, according to
our Feminine faculty; we will keep them at a distantical posture; Vowing a
Maiden magnanimity, in opposition to all Conventickling conjugations; so
standing upon the conscientious Liberty of our unresolved Virginity; We here
unanimously Vote, to render our selves to the use aforesaid; for bringing in of
the right Proprietor, which alone can settle us against the Fictions and
Factions, which our Flesh and Blood cannot endure.

Therefore stand to it Fellow-doers and sufferers.

And we shall live and dye for you, stand to you, and fall with you.

