THE DECLARATION OF THE ARMY UNDER His Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, As it
was Lately presented at Saffron-Walden in Essex, unto Major-Generall Skippon,
Lievtenant-General Cromwell, Commissary-General Ireton, And Colonel Fleetwood,


Members of the House of Commons, and Commissioners there for the Parliament,
by Colonel Whaley, Colonel Rich, Colonel Hammond, Colonel Lambert, Colonel
Okey, Colonel Hewson, And Major Disborow,
With the names of two hundred thirty and more Commission-Officers annexed.

Which Declaration is to manifest and set forth to them, they being Members of
Parliament, and of the Army, the Armies real love and diligent care to
discharge that duty for which they were raised, as will manifestly appear in
time to all that wish well to Mercy, Peace, and Justice.

The time is coming when God will execute justice and judgment on the earth.

Printed by the appointment of the Officers, whose names are hereunto
subscribed. 1646.

To the honorable, Major General Skippon, Field-Marshall for Ireland,
Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell, Commissary-Generall Ireton, and Colonel
Fleetwood:
The Officers of the Army now convened at Walden, whose names are subscribed,
humbly show,
THat whereas according to the direction received from you, the two Votes of
the honorable House concerning Indemnity and Arrears, have been faithfully
communicated to the Soldiery under our respective Commands; and thereupon
there have been returns made from the several Regiments, of the grievances
that yet stick upon them; out of which there has been drawn up by the
Officers, and consent of private Soldiers (for more brevity) a Summary of all
such heads, wherein the returns from all did agree: All which have been
presented, and showed unto you; by which it does appear, that in the Army
there are sundry discontents, which we are sorry to see. Now for the clearer
discovery (according to our best observations) of the original grounds,
together with the rise and growth of these discontents, and the occasions that
have happened to increase the same; as also of our own and other Officers
proceedings, in relation thereunto: We do here humbly tender this faithful and
true account, as follows.

THat we have long found our Soldiers and inferior Officers (as we have also
been our selves) generally much troubled, That since the Kingdom was (through
the goodness of God) cleared, and free for the Parliament to raise money in,
the Army should yet not be supplied with pay to enable them to discharge
Quarters, but compelled to be burdensome to friends, beholden to enemies, and
oppressive to all, for their necessary subsistence, which, in the way of
Free Quarter (besides the unequal burden to those parts where the Army has
been occasioned to lie) has put the Kingdom to almost double the charge,
(damage or debt) that it would have been, if n^o^^ys had been timely raised to
enable the Soldiers to pay Quarters. And the considerations of this to the
Soldiery has been the more grievous, in regard of the advantage which the
envy and malignity of many against this Army has thereby had to bring the
soldiers under scorn, contempt and odium with the Country, and to render the
reproaches and calumnies cast upon the Army the better accepted with the people.

We have found them also very sensible (both from their own reason and the
experience of others) how tedious, chargeable, difficult and uncertain it is
for Soldiers after disbanding to get their particular accounts audited, and
Debenters for Arreares, and much more to get the money, and therefore having
not out of their small wages got money enough before hand to maintain them in
prosecution of that business, nor the sum of their Arrears so considerable as
to countervaile the expense of time and money in their necessary attendance at
London or elsewhere about it, every man for himself; they have been apt to
account for as good as lost whatever part of their Arrears they should not
(before disbanding) either receive or get debenters for, and a certain
appointment where and how to have the same.

That the many examples before our eyes of bitter and rigorous prosecutions at
Law against Soldiers for things done in the War have occasioned us and them
with some amazement and anxiety to fore-thinke if the Parliament sitting, and
the Army yet standing such things were dared and done, what measure we were
like afterward to find in case (sufficient provision being not made
beforehand for indemnity in such things) we should be left to the sense of a
Countrey-Jury or Judge at Law concerning the exigence of war and duty of a
Soldier, especially considering how many of those under whose verdicts it were
like to fall are either Malignants or Newters, and the latter (though in other
things indifferent, yet in the matter of the war disaffecting the Parliaments
proceedings) do distaste none so much as Soldiers looking upon them as their
immediate disturbers, and the same consideration makes the Soldiers also fear
that upon all future occasions of pressing they shall be most aimed at by
disaffected or maligning Neighbors, if that business be left to their
discretion. We have found them also sensible of the neglect appearing in most
Countries toward maimed Soldiers and the wives and children of men slain in
the war.

We have also found in the apprehensions of many some dissatisfaction in
relation to those public ends, for which principally both in the Parliaments
invitations, and their own intentions, they were induced to engage in this
war.

In all these respects premised, we have found the Soldiery very earnest to
have their grievances and desires in these things represented to the Parliament
by way of humble Petition, and (as there is right and reason enough in the
things themselves, so) we know nothing that might absolutely debar us, or
render it unlawful for them or us to have used that liberty of petitioning
which belongs to us in common with all other members of the Commonwealth: But
yet considering how subject to ill resentment or misconstruction a Petition
from an Army might be, and with what jealousy all our actions and proceedings
in this Army have by many been looked upon, and how watchful and ready many
have been to make misrepresentations and raise misapprehensions of the same. We
did apply our selves to dissuade from petitioning at all, or at least to put it
off as long as we could, in expectation of what the Parliament of themselves
would do in those things that might prevent the need of petitioning. Thus we
delayed so long, till at last the Soldiers grew jealous of their Officers, and
began to conceive, that the Superior Officers (their Arreares being more
considerable, and more worth their expense of time, and money in attendance for
them, and they better able to prosecute the same for themselves, as also to
save themselves from molestation or pressing, after disbanding) did neglect
their Soldiers concernments and mind only their own, insomuch as having been
long put off in their desires of petitioning, the Soldiers of diverse Regiments
sent some of themselves at the first conveneing of Officers at Walden, to know
whether the Officers (having long understood the common grievances before)
would effectually fall upon some Petition in their behalfes, and to let them
know, that otherwise they must speedily fall upon something by themselves to
make known their grievances and desires while they had time.

Hereupon to prevent the Soldiers acting of themselves in any irregular way,
or intermedling with any thing which might breed offense or inconvenience,
finding there had been many draughts of Petitions carried about in the Army
which did extend to things of diverse natures, and some beyond the proper
concernments of Soldiers; the Officers then convened took one draught which
they found least obnoxious that way, and leaving out ^^^^ltering such passages
as they thought might (for (...)) prove d^^^^stfull or inconvenient, they
brought it to (...) Petition, whereof a copy is hereunto annexed, (not
touching (...) any thing but the due and necessary concernments of Soldiers)
and this they directed to the General, so as, if any thing (...) escaped their
consideration, it might through his hand receive a further examen and
correction, ere it should come to the Parliament. And thus to concur with the
Soldiers in such a Petition, we were induced the rather because (there being
ill-affected spirits in all places, ready to stir up discontents in the Army
against the Parliament) we doubted, that if we did not thus give some vent to
their just grievances and desires, in those things which generally concern the
Soldiery, such spirits might (upon the Soldiers general discontents therein,
and the Officers declining them) have a great advantage to engage the
Soldiers, by those things, in an implication of other matters: And we knew no
better way to prevent such discontents from being blown up into any mutinous
distemper, as by giving timely vent to their common and just desires in a
regular way, and thereby to keep them within the bounds of due order and
relation to their Officers in all they should do; and we are confident that
what was (chiefly to this end) then agreed on by the Officers in the business
of the Petition, if it had been permitted to go on, and not found such an
absolute check and restraint as it did, would have proved answerably effectual
to have prevented all further inconveniences, and (with a reasonable answer
from the Parliament) would have rendered the Soldiers easily satisfiable with
what the Parliament would do in the things petitioned, and would have enabled
the Officers the better to keep them in all due order.

Having upon these grounds agreed upon the said Petition, most of the Officers
then at Walden took a copy thereof to their quarters to let the soldiers
understand what was agreed upon for their better satisfaction, intending after
they had done that, to have presented it to the General, but before that could
be done, some that were then at Walden (whom whoever they be, we can judge by
the carriage and sequel of the business, to be no better then malicious
Incendiaries endeavoring to beget misunderstanding betwixt the Parliament and
their Army) having surreptitiously got a copy of the Petition intended, did
unseasonably propossesse the Parliament therewith, and that (as we cannot but
imagine by the effect) with such misrepresentations of our intentions and
proceedings therein, as to delude the Parliament into high suspicions of some
dangerous design in it, insomuch as the honorable House of Commons was
induced first to send order to the General for suppressing the Petition, and
to summon diverse ominent Officers of the Army to appear at their Bar about it,
and after that a Declaration in the name of both Houses against all that should
proceed therein, was sent down, with order to the General for the publishing
of it through the Army, of which Declaration here is also a copy annexed.

The said Declaration censuring the Petition as dangerous, tending to put the
Army into distemper and mutiny, to obstruct the relief of Ireland, and to put
conditions upon the Parliament, and declaring the Petitioners if they should
proceed therein no less then enemies to the State and disturbers of the
public peace; we confess, both we and our soldiers could not but look upon
it with great trouble and amazement, we could not apprehend or imagine wherein
the Petition tendded to put the Army into mutiny or distemper (being by us
intended and conceived as the surest way to prevent the same for the reasons
before expressed) nor wherein it tended to obstruct the relief of Ireland,
being rather the way, as we conceived, of gaining that just satisfaction to the
soldiery which might encourage both this Army more unanimously, and all other
soldiers more cheerfully to engage in any future service for the Parliament,
when they should find a due consideration in the Parliament as far as they
were able, for services past; nor wherein it tended to put conditions upon the
Parliament, when as the things it desired were such as the Parliament had long
since voluntarily (without any bodies capitulation) promised and offered to all
that should engage in their service or else declared to be a general right,
neither could we understand why our desiring of things (though not due, if yet
they were but reasonable, and offered by way of humble Petition, with
submission and reference of it to the Parliament, as we profess our desires
were) should be apprehended as a putting of conditions upon the Parliament,
more then all other Petitions have been, from Counties, from Corporations, and
especially from the City of London, being a Body more numerous, more closely
compacted, more near to the Parliament, and more plentifully furnished with
money, and all things else to back and carry on their desires, then the Army
is: neither could we bethink our selves of any passage in the Petition that
might be any ground of offense, except that clause concerning the Royal
Assent; for which we clearly profess, that the assurance we desired for
indemnity, was an Ordinance of Parliament, and our intention in that claus^
was but this, That what Ordinance should be past for indemnity, might be
proposed amongst those other things, to which the Parliament would of
themselves desire the Royal Assent; and that being denied, we should and shall
acquiesse in the authority of Parliament for that, as we suppose the Parliament
also will for those other things. And we could not see, how that clause
(weighed as it stands) can reasonably be understood to import any more.

Nevertheless we have that honorable esteem of the wisdom and gravity, and
that regard to the authority of the Parliament, as that though we (looking only
upon the ^^^^tion censured, and upon our own clear intentions in it) cannot see
the ground of suppressing the Petition, or passing such a censure upon it, yet
we are induced to believe, that the Parliament either had such
misrepresentations of our carriage about it, and suggestions of dangerous
designs therein as (if true) might justly raise them into an high resentment
thereof, and jealousies thereupon, or else were some other way abused or
surprised in the proposal or passing of such a Declaration against it: But
since the Parliament has not, either in the Order for suppressing it, or in
the Declaration, expressed any particular ground of their (...) and censure,
either from any passage in the Petition it self, or from their informations
concerning the carriage of it; we find, that both common Soldiers, and other
that look singly upon the said Order and Declaration as they stand directed
against the Petition it self, the matter whereof they account to be undeniably
just and due, are carried away with this apprehension, that in the one they are
denied and debarred the common liberty of petitioning, and in the other are
judged no better then traitors, for but going about to desire what they
conceive their due, and dearly earned; and are apt to include themselves in a
bondage below an equal to the worst of ^^^ives, if in any case whatsoever they
have no way left or allowed to represent to their Officers, and by them to
their General, their grievances and desires in (...) concerns them meetly as
Soldiers, though it be at a seasonable time, when there is not present action
to imp^de or disturb thereby, and though in a regular, quiet and subm^ssive
way, as this in their conceptions and intentions was: These last particulars
(ere we pass them over) we cannot but denote, as being, to our best
observations, the maine root and bottom of what later discontents, or unusual
proceedings have since appeared amongst the Soldiers; to give account whereof,
we shall in discharge of our duties, clearly proceed as follows.

The Soldiers (as is premised) finding, o^ at least conceiving themselves
debarred from the usual and regular ways of making known their grievances and
desires, and finding the Officers generally discouraged from acting or meddling
any further for them in that way, have fallen into other ways of
correspondence and agreement amongst themselves, for promoting, as they
conceive, their just and necessary desires, and for their vindication in what
they had formerly done, as they thought, upon just grounds; and have to that
purpose appointed, or chosen, out of themselves, a certain number for every
Regiment, or Troop and Company, to agitate for those ends, in behalf of them
all.

And thus in pursuance of those grounds (which they thought just and necessary)
many things have been proposed amongst them, written and done, which to others
may appear irregular: and particularly we find, there was indeed such a letter
(as the Parliament has had notice of) sent to the General, Major General, and
Lieu. General, from the Soldiers of eight Regiments of Horse; but we cannot
find, that that, or ought else has been done by those their agents which has
not been with the consent or allowance, or approbation of the generality of the
Soldiers. And we find it has been also agreed and resolved amongst them, to
send up to the Parliament by their said Agents, all the heads of the former
Petition already; only in form (directing the same immediately to the
Parliament) and we perceive there have not wanted some in all quarters (upon
their dissatisfaction in those things) ready to engage them in an implication
of things of other nature, which though not evil in themselves, yet did not
concern them properly, as Soldiers.) And that purpose of sending up their
desires to the Parliamiament, had (as we find) been done or attempted ere now,
but that (upon the sending down of your selves from the House of Commons, to
quiet distempers in the Army) those appointed to go up, were stopped, upon
expectation of what you might bring down from the House toward their
satisfaction; or, in hope, at least, to have their grievances and desires in
reasonable things again admitted into some regular way of being made known, and
that with clearness, and candid dealings on your parts, and without such
misrepresentation, as by others (the precedent officious informers) had
formerly been put upon them. And since this expectation bred amongst them, we
have not found any proceedings amongst them in other ways, that might be
counted disorder or distemper.

Now for the effect of those two votes of the House on Friday, April 30. sent
down by your hands, which according to our duty have been faithfully imparted
to our several Troops and Companies, we generally find as follows.

1 That the Ordinance for indemnity (mentioned in the first Vote) will clearly
satisfy as to that point, if once past and full to the purpose, as we presume
it will be.

2 That upon the second Uote concerning arrears, we cannot find or expect the
like effect, and that amongst diverse other reasons) principally for this;
because all the assurance the Uote gives concerning arrears to be paid at
disbanding is this, viz [That the house has resolved that a considerable part
of the arrears, shall be paid at disbanding] and no mention being made what
proportion; but those words, [the house has resolved] seeming to refer to
some proportion formerly resolved; It is generally understood to employ any
other then that of six weeks pay.

Now that Uote for six weeks pay at disbanding, as it came forth at a time of
much disadvantage in respect of the discontents preceding, so in the effect and
circumstances of it, It conduced much to heigthen increase and fix the same;
the sum being generally looked upon as very inconsiderable, in relation to the
great arreares incurred, not under the new Model alone, but also in former
Armies and services of the Parliament. For the Officers of this Army generally,
and amongst the horse, most of the Soldiers and very many of the foot are
such, as have been engaged for the Parliament on where or other from the
beginning of the war, and have their arrears incurred under the Model,
superadded to what arrears all former Armies and forces (where they have
served) were in, at their several reducements or disbandings. And that ground
which moved the Soldiery from affection to the cause, to be content with less
of arreares upon former reducements in times of necessity, viz. (because the
Parliament could then do no more,) that ground (we say) does with some, seem
now to be something impaired since the Parliament has had the Kingdom now a
good while wholly under their power.

We find some other things that have concurred not a little to increase
discontents, from the carriage of some of the Commissioners that came down
hither for the Irish service; as particularly their imprisoning and sending up
to London a Commission-Officer of the Army, (Ensign Nichols) which (whatever
the ground may be) yet being without any concurrence of the General, or those
left to command in his absence, and their own authority not appearing, nor any
produced by them) seems an absolute breach both of the subjects liberty, and
Soldiers usual right, and an affront to the authority appointed by the
Parliament over the Army. And this particular, together with many other
carriages of some of them, seeming to concur all to one end, viz. the pulling
of the Army in pieces, and provoking it to distempers by their violent ways,
rather then the service of Ireland should be supplied, or the quiet of this
Kingdom assured in any other way, wherein this Army might pass without a
dishonor.

Lastly, we find that discontents, discouragements, and some animosities, have
been much occasioned and increased in the Army by the high indignities, the
manifold reproaches and calumnies of all sorts most unworthily cast upon the
Army, in false reports raised, and industriously divulged in Sermons, in
printed books, (licensed and passing without check to be published through
the world) and in petitions accepted, (most of them) with thanks. And here we
cannot but take notice of the ingratitudes and unworthy requitals appearing
especially from a great party in that City (whose Trade since this Army began
to open it) has been advantaged above a million thereby; and yet they have not
only long withheld their contributions appointed by the Parliament for this
Army, (which has occasioned a great part of its arreares:) but have in all
other ways indeed contributed their endeavors, to have it paid with dishonor,
and unworthily turned off. And though all reproaches and indignities have been
born by the Army with patience and absolute silence hitherto, (not to be
exampled, we think, in other armies; yet it cannot but trouble men, when they
have followed the work of the kingdom with diligence and faithfulness; and
have (at least) endeavored to do the whole Kingdom good, and to do no man any
wrong or damage where ere they have come (that the Being of an Army could
avoid;) they should yet by spite and falsehood (even from that party that reaps
the advantange of all what they have done) be rendered the scorn and hate of
men, while (to avoid the Kingdoms disquiet) they have been silent in their
own behalf.

We have thus (we hope) discharged our duty in a faithful and clear account of
the general discontents (not to trouble you with the numerous particularities)
that we find in the Army, together with the grounds, occasions, and growth of
them, and of our own proceedings in relation to them, we hope the full
discovery of the bottom, if the soar may give the least advantage to the
cure: toward which, if we may offer any thing as we have done for the other:
we humbly conceive that nothing can so fully reach, and surely remove the
ground of those discontents, and prevent all further inconveniences hereupon,
as these things following.

That if the order for suppressing the Petition, or the censure past in the
declaration against it were not (in the Parliaments sense and intention) merely
in relation to the act of petitioning, or the matter petitioned, but chiefly
upon information of ill carriages, or suggestions of some design in the
managing of it; The Parliament would be pleased to declare so much, and to
clear their own sense and intentions, as to the just liberty of Soldiers in
representing their grievances and desires (as Soldiers) to their officers, and
by them to their General, in a quiet and regular way, and also as to the right
or reasonableness of the things petitioned.

2 That if the Parliament have been by false informations abused, or o^herwise
surprised, or indirectly dealt withal by any persons whatsoever, in what has
there passed in relation to that business, they would be pl^ased to vindicate
and clear the ho^o^ of the Parliament from the evil pract^ses and dest^uctive
designs of a^l such men and cause them to be discovered and deal withal
according to their demerits.

3. That, next, since the Pa^l^a^ent is already (though by some anticipation)
possessed with the effect of the petition they would be pleased to take the
matter of it into timely consideration, and give therein what satisfaction they
may.

4. That the Parliament would discountenance all unjust calumnies against the
Army, and give way, that before it be disbanded, and dispersed, the army may
agree upon, and publish a sober and temperate vindication of themselves, from
the many scandals cast upon them, first presenting and submitting the same to
the Parliaments approbation.

And thus, notwithstanding all discontents, and past provocations, we dare be
confident for our Soldiers, and the body of the Army, that they will be swayed
and sa^isfied with justice and reason, will suffer much in their own
particulars for the quiet and w^ale of the public, and will be ever faithful
and serviceable to Parliament and Kingdom.

We have in all this discharged our consciences and duties to God, the
Parliament and Kingdom, as well as to the Army, for the prevention of any
further inconvenience on all hands. And the Lord is whose hands all issues are,
direct all counse^s hereupon for the best.

A List of the several respective Officers interested herein.
Field-Off^cers. Ioh. Hammo^d Colonel. John Lambert Colonel. John Hewson
Colonel Richard Englesby Colonel Edward W^aley Colonel. John O^^^ Colonel
Nicholas Cowley
C^m: General. viz, Lieutenant Collonells. Izick Ewers Lieu^enant Coll: Thomas
Pride Li^ut: Col: John Iubbe^ Lieu: Col: Mark Gr^ms Lieut. Col. Edward Salm^n
Li^ut: Col. Thomas R^a^e Lieu: Col: Robert Huntington Major. John Disbrow
Major. Thomas Horten Major. G^orge Sedasive Maj. Cap^aine Lawrence Martial of
Horse.
A^l these Field Off^cers. Wr^th Rogers Major. William Cowel Maj^r. Thomas
Smith Maj. Dani^ll Ax^il Major John Wade Major.
Horse. John Reynolds Captain. Azaliah Husbands Captain Richard Sand Captain
Robert Gibhouse Captain. Robert Kirkby Capt. Lieutenant I^seph Wa^ento^ Cap.
Lieutenant Tobias Bri^g^s Cap^aine. S^muel Gar^ner Cap. Jose^^ Bl^sse Cap.
Li^utenant. Io^n Pit^hfo^^ Cap^aine. W^^liam Ev^ns^n Cap. Adam Lawrenes Cap.
John Gladman Cap. Li^utenant. Thomas Ireton Cap. John G^ve Capt. Wi^liam
Rain^borough Cap. Thomas Pennef^her Cap. H^nry Can^n Cap.
Gen^ralls. Francis Wh^te Cap. W^lliam L^^g^ Cap. L^wis Audl^y Cap. Lieutenant.
Horse. B^ng. Burg^sse Cap. Francis Haw^e^ Cap. I^mes L^ughton Cap. Daniel Dale
Cap. Lieutenant. William Colm^n Capt. John Ien^in^ Cap. Walth^r Bethel Cap
Henry Pretty Cap.
Hamonds. Thomas Disney Cap. William Siraton Cap. John Boyce Cap. Edmona Ralph
Cap. Israel Smith Cap. John Puckell Cap. Edward Humphrey Cap. Lieu.
Wallers. William Goffe Cap. George Griphin Cap. John Mason Cap. Waldine L^goe
Cap. Thomas Pasons Cap. Roger Alsop Cap. Ios^ph Sallile Cap. Lieut.
La^b. John B^sco Cap. Ma^thew Ca^well Cap. William Disney Cap. Gul. Sands
Cap. John Grims Cap. Robert Read Cap. John Sp^uer Cap. Edward O^p^en Cap.
^sae^ll Smith Cap. William Wear Cap Lieut. Robert Anderson Cap. Samuel Ro^e
Cap. Lieut.
Hu^ons J^h^ Carter Cap. Sa^u^l Grimes Cap. Thomas Price Cap. John Tappildi
Cap. Henry Davi^ Capt. Alexander B^^fie^d Cap. Thomas Atkinson William Arnop
Jeremy Tolherst Abraham Hopkins Henry Lilbron Cap. Captain Deslodden. John
Clock.
Horse lieu, Edward Sooten James Flood Thomas Shears Henry Johnson Feorge Enson
Nathaniel White Griffith Looyd Sampson Twogoed Benjamin Giffard Stephen White
John Frank Lieu. Philip Prine John Merryman Thomas Johnson Henry Barton Lieu.
Samuel Axtill George Elsemore Edmond Chillenden Tho. Chamberland John Savedge
Thomas Alridge John Peck
Foot. Lewis Nothcut John Filkens Nathaniel Chats Briant Smith William Ward
Gabrell Earwood Ethelbert Morgan John Topping Roger Lewis Ralph Wilson John
Watson John Nich^las Henry Dorney Edward Turner Francis Clarke Abraham Davis
Thomas Day Lieu. George Smith William Hill Lieu. Thomas Baker William Shelley
Edmond Singleton Ran: Warner William Gougha^ Andrew Edwards Jenken Benam John
Beab George Jeckes William Farly Heugh Jenkins John Miller Thomas Casinghurst,
John Potter Mar: Jubbs
Cornets. Peter Wallis Cornet Wig. Barrington, John Spenser. Thomas Euse Will.
Whittington Richard Winstanley Thomas Barker William Quints James Wilson
Christopher Kemer John Clarke Samuel Parker John Fox John Ledbrooke. Richard
Essex Abel Warren. Charles Whitehead John Ward John Southwood Henry Miles Ios.
Saberion William Cob. Richard Weeb. John Chyman. Sammuell Balls, William Rance,
Quarter Masters. James Goodwen Thomas Savedge. Edward Waren Henry Ward Robert
Stanard. Will. Williams Caleb Lee Nath. Philips Paul Chrisine George Sanders.
Q. Hurd John Due W. Miler John Kennet. Will. Wilmate. Rob. Agur^d.
Ensigns of Foot. Charles Bolton, Ensign to his Excel. Robert Smith, Ensign
George Clerk. Sam. Wise. Henry Williams. Joseph Grovey. Tho. Rawlins. Thomas
Lewis. Ier. Camfield Lisle Thomas, Will. Bird Sam. Chase. Will. Ererrard. John
Mason Rob. Besdin Will. Jones. Evan Jones Tho. Newman. Morgan Portree. John
Davis Richard Bourn William Jayse Ferdinando Green. Francis Farmer Henry
Hoadworth. Edward Hour. Morgan Portree. Tho. Newman. John Davis Robert Munings
Edward Evans. Will. Allen. Morgan Porter.

The Armies Petition. To his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, General for the
Parliaments forces. The humble Petition of the Officers and Soldiers of the
Army under your Command.
Shows,
THat ever since our first engagement in the service for the preserving the
power of this Kingdom in the hands of the Parliament, we have in our several
places served them with all faithfulness, and although we have lain under
many discouragements, for want of pay and other necessaries, yet have we not
dispared their Commands disobeyed their Orders, nor disturbed them with
Petitions, nor have their any visible discontents appeared amongst us, to the
encouragement of the enemy, and the impediment of their affairs, but have with
all cheerfullnesse, done Summer service in Winter seasons, improving the utmost
of our abilities, in the advancment of their service, and seeing God has
Crowned our endeavors with the end of our desire ( viz. the disperseing of the
public enemy, and reducing them to their obedience) the King being now
brought in, our brethren the Scots now satisfied and departed the Kingdom, all
danger seemingly blown over and peace in all their quarters.

We (imboldned by the manifold promises and Declaration, to defend and protect
those that appeared and acted in the service) do herewith humbly present to
your Excellency, the annexed representation of our desires, which we humbly
beseech your Excelency to recommend or represent in our behalf unto the
Parliament, and your Petitioner shall ever honor and pray for your Excelency,
etc.

The humble Representation of the desires of the Officers and Soldiers of the
Army, under the Command of his Excellency Sr. Thomas Fairfax presented first to
his Excellency, to be by him represented to the Parliament.

1. Whereas the necessity and exigency of the War has put us upon many
actions, which the Law would not warrant, nor we have acted in a time of settled
peace, we humbly desire that before our disbanding, a full and sufficient
provision may be made by Odinance of Parliament (to which the Royal assen: may
be desired) for our indemnity and security in all such cases.

2. That Audicers and Commissioners may be speedily appointed and authorized to
repair to the head quarters of this Army, to audite and state our accounts, as
well for our former, service as for our service in this Army, and that before
the disbinding of the Army, satisfaction may be given to the Petitioners for
their arrears, that for the charge, trouble and loss of time, which we must
otherwise necessarily undergo in attendance for obtaining of them may be
prevented, we having had ^xperience that many have been reduced to miserable
extremity, even almost starved for want of releife, by their tedious
attendance, and that no Officer may be charged with any thing in his accounts,
that does not particularly concern himself.

3 That those who have voluntarily served the Parliament in the late war, may
not hereafter be compelled by press or otherwise, to serve as Soldiers out of
this Kingdom, nor those who have served as Horsemen, may be compelled by
press, to serve on foot in any future case.

4 That such in this Army, as have lost their lives, and the wives and children
of such as have been slain in the Service, and such Officers and Soldiers as
have sustained losses, or have been prejudiced in their estates, by adhering
unto the Parliamen^, or in their persons by sickness or imprisonment under the
enemy, may have such allowance, and satisfaction, as may be agreeable to
justice and equity,

5. That till the Army be disbanded as aforesaid, some course may be taken for
the supply thereof with money, whereby we may be enabled to discharge our
quarters, that so we may not for necessaries forced to be beholding to the
Parliaments enemies, burdensome to their friends; or oppressive to the
Country, whose preservation we have always endeavored, and in whose
happiness we shall still rejoice.

A Declaration of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, Die Martis 30.
Martii 1647.
THat the 2. Houses of parliament having received information of a dangerous
Petition, with representations annexed, tending to put the Army in a distemper
and muteny, to put conditions upon the Parliament, and obstruct the relief of
Ireland, which has been contrived and promoted by some persons in the Army
They do declare their high dislike of that Petition, their approbation and
esteem o their good service who first discovered it, and of all such Officers
and Soldiers as have refused to join in it, and that for such as have been
abused, and by the persuasion of others drawn to subscribe it; if they shall
for the future manifest their dislike of what they have done, by forbearing to
proceed any further in it, it shall not be looked upon as any cause to take
away the remembrance and sense the Houses have of the good service they have
formerly done; but they shall still be retained in their good opinion, and
shall be cared for with the rest of the Army in all things necessary and
fitting for the satisfaction of Persons that have done so good and faithful
service, and as may be expected from a Parliament, so careful to perform all
things appertaining to Hono^r and Justice; as on the other side it is declared,
that all those who sha l continue in their distempered condition, and go on in
advansing and promoting that Petition, shall be looked upon and proceeded
against as enemies to the State, and disturbers of the public Peace.

Die Martis 30. Martii 1647.
Ordered by the Lords assembled in Parliament, that this Declaration be
forthwith printed and published,

John Brown Cler: Parliamentorum.

FINIS.

