A DECLARATION OF THE KNIGHTS AND GENTRY IN THE County OF Dorset, Who were in
his Late MAJESTY'S Army.
UPon a due consideration of the dangerous jealousies which are promoted;
partly, by the cunning of a close, and malicious Faction of Separatists: and
partly, by the unwarranted Liberties of a heady, and intemperate sort of
People, which falsely term themselves Royallists: -- to the great
dissettlement of Sober, and well-minded Persons: and sufficient to blast the
hopes we have of returning to our Ancient Freedoms; without a more then
ordinary appearance of Divine aid, to support, and reunite us in this our
Critical necessity.

We have thought it highly expedient to declare our Sense, and Resolves, in
the particular of adherence to the largest Assurances of Amicable Agreement,
and Correspondence Imaginable: Looking upon our selves as Obliged by an
Indispensible Tie of Religious Charity, to compassionate, and forgive one
another, as we expect to be forgiven: And we do further Declare, that we are so
far from Justifying those Unchristian Animosityes, which reign in diverse
turbulent Spirits, even of our own Party; (by Reputation at least) that we
disclaim any Society with men of those wild Principles: and that to all
honest purposes, we will never put any difference, betwixt such as shall now
unite with us, in Order to the Public Peace, and those who first engaged in
the same persuasion, with our selves: Submitting all to the Resolves of
Parliament, upon whose Determinations we beseech God to bestow his Benediction.

Sir Hugh Windham. Sir Gerard Naper. Sir John Strangwayes. Giles Strangwayes.
John Hardy. Henry Coker. Edward Hull. Henry Butler. Maximilian Mohune. Robert
Mohune. Henry Hoskins. James Hoskins. George Strangwayes. Nicholas Strangwayes.
Robert Lawrence. Bruen Lawrence. Arthur Fookes. George Brown. Major Udvehall.
Robert Chamberlain. Robert Strode of Slape. John Strode of Slape. Humphrey
Bishopp. John Bishopp. Robert Culliford. George Carry. George Penny. Tho.
Turbervile. George Turbervile. Tho. Paulet. Capt. Hoare. Major Dolline. Hugh
Hodges. Richard Willoughby. John Pesing. John Gillingham. William Eising.
Robert Ernsly. John Dawe. John Fisher. Ellis Collins.
LONDON, Printed in the Year 1660.


