A DECLARATION Of the Counties of KENT AND ESSEX In pursuance of their
Petitions concerning the Kings Majesty.

The further proceedings of the Petitioners of the County of Surrey, and News
from Kingston.

With a Letter from Burry, concerning seven hundred of the Townes-men taking up
Arms to defend themselves, and their Declaration thereupon.

C R
royal insignia

MAy 18th London, Printed by B. A. MDCXLVIII

An exact RELATION OF The late rising at Bury, and seven hundred men in Arms
keeping the town.
SIR,
ON Friday last here began a great combustion in this town about setting up of
a May Pole, which grew to that height, that by Satterday six or seven hun^^^^
men were gotten into Arms; some of them cried out; saying, they were for God
and King Charles, and began to lay hold on some soldiers which were in town,
and set guards in several places, pretending they were in fear that the
soldiers would come in upon them, and disarme them: some of those which stood
for the Parliament were forced to leave the town and their goods to shift for
themselves, and go away to friends in the Country.

To appease this combustion, some troops of horse which were quartered in
these parts were drawn before the town, and finding the townsmen well armed
and in a posture of defense they kept in a body before the town all that night;
the next day many Country Foot joined with them; by reason whereof kept in on
every side; and when they perceived they had brought themselves into a
straight, and had no means to recover themselves, but by submission desired a
parley, which was granted, and for want of better co^nditions (for indeed they
could obtain no other they yielded to mercy. And how much this will conduce to
securing them from what they pretended to be the greatest part of their fear,
viz. the losing of their Arms, I leave to your judgment: However, we hope the
event will be the peace and quiet of the town; which I hope is that which other
places look after. We hear that the trained Bands in Essex have had some
meeting the last week, and intend a General Rendezvous shortly, I pray God all
things may be for the best. Sir, I am

Your obliged friend, R. S.
Bury May 17. 1648.
A Declaration of the Inhabitants of the County of Kent, to the Distorbers of
the peace; subscribed by twenty seven thousand three hundred seventy three
hands.
OBserving with what diligence and expedition, Parties are drawn together,
armed, and by whom; we cannot but demand; to what end? The Country is quiet,
and desires so to continue our Interest in peace, not rapine and bloodshed: yet
are we also resolved not to fall tam^ sacrifices to the spirit of slumber and
delusion, and render up our Religions, Laws, lives and fortunes upon such cold
conditi^ns.

We must ^^ve leave to tell you, that a Petition, concluded on, and avowed by
the universality of this County, representing their honest desires, in a modest
way, to the two Houses of Parliament, according to the practice, nay the
approbation of this present Parliament -- That this Petition is by the most
active in this new commotion, discountenanced and menaced, which makes us
reasonably suspect whither those designs may tend whereof they have the sole
conduct. Our addresses are to the Parliament, not you, and from them we shall
await a seasonable return; our desires being of a moment above your
cognizance. That we labor for is peace; and in a peaceable manner: Nor can we
without horror think of a fresh imbroylment.

The Petition we do all own, affirming the scope thereof so innoten, that we
dare deliver it up to heaven with our souls; and so determine to do, if
thereunto reduced by any troublesome interposition, till the great Council of
the Kingdom to whom only and and properly it refers shall advise upon it.
Wherefore to avoid the effect of jealousies, (the fountain of this la^e war)
we desire also the causes may be removed, least introductive to another.

When you have satisfied this scruple, you have obliged your friends.

The Engagement and Declaration of the Grand Jury, Freeholders, and other
Inhabitants of the County of Essex, in prosecution of their late Petition,
presented to both Houses of Parliament, May 4. 1648.
WE the Grand Jury Freeholders, and other the Inhabitants of the said County
in prosecution of our said Petition do engage our selves one to another, and
declare.

1. That we will not pay any more Excize, or other taxes, till all the desires
expressed in our said petition be fully obtained by us.

2. That we will admit of no Soldiers to come into our County, but such as
agree with us in our said petition and this engagement.

3. That we will employ our utmost endeavors to preserve and defend our Royal
Sovereigne King Charles, his Kingly Government, the Subjects liberty, and the
known Laws of the Kingdom, that is to say, the Common and Statute Laws, and
will never submit our selve to any other kind of Laws, much less to any
arbitrary power whatsoever.

4. That we will protect and defend one another and all that shall adhere to
us, in the pursuance, performing, and keeping of this Engagement, and if any
Inhabitants of our County, shall refuse to join with us herein, we shall
esteem as a person disaffected to the peace, and welfare of the sam^.

A Method of putting the County of Essex in a posture Of Defense. Offered to
the consideration of the Gent. thereof and Trained Bands, at there several
Rendezvous, and to all other of the Inhabitants, who shall meet in those
respective places or else where in the said County, in prosecution of their
Petition.
1. THat such Officers may be chosen for the said Trained Bands, as the County
and the Petioners may confide in, and that all such Soldiers of the Trained
Bands, who shall not approve of, and subscribe to the Petition, be turned off,
and others chosen to serve with their Arms in their places.

2. That the Earl of War wick be entreated to repair speedily into the County
that they may have one to command in chief among them, and to consult among
them upon all sudden accidents; and if his Lordships occasion will not permit
to come so requested, to depute such a person to execute that charge as they
shall approve of.

3. In regard the number contained in the trained Bands may not be thought
competent for the security of the county, that such Gentlemen thereof, in whom
they may repose trust, may have liberty to list those persons of the said
county well affected to the late Petition, who shall voluntary peesent
themselves for the ^^sire of the same.

4, That a day may be appointed for ^^^^ting of the trained. Bands, and a
muster made of all such of the county as shall voluntary appear for the service
of it.

5. That in order to the safety of the county, the Sheriff, and Grand Jury be
desired to take care of the particulars.

As for the report of a fight at Kingston on Thames, and the like it proves to
be of no validity: but altogether groundless and no disturbance there at all,
but on Tuesday night, last a Gent. was robbed between Kingston and Putney,
which was done by 3 Horsemen in the habit of Soldiers, which are apprehended,
whether they were of the Army or not does not yet appear.

Some of the Country men which came with Surry petition were taken into custody
at White Hall: but are all discharged again, Some of the Countrymen complain
of the loss of their money and Cloakes, if they know who to accuse for it, they
will doubtless have satisfaction.

Two of the Soldiers that were wounded in that commotion are since dead.

This present Thursday the 19 of May there was a meetting at Brainford for
election of a Knight of the sheire to serve in Parliament instead of Sir John
Franklin deceased.

Imprimatur

G. M.

FINIS.

