THE DECLARATION OF THE High-Sheriffe OF YORKSHIRE, AND OF The Commander in
Chief of the PARLIAMENTS Forces in the NORTH, and the rest of the Gentlemen
Commissioners in that County of York, the 19. of May 1648. OF Their intentions
to rise for the suppression of Sir Marmaduke Langdale, and Sir Philip Musgrave,
and the Forces under their Command.

ALSO, A Message from Genesis HALES, to his Excellency the Lord Genesis Fairfax,
touching his holding out of Conditions of uncertain mercy to the people, and
the Resolution of the Kentish Army, to live and dye, and stand and f^ll
together.

SVbs^ribed in the Name, and by the Appointment of the Knights Gentry, and
Inhabitants of the County of Kent.

Imprimatur

GILBERT MABBOT.



LONDON. Printed by John Clowes. MDCXLVIII.

THE DECLARATION OF THE HIGH SHERIFF OF Yorkshire, and of the Commander in
Chief of the Parliaments Forces in the North, and the rest of the Gentlemen
Commissioners in that County of York, there assembled the 19. of May 1648: of
their intentions to rise for the suppression of Sir Marmaduke Langdale, and Sir
Philip Musgrave, and the Forces under their Command.
THe Parliament having lately (with much expense of blood and public Treasure)
reduced the whole Kingdom from the miseries of a long and dangerous War to a
hopeful beginning of Peace, and having taken off Free Quarter, and reduced the
Forces of the Kingdom to a small Army, which is to be continued only for a
season, until the ill humors, stirred up by the War, should be settled
again, (the n^cess^ie whereof most evidently appears at this time) and being in
hand to take off all other burdens and gri^vances of ^he people, and to settle
the Government according to the ^ncient Laws and just freedom of this Nation.
The same Malignant Parti^ and Council that first involved the Land in the la^e
War, envying that the people should ^njoy the blessing of Peace, have now
again invaded the North with some Forces brought in under Command of Sir
Marmaduke Langdale, Sir Philip Musgrave, and others, who have already seized
upon Barwick and Carlisle, and have poss^ssed themselves of all or most part of
Cumberland and Westmerland, raising Forces in those parts, in great numbers,
and drawing to them from this Gountie, and other parts of England very great
multitudes of P^p^sts, Malignants, and other persons of desperate condition,
that were formerly engaged in the late War, against the Parliament and
Kingdom of England, and are now marched up very near the Borders of this
County, which they threaten every day to invade, and by that means must
infallibly bring upon all the Inhabitants the same or worse evils than those
formerly suff^red by the War, the bleeding wounds whereof are not yet
stanched, which we having taken into serious consideration, and well knowing,
that, how specious soever their pretenses are, yet they intend the intraducing
of a Tirannicall Government, and the destruction of the Laws, Liberties, and
Religion of this Kingdom; and that if they be suffered to enter into this
County, they will make it the seat of a most dangerous and lasti^g War, and
thereby will undoubtedly destroy the lives of a great number of I^habitants,
and utterly con^ume the Estates and Livelihoods of all sort^ of people
whatsoever, which we being resolved (by the help of Almighty God) to prevent,
and avoid, so much as in us lies, and to that end (having given order for the
raising of Forces in this County, according to the V^tes and Resolutions
concluded upon Us) We do Declare, that our intentions therein are no other than
to oppose the invasion of this County, and the spoil thereof, by the said
Forces rais^d by Sir Marmaduke Langdale and his adherents; and that such forces
as shall thus be raised by us shall neither be drawn out of the bounds of this
County without their own consents, nor shall be longer continued in Arms then
until the Country shall be secured from the danger now threatened, which we
thought necessary to publish in this manner to all persons well-affected to
the Peace and welfarre of the County, and the maintenance of the Protestant
Religion, to encourage them cheerefullie to rise, and take up Arms in this so
just and nec^ssarie Defense of themselves, wherein we cannot doubt to find
their compliance with Us; and to this extraordinary way we are at this instant
necessitated, because we hea^ that a part of ^he Parliaments Army, that were
lately engaged in suppressing the like attempts of the Enemy in Wales, are
still employed in se^ling of the peace of those parts, though part of that Army
be now also upon their March this way for our Protection, yet the danger of the
Country is so eminent, and at hand, as it requires all men's active readiness
to defend it, and we doubt not that every one doing his duty therein, God will
bless our endeavors.

June the second 1648. Thomas Darcy Cler:

A Letter to His Excellency THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX.
My Lord.
THe Laws of Nature are universal and perpetual, among which, that of self
preservation is one, ye have Declared as much, judge if it be not; We have
taken up Arms to defend our selves, and providence has now blessed us with a
power to do it, which we cannot relinquish but with the forfeiture of our
reason, and honor. We invade not your right, but seek to secure our own, and
so to do, is neither tumult nor rebellion. You are pleased to hold out
conditions of uncertain mercy to the people, and withal a fi^t menassie of an
exemplary and possitive prosecution upon the principles. To this I must assure
you (Sr.) it is but one soul which informs this body, and we are determined
to stand, or fall together being rendered incapable of any fear, save only, of
relapsing into our former slavery; We need no other arguments (then what the
fair manage of this business affords) to testify our love to peace, if your
self stand so inclined. Also be pleased rather to make this County a friend
then an enemy, ar to the Petition, we hope it will be seasonably considered of,

Rochester. May 31. 1648. We are your servants Phil. Masvell Major, Edward
Hales.
Signed in the name and by the appointment of the Gentry of this County, by Us.

Jmprimatur

GILBERT MABBOT

FJNJS.

