A DECLARATION OF THE Cornish-men Concerning the Prince of WALES; AND The
Resolution of the two famous Garrisons of Plymouth and Portsmouth, concerning
the Parliament and Army, and their Engagement, to live and die together, for
the defense and preservation Of RELIGION, GOVERNMENT, LIBERTY, and EREEDOME.


ALSO, The Princes Declaration and Speech touching the Death of His Father; And
His Design and Resolution touching the Kingdom of Scotland.

Imprimatur,

feb: 9. 1648 THEODORE JENNINGS.



Printed for R.W. for general satisfaction of the Kingdom.

A DECLARATION From the West of ENGLAND Containing The Resolution of the
Cornish-men, touching the Prince of Wales, and a Declaration of their
Engagement, in relation to the proceedings of the Parliament and Army.
SIR,
THE Distractions in these parts begin to grow numerous, and the adverse party
appears visible it several places throughout this Western Climate,
especially since the late Blow given to the great Cedar; who upon receipt of
the intesligence, vowed to revenge his blood, and prove isntrumental, in
propagating the Royal succession, by crowning the Prince of Wales. But upon
proclaiming of the proclamation, prohibiting the same, the pride of their
insolent spirits was much abated, and diverse who seemed to smile upon their
actions, have now shrouded themselves under the Banner of Freedom, by holding
correspondency with the well affected in these parts, and mutually engaging
with them in this ensuing Declaration, for the preservation of their Relgion
and Liberty, from the violation of their insulting Enemies; a copy of the said
Declaration follows.

WHereas, we having found (by sad and woeful experience) the continuance of the
public Calamities of this distracted County, and bleeding Kingdom to have been
principally occasioned by the prevalency of a corrupted and self-seeking party,
whose daily actings, has brought forth, cross, delatory, and destructive
proceedings, for obstructing the peace of this Nation, and infringing the
liberty and freedom of the Inhabitants thereof.

And likewise considering the apparent danger, and approaching ruin ready to
be fall us (if not timely prevented) by reason of the Princes being at Sea with
a Fleet (consisting for the most part) of Forreiners, and men disaffected to
the peace of this Kingdom: In order whereunto, and for prevention of the
aforesaid ruin and danger, We do (in the presence of Almighty God)
unanimously declare,

That we shall leave no means unattempted, for the strengthening and quickening
of our hands in this great work of the Parliament and Army, which so much
redounds to the universal peace of this distracted Kingdom, the preservation
of our lives, liberties, and freedoms, from the violation of an arbytrary and
self-seeking people, and the establishing of truth and Righteousness both in
Church and State.

And that according to this our Engagement) we shall with the hazard of our
lives and fortunes expose all that is near and dear unto us, in defense
thereof, and for preservation of our peace, liberty and freedom, against all
opposition whatsoever either by Sea or Land; being confident, that these
suitable Actings to such just principles, will soon bring in, and promote all
the upright in the whole Land to a mutual compliance and engagement with the
Parliament and Army; and not only so, but will also prove isntrumental, for
the making of them renowned patterns to all the people of Europe, for the good
of all Nations.

This Declaration was subscribed unto by many hundreds of the well-affected in
the Towns of Plymouth, Portsmouth, Tavestock,and other places, with a
Resolution to live and dye with the Parliament and Army in all righteousness,
for defense and safety of the Religion, Government, and the public peace and
interest of the Kingdom.

The moderate party about Taunton have likewise declared for the Par. and army,
and are resolved to put themselves into a posture of defense, and to oppose the
landing of the Princes Forces, whose floting up and down the Neptune Seas, and
riding in our Western Channel, causes some fear of jealousy: they are very
numerous in shipping, but are slightly armed, and weakly manned; yet seem to be
very full of courage, and resolutenesse of spirit; for within these few days,
upon the landing of some of the Hoptonians near Dartmouth, an allarum being
given, that Sir Hardresse Wallers Forces were upon their march to receive them,
the Soldiery declared a great willingness to fight them; but the Officers
caused them all to quit their Land-sanctuary, and to hasten aboard.

The Fleet consists of 28 Sail, but Pr. Rupert generally hated amongst them
all: the Lord Hopton has the greatest influence on the Seamen, who wa^teth an
opportunity for the playing of his game.

There are diverse in the town of Plymouth who seem to be much discontented at
the death of the King, and have declared a great deal of sadness, and
vexation of spirit, in relerence to the same; who accordingly upon receipt
thereof, dispatched a messenger aboard the Princes Fleet, to advertize them
thereof; but the Governor has shown a great deal of wisdom and integrity, in
preservation of the peace of the Inhabitants, and allaying all differences.

The Princes Agent (during his private residence in the said town) had wrought
exceedingly upon the hearts of many; insomuch, that diverse would not stick to
say, That if they were deprived of the Father, they would endeavor the
Inthroning of the Son; but most of this Royal Faction are now silenced, since
the Kings death, and the rest will be proceeded against in a way of Justice.

Exceter 5 Feb. 1648.
Other Letters from the West make mention, That diverse of the well-affected in
the Counties adjacent, upon a meeting near Taunton, on the 3. of this instant,
declared their Resolutions, and entered into protest^tion, to sacrifice lives
and fortunes in the defense of Parliament and Army, for the obtaining of
Justice, Liberty, and Freedom, together with the common Rights of the people of
England.

And do desire, that impartial Justice may (without detraction of time) be
forthwith executed upon all Offendeas wdo have been ayding and assisting in
this tyrannical, and bloody war, and promoted the Designs of the adverse
party, against the well-affected of this Kingdom.

Since which Declaratory Expressions from the said well-affected party, the
spirits of malignancy have been much abated in these parts: But in some parts
of Hereford, and Somertsetshire, the Coals of Enmity are kindling, and ready to
break forth into new flames of Discord and Contention, the Clergy stirring up
the people in their pulpits, and using all means possible to incite them to an
Engagement against the Parliament and Army.

Gloucester 5. Feb. 1648.
Feb. 7.
Letters from Southampton say, That diverse of the Princes men desert him daily,
being not willing ^o engage either with the Irish or Scots, against the
English: they further intimate, that on Friday Feb. 2. the Prince received
intelligence of his Fathers death, and being much astonished thereat, declared
himself with a sad dejected countenance, to diverse Gentlemen attending his
person, saying, O unfortunate Prince, that ever I should live to see this day;
now woe be unto the Kingdom of England: with that, the tears trickled down his
cheeks, and his Highness betook himself to some privacy for a while: Some
roport, that he has designed his resolution for Scotland; it being said, that
the Jockies intend to crown him at Edinburgh, and then he will revenge his
Fathers quarrel. But those that cover to swim in the blood of Saints, shall
assuredly sink in the gulf of Gods eternal wrath.

FINIS.

