A DECLARATION Of some PROCEEDINGS of Lt. Col. John Lilburn, And his
ASSOCIATES: WITH Some Examination, and Animadversion upon Papers lately
Printed, and scattered abroad. One called The earnest Petition of many
Freeborn People of this Kingdom: Another, The mournful Cries of many
thousand poor Tradesmen, who are ready to famish for want of Bread, Or, The
Warning Tears of the Oppressed.

Also a Letter sent to KENT.

Likewise a true Relation of Mr. Masterson's, Minister of SHOREDITCH, Signed
with his own hand.

Published by Authority, for the undeceiving of those that are misled by these
Deceivers, in many places of this Kingdom.

Prove. 18.17. He that is first in his Cause, seems just, but his neighbor
comes and searches him.

2 Timothy 3.13. But Evil men, and Seducers, shall wax worse and worse,
deceiving, and being deceived.

London, Printed for Humphrey Harward, and are to be sold at his Shop, the
Crown and Bible at Budge-Row-End, near Canning-street. Anno Domini, MDCXLVIII.

A Declaration, etc.
THere can be nothing more evident to any that will give themselves leave
maturely to weigh and compare the past and present state of affairs in this
Kingdom with an impartial Judgment, than that all the pressures formerly
imposed, the late War, the present distempers, and future threatened danger
thereby, do all grow out of the same root, and flow from the same fountain;
and will lead, if they be pursued, to one and the same end, Even that which was
first in the intention of the first Designers, The settling of Tyranny, and
inslaving the People. And although he that shall look upon these things only en
passant, will scarce believe that such different Principles and pretentions as
are held out to view, should serve the same ends. And though it should seem
there could be nothing at greater distance to the intention of some, who are
abused into these distempers, than to promote slavery and hasten ruin. Yet
they who are uninteressed and uningaged in them, and instructed in, and
convinced of the Grand Design of those who began our troubles, and how it is
still carried on* can both see the Artifice by which they are raised and
fomented, and the End to which they tend, and where at they are like to arrive;
There is no need to reckon up what the state of this Kingdom was before the
breaking out of these troubles, being in such condition of wealth, and all
mnaner of prosperity, as made it the Subject of Envy to those who knew not
what was designed against it. But no less than an absolute Tyranny would
please the King, to command the hearts of his people by a just Government,
according to the Laws, and the Limits of his Trust, and there by to command
their persons, and purses, and all; for the good of all, was beneath Royallity.
And that it was fitter for a King to take, than ask, was then State Doctrine,
and the practice suitable. We were to be modelled to a foreign pattern, and in
pursuance thereof, all manner of Arbitrary exactions, and impositions were laid
upon the people, the particulars will not be forgotten this Age, and need not a
recapitulation. A Consumption had seized the people, and their usual Physic
was denied them; and when it was grown dangerous even to sigh for a Parliament,
the Kings necessities by the stirs in Scotland enforce him to call one. But
that was not the first the King had broken, and he then knew well enough when
it would not serve his turn, and verefie Edicts, How to keep it from serving
the people for the recovery of their Liberty: His necessities increase, this
present Parliament is called; and in regard of so many broken before, this was
not able to serve the necessities of the Kingdom, unless it were put beyond
his power to break; And therefore was continued by Law till the Houses by joint
consent should dissolve it; Now the King being fast, as to usual Court
Stratagems, has recourse to force, deals with one Army, tempts another,
frustrate in both; impeacheth Members, comes himself to fetch them, nothing
takes; He retires into the North, resolves a Conquest of the Parliament, the
People, the Laws, and though to blind the short-sighted multitude, He forbids
the repair of Papists to the Court, yet his principal Assistants in it are
those his good Subjects; He set up his Standard, raises an Army, makes War
against the Parliament and Kingdom, and put it to the trial of the Sword,
whether he shall govern by the Laws, or by his Will without Law. In the
prosecution of which appeal to the Lord of Hosts, he has lost his Cause, which
stands determined against him by a full Conquest of all his forces; And thereby
an happy opportunity given, not only to deliver from those late Exactions, and
to make their return impossible, but for the recovery and establishment of all
that just Freedom that may make a people happy, as they stand in the Natural
Constitution, and Civil Consociation, and distinct and mutual relations of
the people of England; if themselves hinder not.

The way of force being at an end, but there being no end of the malice of our
Enemies, but the slaverie of the Nation; and the ruin of all those faithful
Patriots that has hitherto hindered it.

They convert now their whole industry to the manage of that Maxim (Divide
and Rule) as to the only Engine left them to attain their ends, yet this is
not now first in practice amongst them, it has had its part during all the
time of the War (though not so strenuously pursued, while they had other
hopes) by raising and fomenting of factions, and divisions in all places,
Armies, Councels, Cajoling all sorts by all those Artifices, whereby their
Interests, humors, and discontents might be wrought upon. Thus they have had
their Emissaries under every disguise, who have labored to divide the people
among themselves; and Characterize that division by distinguishing Names, and
to divide them all from the Parliament by several pretenses; that it being
naked of the protection of their force, might be unable to protect the people
by their Authority. The Pulpits have served the Kings Interest, while they
thought they pursued their own. (The Instruments putting them on, being a New
Malignant party, under a disguise, they not discerning they were acted by the
old one, through the entremise of these,) and while they have divided the
people, they have left them less able to defend themselves: Division among
themselves is not al, they divide also from the Parliament: for the people being
wont to believe what ever they hear from that place, by those men, have from
thence been abated in their respect and opinion of the Parliament. Hence the
City Remonstrance, and hence the first visible turn to their Actings toward
the Parliament: The same Instruments tell the soldiers of their Arrears,
strengthen their reflections upon their merit, help them to heighten the sense
of their present wants, and sufferings, and in the mean time labor all they
can possibly, both in the Houses, and among the people, to hinder the advancing
or levy of moneys to satisfy them. And what workings there has been, both
toward, and in the Army under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, to breed
faction and division there, to irritate it, or to break it, by whom it was
done, and whose interest those men carried on, all men know. And how incredible
soever it seem, yet even the Cries for liberty, endeavors of levellin^
perfectly play the Kings Game; his Tyranny can with greater ease overflow a
level, then where it meets with the opposition of the power of the Kingdom in
the Parliament. The Instruments of those designs, know that it is impossible
for Tyranny ever to grow again upon Us, till that power be taken away, or
disabled, by which it has been broken, and our right recovered; and that so
long as the people acknowledge their Protectors, and own their Protection, they
will be safe under it. The Woolves persuade the Sheep, if the Dogs were away,
there would be a happy peace between them. The difficulty now is, to make the
Sheep believe they are Woolves that make the overture.

The truth is, it is the greatest pity in the world that plain and simple
integrity, and well-meaning innocence should be deceived. But their
unhappiness is, there is nothing easier; it is necessary the Serpent and the
Dove should go together, else he that only consults his own Candor and
Integrity, will never believe that another man's Propositions or Designs have
any worse principle. When Absolon went about to dethrone his father, there
followed him three hundred men from Jerusalem, that went in the simplicity of
their hearts, knowing nothing: the man pretended only a Religious Vow, and
these poor, believed him, And every age produces sufficient numbers of as
little foresight; and there is no doubt, but if many among those that promote
the dividing destructive Agreement of the people, and endeavor an Anarchicall
levelling, had had but as much light to have judged the designs of their
leaders, and to have foreseen the end of their motions, as they have good
meaning, their Musters had never swelled to the numbers they account them,
though in that there is very little credit to be given to their own Roll.

It has not been the least part of the Art of those that drive on these
designs, to employ such to serve their turns, whose former merit might seem to
privilege a mistake in their duty, and that it must be ingratitude at least,
if not cruelty in the Parliament to proceed to any severe animadversion against
men of so much merit as the Leaders, or so large and good affection as their
followers.

In which Stratagem, they have not failed, for by the Parliaments lenity and
forbearance toward such men, (in hope they would see their mistakes, and return
to the ways of their duty and safety,) they are grown to that height, both by
making Combinations; Printing and dispersing all manner of false and scandalous
Pamphlets and Papers against the Parliament, to debauch the rest of the people,
gathering monyes, and making Treasurers and Representons of themselves, as it
is necessary to obviate by present and effectual means. And the Parliament can
no longer suffer them in these seditious ways, without deserting their trust
in preserving the Peace of the Kingdom, and the freedom and property of
peaceable men.

Among all the Instruments they have outwitted to carry on their designs with
this sort of people, there are none have visibly done them more service then
Lieutenant Col. John Lilburn, a man who has made himself sufficiently known
to the world, by those heaps of scandalous Books and Papers that he has either
written, or owned against the House of Peers, and such as have done him
greatest courtesies; filled with falsehoods, bitterness, and ingratitude,
whereby he has given himself a Character sufficient to distinguish him (with
the Judicious) from a man walking according to the rules of sobriety, and the
just deportment of a Christian: It Is true, he suffered much from the Bishops,
in the time of their exorbitancies, and he was one of the first the Parliament
took into their care for liberty and redress. But the present temper of his
spirit, gives some ground to believe, that he added much to the weight of his
pressures, by his want of meekness to bear what Providence had laid him under.

It Is also true, that he has done good service for the Parliament, and
adventured his life, and lost of his blood in the Common Cause. But some that
know him, well observe, that he brought not the same affections from Oxford,
that he was carried prisoner thither withal; though indeed he has also done
service since that time. And the Parliament has not been unmindfull either of
his sufferings, or of his services, but has given him several sums of money,
notwithstanding the Committee of Accounts reported to the House, that in their
judgments there was nothing due to him.

But let his services be as great as himself, or his friends will have them,
yet it is possible for a man to reflect too much upon his own desert; and men's
overvaluing their services, have oftentimes produced such subsequent Actions,
as have buried their first merit in a punishment.

It is very probable, many of those that he misleads into these dangerous
Actions, look upon him as a Martyr in the Cause against the Bishops; and
believe that all his zeal is only for the promotion of Righteousness, and just
things, and for the Vindicating and Asserting the peoples liberty against
Oppression and Violence, and that only by Petition, and indubitably just, and
allowed way for all men to seek their grievances by, and by which they may
without offense, address to any authority or greatness whatsoever.

To take off this disguise, and disabuse well meaning men, who cannot judge him
by his Character drawn of himself, by himself, in his several books; It will
be necessary to give the world a Narrative of what his deportment and carriage
was toward the House of Peers, upon which he was imprisoned, it having yet been
spread to the World, only as he and his friends have pleased to dress it, all
which is taken out of the Records of that House, and is as follows.

UPon the publishing of a Book by him written, called, The just man's
Justification, and complaint thereof made to the House; It was Ordered the 10.
of June, 1646. That Lieutenant Colonel John Lilborne shall appear, and answer
such things as he stands charged with, concerning a Book entitled, The just
man's Justification. The 11. of June he appeared, and there delivered at the
Bar a paper, entitled, The Protestation, Plea, and Defense of Lieut. Col.
John Lilborn, given to the Lords at their Bar, the 11. of June, 1646. with
his Appeal to his proper and legal Tryers, and Judges, the Commons of England
assembled in Parliament. In which Protestation, after he has acknowledged an
Obligation to the House, for dealing justly and honorably with him in a
Parliamentary way, in a business of his, lately before that House, yet that he
would not submit to any Judgment of this House against him in a criminal
Cause; but would rather undergo all deaths or miseries which the wit of man
can devise, or his power and Tyranny inflict; And closes his Protestation in
these words, Therefore do from you, and from your Bar, as Inchroachers and
usurping Judges, appeal to the Bar, and Tribunal of my competent, proper, and
legal Tryers and Judges, the Commons of England assembled in Parliament: which
Protestation being contrived, and prepared by him upon premeditation, and given
in at the Bar with so much contempt of and affront unto the Privileges of
this House, It was upon consideration thereof had, Ordered that the said
Lieutenant Colonel John Lilborn should stand committed to Newgate, for
bringing into the House a scandalous and contemptuous paper, And that the
Keeper of Newgate do keep him in safe custody.

The 23. of June following, the House Ordered he should be brought into the
House as a Delinquent, being formerly committed as a Delinquent. At which time
being brought to the Bar according to the said Order, he refused there to
kneel, which is the constant posture, and so known to be; and accordingly
practiced by all who are sent for as Delinquents by either of the Houses. And
upon that refusal, the House Ordered, That he should for that his contempt to
the House, be committed close prisoner to Newgate, And that none be suffered to
resort to him, nor any pen and ink to be allowed him, until the House should
take further Order therein, And it was then further Ordered, That the Kings
Counsel, with the assistance of Mr. Hailes, Mr. Herne, and Mr. Glover, should
draw up a Charge against him with all convenient speed, and that they should
advise with the Judges herein, and acquaint them with precedents: Which Charge
being by the said Council drawn up into certain Articles, and brought into
the House by Mr. Nathaniel Finch, his Majesty's Sergeant at Law. July 10.
Containing matter of high crimes, and misdemeanors, (and such as only concerned
the House of Peers in the Privileges thereof, and some of their Members, of
which matters, We are certainly the unquestionable and undoubted Judges) which
Charge was then and there read. And it was then Ordered, That the said John,
Lilborne should be brought to the Bar next day, which was done accordingly.
And he being there, was required to kneel at the Bar (as is usual in such
cases) and to hear his Charge read, that he might make his defense thereto; he
did not only refuse to kneel, as before he had done, but when the House
commanded his Charge to be read, he said he would not hear, and upon reading
thereof he stopped his ears with his finger. Being commanded to withdraw
(after the House had taken this his contemptuous carriage into consideration)
it was Ordered, That he should be called in again, and admonished, and told,
that by his stopping of his ears, his ill language, and contemptuous and
scornful deportment, he had deprived himself of what favor he might have had
in the House. And commanded him again without stopping of his ears to hear his
Charge. He answered, he had appealed from this House (as not his competent
Judges) to the House of Commons, to which he would stand so long as he had any
blood in his body. The House again commands his Charge to be read, and he again
told them he would not hear it, And accordingly he again stopped his ears
while it was readings being asked what he said to his Charge, he answered he
heard nothing of it, had nothing to do with it, took no notice of it, but
would stand to his Protestation, having appealed from this House, and protested
against it, as unrighteous Judges, to those Judges who were to judge him and
them, namely the House of Commons assembled in Parliament. Being again
commanded to withdraw, the House took his refusal as an Answer pro Confesso to
the whole matter of his Charge. And taking into consideration, the high
contempt to the honor and dignity of the House of Peers, showed by his words
and speeches at the Bar, which were also contained in his Charge. It was
amongst other things adjudged, That Lieutenant Colonel John Lilborne for his
high contempt to the honor of the House, should be imprisoned in the Tower of
London, during the pleasure of the House. And upon consideration of the whole
matter of his Charge, it was likewise amongst other things adjudged, that he be
imprisoned seven years.

Had this Contemptuous carriage been showed to the meanest Court in the
Kingdom, or to a single Justice of the Peace, he would certainly have been
committed for misbehaviour. Courts and Magistrates are no longer able to
execute the duty of their places, and discharge their trust in the
administration of Justice, than they keep up and maintain their Dignity and
Authority from the tramplings and contempt of Delinquents. And there is no
doubt but these approaches made by Lieutenant Colonel John Lilborne, and
carried even within the walls of the Lords House with so little loss, was a
maine encouragement to that general assault and force upon both Houses, upon
the 26. of July last, by that Rabble of Reformadoes, and of the Prentices set on
and encouraged, by the known Malignant-then- ruling-part of the City. This
carriage of his might seem sufficient to discover the Man, and being known,
might warn every well-tempered and peaceable disposition, to take heed of
engaging in any Design that may be the conception of such a Spirit: the birth
whereof can portend nothing but Distraction and confusion. And the better yet
to undeceive wel-meaning men, who may perhaps believe the Results and
productions of the late frequent, and numerous meetings of him, and his party,
in and about the City, are of a contrary ^omplexion and tendency, and can serve
no other end than a firm and speedy settling the peace and tranquillity of the
Kingdom, which all good men desire and should promote; They may here take
notice of what was delivered to the Houses of Parliament, by Mr. Masterson
Minister of Shoreditch, who was present at one of those meetings, And which was
also (after many denials, tergiversations and prevarications, by the said
Lieutenant Colonel John Lilborne, and the lie given (or words that signified as
much) to Mr. Masterson in the House of Commons (who was confronted there with
him at the Bar) confessed by himself, in every particular one only excepted.
The whole Relation whereof is here printed from the Copy, signed by the said
Mr. Masterson with his own hand, and is as follows.

At a meeting in Well-Yard, in, or near Wapping, at the house of one Williams a
Gardener, on Monday the 17 of January. 1647.
THere were Assembled Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn, John Wildman, (with many
others) debating a Petition, when I and one Robert Malbor of Shorditch Parish
came in; anon after we entered the Room, one Lieutenant Lever Objected against
the manner of their Proceedings, and said, That he liked well enough the
particulars of the Petition, but he did not like the manner (namely) of
Petitioning the House of Commons, for (said he) They have never done us any
Right, nor will they ever do us any: To this Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn
Answered, We must, said he, own some visible Authority for the present, or else
we shall be brought to Ruin and Confusion: but when we have raised up the
spirits of the people through the whole Kingdom whether it be nine days hence,
or a month, or three months, when the House shall be fit to receive an
Impression of Justice) We shall FORCE. them to grant us those things we desire.

Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn did then and there Affirm, That the People of
London had appointed ten or twelve of their Commissioners, (whereof he the said
Lilburn was one) though he said likewise, that the honest Blades in Southwark
did not like the word Commissioners. These Commissioners were appointed to
promote the Petition, and send out Agents into every City, Town, and Parish, if
they could possibly) of every County of the Kingdom, to inform the people of
their Liberties and Privileges; and not only to get their hands to the
Petition, for (said he) I would not give three pence for ten thousand hands.

A plain man of the Company Objected against that way of Proceeding, thus: Mr.
Lilburn (said he) we know that the generality of the People are wicked, and if
(by the sending abroad of your Agents into all the Parishes of the Kingdom)
they come to have power and strength in their hand, We may suppose, and fear
they will cut the throats of all those who are called Roundheads, that is, the
honest, godly, faithful men in the Land. Lieutenant Colonel Lilburn Answered,
Pish (said he) do not you fear that, he that has this Petition in his hand,
and a Blue Ribb and in his Hat, need not fear his throat cutting; or this
Petition in your hand, will be as good as a Blue Ribband in your Hat to
preserve your throat from cutting. It was further Objected by one of the
Company that sat at, or near the upper end of the Table, That it was not fit to
disturb (or to that purpose) the House at this time, seeing they had made such
excellent Votes concerning the King, and had appointed a Committee to hear, and
report all our grievances. Lieutenant Colonel Lilburn Answered, Do you know,
said he, how those Votes were procured? (or words to that effect.) Some
Answered, No; nor did they care, since the Votes (as they apprehended) were so
excellent; Lieutenant Colonel Lilburn said he could tell them. There was (said
he) a bargain struck between Crumwell, Ireton, and the King, and the bargain
was this, They (namely Lieutenant General Crumwell, and Commissary General
Ireton) by their influence on the Army, should estate the King in his Throne,
Power, and Authority; and for their Reward, Crumwell should receive (or had
received) a Blue Ribband from the King, and be made Earl of Essex, and his son
Ireton, either Lord Lieutenant, or Field Marshall of Ireland: and this he (the
said Lieutenant Colonel Lilburn) said he would make good to all the world.

Lieutenant Colonel Lilburn said further, that certain Information of this
coming to a Member of the House of Commons, our good for best) friend: I need
not name him, said he, I suppose you all know him; his father was a Parliament
man, and a Knight, but he is dead, and this Gentleman his son is of his
Christian name (as they call it) a man of a good Estate. This Gentleman, said
he, takes upon him a noble Felton resolution, that (rather then a Kingdom
should be inslaved to the lust of one man) he would dispatch him (namely
Crumwell) wherever he met him, though in the presence of the General Sir
Thomas Fairfax himself, and for that end, provided, and charged a Pistol, and
took a Dagger in his Pocket, that if the one did not, the other should dispatch
him. The said Lieut. Col. John Lilburn, (being asked how it came to pass that
he did not effect it, and Act according to his resolution? Answered, The
Gentleman (said he) communicating his resolution to a Member of the House of
Commons, a Knight whom he judged faithful, the Gentleman was by this Knight
shut up in his Chamber in White Hall a whole day; and the Knight dispatched an
express to Crumwell, to inform him of the Gentleman's Resolution; whereupon,
Crumwell (apprehending his person in danger) called a pretended day of
Humiliation; there he was reconciled to the Officers of the Army, drew up a
Declaration to the House, which begat and produced those Votes. Upon this John
Wildman said, That he knew three other men (at the same time) had taken up the
same Resolution of killing Crumwell, and there was not one of them that knew
the Intentions of another: likewise the said John Wildman said, That he would
never trust honest man again for Crumwels sake.

Lieutenant Colonel Lilburn, and the said John Wildman (speaking promiscuously
in the Commendation of the said Petition) one or other or both of them
affirmed, That this Petition was of more worth and value, then any thing they
had ever yet attempted; and that some great Malignants (as they are called)
told them, that if they were not engaged to the person of this King, and had
personally served him, they would engage with them; and the said Malignants
gave them encouragement to go on with it, saying, it was the most rational
piece that they had seen: And that they (the people assembled) might understand
how the Petition had wrought already, they affirmed that it (the Petition) had
made the Lords House to quake, and the Commons themselves to stink: and that
before the Petition was two days old, or had been two days abroad, the Lords
(I shall not need to name them, said he, but the greatest Earls of them in
Estate, in Authority and Popularity) sent to us a creature of their own to
Article with us, and offered (so we would desist-from promoting the Petition)
to consent to all our privileges and liberties that we desired in our
Petition, so that we would abate them their Legislative power. Lieutenant
Colonel Lilburn said further, When they saw we would not desist, they (the
Lords) offered us thirty thousand pounds, if we would yet sit down, and lay the
Petition aside: nay, more said he, but here the said John Wildman interrupted
him, and said, Prithee do not tell all, but Lilburn replied, He would, and they
should hereby see their (the Lords) baseness, whereupon going on, he said,
This morning they sent to this Gentleman's Chamber (laying his hand upon
Wildman) at the Sarazens head in Fridaystreet, and offered him, that if we
would forbear to Promote this Petition, they would be content for their heirs
and successors, to cut off the Legislative power from them by Ordinance or Act
for ever, so we would let them quietly enjoy the Legislative power for their
lives.

Lieutenant Col. Lilburn told them, That they (the Commissioners) had their
constant meetings on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays in the evening at the
Whalebone; and the other three days at Southwark, Wapping, and other places,
with their friends; and that upon the next Lords day they were to meet at
Dartfort in Kent, to receive an account of their Agents, (from Gravesend,
Maidstone, and most of the choice Towns in that County) how they had promoted
the business there.

Lieutenant Colonel Lilburn drawing a Paper-Book from under his short Red Coat,
and turning over the leaves of it, told them that there were certain Letters,
one to Colonel Blunt, another (as I remember) to Sir Anthony Welden; and that
he said, he wrote himself likewise diverse Letters to our friends the
well-affected of such and such a County, whose names I remembered not: he the
said (Lieutenant Colonel) told them likewise, That because the business must
needs be a work of charge (there being thirty thousand Petitions to come forth
in Print to morrow, and it would cost money to send their Agents abroad, though
the honest soldiers now at White Hall would save them something in scattering
them up and down in the Counties) they had therefore appointed Treasurers,
namely Mr. Prince, Mr. Chidly, and others, and Collectors, (whose names as I
remember, he did not read) who should gather up from those that acted with
them, of some two pence, three pence, six pence, a shilling, two shillings,
half a Crown a week: and thus promising to meet them the next night, he took
leave.

But immediately before his departure told them, that they shut him up in the
Tower the night before, but they should not have his company these fourteen
nights for it. This is the sum and sense of that which was delivered, and
affirmed in the House of Lords, at the conference, and in the Commons House by

Geo: Masterson.

BY this testimony of Mr. Masterson (which was all but one particular, as was
said before, confessed by Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn himself) Its hoped
all men truly conscientious will take heed how they comply with these men, who
have conceived those black designs in the dark, and think to bring them forth
by murders and assassination; certainly these Councels look as if they were
suggested from him that is a Murderer from the beginning, and yet many are
drawn into the same guilt, danger, and disservice to the peace of the Kingdom.
The Conspiracy seems to be formed, and the actings to be at hand, Treasurers
chosen, Collectors appointed, moneys gathered, Emissaries sent abroad to stir
up the people; Murders and assassinations are undertaken, and Lilburn, and
Wildman know the Instruments. Can any man now that desire to have Peace, and
prosperity settled, and conserved, and that abhorres to think of Confusion of
all things, and the effusions of innocent blood, wonder if the Parliament takes
care in discharge of their Trust, to make abortive these monstrous conceptions,
and prevent the like for the future, by present securing in order to punishing
the Authors of these?

To say any thing further upon this relation seems needless, it being not
imaginable, That after so clear and full a discovery, there should be found any
man, either so simple, or so wicked, as not to discover the monster under the
mask, to see the danger, hate the design, and fear the Event; and that will
not fly from the Councels and Companies of these Pests and Incendiaries, who
while they call themselves Christians, do yet project, or else at least conceal,
and applaud designed murders and assassinations. And that all men may the
better see, what is like to be the end to which these actions ^end, let them
here take this account given from a sure hand in foreign parts, Namely, that a
Priest, a Chaplain of a foreign Minister of State, whose name (which is to be
concealed) seems to make him an English man, was lately employed hither as a
Spy, and at his return gives this account to his Master, and to other
Confidents, That there are four hundred Missionaries now in London, and in the
Army, under several disguises, and that some of them act the Preacher, all
which, with all diligence attend the service of their Mission, with hope to
give a very good account to their Superiors: Are not these Designs, these
Councels, and the violent carrying thereof, more like to be the Doctrine of
those Wolves under Sheeps skins, than of any man that has resigned up himself
to be led by the Spirit of God.

But that which covers all is, that you do but Petition, and address to the
House of Commons, with much seeming respect and deferencie. But, what account
you make of their Authority, is seen by Lieutenant Colonel Lilburns Answer to
Lieutenant Level his Objection, and what account of all the Parliament has
done, in asserting and vindicating the just freedom of the Nation, is seen in
the said objection. And how far you mean to attend upon, and acquiesce in
the Judgment of the House, to which you address, is likewise seen in some of
the Letters mentioned by Mr. Masterson, to be sent to their friends, the
well-affected of such and such a County. That, to all the peaceable and
wel-minded people in Kent, who desire present Peace, Freedom, Justice, and
common Right, and good of all men, is, as follows, the Original whereof is
ready to be produced when occasion is.

Worthy Gentlemen, and dear Friends,
Our bowels are troubled, and our hearts pained within us, to behold the
Divisions, Distractions, heart-burnings, and contentions which abound in this
distressed Nation, and we are confounded in our selves upon the foresight of
the confusion and desolation, which will be the certain consequence of such
divisions, if they should be but for a little time longer continued; there are
now clouds of blood over our heads again, and the very rumors and fears of
War has so wasted Trading, and enhaunsed the price of all food and
clothing, that Famine is even entering into your gates; and doubtless, neither
pen nor tongue can express the misery, which will ensue immediately upon the
beginning of another War; Why therefore O our Country men, should we not
every man say each to other, as Abraham to Lot, or Moses to the two Israelites,
Why should we contend each with other, seeing we are brethren? O that our
advice might be acceptable to you, that you would every man expostulate each
with other, and now while you have an opportunity, consider together, wherefore
the contention has been these six or seven years! Has it not been for
freedom and Justice? O then propound each to other the chief principles of
your freedom, and the foundation of Justice, and common Right, and
questionless, when you shall understand the desires each of other, you will
unite together inviolably to pursue them.

Now truly in our apprehensions, this work is prepared to your hands in the
Fetition, which we herewith send to you; certainly, if you shall all join
together to follow resolutely, and unweariedly, after the things contained in
that Petition, the blood and confusion which now threaten us may be prevented,
and the sweet streams of Justice will run into your bosoms freely without
obstruction; O that the Lord may be so propitious to this tottering Nation, as
to give you to understand these things which belong to your Peace and welfare!

Many honest people are resolved already to unite together in that Petition,
and to prosecute the obtaining it with all their strength; they are determined,
that now after seven years waiting for Justice, Peace, and Freedom, they will
receive no denial in these requests which are so essential to their Peace and
Freedom; and for the more effectual proceedings in this business, there is a
Method and Order settled in all the Wards in London, and the out Parishes and
Suburbs; they have appointed several active men in every Ward and Division, to
be a Committee, to take the special care of the business, and to appoint
active men in every Parish, to read the Petition at set meetings for that
purpose, and to take Subscriptions, and to move as many as can possibly, to go
in person when the day of delivering it shall be appointed; and they intend to
give notice of that time to all the adjacent Counties, that as many of them as
possibly can, may also join with them the same day; and the like orderly way
of proceeding is commended to several Counties, to whom the Petition is sent,
as to Hartfordshier, Buckingham, Oxford, Cambridge, Rutlandshier, etc. And we
cannot but propound to you the same Method, as the best expedient for your
union, in pursuing after a speedy settlement of your Peace and Freedom,
therefore in brief we desire,

1. That you would appoint meetings in every Division of your County, and there
to select faithful men of public spirits, to take care that the Petition be
sent to the hands of the most active men in every Town, to unite the Town in
those desires of common right, and to take their subscriptions.

2. That you would appoint as many as can with convenience, to meet at
Dartford, the 23. of this present January, being Lords day, and we shall
confer with you about the Matters that concern your Peace, and common good
and Freedom.

We shall at present add no more but this, that to serve you, and our whole
country in whatsoever concerns its common peace and well fare, is, and always
shall be, the desire and joy of

Your most Faithful Friends and Servants which came from London from many
other friends upon this Service, John Lilburn. Wildman. John Davies. Richard
Woodward.

Dartford this 9. of Ian. 1647.

Well minded People,
YOU who are apt to resolve and Act upon the bare consultation of your own
unexperienced innocence, look to your selves, there is a design upon you; you
perhaps cannot believe, that this tenderness and trouble of Bowels professed,
should tend to tear out your own; that these breathings after Justice should
subject you to the worst Tyranny, and that these men are reducing the Kingdom
into Atoms, while they cry out, and complain of Division; but a Poison is
offered you in this sweet wine, and all these sugared words serve but to sweeten
that Pill in your mouth, which will be bitterness in your belly; there is a
book in the Bait, and all those seeming prudentiall directions in the close of
this Letter, serve but to teach you how to destroy your selves with the
greatest dexterity and infallibility. The poison is in the middle, which (if
you will take these State-Montebanks words) many honest people are resolved
already to take, that is, To unite together in the Petition, and to prosecute
the obtaining of it with all their strength; and they are determined, that now
after so long waiting for Justice, Peace, and Freedom, they will receive no
deny all in these requests: Here Is the second part of the 26 of July, to the
same Tune to a syllable: There was a Petition, and so is here; there was an
Union of the Rabble, so here must be an Union; there was an Horrid, and
Barbarous force and violence; here must be a Prosecution with all their
strength: The people of diverse whole Counties solicited to be present at the
delivery of it, and must be engaged to it by presubscriptions: Can this, all
their strength, all this number, this determination to take no denial, be
less then a War, or less then a forcing of the Legislative power? Be warned
to take heed of such days works as the 26 of July, it has, and will cost some
dear: Only the difference is, The Actors in this intended Rebellious and
Treasonable force, in the judgment of these infallible Censors of Piety and
Honesty, must be honest men: But if they be men so qualified, let them take
heed of this Conspiracy, that they may continue so still, and let not those
himble Presligiators juggle them into Sedition and Treason, before they
consider whither they are going.

The Truth is, you mean to stir up the people, and make your selves the
leaders; and then it is not one man alone that will be armed with Pisiol and
Dagger. And it will not be then, either a Blue Riband in the Hat, nor a
Petition in the Hand, that will be a sufficient defense to any of those, whose
either Religion and Conscience, Wisdom and Judgment, Integrity and sense of
Duty, or more large Estate, and desire to defend his propriety, shall have made
them the object of your bevelling fury. But any one of those qualifications may
make a man as guilty to you, as to write and read did those, who had the
unhappiness of so much learning in the days of your Predecessors, Jack Straw
and his Associats.

But let us examine your Petition it self, magnified, as Lilburn and Wildman
affirm, by the greatest Malignants, for the most rational Peace they had seen,
and which they persuade them by all means to promote, an acknowledgment of
theirs to be specially noted, they have never yet been so zealous for the peace
of the People, if it took not beginning from their suggestions, it is certainly
promoted by their help. They also giving out that noman is more the Kings then
Lilburn; And it is known to all, that while Lilburn was in the Tower, he still
maintained a close Conversation and aquaintance with the principle dangerous
men, and especially with David Jenkins, now a prisoner in Newgate for his
Treasons. But if it be a Petition to the House, why is it Printed and Published
to the people, before the presenting of it to the House? Is it to get the
approbation of multitudes? What need of that? If what is asked be reasonable
and just, and good for the public, it needs no other qualisication for its
acceptance, nor arguments for its grant; though it were only the private
suggestion of a single man: If it be not so, the Petitioners, though very many
more then will own this, ought not to be gratisied with the wrong of all the
rest. The whole Judgment of the Kingdom, is in the Judgment of the Houses; you
can represent your own pressures, but not those of all the Kingdom, for you are
not all the Kingdom. You may account that your pressure, which others, and as
many as you, may judge their benefit; and the Houses trusted by all, must judge
what is good for all.


To the Supreme Authority of England, the Commons Assembled in Parliament.
The earnest Petition of many Freeborn People of this Nation.
SHOWS,
THAT the devouring fire of the Lords wrath, has burnt in the bowels of this
miserable Nation, until its almost consumed.

That upon a due search into the causes of Gods heavy Judgments, we find A^ns
5.9, 10 11 12. Micah 2 2.3. Micah 3.3 4 9.10.11.12. Habba 2.8.17 Joel 3.3
that in justice and oppression, have been the common National sias, for which
the Lord has threatened woes, confusions and desolations, unto any People or
Nation; Woe (says God) to the oppressing City. Zeph. 3.1.

That when the King had opened the Floodgates of injustice and oppression See
the Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, December. 1641. p. 5, 6, 7, 8 9 10,
11, 14, 15.
upon the people, and yet peremptorily declared that the people, who trusted
him for their good, could not in, or by their Parliam nt require any account of
the discharge of his trust; and when by a pretended negative vo ce See the
Kings Answer to the Parliaments Remonst. of May 19 1642. 1 part book Decla.
page 254, 284, 285. See the Kings Answer to the Parl. Decla of May 26. 1642.
page 298.
to Laws, he would not suffer the strength of the Kingdom, the Sea the
Ordinance for the Militia, Feb. 1641 1 book Decla. page 89, and pa. 96, 105
106. 114, 126, 175, 176, 182 243, 289, 292
Militi^, to be so disposed of, that oppression^ might be safely remedied, and
oppressors brought to condign punishment, but raised a War See the Parliaments
Votes May 20, 1642 1 part Book Decla, 259, see also page 5^9, 576, 577, 580,
584, 617.
to protect the subvertors of our Laws and Libe ties, and maintain Himself to
be subject to no account, even for such oppressions, and pursuing after an
oppressive power* the Judge of the Earth, with whom the Throne of iniquity can
have no fellowship, has brought him low, and executed fierce wrath upon many
of his ad^r^nts

That God expects Justice from those before whose eyes he has destroyed an
unjust generation. Zeph. 3.6.7. and without doing justly, and releeving the
oppressed, God abhors fastings and pray s, and accounts himself mocked. Esa. 5
8.4 5, 6 7. Mic. 6.6, 7, 8.

That our eyes fail with looking to see the Foundations of our Freedoms and
Peace secured by this Honorable House, and yet we are made to depend upon the
Will of the King, and the Lords, which were never chosen or betrusted by the
People, to redress their grievances. And this Honorable House, which formerly
declared, that they were the representative of al England, and betrusted with
our Estates, Liberties and Lives, 1 part Book of Decla. 264.382. do now declare
by their practice, that they will not redress our grievances, or settle our
Freedoms, unless the King and the Lords will.

That in case you should thus proceed, Parliaments will be rendered wholly
useless to the People, and their happiness left to depend solely upon the Will
of the King, and such as he by his Patents creates Lords; and so the invaluable
price of all the precious English blood; spilt in the defense of our freedoms
against the King, shall be imbezelled or lost; and certainly, God the avenger of
blood, will require it of the obstructors of justice and freedom. Judges 9.24.

That though our Petitions have been burned, and our persons imprisoned,
reviled, and abused only for petitioning, yet we cannot despair absolutely of
all bowels of compassion in this Honorable House, to an inslaved perishing
people. We still nourish some hopes, that you will at last consider that our
estates are expended, the whole trade of the Nation decayed, thousands of
families impoverished, and merciless Famine is entered into our Gates, and
therefore we cannot but once more assay to pierce your ears with our doleful
cries for Justice and Freedom, before your delays wholly consume the Nation. In
particular we earnestly entreat:

First, That seeing we conceive this Honorable House is entrusted by the
People, with all power to redress our grievances, and to provide security for
our Freedoms, by making or repealing Laws, errecting or abolishing Courts,
displacing or plaecing Officers, and the like: And seeing upon this
consideration, we have often made our addresses to you, and yet we are made to
depend for all our expected good, upon the wills of others who have brought all
our misery See the Kings Decla. of the 12 Aug. 1642. 1 part book Decla. page
522, 526, 528, 548, and pa. 617.
upon us: That therefore in case this Honorable House, will not, or cannot,
according to their trust, relieve and help us; that it be clearly declared;
That we may know to whom, as the Supreme power, we may make our present
addresses dresses before we perish, or be enforced to fly to the prime Laws of
nature See 1 part book decla. pa. 44.150, 382, 466, 637, 699,
or refuge.

2. That as we conceive all Governors and Magistrates, being the ordinance See
Col. Nath. Fines his Speech against the Bishops Canons, made in 164^, in a book
called Speeches and Passages of Parliament, from 3 Nove. 1640. to June 1641,
page 50.51, 52.
of m^n, before they be the ordinance of God, and no Authority being of God,
but what is erected by the mutual consent of a People: and seeing this
Honorable House alone represents the People of this Nation, that therefore no
person whatsoever, be permitted to exercise any power or Authority in this
Nation, who shall not clearly and confessedly, receive his power from this
House, and be always accountable for the discharge of his trust, to the People
in their Representers in Parliament: If otherwise, that it be declared who they
are which assume to themselves a power according to their own Wills, and not
received as a trust from the People, that we may know to whose Wills we must be
subject, and under whom we must suffer such oppressions, as they please,
without a possibillity of having Justice against them.

3. That considering, that all just Power and Authority in this Nation, which
is not immediately derived from the People, can be derived only from this
Honorable House, and that the People are perpetually subject to Tyranny, when
the Jurisdiction of Courts, and the Power and Authority of Officers are not
clearly described, and their bounds and limits See your Remonstrance of the
state of the kingdom, book decla. page, 6, 8 See also the Acts made this
Parliament, that abolished the Starchamber and Hig^ Commission.
prefixed; that therefore the Jurisdiction of every Court or Judicature, and
the Power of every Officer or Minister of Justice, with their bounds and
limits, be forthwith declared by this honorable House; and that it be enacted,
that the Judges of every Court, which shall exceed its Jurisdiction, and every
other Officer or Minister of Justice, which shall interm^dle with matters not
coming under his (ognizance, shall incurr the forfeiture of his, and their
whole estates And likewise, that all unnecessary Courts may be forthwith
abolished; and that the public Treasury, out of which the Officers solely
ought to be maintained, See the Statute of Westmin. 1, made 3 Edw. 1 chap. 26,
and 20 Edw. 3, 1, and the Judges oath made in the 18 Edw. 3, Anno 1344,
recorded in Pultons collections of sta^^tes, fol. 144,
may be put to the less Charge.

4. That whereas there are multitudes of Complaints of oppression, by
Committees of this House, determining particular matters, which properly
appertains to the Cognizance of the ordinary Courts See the 29, chap of Magna
Charta, and Sir Ed. Cooks ezpo sition upit, in his 2, part instit. fol. 187,
and the Petition of Right,
of Justice; and whereas many persons, of faithful and public spirits, have
bin, and are daily molested, vexed, Imprisoned by such Committes, sometimes for
not answering Interroga ories, and sometimes for other matters, which are not
in Law Criminal; and also without any legal warrants expressing the cause, and
commanding the Jailer safely to keep their bodies, until they be delivered by
due course See the Petition of right made in the 3 of the King, and Sir Edward
COOKS 2 par, insti. fol. 52, 53, 589, 590, 591.
of Law; And by these oppressions, the persons and estates of many are wasted,
and destroyed: That therefore henceforth, No particular cause, whether Criminal
or other, which comes under the Cognizance of the ordinary Courts of Justice,
may be determined by this House, or any Committee thereof, or any other, then
by those Courts, whose duty it is to execute such Laws as this honorable House
shall make; and who are to be censured by this House in case of injustice:
Always excepted, matters relating to the late War, for Indemnity for your
Assisters; and the exact Observation of al articles granted to the adverse See
Psalm 15, 4 See Rom 4, 15
Party: And that henceforth, no Person be molested or Imprisoned by the will or
arbitrary powers of any, or for such Matters as are not Crimes, [o] according
to Law: And that all persons Imprisoned at present for any such matters, or
without such legal warrants as abovesaid, upon what pretense, or by what
Authority soever, may be forthwith releast, with due reparations.

5. That considering it s a Badg of our Slavery to a Norman Conqueror, to have
our Laws in the French Tongue, and it is little less then brutish vassalage to
be bound to walk by Laws which the People See the 36, Edw. 3, 15, 80 1 Co^. 14
7, 11 16, 19, 23 See also the English Chronicles, in the Reign of Will. the
Conqueror.
cannot know, that therefore all the Laws and Customs of this Realm, be
immediately written in our Mothers Tongue See Deuteronomy 30, 12, 13, 14.
without any abreviations of words, and the most known vulgar hand, viz. Roman
or Secretary, and that Writs, Processes, and Enroulments, be issued forth,
entered or inrouled in English, and such manner of writing as aforesaid.

6. That seeing in Magna Charta, which is our Native right, it is pronounced in
the name of all Courts, That we will sell to no man, we will not deny, or defer
to any man either Justice or Right, notwithstanding we can obtain no Justice or
Right, neither from the common ordinary Courts or Judges, nor yet from your own
Committees, though it be in case of indemnity for serving you, without paying
a dear price for it; that therefore our native See Sir Ed. Cook in his 1 part
insti. lib. 3 chap 13, Sect, 701, fol, 3^8, where he possitively declares it
was the native and ancient Rights of all Englishmen, both by the Statute and
Common Law of England, to pay no Fees at all to any Administrators of justice
whatsoever. See also 2 part insti. fol, 74, 209, 210, and 176, and he there
gives this Reason, why Judges should take no fees of any man for doing his
office, because he should be free, and at liberty to do justice, and not to be
fettered with golden fees, as fetters to the subvertion or suppression of truth
and justice.
Right be restored to us, which is now also the price of our blood; that in any
Court whatsoever, no moneys be extorted from us, under pretense of Fees to the
Officers of the Court, or otherwise: And that for this end, sufficient
sallaries or pensions be allowed to the Judges, and Officers of Courts, as was
of old, out of the common Treasury, that they may maintain their Clerks and
servants, and keep their Oaths uprightly; wherein they swear to take no mon^y
o^ Clothes, or other rewar^s except meat and drink, in a small quantity, besides
what is allowed them by the King; and this we may with the more confidence
claim as our Right, seeing this honorable House has declared, in case of
Ship Money, and in the case of the Bishops Canons that not one penny, by any
power whatsoever, could be leavied upon the people, without common consent in
Parliament, and sure we are that the Fees exacted by Judges, and Clerks, and
Iaylors, and all kind of Ministers of Justice, are not settled upon them by Act
of Parliament, and therefore by your own declared principles, destructive to
our property; See the Articles of high treason in our Chronicles against Judge
Tresilian, in Rich. the seconds time.
therefore we desire it may be enacted to be death for any Judge, Officer, or
Minister of Justice, from the highest to the lowest, to exact the least moneys,
or the worth of moneys from any person whatsoever, more then his pension or
sallary allowed from the Common Treasury. That no Judge of any Court may
continue above three years.

7. That whereas according to your own complaint in your first Remonstrance of
the Sea 1 part book decla. p. 9.
State of the Kingdom, occasion is given to bribery, extortion and partiallity,
by reason, that judicial places, and other Offices of power and trust, are sold
and bought: That therefore for prevention of all injustice, it be forthwith
enacted, to be death for any person or persons whatsoever, directly or
indirectly, to buy, or sell, or offer, or receive moneys, or rewards, to
procure for themselves or others, any Office of power or trust whatsoever.

8. Whereas according to Justice, and the equitable sense of the Law, Goals and
Prisons ought to be only used as places of safe custody, until the constant
appointed time of trial, and now they are made places of See Sir Edward Cook 1
part Insti. lib. 3 Cha. 7. sect. 438 fol. 260. who expressly faith, that
imprisonment must be a safe custody, not a punishment; and that a prison ought
to be for keeping men safe, not to punish them See also 2 par. instit. fol
589.590.591.
torment, and the punishment of supposed offenders, they being detained many
years without any Legal trials: That therefore it be enacted that henceforth
no supposed offender whatsoever, may be denied his Legal trial, at the first
Sessions, Assizes, or Goal delivery, after his Commitment See the Statute of
the E. 3.2. 12 R. 2.10.
and that at such trial, every such supposed offender be either condemned or
acquitted.

9. Whereas Monopolies of all kinds have been declared by this honorable House,
to be against the Fundamental Laws of the Land, and all such restrictions of
Trade, do in the consequence destroy not only Liberty but property: That
therefore all Monopolies whatsoever and in particular that oppressive Company
of Merchant Adventurers be forthwith abolished, and a free trade restored, and
that all Monopolizers may give good reparation to the Commonwealth, the
particular parties who have been damnified by them, and to be made incapable of
bearing any Office of power, or trust, in the Nation, and that the Votes of
this House November. 19. 1640. against their siting therein, may be forthwith put
in due execution.

10. Whereas this House has declared in the first Remonstrance of the Sea 1
part book decl. pa. 14.
State of the Kingdom, that Ship Money, and Monopolies, which were imposed upon
the people before the late War, did at least amount to 1400000 l. per annum,
and whereas since then, the Taxes have been double and treble, and the Army See
the Armies last Representation to the House.
has declared that 1300000 l. per annum, would completely pay all Forces and
Garrisons in the Kingdom, and the Customs could not but amount to much more then
would pay the Navy; so that considering the vast sums of moneys, raised by
imposition of money, the fifth and twentieth part, Sequestrations, and
Compositions, Excise, and otherwise, it is conceived much Treasure is concealed:
that therefore an Order issue forth immediately from this Honorable House, to
every Parish in the Kingdom, to deliver in without delay to some faithful
persons, as perfect an account as possible, of all moneys Leavied in such Town,
City, or Parish; for what end or use soever, since the beginning of the late
War, and to return the several receivers names, and that those who shall be
employed by the several Parishes in every Shire or County, to carry in those
accounts to some appointed place in the County, may have liberty to choose the
receiver of them, and that those selected persons by the several Parishes in
every County or Shire, may have liberty to invest some one faithful person in
every of their respective Counties or places, with power to sit in a Committee
at London or elsewhere, to be the General Accomptants of the Kingdom, who shall
publish their Accounts every month to the public view, and that henceforth
there be only one Common Treasury where the books of Accounts may be kept by
several persons, open to the view of all men.

11. Whereas it has been the Ancient Liberty of this Nation, that all the
Freeborn people have freely elected their Representers in Parliament, and
their Sheriffs and 28. Edw. 1 Chap. 1.8. and 13. See 2 part instit. fo. 174.175
where Sir Ed. Cook positively declares that in ancient times by the common law
of England, the Coroner, the high Sheriff, Justices of Peace, Verderors of
Forests yea and in times of war, the leaders of the Counties soldiers, were
chosen in full county by the freeholders.
Justices of the Peace, etc. and that they were abridged of that their native
Liberty, by a Statute of the 8. H. 6.7. That therefore, that Birthright of all
English men, be forthwith restored to all which are not, or shall not be legally
disfranchised for some criminal cause, or are not under 21 years of age, or
servants, or beggars; and we humbly offer, That every County may have its equal
proportion of Representers; and that every County may have its several
divisions, in which one Representer may be chosen, and that some chosen
Representatives of every Parish proportionably may be the Electors of the
Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Committee Men, Grand Jury men, and all
ministers of Justice Whatsoever, in the respective Counties, and that no such
minister of justice may continue in his Office above one whole year, without a
new It has been a maxim amongst the wisest Legislators that whosoever means
to settle good Laws, must proceed in them with a sinister, or evil opinion of
all mankind; and suppole that whosoever is not wicked, it is for want of
opportunity, and that no State can be wisely confident of any public minister
continuing good longer then the Rod is over him.
Election.

12. That all Statutes for all kind of Oaths, whether in Corporations, Cities,
or other, which ensnare conscientious people, as also other Statutes, injoyning
all to hear the Book of Common Prayer, be forthwith repealed and nulled, and
that nothing be imposed upon the consciences of any to compel them to sin
against their own consciences.

13. That the too long continued shame of this Nation, viz. permission of any
to suffer such poverty as to beg their bread, may be forthwith effectually
remedied: and to that purpose that the Poor be enabled to choose their
Trustees, to discover all Stocks, Houses, Lands, etc. which of right belong to
them, and their use, that they may speedily receive the benefit thereof; and
that some good improvement may be made of waste Grounds for their use; and that
according to the promise of this honorable House, in your first Remonstrance,
care be taken forthwith to advance the native commodities of this Nation, that
the poor may have better wages for their labor; and that Manufactures may be
increased, and the Herring-fishing upon our own Coasts may be improved for the
best advantange of our own Mariners, and the whole Nation.

14. Whereas that burthensom Tax of the Excise lies heavy only upon the Poorer,
and most ingenious industrious People, to their intolerable oppression; and
that all persons of large Revenues in Lands, and vast estates at usury, bear
not the least proportionable weight of that burden, whereby Trade decays, and
all ingenuity and industry is discouraged: That therefore that oppressive way
of raising money may forthwith cease, and all moneys be raised by equal Rates,
according to the proportion of men's estates.

15. That M. Peter Smart, Doctor Leighton, M. Ralph Grafton, M. Hen. Burton,
Doctor Bastwick, M. William Prinne, Lievt. Conell John Lilburne, the heirs and
executors of M. Brewer, M. John Turner, and all others that suffered any
cruelty, or false illegal imprisonment, by the Star Chamber, the high
Commission, or Councell-Board, as M. Aederman Chambers, and all others that
suffered oppression before the Parliament, for refusing to pay illegal
imposts, customs, or Shipmoney, or yield conformity to Monopolizing Patentees,
may (after 7. years attendance for justice and right) forthwith by this House
receive legal and just reparations out of the estates of all those without
exception, who occasioned, acted in, or procured their heavy sufferings, that
so in future Ages men may not be totally discouraged to stand for their
Liberties and Freedoms, against Oppressors and Tyrants.

16. Whereas we can fix our eyes upon no other but this honor able House for
relief in all these our pressing grievances, until we shall be forced to
despair, we therefore desire, that the most exact care be had of the right
constitutions thereof: And therefore we desire that all Members of this House
chosen in their Nonage, may be forthwith ejected, and that all Votes for
suspension of Members from this House may be forthwith put in execution;
provided, that the House proceed either finally to expel them, that others may
be elected in their stead, or they be restored to serve their Country: And
likewise that all Lawyers who are Members of this House (by reason of their
over-awing power over Judges of their own making) may wholly attend the
peoples service therein, and that every of them may be expelled the House who
shall hereafter plead any cause before any Court or Committee whatsoever,
during his Membership in this House: And we further desire, that every Member
of this House may be enjoined under some great penalty, not to be absent above
three days, without the express license of this House, and not above one
month without the license of the place by which they are betrusted: And
likewise that no Law may be passed, unless two third parts of all the Members
of this House be present, and that the most speedy care be had to distribute
Elections equally throughout the Nation.

Now whereas the particular requests in our Peritions, are for the most part
never debated in this House, but when we are at any time rightly interpreted in
our meanings and intentions, we only receive thanks for our good affections,
or promises that in due time our desires shall be taken into consideration, and
by such delays our distractions are daily increased, and our burdens made more
heavy; therefore we desire, that a Committee be forthwith appointed by this
honorable House, who may be enjoined under some penalty, to sit from day to
day, until they have debated every particular of our requests, and reported
their sense of the justness and necessity of them to this House, that we may
attend for an answer accordingly; and that a time be fixed when such a
Committee shall make their report. And we further desire the same Committee may
be invested with power to hear all our other complaints, and offer suitable
remedies to this honorable House, and to bring in the Appeals of any persons
from the Judges at Westminster, to this honorable House, against their
injustice, bribety, or illegal delay and oppression.

Now O ye worthy Trustees! let not your ears be any longer deaf to our
importunate cries, let not our destruction be worse then that of Sodom, who
was overthrown in a moment. Let us not pine away with famine and be worse then
those who die by the sword. Oh dissolve not all Government into the prime Laws
of nature, and compel us to take the natural remedy to preserve our selves,
which you have declared no people can be deprived of See your Declaration of
May 19. 1642* 1 book dec. page 207. And your Declaration Nov. 1642. pa. 728. as
also pa. 150.
Oh remember that the righteous God stands in the congregation of the mighty,
and judges among the gods, and says, How Psalm. 82.1, 2, 3, 4.
long will ye judge unjustly, and accept the persons of the wicked, defend the
poor and fatherless, do justice to the afflicted and needy, deliver the poor
and needy, and rid them out of the hands of the wicked,

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.
It Is indeed called a Petition, but the whole frame and matter of it is nothing
else but a Calumny against those they seem to petition, charging upon their
account all those Evils that are upon the Kingdom, and a great number more
imaginary ones which they have created, and make men believe they are pressed
with; and publish all this to the Kingdom, to render the Parliament odious to
the People, to divorce their affections, and withdraw their assistance, without
which, the Common Enemy know very well, they are not able to settle the peace
and tranquillity of the Kingdom from foreign and domestic Force, and calm
and compesce those civil and intestine aestuations, the remaining distempers
of our late (almost mortal) Disease, (of which the motions of the Petitioners
are a very consider able part) that thereby a fair way might be paved for a
free and equal course of Law and Justice, (which is a fitter means to
preserve peace, then restore it) whose lower voice cannot be heard while the
Drums beat, or the People tumultuate. It pursues that common and hateful
Maxim, Calumniate boldly, something will stick. It runs in generals, which
ever covers deceit: why descend you not to particulars? The Cries are loud
against injustice, oppression, bribery, exacted, extorted Fees, and can you
name no man that is guilty? You would make all the World believe you were in an
iron furnace, and that the Kingdom were an Hell to its Inhabitants; and yet
tell not who hurts you: But it is easier to calumniate then accuse, and yet to
accuse, then to prove. Be not abused by them that serve their designs by you;
Accuse no man falsely, though upon others informations; look upon the File in
which false accusers march, and consider who may be like to the Leader. A good
name is above riches, it is sooner taken away then restored: name those
Oppressors you complain of, bring forth the matter and the proof, and then if
you have not justice, you may have reason to complain. You complain of
unnecessary Courts, and Courts exceeding the limits of their jurisdiction; you
desire the one to be abolished, and the other to be limited; neither is here
any particular: Has not this Parliament taken away the Star Chamber, High
Commission, all the Bishops Courts, the Court of Wards? and are not all the
jurisdictions of the other Courts well known? What have any of the Petitioners
suffered by those Courts transgressing their limits? or what are the
unnecessary Courts you mean? was it your modesty, or want of matter, that you
omit particulars? Untruths are boldly affirmed upon hearsay; why are you
silent in the things that press your selves?

A word or two to your Margent, and then the particulars of the Petition it
self shall be a little touched upon. The Margent you have filled, with
Authorities and Quotations of Magna Charta, Statutes, Comments on them,
Declarations of etc. Speeches in Parliament; to what purpose serve these? Would
you have the Parliament bound in their Parliamentary proceedings by precedent
Laws? Were not those Laws made by Parliament, and is it not the proper work
of the Parliament, to repeal, as well as to make Laws? Else why do you desire
in your twelfth Particular, to have the Statutes there mentioned repealed?
Either put out your Margent, and deceive not the ignorant with a show of that
which signifies nothing, or else reconcile it with your text; unless you mean
to say, you will appoint the Parliament what Laws they shall repeal, and by
what they shall govern themselves. If it be only to tell them what has been
done before, you may take notice, that there are these in that House, to which
you address, that can as well tell what the Law new is, or heretofore was,
without your Index, as they are able to judge what is necessary for the
present, or for the future, without your advice or intimation. But you would
feign make the People believe, the Parliament neither have wisdom enough to
know how, nor fidelity enough to make them willing to discharge their trust,
unless you direct and incite them.

The Petition is large; to give it an answer in proportion, were to write a
volume, which few could buy, and fewer would read: and perhaps there is
something of policy in the length, least their seduced numbers should be
satisfied by a just confutation. Yet because perhaps there are some among them
of that sort of people, to whom a word is enough; therefore they may please to
consider, It Is called only the Petition of many Freeborn people of this
Nation; it is not then, by your own confession, of all, or of the major part:
remember this, and be modest for once, act not as if you were all. But why many
Freeborn People of this Nation? are there any Englishmen that are not
Freeborn? why do you distinguish your selves? what need of that Epithete,
while you address to the House of Commons, who have asserted, and by the
blessing of God upon the Counsels and Forces of the Parliament, vindicated the
English Freedom from the Common Enemy, under the slavery of whom, by these
your dividing distempers, and weak and outwitted designs, you seek to
return, and carry the Kingdom with you.

To give it the more Authority, the prefacing part of it is forced to speak
Scripture; but not with the Idiome of the Spirit that wrote it, your Hebrew
has much of Ashdod, the breathings of that Spirit are purity and peace; and
the fruits of that Spirit are love, joy, peace, and the rest of that Catalogue.

You begin with a sad complaint, that the fire of the Lords wrath has been
among us, which must be acknowledged; and it may be justly conceived it is so
still; what mean else the distempers of the people, that will not be healed,
and the actings of division, together with the Cries for peace? But to say as
you do, that it is almost consumed, were to lie against the truth, and sin
against that mercy which he has remembered in the midst of his wrath. This
Kingdom has found the effects of the rowlings of his bowels, while it has
been under his chastising rod, that bush has burned, but it is not consumed;
and it is an evidence that God is in it. It Is true, in many places of the Land
the scarres of great wounds remain, but not as in Germany; the lands in
England are not untilled for want of men, the thistles grow not in the furrows
of the field, the Oxen are yet strong to labor, and the Sheep bring forth
their thousands; if you had not intended an ill use of the complaint, the
matter would have borne a mixture of thanks: but if seems you had rather God
should lose the praise of his mercy, then you would omit this Engine, to move
the People to murmr and discontent.

It Is true, that for injustice and oppression God has threatened woes,
confusion and desolation to any People or Nation; but if your search had been
as due as you affirm it was, you might have found other besides those, which
you may light upon perhaps, if you would make a review. It is not to be denied,
that oppression and injustice cause loud cries to heaven, only remember
justice is to render to every one his own, and not to do to another what you
would not should be done to you.

The rich may be oppressed as well as the poor, propriety is to be preserved
to all: and a poor man that oppresses the poor, is like a sweeping rain
that leaves no food.

You observe the Kings oppressions and how God has brought him low, and
executed fierce wrath upon his adherents. Why will ye suffer your selves to be
abused by those adherents, into those dividing destructive courses whereby you
contribute directly to the restoring of the Kings affairs; you are acted by
his Counsels, and you will not see it, and every man shall be the Enemy of the
people that tells you of it, and if his party shall again get head to the
indangering of the Kingdom, which God forbid, thank your own petulant
importune and unseasonable interpellations of those Counsels, by which through
the blessing of God, your deliverance had been perfected, if your selves had
not hindered; can you believe the Kings Counsels are changed? or that he wants
a party waiting an opportunity to bring that upon you which you fear and
complain of? why do you then give them hope and the Parliament work, who
have yet so much to do to preserve the vitalls and recover strength, that they
cannot attend to prescribe a topike to cure the Morphew on the face? trust them
with your cure, and allow it time, overhasty ones prove palliate ones, and not
sound. It is the Patients part to declare his grief, and take his Physic, but
he must let the Physician write the Recipe, if he desires the cure should
succeed.

That your Petitions were burned, and your selves imprisoned only for
petitioning, serves to irritate and inrage those whom you have misled and
deceived, a Petition may well deserve to be burned and the Petitioners
punished, if the matter be unjust, false, scandalous, seditious, read over some
of your old copies, and see if there be none of those faults, it is true, it is
your liberty to Petition, and it is also your duty to acquiesce in the
Parliaments jugement upon it; a Petition is to set forth your grievances, and
not to give a rule to the Legislative Power, if you mean it shall be an Edict,
which you must compose, and the Parliament must verify, call it no more a
Petition.

You say your Estates are expended, how come you then to lay Contributions upon
your selves for the promoting these destructive designs? is that the way to
reimburse your selves? or is it to enable you to fly to the prime laws of
nature for refuge? your Margent will teach the Legislative Power to suspect
you, and that if you be not wicked, it is because perhaps you may not have
opportunity or strength enough, which it will be therefore their care to
prevent: and however perhaps it may be true, that these sad troubles have
caused some diminution in your Estates, yet if you had used as much diligence
since in your own callings, as you have done in those you less understand,
and had let out the current of your thoughts, which have been misimployed about
Politiques, to the Economy of your families, the account of loss had not run
so high, and your private reflections (if ever you assume the trouble of
viewing your selves) had embraced you with the smiles of a sweeter peace with
him, and your actions abroad had less procured the guilt of others.

Thousands of families you say are improverished, and merciless Famine is
entering into your Gates, and therefore You will once more essay to pierce their
ears with your doleful cries for Justice and freedom, before the Parliaments
delays consume the Nation. What justice, what freedom is it you mean* Which of
all the particulars in your Petition being granted, will be able to turn this
famine you so aggravate, into a plenty? what an odious aspersion is this, to
lay upon the Parliament, to make them hateful to all men? To tell the World in
Print, That there is something in their power (for otherwise you say nothing)
that they delay, whereby this Dearth and Famine, as you call it, is upon the
Kingdom? Have you learned this from those of old? That whenever Famine,
Pestilence, or any publicker calamity, invaded the World from the just hand of
God, then to cry out, Throw the Christians to the Lions, attributing to them
the cause of all, as you do now to the Parliament. Do you not know that the
unseasonable seed-time in 1646. and the unkindly Spring following, might well
cause a Dearth, which is not yet in England, (through the mercy of God) as it
is in other places? And do you think it is in the power of the Parliament to
give a Law to the Heavens, to restrain the Pleiades, or loose Orion, to give or
withhold rain? can the Parliament make windows in heaven, or create a plenty?
Why do you say you care not what, and abuse the people without blushing?

Your large Petitory part in 16 Articles, might well receive a very short
Answer, That it offers many things as grievances that are removed, desires many
things that are already granted, of which you will take no notice, that you may
multiply the Odium, mistake the present state of things, as if all were an
unformed matter, or abrasa tabula fitted for the projection of a new model, or
for the compiling of a new body of Laws.

He that will build a City upon a Plain, has the place obedient to his
projections, and succeptible of any form; And if he be not prejudiced by
foreign extrinsicall observations, to which he will conform his lines, he may
exemplify the best Ideas his mind offers him: But he that would reedifie or
beautify an old one, will meet with many things that will not submit to pure
technicall rules; And where it will not, it is not presently to be pulled down,
or set on fire. Rome had a greater beauty and uniformity as it was built by its
first Kings, then after the Burning by the Gauls, and Rescue by Camillus,
where each man built as it was most Commodious for him, and not as it was most
comely, or convenient for the whole: And yet Catiline and his Accomplices were
judged Traitors for designing to burn it, and it was only becoming Nero to put
it into flames.

The dispute is not now of what is absolutely best if all were new, but of what
is perfectly just as things now stand: It is not the Parliaments work to set up
an Vtopian Commonwealth, or to force the people to practice abstractions, but
to make them as happy as the present frame will bear. That wise Lawgiver of
old, acknowledged that he had not given his people the Laws that were
absolutely best, but the best they were able to receive. The perfect return of
health after sickness, is to be left to nature and time; he that will purge
his body, till there remain nothing peccant, will sooner expel his life, then
the cause of his sickness. And he that out of a desire to repair his house,
shall move all the foundations, will sooner be buried in the ruins of the old,
then live to see the erection of a new structure.

1. You forget that universal rule of Justice (to do as you would be doneby)
which is not only one of those con-nate and common Notions which are written in
the hearts of all, which every one capable of reason, and under wrong, can
quote from that internal writing, though he that inferrs the injury, will not:
And it is given also as a Compendium of the Law, and an Universal rule of
Christian Practice, by him who is the one Lawgiver, who is able to save and to
destroy; To whose Commands and Dictates, whoever will profess contradiction,
and pursue a contumacious disobedience, is more worthy the name of a Renegado
then a Christian.

Upon forgetfullnesse of this rule it is, that you would by force spoil the
Lords of their part of the Legislative power, which they hold by a claim of an
older date then any of the Petitioners can show for their Land: Ask your selves
the question, Would any of you be content to be disseized of his Land, to which
he can derive a title, or prescribe to for so long a time? And your
contumelious expression of Patent Lords might have been spared, seeing the
Houses have resolved that none shall be made Peers of Parliament hereafter, but
by consent of both Houses, whereby your Representors and Trustees have a
Negative voice against any such Creation for the future? Were it not to enlarge
this particular beyond what is intended for the rest, you might be informed,
That there were Princes of the people, and heads of the Tribes, amongst the
Israelites; and the f rst choice of them, when they were new come up out of
Egypt, and were then receptive of any form, was not by the people, but by
Moses; and as it is express of the Priesthood, so it is evident in the rest of
the Tribes, that the first of the first line was still Prince of the Tribe.

And the longest lived, best governed, most Potent and flourishing
Commonwealths that ever the sun saw, have always had their Orders of Nobility
or Patricians, in succession from Father to Son, preserved with a kind of
Religion in a clear distinction from the people: Those two of Old Rome, while a
Commonwealth; And Venice at present, are known Examples. But this particular
with diverse others concerning Government, require a fuller Tractate then this
occasional glaunce.

2. Secondly (besides their right) there is at least a very great convenience,
if not a necessity, that the Legislative power should be in several and
distinct bodies for the review of what might else be perhaps at first overseen:
There is scarce any man but finds, that revising in the morning his evenings
conceptions, he meets with something or other to be added or altered.

3. Are not all Officers and Ministers of Justice, and all other Civil
Officers, all military Officers both by sea and land, chosen, and put into
their places, by both Houses of Parliament, wherein, as in all other things,
the Commons have a Negative Vote?

4. Is not there a Committee that has been a good while since appointed to
receive Informations of grievances, and propound them with remedies to the
House? What address have you made to them? Have they refused to take your
Informations? Why do you complain before you have been refused redress?

5. You complain of the imprisonment of faithful and public spirits, for
matters not criminal, and would have no imprisonment to be but for crimes,
according to Law. But are there not some actions in these unsettled times that
may deserve a punishment, for which no former Law has explicitly provided
any? You would have no man kept in prison longer, than till he be delivered by
due course of Law. You know there are two ways of delivery by due course of
Law; And he that has deserved the one should not complain he is still a
Prisoner; And for what is a Crime, the party guilty is no Judge; it cannot be
denied, that as the Parliament is the supreme Judge, so it is the most
competent; and if they Judge it necessary, that seditious Incendiaries should
be restrained, for the Peace of the Kingdom, must they give an account to the
Delinquents of the reason of their Actions?

6. You would have the Laws in our known tongue, and all writings and
proceedings in the present known hands; they have been so heretofore; What are
you now the better for it? Which of you understand the Saxon Laws, written in
the then vulgar tongue? And the Norman-French, though not then National, yet
was very generally understood. And if most of the Petitioners shall look upon
the language of two or three Centuries past, they will meet with so many words
they understand not, as will disable their understanding of the sense of those
they do. And if those which are in other tongues, were in English, there were
a possibility you might mistake them, as well as you do those that already are
so. And if there should be a disuse in the Courts, of writing those hands which
now are obsolete to vulgar use, the reading of those hands might in time come
to be lost, and thereby a loss of all the Records that are written in them.

7. If any shall deny to do you Justice, according to Magna Charta, unless
he may sell it, why do you not accuse the man? Strike not through all by such
oblique insinuations, but let the guilty bear his shame and punishment. You
might have taken notice, that the Parliament has doubled the salaries of the
Judges: but to pay all ministerial Officers from the public Treasury, were
to waste the States treasure to maintain the quarrels of the contentious
against them that are peaceable.

8. You would have no Judge continue for above three years; What shall he do
the rest of his life? Were not this to put them upon the temptation of the
unjust Steward? You will say he may return to private practice at the Bar
again. Will any of you when he has set up for himself for the space of three
years, be content to serve journeyman for the rest of his life? If it be so
comely or easy a matter, Why did Lieutenant Colonel Lilburn refuse the Command
of a Troup of Horse offered him in the Army of Sir Thomas Fairfax, because he
had the title of a Lieutenant Colonel before, And would not accept of less
than a Regiment? Consider who they are that bind heavy burdens for other
men, and grievous to be borne, but themselves will not touch them with one of
their fingers.

9. For the buying of Offices; suppose both parties agreed, yet he must have a
large purse who can buy of a Parliament, and 'twill be hard where so many must
be bribed to be secret in all.

10. For that speedy trial of offenders; your desire may interferre with
Justice, matter cannot be always presently proved, Will you free a man accused
of murder done the day before the Assizes, because that which has vehement
presumptions, cannot have a legal Evidence till some days after.

11. The Monopolies you so much complain of are condemned by Law, You may take
your course against any, and no man can hinder you. If there be any Monopolizer
in the House, why do you not declare it to the House, and prove it? Have they
not formerly put out some for that offense? if there be none there, that piece
might have been spared.

12. You complain, That the Members of the House of Commons are chosen only by
Freeholders, and not by all the freeborn people of the Kingdom. If you
conceive it be an Injury to all the rest, that they are chosen only by
Freeholders, Consider seriously, and then tell Us, whether it be not an injury
to all the rest, that they so chosen must be directed and ordered by you. Tell
the world how you came by your Privilege, To make a Collection of such as this
is, of some things good; with a mixture of diverse mistakes in the rest, and
then magistically obtrude it upon the House, presently to pass and confirm,
the highest affront to the Legislative power, and the highest injury to your
freeborn fellows that can be well imagined.

13. You take notice of the shame of the Nation, by the begging of the poor,
and it is undeniably a great one, and Peace being settled, the remedy of it were
one of the most desirable things to be undertaken, and this Kingdom wants not
materials for industry, and there is not any doubt, that the encouragement of
fishing in this Kingdom, might produce it a profit of exceeding value; but do
You not know that the Parliament has had so hard a task to preserve the Land,
that they have had no time left to improve those advantages of the Sea? neither
can they give industry to men, which if any will exercise in it, they may be
sure of all acceptance. And certainly that, and diverse other things for the
good of the Kingdom have been thought upon by the Parliament (though you would
feign have the world believe they mind nothing, unless You be their
remembrancers) and had been in effect before this time, had not such
consultations been diverted by the necessity of providing against these, and
some other distempers. In the mean time, till care can be taken for prevention
of beggary, increase not their number by the addition of your selves; neglect
not your Callings, forbear your clandestine Contributions, You may perhaps
thrive in your own way, but your unhappy and ill advised Statizing will ruin
your selves, and has a natural tendency to the ruin of the Kingdom.

14. You complain of the heavy burden of the Excise, and there again you
pretend to be the Advocates of the poor, but in nothing are you more the Kings
Atturneys, That standing and constant Revenue being that, which of all others
with great est ease, supplied the Exigencies of the War when it was hottest,
and contributed most to the breaking of the Enemy. Every thing must serve to
heighten your discontent, and to stir up the ignorant people. Otherwise it is
obvious enough to every discerning eye, that as it is least grievous of all other
ways, because it passes from a man unseen, so it cannot but be most Equal,
because every man is in a sort his own assessor, it being in his own power by
his frugallity, to reduce it to as small a sum as he please, the greatest
burden of it lying upon things not necessary, less necessary, or, if
necessary, yet there in such a proportion, as those which are for the use of
the richer sort have the greatest imposition, there being nothing but only
strong beer, wherein the poor seem to be touched, which for the too much
abuse of it, and that even by the poor, it may justly afford something toward
the maintenance of the public, while it is so deeply accessory to the undoing
of many private persons. For that other, that it is the decay of Trade, and the
discouragement of all ingenuity and industry, You may, if you will but send
some of your Emissaries into the united Provinces, be informed there, That that
people could never find a foundation of money for those vast charges they were
forced to be at, to defend themselves from those who tyrannized their
Liberties, and to settle the free State they have since managed, till they had
fallen upon the Excise; And that notwithstanding it, their Trade is so grown
upon them since, that they have in a great measure engrossed it from the rest
of Europe, and yet have little matter to raise it upon, but their Industry,
which is not so discouraged by the Excise, but it produces that effect, and
were worth our Imitation; but there was but a word intended, If twere
necessary, there is nothing more easy than to justify this way of Levy by
Excise, before all other ways whatsoever.

15. You do very magisterially appoint the House how to regulate their
Members, and especially those of the long robe, who by no means may exercise
their calling, because they are called thither to serve the public; Other
Gentlemen have their rents and profits come in without their own particular
care, and they who have trades can drive them by their partners and servants,
only these whose employments must be personal must needs suffer loss in their
Estates, because they are Members. And what reason is there why a just Judge,
who judges according to Law, and proceeds according to the rules of the Court,
should be awed by, or afraid of, the person of any, though a Member of the
House? for though that House be a Judge of the Judges, yet the Judge in his
Court is Superior in that qualification to whosoever pleads at his Bar.

Your Epilogue might have been spared; the first part of it, in regard the
Committee You desire has been long appointed, to whom any man has Liberty to
bring his grievances, and there is doubt they will be received, and their sense
of the justness and necessity of them be reported to the House, though it is
probable 'twill not please you concerning yours, unless it be your own sense
also.

Your second might be with more Justice retorted; Poor deluded people! When
will ye begin to turn a deaf Ear to those who seduce you? When will you
remember your duty, and come out of your dream, in which you have believed
that you are all the people, and therefore supreme, and have arraigned all men
in a suitable Style? Act not a part, dissemble not with Heaven, remember you
are in the light and view of Omniscience; Complain not of Famine before you
feel it, lest you provoke him that can send it. There is a difference between
scarcity and Famine. God is the God of order, forbear to endeavor any further
to dissolve all government into Confusion, lest you compel the Parliament to
prevent it in your just punishment; Remember that God stands in your
Clandestine Conciliables, as well as in the Congregation of the Mighty, and as
he requires of Magistrates to defend the poor and needy, so he has also
forbidden to countenance a poor man in his cause.

Together with this Petition, there was at the same time brought to the House
of Commons, by Colonel Barlistead, another scandalous printed paper, of which
two quires had been delivered to one Lazarus Tindall, a private soldier of
Captain Grooms Company, in the Regiment of the said Colonel, the papers were
delivered to him, to spread among the soldiers of that Regiment, and that same
person that delivered them, told him he should have one thousand of the large
Petitions also, to disperse in that Regiment, so soon as they were reprinted,
which they were about to do in a smaller leter, for the saving of charges. By
which it appears that paper also springs from the same root with the foresaid
Petition, of which it also takes notice, and helps to promote the same ends
with it; and who ever shall put himself to the trouble to read them both, will
find them speak the same Language, and discern the same spirit in them both;
and is yet more evident by the latter clause of the first Marginall note, which
were Lilburns words to a syllable, at the Bar of the House of Commons; And by
that paragraph of the paper, which begins [have you not upon such pretences]
etc. which were Wildmans words at that meeting in Well-yard, which is mentioned
in Mr. Marstersons relation, and at the Commons Bar; and by the last clause
of the next paragraph, which were the words of Lilburn and Wildman, or one of
them, at the Bar of the House of Commons, and are also to be found in the
Petition it self, so as a very dim sight may discern it to be a Whelp of the
same litter.

The mournful Cries of many thousand poor Tradesmen, who are ready to famish
through decay of Trade.
Or, The warning Tears of the Oppressed.
OH that the cravings of our Stomachs could be heard by the Parliament and
City! Oh that the Tears of our poor famishing Babes were botled! Oh that their
tender Mothers Cries for bread to feed them were engraven in Brass! Oh that
our pined Carcasses were open to every pitiful Eye! Oh that it were known that
we sell our Beds and Clothes for Bread! Oh our Hearts faint, and we are ready
to swoon in the top of every Street!

O you Members of Parliament, and rich men in the City, that are at ease, and
drink Wine in Bowls, and stretch your selves upon Beds of Down, you that grind
our faces, and flay off our skins, Will no man amonst you regard, will no man
behold our faces black with Sorrow and Famine? Is there none to pity? The Sea
Monster draws out the breast, and gives suck to their young ones, and are our
Rulers become cruel like the Ostrich in the Wilderness? Lament. 4.3.

OH ye great men of England, will not (think you) the righteous God behold our
Affliction, does not he take notice that you devour us as if our Flesh were
Bread? are not most of you either Parliament Men, Committee Men, Customers,
Excise-men, Treasurers, Governors of Towns and Castles, or Commanders in the
Army, Officers in those Dens of Robbery, the Courts of Law? and are not your
Kinsmen and Allies, Colectors of the Kings Revenue, or the Bishops Rents, or
Sequestratours? What then are your ruffling Silks and Velvets, and your
glittering Gold and Silver Laces? are they not the sweat of our brows, and the
wants of our backs and bellies?

Its your Taxes, Customs, and Excize, that compells the Country to raise the
price of food, and to buy nothing from us but mere absolute necessaries; and
then you of the City that buy our Work, must have your Tables furnished, and
your Cups overflow; and therefore will give us little or nothing for our Work,
even what you And since the late Lord Mayor Adam, you have put in execution art
illegal wicked docree of the Common Council, whereby you have taken our goods
from us if we have gone to the Inns to sell them to country men; and you have
murdered some of our poor wives that have gone to Innes to sinde country men to
buy them.
please, because you know we must sell for moneys to set our Families on work,
or else we famish: Thus our Flesh is that whereupon you Rich men live, and
wherewith you deck and adorn your selves. Ye great men, Is it not your plenty
and abundance which begets you Pride and Riot? And does not your Pride beget
Ambition, and your Ambition Faction, and your Faction these Civil broils? What
else but your Ambition and Faction continue our Distractions and Oppressions?
Is not all the Controversy whose Slaves the poor shall be? Whether they shall
be the Kings Vassals, or the Presbyterians, or the Independent Factions? And is
not the Contention nourished, that you whose Houses are full of the spoils of
your Country, might be secure from Accounts, while there is nothing but
Distraction? and that by the tumultuousnesse of the people under prodigious
oppression, you might have fair pretenses to keep up an Army, and garrisons?
and that under pretense of necessity, you may uphold your arbitrary Government
by Committees, etc.

Have you not upon such pretenses brought an Army into the bowels of the City?
and now Exchange does rise already beyond Sea, and no Merchants beyond Sea will
trust their Goods hither, and our own Merchants conveigh their The Merchants
have already kept back from the Tower, many hundred thousand pounds, and no
bullion is brought into the Tower, so that money will be more scarce daily.
Estates from hence, so there is likely to be no importing of Goods, and then
there will be no Exporting, and then our Trade will be utterly lost, and our
Families perish as it were in a moment.

O ye Parliament Men hear our dying cry, Settle a Peace, settle a Peace! strive
not who shall be greatest until you be all confounded. You may if you will
presently determine where the supreme Power resides, and settle the just common
Freedoms of the Nation, so that all Parties may equally receive Justice, and
enjoy their Right, and every one may be as much concerned as other to defend
those common Freedoms; you may presently put down your Arbitrary Committees,
and let us be Governed by plain written Laws, in our own Tongue, and pay your
Ministers of Justice out of a common Treasury, that every one may have Justice
freely and impartially.

You have in your hands the Kings, Queens, and Princes Revenue, and Papists
Lands, and Bishops, and Deans, and Chapters Lands, and Sequestered Lands, at
least to the value of eighteen hundred thousand pounds by the year, Which is at
least five hundred thousand pounds a year more then will pay the Navy, and all
the Army, and the Forces which need to be kept up in England and Ireland; and
out of that the Kingdoms debts would be paid yearly; whereas now you run
further into Debt daily, and pay one thousand pounds by the day at least for
use Money. Besides you may if you will Proclaim Liberty, for all to come and
discover to a Committee of disingaged men, chosen out of every County, one for
a County, to discover to them what Moneys and Treasure, your own Members, and
your Sequestrators, etc. have in their hands, and you may by that means find
many Millions of Money to pay the public Debts. You may find 30000. li. in
Mr. Richard Darley's hand, 25000. li. in Mr. Thorpes hand M. William Lenthall,
Speaker of the House, to cover his cozenage, gave 22000 li. to his servant Mr.
Cole, to purchase land in his own name, though for his use; which he did, and
then died suddenly, and the land fell to his son, and the widow having married
a Lawyer, keeps the land for the childs use, and says he knows not that his
predecessor received any money from the Speaker, and now Mr. Speaker sueth in
Chancery for the land. A hundred such discoveries might be made.
, a Member of Yours, who first Proclaimed Sir John Hotham Traitor. And thus you
may take off all Taxes presently, and so secure Peace, that Trading may revive,
and our pining, hungry, famishing Families be saved.

And O ye Soldiers who refused to disband, because you would have Justice and
Freedom, who cried till the Earth ecchoed, Justice, Justice; forget not that
cry, but cry speedily for Peace and Justice, louder then ever. There is a large
Petition of some pitiful men, that is now abroad, which contains all our
desires, and were that granted in all things, we should have Trading again, and
should not need to beg our Bread, though those men have so much mercy, as they
would have none to cry in the Streets for Bread.

Oh though you be Soldiers, show bowels of Mercy and Pity to a hunger-starved
People; Go down to the Parliament, desire them to consume and trifle away no
more time, but offer your desires for Us in that large Petition, and cry
Justice, Justice; Save, save, save the perishing People; O cry thus till your
importunity make them hear you.

O Parliament men, and Soldiers! Necessity dissolves all Laws and Government,
and Hunger will break through stone Walls; Tender Mothers will sooner devour
You, then the Fruit of their own womb, and Hunger regards no Swords nor Canons.
It may be so great oppressors intend tumults, that they may escape in a crowd,
but your food may then be wanting as well as ours, and your Arms will be hard
diet. O hark, hark at our doors, how our children cry Bread, Bread, Bread;
and we now with bleeding hearts, cry once more to you, pity, pity an oppressed,
inslaved People: carry our cries in the large Petition to the Parliament, and
tell them, if they be still deaf, the Tears of the oppressed will wash away
the foundations of their houses. Amen, Amen, so be it.

It seems to be written by some of the Professors of Rhetoric in Newgate, or
Ludgate, whose long practice of that kind of Oratory had made him as great a
stranger to truth, as to blushing* The whole matter of it composed of so gross
an hypocrisy, that it scarce deserves that name; mixed with impudency, and
lies, of the same Genius with the Petition, boldly affirming in generals, and
brins gnot forth one particular with proof. Where are those famishing babes?
and where are those pining carcasses? Why are they not brought forth to the
view of some pitiful eye? You cry for pity, why show you not the object?
Where are those faces black with sorrow and famine? Spend no longer your breath
in vain, Let the famishing pined Carcasses, those black faces be seen, the
view gives a deeper impression then hearsay. If you be not of those that have
said in their hrarts, There is no God, (though your paper abuse the repetition
of that sacred Name) Remember that the al-seeing God beholds your hearts, and
knows your distempers, murmurings, and black designations as well as your
wants, And sees with what a frontlesse boldness you affirm any thing, be the
untruth never so notorious. The language looks more like the ebullition of wine
than the cries of want.

You complain of the rising of the Exchange abroad, that Merchants will not
trust their goods hither, and our Merchants convey their Estates. And what is
the reason think you they do so? (if the matter of fact be true) Why an Army
is brought into the bowels of the City. Does one Regiment of Horse, and one of
Foot make an Army in your account? And is White Hall, and the Mewes, in the
bowels of the City? The Parliament has had a guard these five yares; when it
was furnished from the City, and places within the lines, it was held a great
grievance, And what security the Parliament had by it was evident on Monday the
26. of July last, when either by the Cowardice, or Compliance of the then
guard, so horrid and dishonorable a violence was put upon the Houses by an
inconsiderable Rabble of people. And what a danger to trade these Regiments are
like to be, You might be able to judge, if you would but make an Estimate of
the Millions the City suffered in, when the whole Army, whereof these Regiments
are a part, marched in Arms through the City, upon the sixth of August, after
they had been sufficiently irritated by some of the City: Yet you are not able
to bring so much as a loaf of bread to the account of loss to the City by all
their march, though the shops were open, and the market furnished.

But you would feign use any pretense to remove these faithful forces, because
you see as long as they are here, you will hardly be able to make use of your
pistolls and daggers, or to dissolve all Laws and Government, or to have
recourse to the prime Laws of Nature. But indeed twere worth the inquiry,
what it is that causes this great exporting of Estates, and that hinders all
importation, it is certainly a disease that must needs destroy, though not in a
moment. There has been a good while a rumor of a pestilence that walks in
darkness; and has been known to have infected some that frequent your
meetings, and are accounted as your own; and this rumor is not a whispering,
it has spoken almost as loud as some of your Cries for bread, And it is the
Doctrine of Parity or levelling, bringing all men's Estates to an Equallity; A
notion that Merchants, and men of great Trade, are as little edified with, as
either the Lords are with being divested of their Honors, and part in the
Legislative power, or other Gentlemen to part with their Lands, and therefore
having so good means to put them out of your reach, which other men have not,
may perhaps transport them, not willing their large personal Estates should
come under your Distribution, from which there an be no recovery. And if you
think that Merchandise be good for the Kingdom, and if you have any care of
that good, you must consider how to satisfy Merchants, that you intend not to
level; for their Trade runs such an hazard, and must be managed with such a
diligence, and industry, as will hardly receive encouragement from your Vtopian
parity. And however the Crowd of those that follow you intend no such thing,
but think these are ways to secure their own property; yet just suspicion is
upon many of you, And it is not your bare denial will serve, good words will not
satisfy. You know who said Hayle Master, when the salutation was a watchword.
It might be thought there would be nothing of greater deferency and respect,
than the address of your Petition in the superlative inscription, yet Lilburn
told you at the meeting in VVellyard, that when you had once raised the spirits
of the peaple, you would then force the House to grant what you ask. Confide
not in your present intentions, remember Hazael. There is not the most clear
and Candid soul amongst you that knows to what (now abhorred) actions he may
be driven by the violence of the people, if that Sea shall once break over his
banks, and twill not be then in their power to stop, but only is his that
calmeth the Sea and rebukes the raging of the people, who can say to both,
hitherto shall thou come and no further, and here shall thy proud waves be
stayed. But to pass by all the rest, be persuaded to examine the truth of fact
with a little more care when you compose your next seditious Harangue; You may
take notice, how ill your intelligence has been in this; It Is possible indeed,
much of the public money may be in Collectors, Receivers, and sequestrators
hands, and it were a meritorious service to the Commonwealth to discover it,
and would no doubt be of universal acceptance; but be sure you be rightly
informed, accuse no man falsely, specially in print, it is against Charity, to
which Grace no Christian should be a stranger. Bring the particulars and
proofs to the House, that a course may be taken to bring that money in to
supply the necessities of the Commonwealth, which are great; some pains taken
to the purpose in this service, will be more worth than all your Petitioning.
But for these particulars here produced, they are so far from truth, as makes
your whole paper suspected to proceed from the Father of lies. You say there is
25000. l. in Mr. Thorps hands, a Member of the House of Commons. He was never
appointed or authorized Treasurer, or Collector of any public moneys, either
by the Parliament, or any Committee, or any others, nor ever received one penny
of the public moneys. Mr. Richard Darley was indeed appointed to receive some
moneys in the East riding of Yorkeshier, But he never received more himself
than sixty three pound or therabouts, which was upon occasion of calling the
Sequestrators of Beverly to account; At which time his Deputy receiver, Mr.
Richard Thornton, being not there, he received it himself, and put it to
account. All other moneys were received by his said Deputy, who has from time
to time paid out the same, according to such Orders as he received for that
purpose. Mr. Darley knows not particularly what is at present in his Deputies
hand, in regard he is here at London, attending his service in the House of
Commons, and his Deputy is in Yorkeshier, neither yet can he tell whether he
may not have already accounted with the Committee of the County; how ever he
knows it cannot be any great sum, and the account for the whole is ready,
when it shall be called for; And so is also the money remaining, when Order
shall be given for it. But your famous mistake, is that of your margent
concerning Mr. Speaker, The truth of which story upon through inquiry, instead
of what you have Printed, is clearly thus, That Mr. William Lenthall Speaker of
the House of Commons, never purchased Land, either in his own, or any other
man's name since these troubles; neither did Mr. Cole purchase any for him; Mr.
Cole died not suddenly, but of a Fever, and that after ten or twelve days
sickness; his wife is still a widow, and not married either to Lawyer, or any
other; there is no suit against her by Mr. Speaker, nor cause of any. You say
an hundred such discoveries might be made as this latter, and indeed its true,
they may be done with great ease, it is but to sit down and write an hundred
particulars what comes upermost, taking only care there be never a true word in
them, which the suggestor of this will easily enable you to do, and then there
will be an hundred such discoveries made; but indeed he that would take pains
to examine both your Petition, and this Paper, and had so little to do with
precious time, as so to employ it, might find among your Complaints,
Suggestions, and Calculations, some convenient number of truths of the same
Complexion with these: But as you may know the Lion by his claw, so you may
know the Devil by his tongue, he is a liar, and the Father of lies; and
certainly this your mistaken confidence may be sufficient to command belief
from such as are content to be deceived in all your Generals, for information
in which, it is not credible you would take more care, then in these
particulars, which both concerned the reputation of particular Gentlemen, and
whereof the truth might be inquired out. But now how will you do these
Gentlemen right in this, and give them reparations? perhaps your scandalous
Paper, by the great diligence of your selves, and Emissaries to spread them,
may come to many hands where their just defense may not follow, and perhaps
they may escape more proper uses, so as to remain when the Gentlemen shall be
at rest, and be a black Epitaph upon their innocence, and an unjust and
unworthy Blot upon their fair reputation. If any man shall after this be misled
by these guides, it will not be an easy matter to undeceive him, but he is to
be Pitied, as one of those who being fallen out with truth, is given up to
strong delusions to believe a lie. Be yet advised not to feign a necessity, and
hold out that as a Vail to your Resolution to dissolve all Laws of Government,
it may confound propriety, and level Estates, the thing perhaps that some aim
at: But it may cause a promiscuous mingling of blood too, and in such a
confusion as you seek to introduce, it is not impossible you may lose your own
in the Crowd. Call not up therefore more spirits then you know how to conjure
down, yo^^ Spells may fail you, there may be some have Pistols and Daggers, that
neither care for your Spells nor you, nor your Petition neither. While you plot
tragedies, and endeavor thus to bring them upon the Stage, take heed there
enter not some who will neither take their Cu from your Prompter, nor Act
according to your Poets design.

We shall add noe further trouble to the Reader, and indeed very much of this
might have been spared, as to those who have their parts exercised to discern
good and evil. The evil of this is so written, that they that run might read
it, if prejudice did not blind them, if perhaps there be not also some that do
not see, because they will not see; but because there are some, who in the
simplicity of their hearts, have followed those Impostors, let them suffer
themselves to make halt in this furious march, and a little to consider their
leader, and then think whither they are going; let them take a measure of
Lilburn by his books filled with falsehoods and bitterness* by his ingratitude
to those who have obliged him, by that behavior in the House of Lords, that
wants a name; by the Pistol and Dagger he speaks of, by which murder was
designed, which he calls a noble resolution; by his company, the most desperate
Malignants; by their opinion of him, as being wholly the Kings; by all these
Actions which tend to stir up the people, to force the power which your
Petition acknowledges supreme, and thereby to dissolve all Government, and
mingle all with ruin; then judge impartially, if this be the Character of a
Christian, or a Banditto; of a man acted and guided by the Spirit of God, or
moved and driven by the Devil: And think if it be becoming men professing
Religion to be found in these ways. To be Religious is no more in despising
forms then in adoring them, The power of it is in Conforming the will of man to
the will of God, and in all the goings out of that will either into affection,
or action, with an unreserved resignation to give up the man to be guided
still, by the eternal rule of truth and gooddesse, of which there is
sufficient, and clearly enough laid down in the word of truth, for direction
in all things to him that humbly seeks it of which You should have made more
use in sincerity and humility to direct your selves, and less in prevaricating
and misapplying it with a spirit of bitterness, to make it serve for the
language in which you would falsely accuse, not your brethren, but your
confessed Superiors. Be persuaded to study to be quiet, and do your own
business, to live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you;
and leave the public affairs to those, to whom God and the Kingdom has
committed them; abuse not lenity, but make use of thus much for your fair
retreat, and charge no more; nor undertake any further to prastise till you be
a great deal better studied in, and have more universal, comprehension of,
that very important, and yet very little known art of Statizing.

FINIS.

