A DISCOVERY OF SOME PLOTS OF LUCIFER AND HIS COUNCIL AGAINST The Children of
MEN.

LONDON, Printed for T. Brewster at the sign of the three Bibles at the West
end of Paul's. 1656.

A discovery of some plots of Lucifer and his Council against the Children of
men.
1. ONe that had some experience of the devices of Satan, and is not wholly
ignorant of them, does here in few words cry out to you all the children of
men to take heed, and be wise in Christ's wisdom, and watch against this
roaring, devouring deep and dangerous lion; whose Jaws are the gates of hell,
and whose interest is in all our natures.

2. At first, when he saw God had made man after his own Image; (which
similitude Satan himself had lost) he was so busy with the first Adam, that
within 40 days he fetched him, and in him all his to his own element. And
presently after when God promised Adam that the seed of the woman should bruise
the Serpents head (not seeds as of many, nor heads as of many, neither) then
Satan fell upon Cain her first seed, and also kept fast all the old world
(excepting a few that escaped out of his snares) in iniquity.

3. Then after this, Jehovah raised up Abraham as a common root to a spiritual
nation, according to his faith, and as a public spring to the most famous
nation of the Jews after the flesh. But the divider rested not, till he broke
off about 600000 men in the wilderness. Afterward he cozened ten tribes from
the pure worship at Jerusalem; and at length prevailed with the other tribes,
to crucify the Messiah; for he veiled over the Lord of glory, that they did
not know him, but killed him.

4. Now, when God seemed to be thus defoyled, and put back, he Creates a new
people among the Gentiles. And this with a few Jews, is called the primitive
Church Apostolical. But not many years after, the old dragon, played another
game, and divides those Churches by breaking them among themselves. So that
the Apostasy and Antichrist, all in black and blood came up, and so for many
hundreds of years the beast and dragon carried almost all before them; though
all this while God has his children, and Christ was digging the tophet deep,
for to cast the king and god of this world at last into that bottomless pit.

5. It is well known that of late years, as soon as any sort of people, were
coming out of Babylon and minding the way to Sion, the enemy has by
experience of ages found out many new Inventions to delude, and divide; and by
teaching his doctrines, and applying his conclusions, he prevails with most
of all mankind to submit to him as to their sovereign.

6. Now, whereas truth (being but one) is scattered among all Christians; and
one is taught in one part of it, and another in another, so that no one sort of
men have but only a parcel of the truth, and it but a part of their heart; the
old dragon endeavoring to make truth war against it self, as it does fight
against him who is the father of lies, he coyneth new names for every party of
people, that so they might dispute and wrangle among themselves; and when any
good word is spoken as a testimony, the vulgar despise it, and say O he is such
a one, of such a Sect; so truth is undervalued and Sects maintained.

7. And to secure his den of lies, he rangeth his own subjects into manifold
forms, and makes them seem to fight one against another, that so he that
escapes one evil way or opinion, may greedily run into the Camp of another
party of the devil, being still carefully detained within the verge of his
court which is flesh and disobedience.

8. And further rather then fail, he stirs up a Theudas, and after him
Judas before Christ comes, and possesses the bodies of many, that so (besides
the gaining of those deluded souls) he may prejudge Christ; that the people
may say of Christ, he has a devil and is mad; as them lately risen, and so
tumble them over the stumbling stone.

9. Time would fail to enumerate his protects to vex Christ, and deceive the
people; but this paper intends only a hint, that unstable souls, for want of
comprehension of love, may not fall into the manifold intanglements of the
Serpent.

10. Of any thing he cannot endure love, peace and purity. Therefore striveth
he to set one Text, one Saint, one providence, one government, one Church, one
nation, and one man against another; and delighting to fish in troubled waters,
he sets Churches on flames by disputations, and kingdoms by wars; and
private Christians by envyings and evil surmisings.

11. O thou old Serpent, the day of God discovers thee. Thy den is malice:
Thy trade is sinning: Thy recreation is war: Thy drink is the blood of souls:
Thy food is dust: Thy trap is unbelief: Thy disport is tempting: Thy haunt is
in flesh and blood: Thy subjects are many, but thou and thy angels shall be
broken for ever.

12. Now to overthrow this desperate enemy, the Lord appoints man his whole
Armor; faith to resist him, truth to pierce him, hope to get beyond him, peace
to outdare him, love to fret him, joy to sadden him, prayer to whip him, union
to defeat him, and Christ himself to tread him under feet.

13. O wretched angel, thou accusest me, and many more before God; I will
also rip up thy devices before the sons of men, according to the law of
retaliation, and will vex thee in thy family of sin. Thy kingdom as an
abominable branch, is cut down; Thy fall is as the lightning, Thy Tophet is
preparing, Thou thy self diggest it deep. The great chain is in the great
Angels hand to bind thee. Then shall the people have peace instead of war, and
love for envy, and for injustice equity. And they shall on earth sing
Hallelujah to God and the Lamb that died for man, whilst thou art warming of
thy self in hell fire.

14. O Ye children of Adam, Be not deluded by this serpent, let him not drive
you to sin against your light, as Balaam did his Ass; fling down this rider,
and break the bridle of your own wills, and affections, and be not ignorant of
his devices; The day of God reveals them to you; love the light, and come out
of darkness.

15. Howbeit this enemy does not so much desire your damnation (wherein God
will have glory) as he does the disgrace and contempt of the king Christ who is
his implacable antagonist. He hireth sinners and pays these poor simple
soldiers with the pleasures of their own lusts, to the end that they may fight
against God that made them, and against Christ their friend. And he supplieth
their corrupt natures with the incomes of all pride, malice, lust,
unrighteousness, discontent, unthankfulness, and woe.

16. His study is, how to discourage the Saints, embolden the wicked, to divide
the Churches, to make war in nations, to vilify the Scriptures, to create
discontent in families, and hard thoughts of God and men; and being well
acquainted with the constitutions of all bodies and influences of the stars, he
quickens the sanguine complexion to lust and frothiness; He kindles his own
fire in the choleric, and over the melancholic he spreads his own black
curtain of despairing of good; The phlegmatic also he imprisoneth in
earthinesse, sloth and fatness of heart.

17. If the Government of a nation be changed, It is his policy to make his
slaves free, to accept of places of trust, as magistrates under that present
Government; for he well knows that such will let his kingdom of sin alone,
and not terrify evil doers. In the mean time he creates scruples of the
Governments in the consciences of honest men, who (durst they take power) would
overthrow his dominion and all licencious practices in their respective
quarters. And thus he lays useful men upon their backs, so that by reason of
their needless scrupulosities to do good, as public men, under such a
government, they spend their short life in an incapacity of serving God, and
their generation, and suffer Satan to swagger in all deboistnesse before their
faces, and they dare not touch him. O Ye tender consciences be not guiled by
the devil in this matter. Take all occasions under all to do good before, the
river of your time emptieth it self into the sea of eternity.

18. It is sufficiently known that breaking bread and baptism were instituted
by Jesus Christ to express the love of his heart, and union of his saints. But
now Satan has learnt how to traverse these canons and Ordinances of Jesus, So
as that water baptism is the great text of useless disputes and endless
janglings and awakenings of carnal wits, and galling one another, and rubbing
on the weakness of their arguments; whereas love covers a multitude of sins,
and a heap of mistakes. Yet these exercises (called Sacraments by some) are
made occasions of wranglings and heart-burnings, and at this also Satan
laugheth and pipeth on the divisions.

19. Who sees not by this time that all Ordinances and governments of Churches
(and of nations too) have been, and still are made Imageries of jealousies. And
like that Altar on that side Jordan (that great Altar to look to, says the
Scriptures) which occasioned honest Phineas and others to seem to inveigh
against their brethren, and threaten war too until they heard them speak for
themselves; now the enemy with his bellows of flesh and blood, stands near at
hand to blow up all such animosities, in the wrath of God wherein he lives. His
intent is to fret the sweet meek Spirit of God, to burn up poor souls in
this kindling, and to warm himself with more of the coals of eternal wrath.
Yea if he were not mad with fury and pride, he would for his own ease be
quiet, and not be ever laying of snares for those birds he knows he can never
catch.

20. His malice will not let him alone. The violence of his nature makes him
ripe for the judgment of the great day. He has now been at his study almost
six thousand years, and never slept a wink all that time, yea he studied and
traveled too over all the earth, seas, and natures of things. He is a great
scholar and proud one; and the father of all such conceited Linguists, or
Gnostics. To his shame and theirs, be it spoken, that their learning swells
them as empty bladders, to increase their account before the meek and lowly
lamb.

21. Satan is so called from Sitnah Hatred; The flames of enmity are his
bone-fires; envy, wrath, jealousy and malice are his trappings. Thence it is
he also loves to feed on his own dung, and to feed others with amaritude and
bitterness.

Now the devils filth is malice, which all that live therein, find more suitable
to them then the Manna of God, or the Divine Nature of Christ.

22. Inexcusable therefore is that soul, that chooses Satan's concocted
wickedness (called kakia) rather then the flect and blood of the Son of God;
unto such a poor soul it is more natural to live in contention, sournesse and
hatred, then in love, sweetness, and peace. These are no other then the
firebrands of hell, whom Satan blows to keep himself warm; for the love of
God is such a cold thing to him, he is ready to freez among them that walk in
the love of the Lord Jesus.

23. Thence it is that Satan fills the courts of justice with litigious,
cunning, venomous querimonies, and makes one neighbor so apt to finger, and
to scratch blood out of the scabs and deformities of another, that so provoking
him to anger, he may have somewhat above board wherewith to charge and reproach
him.

24. This subtle and yet foolish vagabond whereof I speak, is discovered with
his nature, by the names and titles given him. He is called Beelzebub, God of
flies, because his angels are numerous and various, and flying thick in the
Air of nature; or Baalzebub because he loves the dung and filth of nature;
Apolluon the destroyer, the serpent, the dragon; the lier, the sower of cares,
the adversary of mankind, and the enemy of all righteousness, holiness and
humility.

25. And because there be legions of these spirits ordered to quarter in all
ages, over several Countries, they therefore have observed thy Ancestors, and
in what sins they most naturally wallowed, the same they will lay close to
thee, and before thee as a net in thy nature, to bring thee to death.

26. But if thou will needs live in love, Behold (says he) here is the
pleasant love of the flesh or common love of mankind for thee to dwell in. If
thou (says he) wilt needs live in joy, get thee wine and strong drink, make
thy self merry, for that solace is better then silver; spend them prodigally
away upon thy lusts. I see says Satan, thou will live in peace, being so well
natured as thou art; A quiet harmless man or woman; well, then be it so; Thy
conscience shall not trouble thee, nor reproofs awaken thee, but thou shall be
an easie-hearted sot or a voluptuous hog, of whom much shall be made in the
Swine-house until it be fully fattened for the house of slaughter.

27. Thus the cheater cozeneth Millions of souls, by affording them counters
for gold, and the love, joy and peace of this world for that which is of God.
And the cunning wit of hell for the wisdom which is from above: And the lying
wonders and angelical glorious flashes of deceit for the true light of
Paradise. And in these things he coucheth and hides himself in the very heart
and bosom of the sinner and hypocrite, but he is not awaked, because he is not
fully aware of the guest that dwells within him,

28. Now when we speak of this enemy, thou must by no means imagine him to be
some outwardly visible bugbear or brickbrack afar off from thee. But rather a
malignant powerful, subtle and agile influence, that mingleth it self with
the souls of people, as the smoke is incorporated with the Air, wherefore let
man watch his own heart, for by nature it is become the devils queen.

29. Some he persuades to over-feed the spirits and nature, and to hoise up
too great a sail for the conscience and inner man, and by excess and riot a
sturdy, stern, proud, heady, quarrelsome, unreasonable spirit, is distilled by
Satan gradually into the hearts of all the drunkards, and lofty gamesters; for
Satan shakes hands often with the proud men, women, and children as with his
near kindred, and says to their hearts, well played, brave fellows, I shall
have your company, we shall fly high above the thrones of God, and his lamb,
and get the honor away.

30. But let not the children of Adam forget that God resists the proud and
graceth the humble; In becoming nothing, we shall inherit all things. But by
lusting to be all things, Millions become worse then nothing for ever. And
while man would be something he exposes himself to the tempests of the devil,
whereas the nothingized heart sinkes down under the cross of Christ, and hides
himself from all the whirlwinds of the enemy, and lives in the peace, love,
power, tranquillity and life of God in Christ Jesus, and so keeps himself
that this wicked one touches him not.

31. Now finally my brethren, ye precious souls of the children of Adam, why
should we not all join as one new man, against this common enemy of mankind?
I have here saluted you in few words but with many thoughts and much love, and
in fear and trembling, being desirous that we might join in a continued prayer
of faith all our days to whip away this cruel hunter, in the name of Christ
out of our earth.

32. The intent of this intelligence is to awaken them that sleep, to let
sinners see whose work they uphold in common, to admonish believers not to be
cheated out of any good, to occasion my fellow soldiers to strike further home
on this subject, to make Satan roar, and retreat for shame. Behold he is
roaring, and retreating. Hallelujah, Praises be to our Lord the Conqueror.

33. Friends, watch, hold fast a little. He that comes to our relief will not
tarry. Study to be quiet and meek; live in love. Be active in good, and thereby
overcome all evil; above all, live by faith. Do not at all doubt but that God
greatly loves you, and that Christ belongs to you, and that the Almighty
spirit is always with you, and shall be in you a fountain of everlasting light
of life, Amen.

And work earnestly with God in the behalf of your poor tempted
fellow-souldier who thus saluteth you in the good will of him that dwells in
the bush, Now unto the Great General, The word of God, The King of kings, And
our Infinite great Lover be Victory and Glory, for ever, Amen, Amen.

N. D.

The second charge written in 1655. printed in 1656.
1. IN the former intelligence of Satan's plots, I have not done him the
hundredth part of the Retaliation which I know is due to him, from me; neither
can I in this: I am wronged and oppressed by him, therefore I make out my
complaint; I fall out with none of Adams children; They are all my kindred, but
follow peace with all and purity, that so in the love I may see the Lord. I am
angry with none of them but as I am with my self, for that a part of our selves
is ready to join with the devil.

2. The corrupt nature within, is the fire; the devil is the wind that
inflameth it; He is a spiritual strong malignant influence of the first
Creation. He was fashioned out of the wrath and goodness of the father of all
things, but he left the sweetness and humility of God and aimed at the
dominion of the outward world (or created nature) and since has begotten many
children of disobedience upon the minds that yielded to his lustful pride, who
with him are disinherited of eternal light, love and life. This is his woeful
pedigree, work and wages.

3. Paul (a lantern of the whole world, and a servant of Christ) uses diverse
words to discover this enemy, when he says (among other things) that Satan
has his darts, his depths, his methods his subtilties and his snares. His
darts are the sudden thoughts injected into men's hearts, that presently kindle
up the passions in the lusts and humors into a flame of turbulency within. His
depths work most upon men of deep reason and penetrating fancy, whereby they
are often touled on by degrees into silent Atheism, destructive Heresies,
voluptuous luxury, and incurable conceits of their own learning and
experience; his methods consist in the ordering of thoughts in man and
affections in the world, where he presents first the fairest dish (easiest to
be digested by reason) pretending mere sound religion; then another that
nourishes sensual spirits, and lastly the devilish dish of intolerable pride,
and his own sauce with it, which is despair in the end after his feast.

4. His subtilties, or panurgia) is a conjunction of all his wits, being
already at hand to deceive every man, in every place, in every age, in every
calling, and this at once. And his snares and devices are his forecasting
projecting faculties; whereby he foresees how one snare may be possibly
avoided, and then how useful another will be, if ready at hand (and herein he
will not fail.) He is permitted to come in among the sons God, into the
company of the holy Angels and Saints, (though he be there also in hell and
wrath) but there he gathers poisons (as the Snake does among the green herbs,
and grass) and then stingeth the wizards, deboist or hypocritical souls, that
yield to him, and so swells them up like himself.

5. He is never weary in doing us mischief. Why should we be weary in
resisting him? He laughs at the backsliders especially, yet his mirth they
shall not perceive in this life; but they also shall laugh with him Now, and
sweetly nible at his baits, and pleasantly feed on his sugar, which is the
lust and pleasure of their own flesh. He well knows the influence of Venus,
and loves to see the dishonest, wanton dallyings of male and female.

He fiddles and makes sport, and merry placentias, to them, while they are
selling their immortal souls for momentany delights. Also Mars he well
knows, and by that starry influence, he rouzeth up warlike or quarrelsome
dispositions to be bloody, valiant, and revengefull until he has (by means of
man's humors, which doubtless are subject to the Starry Influences) gotten
man's poor spirit into that turbulent outward religion, to habitate it self
there where eternity is hid, and then his desire is by some means or other to
cut off the thread of man's life, that he may be beyond recovery, and without
hopes of the remedy of repentance and retreat.

6. The other influences he perceives (as a part or conjunct) And (as in Jobs
case) he loves to pour down fire, so he knows how to seem mild and watery. If
any one element drown soul or body, he has his mind and sport. And finding
poor man imprisonned in his four elementall fetters, he persuades him that its
impossible to live supersensually in this life, and will admit of no talk of
breaking his prison. And if the poor soul once offers to go out, he will set
impossibilities before him, his pleasures or guilt, and behind him, all the
world and his children about his ears, his own reasonings to dishearten him;
God as unwilling to receive him, Heaven but a sublime fancy, Hell but a
child-frighting-bugbear, the world and things thereof as real harmless
comforts, that so by all or any of these means he might detain the poor heart
in his clutches, and powers of nature. And as the cat deals with the mouse,
he also will let a soul loose, to pray, read, hear sermons, and give alms,
but still keep him to live in self, unless the second David Jesus Christ
snatch the poor lamb out of this lions paws, by the effectual workings of his
spirit in the new birth.

7. The young children are by him poisoned with vanity, scorning wits, scoffing
expressions, (as in Elisha's case) wrangling dispositions, proud carriages,
lying excuses, fleering gestures, wanton talks, disobedient spirits, idle
tales, revenging thoughts, profane oaths, contempt of the Lords day, lusts
after Interludes, from thence often to the Alehouse, fighting, murder,
gallows, and hell. O ye Parents (thou Father, and thou tender Mother) see here
in time how the Devil of hell swaggers in your children, and it may be you
laugh at their witty evils. This is to sacrifice your chidren in the fire to
Moloch that bloody Devil. Moloch was a brass hollow image, with the face of an
Ox; and being made red hot, it had spring-arms to clasp the poor children that
were cast in to them. (Hags hugs kill with kindness) and scared them to death;
and while the children were shreeking or roaring, there were drums and loud
music made to stop the Infants cries from the Parents ears. Ah thus are the
souls of many children still burnt with lust, and lost in Tophet, and the
valley of Hinnom. O ye children, be afraid of sin! sin the ugly Idol of Satan.
And ye Parents, be warned of your posterity, lest God curse them, and they
curse you, and you them at the great day. Rather study the blessing of God,
that turns the soul from its wickedness, and the hearts of the parents
aright to the children, and both to the obedience of the just. Parents, look to
your childrens souls, that are Gods portion; you should be Prophets, Priests,
and Princes in all humble meekness of wisdom in your own Families. Teach the
truth, and use the rod and prayer, lest God use his whip, and curse: Example
not your children to wickedness; find them honest occupations according to
their natural Genius, and lawful marriage when God requires it by the law of
nature. And above all, let them not sit in the seat of the scornful while they
are young, lest they come to the chair of anguish when they are old. Why should
Satan by his vain spirit possess your children, that may become heirs of
everlasting riches? Bring them once heartily to be servants of God, and he will
take care they shall want nothing in this world, when you are become dust and
ashes under the earth. But forget not that Satan is busy in bending these
tender twigs from God and Christ.

8. When children grow up to the state of men and women, to the flower and
power and heat of the spirit of this natural world, then comes forth the
Mountebank Satan, and shows them his tricks, dances, and musicks. First in
fornications between single persons; then of adulteries and unsatiable lusts of
the eyes, flesh, and hidden looks of the mind, and so drowns them in the
quagmires of concupiscence (which is a lust of having more.) If these souls
feel (in a sour reproving conscience) that these wanton lusts are folly in
Israel, and in the world; then turns he them over to peruse the lectures and
lessons of the cares of this life, and make them sin by lending, borrowing,
buying, selling, building, planting, providing; and (in all) hurries their
minds to a neglect of God, and of the study of better things, and so hastens
their end, and wears out their natures before they be made partakers of the
nature of God.

9. But if any be given and devoted naturally to enquire into the secrets of
nature or Scripture, and to reading, conferring, and prying into more excellent
things; then he eggs them on in their studies to find out God in their own
reasons, and says, Here Is all the glorious learning of this world, and the
highest contemplations of things. This will I give thee if thou worship. I
would not thou should adore me as a black Devil, but admire thy self, wonder
at thy own thoughts and seize, seek thy own glory, and then I shall meet
thee time enough.

10. But O thou crooked and winding fair Serpent! This will not do with the
thousands of the Elect of God. They have learnt, and will more, to deny self,
and to take up the inward cross that destroys the vain thoughts of the
mind. Through Christ's death they live above, and trample thy heighths and
depths. They stand in the wisdom whence thou art fallen. They have seen thee
in their own darkness, and sublime selfish thoughts; but thou see not them
in the love and humility of Jesus. Their silence outvoiceth thy roarings; Their
nothingness overthrows thy brags; Thy winds work not on these nothings. They
were dead to the life of nature. They are alive to thy death, and on them is
written, These are the revived of the Lord.

11. Furthermore, If a man become a Preacher (as so called) this Doctor, Satan,
will accompany him invisibly to his study and pulpit, and persuade him to
flatter the great men, or at least passionately inveigh against them; and sooth
up, or rock the cradle to the slumbring consciences, or sleepy Churches; or
else let fly out his bitter bullets, and blind uses of reproofs against such as
differ from his opinion: He shall sharply reprove that in public, whereof he
is guilty himself in private. He thinks that (as Solomon speaks of the
muckworms, saying, Money answers all things) his wit, parts, and learned
distinctions will resolve all other consciences, and they should submit to him
and his judgment; and if that seem lame, he will be advised to acknowledge his
weakness in all humble wise, and that also from hypocrisy, to fence and
fortify himself in his own will and way. And thus would Satan (the Rabbi of
Hell) have Preachers learn the deceit of him, that the people also may be
deluded, through such stalking horses. But God has many, and will have more
sincere powerful Preachers among men, who will neither deceive, nor be deceived.

12. If a man be a Magistrate, Satan comes to him (within him) and says, I am
a Magistrate too, and a ruler over men, and over, Angels, and properties of
nature. Be thou as I am, and we shall gloriously sit on one bench. Keep up thy
pomp gallantly; oppress these silly moneyless wretches and widows: Thunder out
by thy Warrants, and apprehend all those Fanatiques that walk by the spirit, as
they say, but are unmannerly unworthy idiots. Then shall thou be my
fellow-Magistrate; do as I do, I shall be at thy elbow; I shall instruct thee
in all gallantry and Magistratical devices, excesses, and bravery of spirit, in
oppression, drunkenness; sloth, and neglect of what is good. But let Satan be
told, though he knows it already, and that with gnashing of teeth, that the
Lord Jesus is fashioning to himself Magistrates that fear God; and hate
covetousness, partiality, and pomp.

13. There is no trade, occupation, calling, employment, or manufacture,
whereinto Satan has not not crept, and is become Master of the trade, and Lord
of the tradesmen also (for the generality of them.) And while the trade their
spirits is sinning, and their practice deceit and falsehood, he takes them for
his fellow-tradesmen; and they that make a trade of any creature in this life,
to let their lusts live thereby, have for their companion the enemy that trades
in the heavenly firmamental, astral, and earthy nature. O ye tradesmen! let
your conversations be in the Heavens; let Christ be your treasure, and your
hearts thereon.

14. But besides all this, it behooves the children of men, and the sons God
also, to remember and know that Satan's fort is never stormed and taken by the
chafed, quickened, or superlatived spirits of nature; neither are this serpents
scales pierced, or he offended or awakened by all or any of the penetrations of
man's wit, reason, learning, writing, preaching, threatening, praying, or
procking of him in all the strength of nature.

He laughs at those bullets, and scorns the arrows of such bows of men. But
the true bow of steel strikes him through. That bow is the word or spirit of
God in man, and in man's doings, prayers, preachings, and writings. Thus the
Prophets, Apostles, and Servants of the Lord, both small and great, have
wounded the dragon; and he that bends this bow, denies himself, blusheth at
the weakness of his endeavors, and yet trusts in God that whatsoever he
does, it shall prosper.

15. The comfort and conquest lies in this, that a great chain in the great
Angels hand is now preparing (with all her links) to bind this old Drgaon in
the dungeon of the bottomless pit. O ye Sons of Sion, and Inhabitants of
Heaven and earth, sing Hallelujah, and praise God and the Lamb; for the burning
of Beelzebub, and Babylon his Whore, is to your joy. And it may work upon Satan
somewhat to hear such songs: And as he is hopeless for himself, so he may
despair of your souls condemnation. But whatever he thinks, he must shortly be
bound; and when he is loosened; it is for his woe. Therefore pray earnestly in
faith, and hasten that blessed time, that long-looked for day of God wherein
righteousness shall bud forth, and mercy take her throne, wherein the
everlasting Gospel (that discovers eternity) shall be heard by the Trump of
God, and the dead spirit released. Hasten that day wherein all Saints shall be
united, when all truths shall be believed, that day wherein all shall be judged
within and without by one spirit of holiness and power of love; for that day
of the Spirit of the Lords mouth discovers all darknesses, and hasteneth to
chase all clouds and tempests off from all Saints speedily. Amen, Amen.

16. In the mean while until Satan (this Achitophel) has erected his own
gallows high enough, let the poor soul be skillful in resisting him in
faith. He comes to thee through thy own thoughts, and says, Thou wretch art
guilty as well as I, read over the book of all thy guilts, turn over the
leaves of thy woeful conscience. Do thou not remember, how beastial and
devilish, vain, wicked and unworthy thy conversation has? been yea thou art
more guilty then I, because the Messiah has taken the nature of man, and not
of Angels upon him. Come then away with me, and thou shall lie under me (for my
ease) in the bottomless pit. Now when the accuser thus charge thee, what will thou poor soul do? Tell him, I do read over my guilts and unworthiness, I am
naturally the foulest of all wretches in the world. I do confess it;
notwithstanding the blood of Jesus washes me from all sin. But now I will no
more live in sin because it is pardoned. I throw it away from me, and that thou
can not do; Therefore it shall be thine; and Christ's Righteousness, and
Holiness too shall be mine. I excommunicate for ever from me that vile nature
which I had, that was the mother (as thou were the father) of my corruptions.
Take thou that Bride; and then what is left in me but the life and love of my
Lord Jesus? what can thou say to this? I am clothed with change of raiment; I
will have nothing to do with sin any more; It is not mine; I will have
fellowship with Jesus, for he is my portion and potentate.

17. Now when thou have thus answered the devil, watch over thy will; Never
give thy consent to any sin, keep thy will pure and earnest to God; slack it
not; expect and draw within thee, the mighty Power of God to carry thee every
minute beyond and above thy own lusts. Thy spirit is like a bowl. The byas is
thy natural corrupt disposition. If thy course in good things be slacked, then
thy own byas will turn thee round (as it fares with a bowl in bowling) but
while thou give all diligence to finish thy course with mighty energy in all
good, thy corruptions are contemned, crucified, and overborn to the land of
oblivion; for to be spiritually minded is life and peace, but to be carnally
minded is death. Therefore whilst soul and body are together, there remains
not one spare minute of time to be careless, loos-hearted, or diffident in
Christ.

18. This also is added to encourage thee, the world is full of books on this
subject, but not of souls that wrestle against the devil; howbeit wherever
Christ's soldiers are, they have heavenly provision made for them (food,
armor, and pay) And if by reading of this (whoever and wherever thou art) thou
be in the least measure refreshed of God in the great camp of Israel, Praise
the great General (the living sweet Eternal and Almighty Word of God) and I
shall rejoice with thee; farewell.

N. D.

A Chapter to this People, and to the World, written in 1655. printed in 1656.
1. O Ye children of Adam in all the corners and habitations of the Earth, upon
whom the end of this World, and the Day of God is dawning, and hastening to
discover and judge all Natures and Nations, Hearken, and awake, and look about
you; yea look into your self, that you may behold God in your self, and your
self in God and in his Son and Word, who is his Love and his all how long must
the children of men run on as beasts, they know not where, nor yet whence, nor
yet in what they move, and breath, and subsist! Lord God Almighty, put a stop
to their minds by the flaming sword of Truth in the hand of thy Covenant-Angel,
whom the Ass sees, and the Ox knows: O that the thousands of Israel, and
millions of the Gentiles, might now all at length under thy fifth, sixth, and
seventh Seal, Trumpet, and Vial, know and understand thy own Personal Being and
appearance in the glasse-windows of their own spirits; for thou art not far
from any of them: But many are far from thee, so as that they neither see thee,
nor hear thee, nor feel thee, nor smell thee, nor taste thee the Only God who
fillest all. And I poor worm am naturally as senseless as any man living, and
as dark, as black, as unworthy as any child of Adam, according to this outward
Man: But the new Adam within (which is thy new creature and thy child) waits
on thee daily and silently, to hear what thou (Lord) say and command to
be spoken or written.

2. My heart is boiling in sorrow and fear, yea in indignation and love, when I
am made to see my brethren and sisters, according to nature, sunk into the deep
pit of corruption: And there is scarce above water as much as the crown of the
head and the hair, yea their breath is stopped: The spirit of crying to God is
gone, and but a form of prayer left for a carcass of Religion; and a wave of
some filthy worldly lust or another comes one in the neck of another, over the
head of the conscience, and over the crown of the learning of the souls of the
people. My spirit within me is baked and parched in the furnace of my secret
sorrows and fears, crying out, Woe is me, I cannot help any. I my self want
help of God as much as any. I am scarce above water, yet I am swimming toward
the shore, by believing in Jesus, to the obedience of the eternal will. But O
how ghastly is it to see (all about) so many hairy scalps floating on the top of
the great deep, as so many sure symptoms of dead souls, dead hearts toward
God, and yet immortal spirits; All such are the men, women, or children,
drowned in self and flesh. O ye friends that are perfect in Christ Jesus,
pity, pity and help both them and me; I am almost arrived and landed, and
sometimes allowed to stand on a bank in Sion.

3. Now when in spirit I am helped to stand on Mount Sion (above) out of the
waters and deluge of Babylon, I see the dead world generally, and the people of
diverse opinions particularly, burying themselves in blood, and warring one with
another, and persecuting their brethren, and yet making truce and peace with
sin it self in their own closets. Every one in the common rode of nature crying
out, Here is Truth, follow me and my judgment, for it is solid, it is
according to the rule, the word of God, the Scriptures, the Orthodox best
Interpretation; My Ware is the best Ware. Buy it of me, or else it is just with
God to leave you to errors, and then it is also fit that men should make war
upon you. O my fellow-friend, say not so; not so; the treasures of Truth are
wonderful: God is good. There is but love in him, though there be wrath
eternal by him. Do not kindle up a fiery flame by working up a whirlwind in thy
own spirit toward any. Look about. How many millions of lives perished in a
blind War? How few follow Peace, and pursue it in God? Where be Gods children
(like Him) that requite good for evil, love for hatred, peace for war? How
easily mast thou slip into this malicious or passionate pit? But when thou art
once in, and hel-fire is kindled into flames, can thou tell when thou shall
come out of this wickedness, cruelty, and evil surmisings of heart? Also O ye
stern austere people, that are so zealously hot, and rigidly censorious, be
warned, lest ye be swallowed up in this gulf, this dark womb and principle of
wrath. John the Baptist (the morning star) must give way to the pleasant Sun:
Terror, trembling, and shaking is indeed the end of flesh, but not of
Godliness. But while ye are afraid of the invisible one, ye know not fully of
what spirit ye are. Howbeit others (in the interim) live in boastings,
mockings, and scoldings, and scufflings about outward things. They project, and
undermine, and deceive, and war, to to gain a name, to get Scepters and
Nations, gold and silver, pleasures and preferments, and care not who they kill
that stand in their way.

4. Man sets up his own mind and judgment. And when he says the Scripture
is the word of God, he himself takes upon him to judge the sense of that word,
and so he will needs judge his own Judge. And if any other man's conscience
strikes not sail to his opinion, he passionately gives him a broad side, and
desires to have him sunk as an heretic or formalist, and so send him quick to
hell. And all that while the children of Adam thus violently act and dispute,
they are as diverse sorts of birds fighting on the top of the same tree, and not
understand nor revere that one root of this tree which bears them all up. O ye
opinionists, go up to this Ramoth Gilead, and prosper; The false Prophets in
your hearts have deceived you: But they that feed only on the true bread and
water, and are meek in heart, have told you the truth; but ye will not hear
them, till the arrow from God strike through your harness; and the end will be
this, The dogs shall lick up your blood that was shed amongst you by one
another. Yet we say, God is one, Truth is one, Love is the chief grace, there
should be but one Church. The holy Scriptures are venerable, and to be admired.
But who shall interpret the Scriptures, and say, This is the meaning? You will
say, the Church, or rather the holy spirit in the true holy Church. But your
neighbors ask you, what Church do you mean? Is it the Baptized, or
Independent, or Prosbyterial, or Shaken, or Episcopal, or Lutheran, or Popish,
or Eastern, or Western Church? The answer from God in ye is, There is none of
these righteous, there is none of these perfect, no not one. The Baptized are
narrow thoughted; The Independent is corrupted, the Presbyter and Episcopal are
dead and swollen up; the shaken too much, mistaken in their censures and
justifications; the Lutheran too sparing in the Doctrine of the New Birth; the
Papal people Jewish, looking out too much through the spectacles of corrupt
Reason, to dote on vain glosses in Divine worship; the Eastern and Western
(both named Christian) not yielding to one another the time of the day,
devoured the one the other, and were caught and swallowed by the spirit and
appetite of Antichrist. The Seekers also are unstable, and the prating Ranters
sensual and beastly. All these are judged as far as the light of God does
convince, or may reprove them: And let every one of them attend to it as far as
they know. Not that these all are dead, but death striveth to prevail in all.
The same spirit of Deceit and Error works in some more visibly and fully,
and would be in others privily, and is in or with all these in measure.

5. Where then dwells knowledge? And how shall the diggers meet with
understanding? Certainly, there is a vein for the silver, and a place for the
hidden treasures of gold. Ye must turn your swords into plowshares, and first
cease from your false Mines; ye must no more dig with your weapons into the
bowels of one another. The golden Mine is not there. Nor must ye goal and gore
one another with bitter words and envenomed expressions, lofty loud words heard
in the streets: what profits thee, or any, to speak evil of any man's whole
person? (but rather strike at the evil nature now predominant in him.) Neither
may thou wisely commend any mortal changeable man in his whole bulk (for man,
whose breath is in his nostrils, is deceitful) but magnify God only as far as
to thee he appears in every one. For as there is but one day and night,
darkness and light, good and evil, and no further or other distinctions that
shall long stand (And this difference is visible in every man that is
enlightened, and not perfected by the light in him:) So until ye come to this
dividing of waters, and see both natures striving hard one with another in all
the Creation of God, and in every creature in its kind. Ye may talk much of
Religion, Grace, or of Sin and Scriptures also; but ye shall be scorched with
the fire of your own mouth: Ye may write out your volumnious Controversies, but
to the fire of God ye shall be a Sacrifice (as the Ram was in the bush to
Abraham.) Ye may make Parties and Factions upon grounds religious and
judicious, (as ye baptize them) but your Factions will be broken to pieces
among themselves, as sure and as far as they have broken themselves off from
the One God of Truth. Ye read books, and know many things: Ye may read this
with the rest with a frothy careless heart (if such you be) but you shall
surely call to mind the sheep and goats for ever. Now some are so wise as to
say that these sheep and goats are not the persons of people, but the qualities
and properties that operate in all mankind. But such may know that one of the
two qualities of light and darkness shall swallow up every person, and so the
persons and natures are eternally incorporated in one. Each one in his own
nature shall lie down or sit up for ever. For where the tree of man's nature
inclines in this world, there it falls at death; and where the tree falls,
there it must be. Now I beseech you consider, that while one language continued
with Hebers seed, they went on and prospered, but the pride of Babels tower
scattered them all abroad. And when man cuts and divides where God would not,
God will divide where man is loath to see a breach. Gods division is but one in
all, but man's divisions are many in one (in almost every one) yet he himself
is naturally none that would be thus torn in pieces in himself. Howbeit he
himself must be thus rent asunder in his own spirit, to be a broken contrite
heart to God; otherwise he will seek to rend and tear all things (if it were
possible) the divine nature, rather then his own base disposition. And all
this while he lives in himself, but is still looking out of himself to
others. He dwells in a chamber of his own opinion, and paints it with words of
holy Scriptures, and with his own deceits; but he considers and reverenceth
not that one true light that shines more or less upon all the inhabitants of
the Earth.

6. The Turk is established in a Religion patched with his own Reason, and
passes the time of ignorance in pleasures, peace, and oppressions. As the
whale is lord of the fish of the Sea, so is he among his fellow creatures. This
Leviathan has scarce been awakened, but kept in the deeps of the multitudes of
his hosts and treasures; His night has been a long, dark, and strong night, in
the spirit of this world, the Reason and fair goddess of the first creation
whom the unlearned despise and utterly reject, because they know it not; for
the ignorant contemns the knowing, and thinks him a fool; but the learned
pittieth the ignorant and knows him to be out of the way; for that without
knowledge the heart cannot be good, says a wiser man then many. Now this
science is not the heavenly, as the Moon is not the Sun. The Turk learned in
reason rationally mocketh a them called Christians and highest professors of
the good, that kill murder and devour one another, for want of reason. Yet
deeply blinded is he him self, and that justly, for that he has limited God
himself to his Moonish reason; as if he that made the Sun (and is Infinitely
brighter) should have the use of no light, but that of the lowest planet, in
which the Mahomettan tricks and deceits are covered, but by the day are made
manifest. Now we easily find that spiritual learning and true Philosophy is
the apprehension of the invisible natural world, and of the origin primitive
isntrumental cause of all things, (which is prudence) If any enjoy her, she
is the daughter of God, and the Philosopher said well and right, we are his
offspring, and live, move and have our being in his own essence, or in him.
But they knew not, or consider not the Primogenite, The Eternal word of the
Infinite God, even his heart and Son, who was Eternally before ever nature was
made, or created or begotten. That infinite word (besides whom there is no true
God, and that word was come into our flesh) The greatest part of the world
acknowledge him not to this day.

Howbeit he made the house of this world (and feeds it by his Virtue invisible)
and he will shortly make all his family hear his voice in this palace of his
own building, even that thundering voice that sounds in all parts the earth.
And no other preacher wiil convince the Turk, or any other, but he that is the
first and last preacher, who is this Word of God. Their Alcaron is an
imagination of their own brains; (as others have formed directories in all
nations to themselves, out of their own heads, and hearts) but God is pleased
only with the worship of his own will and heart, viz. when man's will lives in
his only; That, and that solely pleases him. But woe is to the will of man; and
to the flesh of the children of men. Woe is the world. The world in Turkey, The
world in Christendom; for there is but one world, under Satan in all, and in
all hearts opinions Churches and agitations. The same body of sin and mystery
of iniquity works in them called Christians; for with God there is not a jot
(not a whit) of difference, nor respect of persons. He delights not in a
Christian more then a Turk, if that Chrian be not more like Christ Jesus (his
love) then the Turk is; for if the Turk be as honest, as just, as diligent in
the use of his talent as the nominall Christian is, he is as acceptable as he
with that God that rewards every one according to his deeds. And the Almighty
hates the sins of all equally, and is a lover of all souls as they are
spirits branched forth out of him. All souls are mine, says the Lord; yet by
the fall all souls are not his as he is love; but many are children of his
wrath, and thereun to appointed.

7. But as the Sodomites sought Lots door, so the Christians sought for the
sepulcher in the holy land (so called) and their retreat is shameful, and much
noted by the major part of this habitable world. Howbeit, the Papists generally
remain very presumptuous of their cause, and confident of their way. And as
they did in Sodom, it is even so now in the universal Sodom of depraved
flesh. Men's fleshly minds seek for Lots door, to attain to the angelical
seed, and beauty for their own self ends. And God in his Just power strikes
them blind, so that they never so enter through his gate into his City, but
fume and quarrel, and babble and divide about opinions and texts of Scriptures
and Churches, Sacraments and doctrines and duties right, governmen and
headships (and in many vanities and vexations of the Holy Spirit, who all the
while waits within; for the resignation of their own wills unto him) But thus
they will still certainly certainly continue whatever shall be written; and
this I see beforehand, nothing shall avail until the fire of God devour,
divide or convince them in their bold blind and filthy contentions. Man would
fain find God any where but in his own heart, and walk about in all streets
professing to enter to Lots door, but he wilfully or carefully shuts the door
of his own heart within him, and bars and bolts it fast with his own wilful
conceited corrupt principles; opinions and self interests. He would go into
Paradise, but not out of himself. He thinks to bring his beasts into God, and
the flesh of his mind into the spiritual Kingdom. And so the selfish
praying, preaching and disputings become mere pratings, bablings and scoldings,
before the Spirit of God. He that witnesses this has had a taste of most
religions or opinions in the habitable world, and a prospect of the lamentable
diversities among men called Christians, Jews and Turks; and certainly knows
that this approaching General or Catholic Day of God shall swallow up and
rule so amongst all, that the combustible pieces of all religions shall be
consumed by the Lord, the spirit, and by the breath of his mouth, with his
impartial overflowing to the very neck. He shall divide and cut asunder the
light from the darkness at the last, as he did the day and the night at the
first. And God will sharply reprove and condemn that of man, which would have
others to follow his light and his judgment, when he himself in many other
things walks contrary to his own conscience and Understanding. He will have
others be of his opinion, contrary to their own conscience, and best
knowledge, when he himself imprisoneth the Truth in his knowledge from
practice. God will fire that Beam which the hypocrite will not see in
himself, and so his whole building must fall upon him, and the weight of his
own thoughts he shall not be able to bear; with himself he could have
patience, but others he rashly censured. And the only True Judge will have
pity on the weeping eye, that had the moate in it, and put an end to his
long-suffering toward the censorious hypocrite.

8. What a noise does Magistracy and Ministry make in the Christened world, and
how have they hitherto kissed and clasped hands in blood and blindness
together? The clergy must preach up Magistracy, and the sword of Authority must
seem heathenish, if he does not only protect, but also forcibly use his
Authority for the defense of his own opinion in Christian Religion; whatsoever
that be, he must be judge himself. I may not, (I do not) deny the one nor the
other (Magistracy or Ministry) but I must proclaim that there is a Bill of
divorce written by the Lord Jesus his own hand which he himself will shortly
explain. Among the children of Adam there has been but two laws of God in all
since the beginning; though men have coined many, or at least would mix these
two into one. The law of nature for to rule men (as the Moon by night) and the
law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus to Saints (as the Sun by day) The
interest of Antichrist has been to marry these to one another, that they might
engender an impure seed, of doubts difficulties and wars; bloodsheds and
hellfires, and all under pretense of religion by the Magistrate and of
covercive Church Discipline by the Ministers of the Gospel (so called.) For
says the Magistrate, My sword shall force differing consciences to that form
of form of knowledge or Church Government which I judge most agreeable to the
rule of Christ. And the clergy also solicited the Magistrate to strike them
with the fist of punishment, whom they thought erroneous, in their judgment.
Moreover when these two concurred in opinion, then were always the best people
the world had persecuted, as Heretics, as Schismatics, and unsound. But when
these differed and varied upon humoursome and ambitious grounds, thence also
came forth treasons, wars, Jealousies, combinations and evil concussions in
States and Commonwealths. And just it was with God, to let them both
(Magistracy and Ministry) thus to wrangle to much blood in the dark, when both
mistook their own bounds, or neglected their proper respective charge. Now
when I say that a Magistrate (as he is a Magistrate) has nothing at all to do
with the regulating of men's opinions and consciences, I find him allowed and
stinted to his own statute-booke, which is the law of nature. And I challenge
that Magistrate or officer of State to answer that has learned the measure of
the circumference of the law of nature, though he should as man attain to know
his own nature in particular. And yet where is the man that has known himself
in all naturals? Now the great law of nature is but in part expressed in the
Judicial law of Moses, and not fashioned in all particulars to all nations.
But let the Magistrates study this law that takes notice even of man's long hair
(as Paul says) and he shall find that drunkenness, fornications, idleness,
turbulences, oppressions, wrongs, slanders, thefts, Murders, riots, Rantismes,
Prophane-oaths, Cursings, Tiplings, yea and prophanations of the first day, and
imposing peremptorily a worship upon others, and blasphemy also are all judged
and condemned by the light of the very law of nature. And a Magistrate need
not, yea he may not take cognizance (qua Magistrate) of any other law to judge
and punish by. Hereby he becomes all things to all men for good, but convicts
them of evils out of their own mouths, out of their own consciences, if he
himself be ingenious, comprehensive and blameless. But where can be found a
Magistrate as yet that does not himself transgress in many things, even the
law of nature? Now when Ministers (as spiritual men) take this natural law
into their hands, they are truly Antichrist, and deal with wrong weapons,
(for the spiritual armor on the right and left hand is sufficient for them in
God) so when the Magistrate so presumes on spiritual to drive on and impose as
a Magistrate his judgment of religion upon others consciences (though as a
Christian he may do it and ought to the uttermost) he also fights against
Christ and intermeddles in that which belongs not to him (as Magistrate) to his
danger or ruin.

9. Now though there be six sorts of Magistrates (according to Isaiah the
Prophet) in the world. The golden Magistrate, the silver, the brazen, the iron,
the wooden, and the stony Magistrate, (and also lawful for a man sent of God to
tell the Magistrate his condition, as also for him to deal with such a man
again in love with seriousness, and as men and brethren not incroaching, but
speaking to the man's conscience) so let both endeavor in the faith and love of
Christ, to get out of the iron, or wooden, or stony state, to that which is
more excellent in their generation. But still bear in mind, that until both
these act distinctly and apart in their proper spears, and well acknowledge
that each has task enough imposed on him by his own proper law, there shall
(I say again there may) be no true lasting settlement in any nation of the
world. For while the State boweth to the Church (so called) or the Church
(representative) to curry favor with the state in flattery and much
hypocrisy, the family of the whole earth will be tossed as a ship in a
tempest. Not that the one is to be superior to the other, but both are good in
the sight of God as far as they keep their place, and well use their talents.
Wherefore O ye Magistrates, Ministers and people (as ye love your souls, and
peace with truth and righteousness) lay this one distinction to heart, that
you may no further feel yoaks of miseries upon your necks, nor confusions,
differences, desolations and calamities; for no peace everlasting is there, til
ye come to the bottom of peace in God the root of all. Study therefore your
selves, and how that Christ is in you, unless ye be reprobates; a light of
Heaven that shows man what is good. He does not say that a Magistrate should
forbear to take his liberty (as a knowing Christian man, as before asserted)
to convince men's consciences, to promote and zealously promulgate the truth as
far as he knows it by the force of the spirit of the holy Scriptures, and by
that only. This he must do if he be a Sanctified one (as a Saint) but as a
Magistrate he must act only by that law that accuses man of his evil, and
commends him for good, or may and should convince him in his own
cogitations. Again therefore I say, let Magistrates, as men, study the law of
men, and fulfill it too, and they shall be blessed in their work.

10. Also beyond and besides this, many thousands cry out that the Christians
are divided among themselves more then the Turks, Indians or Jews. The
Christened Papists are almost in three hundred pieces in their opinions amongst
their learned; The common Catholic Protestant (whose Religion is to run far
enough from Papistry in some particular Articles) is all to shivers in his own
Episcopal reformed doctrine (as he calls it) government and discipline (as
abundantly it appears in the Nations.) Also the Reformers of these Reformadoes
are scorned and laughed at by men that are called learned, as mere fools both
in naturals and spirituals. Enquire and find where is there any sort of people
that are not more or less to flitters among themselves; if their secret
discourses and lives were manifested? I could mention many names, persons,
opinions, Churches, interests, parties, engagements, and particular books,
treatises and contemplations of men mixed in self; but I forbear. I feel and
find almost every one has bad thoughts of some evil in his Neighbor, and is
gnawing some bone or other in his reserved thoughts. None of all these Sects
and factions in Christendom does good, all, and always, no not one. Therefore
should all their mouths be stopped before the face of the Throne of God, and
their lips also stayed from uttering words against others. But every man
(excepting a few) forgets the great mountain of his own fins that is always
before the door as the dunghill of his own house, and (as before is said) almost
every childling of Adam would be pulling out either the mote or eye of his
brother; many wise men are yet to learn to reconcile these differences, neither
know they much of the deep ground, nor yet the end; for many study the middles
in the Alphabet, but the Alpha and Omega is hid from their eyes.

11. Many of them also that are called Preachers of the Gospel, and Ministers
of Christ, that should be peace makers, (men comprehending all things in
Christ) and in the true wisdom should come to the people, as the woman at
Abel came to Joab Captain of David's Host, and so end all the matter of stir
and strife, (and nor be behind a woman that composod all differences at Abel)
Many (I say) of these Preachers rather kindle a blind and an evil fire; they
speak evil of what they know not, busy their brains to build high Towers in
Babel, envenome and exasperate one party against another under pretense of
zeal for Christ, and bring upon themselves a swift witness, a heavy judgment
at the day of God, when all the blood of such as they packed on to wars and
slaughters, or evill-speakings, shall stare them in the face, and make them
then starers also. Their excuse then (which will not serve) will be, Lord, I
thought I contended for thy truth, and for a right Religion, as much as against
Errors, Heresies, and Atheism and oppressions of Adams children. But what will
the Judge say? O thou blind guide, thou have led the poor eternal people in the
dark, and have made them leap out of this world they knew not whither. Thou
might have known that I loved peace, patience and overcoming all evil by
love; but when the Bible and my Spirit commanded love, peace, silence, and
consideration; ye were all for war, noise, turbulency, and humoursome
contrivances; ye called light darkness and darkness light. Now therefore
friends be ye all muzled by your own consciences before ye be cast into outer
darkness, for ye have not on the wedding garment of special fellowship with
the true Bridegroom in love unto him, and to his pure Spouse, to an abhorring
of self. And thus when they are first thrust out of the Bridegrooms inner
chamber (where the light and warmth is) they shall be bound hand and foot, and
sit without at the threshold in the outward form of the house, where will be
weeping for things past (past beyond remedy) and gnashing of teeth for very
anger and coldness in Religion. Wherefore O ye Preachers (or Priests that know
not the anointing, the Christ) be warned, be convinced that ye are very unlike
the Bishops mentioned in Timothy; take not upon you the trade of hypocrisy,
nor the burden of the souls of others. The guilt of your own secret pranks
and public sins is burden enough, and more then ye can bear. See to the saving
of your own poor souls first before the face of the burning and living spirit
of God, and leave off a while studying of Brain-sermons for others, when as
your selves are to be cast away.

12. Few clear visions are there in the Countries and Nations, but Teachings
and Preachments seem mixed and disturbed for the present, so that few can say
(if any aright) Lo here, or lo there, in public or in private, in this
opinion, or in that, in this Parish, or in that Church. And the learned (as
they esteem themselves) as also the unlearned, cannot (to this hour) attain to
the unclasping and reading of the Book of the invisible God. What shall poor
souls do before their candles be quite out, they being in great streights,
divisions, and difficulties? O ye precious immortal souls, do not sleep any
longer; let not your minds grow dull and heavy as ye look upon eternity.
Whatsoever darkeneth you, is of the Devil and self; examine your hearts often.
Dwell not abroad. Be not as the harlot, whose feet cannot be kept within her
own doors (being she is a stranger at home, and overmuch acquainted abroad in
the streets of deceit;) a wandering mind every one has in heart by nature. Make
haste to gather quickly together all the thoughts that are to go with you out
of this life (for when a body falls as a leaf to the grave, the thoughts of
the heart are the intimate fruits thereof.) Notice take of your light and of
your practice. Compare both together, how much knowledge thou have, or what
light have thou within thee? How far followest thou thy conscience? Wherein
murderest thou the true light of the righteous One within thee? How often do
thou any thing doubtingly, thy inward principles grumbling at thy allowance of
evil thoughts, and also at thy sloathful performance of good? How often do
thou condemn, and sharply judge in others, that which thou do secretly and
silkenly allow in private practice thy self? What can thou say thou have
done whereof thou need not to repent before the Throne of Christ, and the
face of the seven Spirits of the immortal impartial God? How often have thou with
thy own thoughts made thy self drunk, not knowing the sobriety of God, and so
have been passionate, and in thy vain mind been censuring things and persons,
opinions and Churches, when at that instant the assembly of thy own wicked
thoughts, and the Church within thy own breast, and multitudes of imaginations
were all out of order? How often also have thou limited the eternal and holy one
of Israel to thy own thoughts and seize of a light? How frequently have
thou done, spoken, or thought that which thou know was not for good to thy
spirit, nor others, but probably for hurt and slaughter to thy poor soul? How
much time do thou spend in vain, which thou might bestow on other things?
How many affections do thou scatter upon the creatures, which to gather up
again will be a great task at the hour of death? There is no heaven or
happiness but God; no way to God but Christ; no fellowship with Christ but
what is spiritual; no enjoying his spirit but within (in the heart within) no
comfort within thee but of what within thee is within God also. Therefore thou
poor wandering wailing soul, keep within, but believe not thy imaginations
within. Try the spirits; first try thy own thoughts; what is of love,
lowliness, peace and purity is of God. Mock not thy soul, and be not deceived
by others.

13. There must appear now in this last Nunc of days unheard of motions, with
words, works, and wonders beyond all former Presidents. The Antiquaries, and
all that look back only to former Ages, will say of these, This is new to us,
away with it, not understanding that it is the old renewed with advantage. Let
such remember in their day, that as the great natural Corporation of this whole
world grows old, that it may be changed as a garment by the Creator that wore
it (as his vesture of time) so also toward the end of days, the second
Creation (which always is within this world) shall appear from within, and be
furbished and made brighter. Then shall the Son of Man (who is the Son of God
by the eternal nature) bring to death of a Consumption the first Adam (that now
is) who indeed was by a secondary nature, or kind of propagation, the Son of
God. Consider and understand, There are two Natures; the eternal, and after
that the temporal; which temporary nature is again swallowed up by the Eternal.
In the Eternal, Christ was (and is) begotten as the firstborn of every thing.
In the temporal, was Adam made a center and compendium of all Heaven and Earth.
In the first is Election and Rejection laid in the depths of God. In the second
both do appear to the creatures sight, and therein he is active. Now when
Eternity is brought forth in the fountain-heart of any child of Adam, then is
time (as to that birth) swallowed up. But diverse boast hereof in vain, who mind
earthly or firmamentall things; yea they are worse then mortal beasts, because
they live below their created nature, though they were made to rule over it. O
ye offspring of Adam, open your eyes, and see where you are: Ye marry Time,
and trifle with Everlastingnesse; ye study to be somewhat for a time, and cannot
stoop to be nothing, that ye may comfortably lodge in Eternity. But turn about
and see how all under the Sun is vanity and vexation, and how life is seated
only in the Sun of Righteousness. In his light we may find all old things
pass away, and all things become new. And if ye are, or will indeed be in him
(as Angels standing in the Sun) you will find the substance of your selves
renewed in glory in this life. And then ye will clearly discern what Adam was,
how he fell, and we in him, and what Christ was, is, and will be, and what the
Saints were, are, and will be in him also.

14. The first Adam sinned, in him all fell; but all are not eternally lost.
The second Adam suffered, in him all were raised, or made alive, as Paul says,
but all are not saved therefore. God elected some in the first, and rejected
others in the second. O the depth of the immense operations, or rather looks of
the nature of eternity! The Eagles of the heavenly rock are allowed to see more
in the Sun of Righteousness then they may lawfully utter among men (as long as
men continue dogs and swine.) But this is is safe and common, that God made
Adam an upright man, (changeable if himself pleased) but man found out
innumerable inventions; the flame of Adams candle was wholly put out in
Paradise by the Fall, but some fire of that same candle still remains in the
wick unextinguished, capable of flaming again by a new birth in this life (and
such the devils and damned souls have not, for they are passed out of time and
life) yet such is that fire in a natural man, that it cannot re-kindle (nor the
spirit of the mind (and understanding which is darkened) be renewed, without
the inspiration of the Almighty upon that spirit or candle in Man (which Elihu
and Solomon mention.) And that spirit of life (in his sevenfold breathings)
flows with force on what spirits he lists; and yet its gale from heaven is
upon all spirits more or less in this life. He that yields to Gods wind, is
renewed; the other shuts it out of himself by his own wilfulness or
negligence. O ye Freewillers, and ye Anti-freewillers (so called) look into
that glass, cease from endless disputes and vain janglings. Use to the
uttermost the will and power God gives you in time; for man's spirit or will in
this life remains so proxime and neighboring to the essence and nature of
God (as Princes before the Monarch) that a free choice is left him, but such a
one as is worse then nothing, if the eternal spirit of grace overshadow him
not* for it is not of him that wills or runs, but of God that holds the
scales and balance in his mighty hand, and weighs the spirits, and in man
preponderateth as he pleases. The souls eternal estate is at his beck: Fear
him therefore, and please him, as far as by him thou art enabled (which as yet
thou may see thou have neglected;) but in so doing thou shall know the
mystery of his Will in thy own self; otherwise thou shall reprobate, reject,
or neglect thy own soul and life for ever.

15. The only way to inward order, is to follow the uttermost light God has
given man of his will; and he that will do his Will, shall know of the
Doctrine. This spiritual regularity shall also lead to the outward, and set
Adams posterity in their due places. Now as I have spoken for a righteous
impartial Magistrate (who is the image of God the father) so I plead in God for
a right Minister of the Gospel (who is also the image of Christ the Son)
loving, knowing, condiscending, pure, wise, deep, diligent, weaned, trained,
tried, tempted, and watered every moment, and such as have by Christ's order the
vanguard in knowledge, humbleness, and power. Such Ministers, Pastors, Elders,
and Teachers as these are such as the Son of God and his Apostles owned, and
will confess before the father, as co-workers (not against Christ, but for
him, at least as willing Nethinims, and hewers of wood, and drawers of water,
and the true Preacher is well content with the lowest office in Christ.) Such
as turn many to righteousness and obedience of the just in their hearts (not
to a private lane of man's opinion) they shall shine for ever and ever, as the
stars of God in the invisible world. Now ye may know such Teachers as these by
this; they are like Christ, they do what they teach, and teach what Christ
does in them. They are Innocents, they hurt none by word, by example, or by
mental influence. They seat not themselves in this world in Palaces, Gardens,
Pleasures, Sports, Preferments, and such vanity of vanities; for the true
Preacher finds no time to be trifled away in this life, because he beholds
and eyeth the pleasures at Gods right hand, and so forgets these delights of
goats on his left hand. Such Shepherds of the sheep overlook great livings on
earth, and are ravished with the living immortal in God. Now such as approve
themselves thus the servants of the living God, receive them, and scorn them
not, though they use not your tone, words, and gesture; for who art thou that
wilt bear but with one branch on one tree? Thou spirit, proud spirit,
ignorantly boasting of thy light, must one tree eternally bear but one branch,
one leaf one apple? Silence thou proud flesh, that would silence all flesh
but thy own, and seek not to stop the mouth of truth, though an Ass speak it.
But for the Scribes and Pharisees, that love in their hearts the highest seats
(which are not always counted the pulpits) in the Synagogues, they love to
judge all, and be judged of none, that is the high Pew. In that judgment the
spirit of truth fitteth as Judge, but not any other forerunner; nor did John
Baptist, nor John Evangelist dare sit in that high seat in the Christian
Synagogue, yet in them he that sits on the circle of the earth is sternman
there. Now all such Priests, all such Ministers, Bishops, Pastors, Rulers, and
Administrators, as are proud covetous, dormous, lustful men pleasers, false
accusers, living-lovers, belly-grooms, time vain spenders, idle loytering
recreators, State-contriving Foxes, unjust wrangling, suing neighbors, and the
like; such as these (whoever they be) are all dogs barking, and swine tumbling
themselves in the dirt; how then can they save them that hear them? A whip of
Gods making shall drive all these dogs out of the Church. They are the sons of
Eli, and of Balaam; of Aaron, and of Levi in their wickedness: These follow not
the good, but the evil of their Predecessors, therefore shall they wither and
suddenly come to nothing. Note also, that so long as any continues and abides
in that most excellent spirit of God, so long he is a Minister of Christ in
God, and no longer; for who is he that is a Minister of Christ to day, may not
speak for Antichrist to morrow? As Peter spoke from heaven and from hell too in
the same hour, saying, Lord, thou art the Son of the living God, but Master
spare thy self. Now so long as the two natures are competitors within man, so
long he shall and must necessarily be in doubts. But when the new nature is
aloft and uppermost, and as long as it keeps under the vain spirit, so long he
has joy and assurance, and no longer; for to be spiritually minded is life and
peace. Therefore the Lord Christ does call and cry to all Preachers and
hearers, Give me to drink that which is pure, without the mixture of your
spirits with it, even such as has no self in it, such will do good. I will
bless it to others. That is the true Physic to poor souls. Give them that,
and they shall be well. But if ye administer to them mixed teachings, and their
souls die upon it, who shall answer think ye? O ye public Speakers, look to
your mixtures; for a pure River of God is come out of Sion; in it shall all the
beasts of the field of God drink up the water of life, and leave off the broken
cisternes and disturbed pooles that have much mud and mire in them. The true
Ministers are followers of Christ (that is, they are like him) and the false
are enemies to the cross of Christ that destroys all sin and vanity. Down
with all that nourish wickedness, and up with Christ in the rest: I say up
with Christ in them, rather then with them to honors in this life, lest pride
blossom again, and self-conceit bud forth. These last days will not long
suffer any proud sprigs on the trees; for now the Temple of God in Heaven is
about to open, and there are voices, thundrings, earthquakes, lightnings, and
great hail upon that evil generation of self-seeking Christians. O that we had
hearts to stand out of the way of Gods arrows, out of the way of sin and
hypocrisy! then should not the soul feel within it that plague here mentioned
without it.

16. The time runs out, and is great and marveilous; the grave gapeth for
man, let not man then gape also after the dunghill of this world. Hunger after
Heaven, and that is to say, long after the Lord Jesus. If thou did expect to
find in this Chapter matters of knowledge, eloquence with acuteness, thou have
deceived thy self. But here is mourning, warning, and woe to the world, and
also directions to them that understand; and they that seek the Lord shall
understand all things. None of the wicked perceive it, but the wise shall
understand, says Daniel and Solomon. This Generation is under the sixth
Trumpet of God, and the fire, smoke, and brimstone are felt and smelt in souls
and Nations eminently. Now the seven Thunders utters their voices in some, and
make mortal men tremble at the thoughts of the Great day. The next Trumpet must
sound, and then will be the finishing of the mystery of Gods Being and Will.
Now is the hour, the day, the month, and the year for thee to beg of God,
and to eat the little little book which was in Gods hand, and is in the hand of
his Angel. The knowledge thereof shall be as honey in the mouth of thy mind;
but when that Lords candle shall search the inward parts of thy belly, and
discover thy great corruption, it shall put thee in bitter pain (as of a woman
in travail) And that voice of the Lord shall make thy kind to calve, and cause
thee to cast off thy lust as an untimely fruit. Howbeit, cease not O man to beg
of God that thou may swallow down that book; for until then thy soul shall
not rest indeed, nor shall the Nations and Churches be quiet until that Book
be known. That Book is in and through the Bible, the Creation, and the heart of
man, and yet properly it is either of the three. It is the Hidden word, and yet
revealed counsel of God in himself, and in his spirit in the children of the
new birth. The name of this Book is Nothingnesse before the creature, and All
things before the Throne of God. When thou art nothing to thy self, then shall
thou read it, and not before. No wit or learning of man are sufficient
spectacles; they are lofting up over the lines of this Book. But in self
denial and yielding to Gods will in thee, thou shall become a Scribe and
Scholar of the Kingdom of Heaven, and no other way. Forget not this verse of
the Chapter sent to thee and to the world.

17. One Verse more, and then no more of this present Testimony. The hour is
in sight, when time shall expire and be no more; when day and night, heat and
cold, summer and winter, seedtime and harvest, shall no more for ever take
their Turns. And whereas now day and night, joy and sorrow pass over us
(grief in the evening, comfort in the morning) go on friend a little, and it
will become with thee all day for ever, or all night, without mixture of the
comforts of nature (as the eternal day or night prevails in the spirit.)
Therefore be entreated again to strive to spend thy short time aright, and one
quarter of an hour in four and twenty at least to begin to mind Eternity
whither thou go. If thou say, That is a small time (as indeed it is) see
first whether in that quarter of an hour thy thoughts will not steal away to
some creature or other, and to the things of time, of vanity, and of vexation.
And know, that while thou live in the sieve of vanity (which is the course of
nature in thy own will) it is impossible for thee to have a steady mind to look
on Eternity. And miserable art thou whilst thou live a cripple at Bethesda in
the five gates of the sensual life, till Jesus bid thee take up thy bed and
walk. And this he does when he makes thy will to cease, thy thoughts to stop,
thy working fancy to sink, thy apprehensions to be darkened in dimnesse of
anguish, thy pleasures to wither, thy righteousness to putrive, and thy
self-hood to stoop, and yield, and die, as Christ Jesus did. This is best
effected by the power of his love in thy heart, which love is light and life to
thy spirit, but death to thy flesh. When I speak to thee (honest Reader) I
speak to my self also herein; for I have learnt that sharp expressions to
others, are as weights of lead to our selves, if we be guilty of the same
evils: But when we testify with truth, mildness, and earnestness, we shall
be accepted of the Lord, however men censure us as they please. This I leave
with thee in perfect love, and thee also with that God who will shortly speak
forth his own mind with Power, Authority, and great Glory to the whole World.
Peace be unto thee. Amen.

N. D.

FINIS.
These Books are lately Printed, and sold by T. Brewster at the three Bibles
near the West end of Paul's.
THE retired man's Meditations, or the Mystery and Power of Godliness, etc. by
Henry Vane, Knight.

A brief History containing most of those notable Occurrences and Revolutions
that happened in those late Contests betwixt King and Parliament; being a short
mention of things from 1637. to the Kings death 1648. Written by Thomas May
Esquire.

The Excellence of a free State, or the Right Constitutions of a Commonwealth.
Objections answered, together with some Rules of Policy and Errors in
Governments, as laid down by Machavel and others.

A Confession of Faith of several Churches of Christ in the Western Counties,
viz. Somerset, Wilts, Devon, Gloucester, and Dorset, (signed by T. Collar, and
others.

A Dialogue between a Minister of the Gospel, and an inquire Christian, about
the work of God upon the Soul, the Authority of the Scriptures, the Principles
of the Quakers, and the work of the present Generation: By Tho: Collar.

Lazarus and his Sisters discourse of Paradise; or a Conference about the
excellent things of the other world.

A Discourse betwixt 3 Neighbors about the present Government, viz. Goodman
past, Goodman present, and Goodman future.

A Dialogue between 3 Bords in Welsh, with other Welsh things.


