The manner of His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Officers of His Army
sitting in COUNCIL.
Sir Thomas Fairfax sits at the head of the council table with quills, papers
and a gavel, surrounded by councillors

A DECLARATION OF THE Engagements, Remonstrances, Representations, Proposals,
Desires and Resolutions from His Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax, and the general
Council of the Army. For settling of His Majesty in His just Rights, the
Parliament in their just Privileges, and the Subjects in their LIBERTIES and
FREEDOMS.

With papers of Overtures, of the Army with the Kings Majesty, the Parliament,
the City, and with the Soldiery amongst themselves.

Also Representations of the grievances of the Kingdom, and remedies
propounded, for removing the present pressures whereby the Subjects are
burdened.

And the resolutions of the Army; for the establishment of a firm and lasting
Peace in Church and KINGDOM.

Die Lunae, 27. Seytembris, 1647.
WHereas Math: Simmons has been at great charges in Printing the Declarations
and Papers from the Army in one Volume. It is ordered by the Lords in
Parliament Assembled, that the said Math: Simmons shall have the Printing and
publishing thereof for the space of one whole year from the date hereof. And
that none other shall re-print the same during that time.

John Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons in Aldersgate Street, 1647.

To His Excellency, Sir Thomas Fairfax, General of the PARLIAMENTS Forces; The
humble Petition of the Officers and Soldiers of the Army under your Command.
SHOWS,
THat ever since our first engaging in this service, for preserving the power
of this Kingdom in the hands of the Parliament; we have in our several places
served them with all faithfulness. And although we have layn under many
discouragements for want of pay, and other necessaries; yet have we not
disputed their commands, disobeyed their orders, nor disturbed them with
Petitions; nor have there any visible discontents appeared amongst us to the
encouragement of their Enemies, and the impediment of their affairs; but have
with all cheerfulness done Summer services in Winter seasons, improving the
utmost of our abilities in the advancement of their service: And seeing God
has crowned our endeavors, with the end of our desires, ( viz. the dispersing
of their public Enemies, and reducing them to their obedience) The King being
now brought (...) our Brethren the Scots satisfied, and departed the Kingdom;
all dangers seemingly blown over, and Peace in all their Quarters: We
(imboldned by their manifold promises, and Declarations, to protect and defend
those that appeared, and acted in their service) herewith humbly present to
your Excellency, the annexed Representations of our desires; which we humbly
beseech your Excellency to recommend, or represent in our behalf to the
Parliament.

And your Petitioners shall ever Honor and Pray for your Excellency etc.
The humble Representation of the Desires of the Officers and Soldiers of the
Army under the Command of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, Presented first to
his Excellency, to be by him represented to the Parliament.
1. FIrst, whereas the necessity and exigencie of the War, has put us upon
many actions, which the Law would not warrant, nor we have acted in a time of
settled peace; we humbly desire, that before our disbanding, a full and
sufficient provision may be made by Ordinance of Parliament (to which the
Royal assent may be desired) for our indemnity, and security in all such
cases.

2. That Auditors or Commissioners may be speedily appointed and authorized, to
repair to the head quarter of this Army, to audite and state our accounts, as
well for all former services as for our services in this Army; and that before
the disbanding of the Army, satisfaction may be given to the Petitioners for
their arreares, that so the charge, trouble, and loss of time, which we must
otherwise necessarily undergo; in attendance for the obtaining of them, may be
prevented, we having had experience, that many have been reduced to miserable
extreamities, even almost starved for want of relief, by their tedious
attendance. And that no Officer may be charged with any thing in his account,
that does not particularly concern himself.

3. That those who have voluntarily served the Parliament in the late Wars,
may not hereafter be compelled by press or otherwise to serve as Soldiers out
of this Kingdom. Nor those who have served as Horsemen, may be compelled by
press to serve on Foot, in any future case.

4. That such in this Army as have lost their limbs, and the wives and Children
of such as have been slain in the service, and such Officers or soldiers as
have sustained losses or have been prejudiced in their estates, by adhering to
the Parliament; or in their persons by sickness or imprisonment under the
Enemy, may have such allowances and satisfaction, as may be agreeable to
Justice and equity.

5. That till the Army be disbanded as aforesaid, some course may be taken for
the supply thereof with moneys. whereby we may be enabled to discharge our
quarters, that so we may not for necessary food be beholding to the Parliaments
Enemies, burdensome to their friends, or oppressive to the country, whose
preservation we have always. endeavored, and in whose happiness we should
still rejoice.

The Officers present at the Debates following.
Viz. Liuet Genesis Hamond. Commissary Ireton. Col Hamond. Col. Harley. Col.
^ngoldesby, Col. Whaley. Col. Fortescue. Col. Rich. Col. Butler. Col. Hewson.
Col Lilburne. Col. Okey. Liuet Col. Jackson. Lieutenant Colonel Pride Liuet.
Col Grimes. Major Fincher. Major Swallow, Major Huntington. Major Cowell. Major
Ducket. Major Sedascue. Major Waade. Captain Brown. Captain Groves Capt.
Lawrence. Capt. Jenkins. Capt Morgan. Capt Far Captain Goff. Capt. Reynolds
Capt. Nevill. Capt Pretty. Capt. Ohara. Capt Leigh. Capt Coleman. Capt. Young.
Capt. cannon. capt. Wallington, capt Lieut, Audley. capt, Liut. Gladman. capt.
Lagoe. Lieut Lloyde. Lieut Scottin. cor. Spencer. At the Convention of Officers
before his Excellency Sir Tho. Fairfax at Saffron Walden, March 21 1646.

THe two Letters from the Committee of Lords and Commons for Irish affairs
sitting at Derby-House, the one dated the 17. the other the 18. of March
instant, and the several votes of the House of Commons there enclosed,
concerning the sending of seven Regiments of Foot and four Regiments of Horse
out of this Army into Irel. for the service of that Kingdom, were read:
Whereupon his Excellency, proposed, unto the O^ficers this Qestion ensuing: viz.

Quest. Whether they were willing, with those under their Commands to engage
for the service of Ireland in the number of Horse, Foot, and Dragoons, now
proposed to be sent.

In order to which, after some debate the first Quaerie propounded amongst the
Officers was.

1. Whether they were prepared, at present, to give a certain resolution to
that Question?

Resolved Negatively (Nemine contradicente)
2 It was resolved and declared by all: That whether they shall find cause to
engage themselves personally in that service or no, they shall in their
several places be ready to further and advance it amongst those under their
respective commands.

Next there were several things propounded by several Officers wherein
satisfaction was desired, before they could give their certain resolution to
the maine Question; which were these.

1. To know, what particular Regiments, Troops or Companies of this Army, are
to be continued in service in this Kingdom.

2. To know under whose conduct and Command in chief, those that engage for
Ireland are to go.

3 What assurance there shall be of pay, and subsistence, to those that shall
engage in this service for Ireland, during their continuance therein.

4. To have satisfaction in point of Arrears, and indemnity for the service in
England.

Upon each of these, this Question was put to every Officer distinctly.

Quest. Whether is this a thing wherein you desire satisfaction before you can
give a certain Resolution to engage in the service proposed?

Which question, upon the third and fourth Propositions was resolved
affirmatively, (Nemine contradicente).

Upon the second it was resolved affirmatively by all except Col. Harley, Coll.
Fortescue, Col. Butler, Major Fincher, Lieut Colonel Iackson, Capt. Far, and
Capt Nevill,

Upon the first it was resolved affirmatively by all, except the persons last
mentioned, and col. Rich, Major Ducket, Capt. Ohara, Capt Audley, and captane
Young.

Lastly, those that were affirmative to the desiring of satisfaction in the
first Proposition. viz.

To know what particular Regiments, Troops, or companies of this Army are to be
continued in service in this Kingdom* did declare,

That this was desired, partly to this end: That in giving the resolution to
the main Question, none that are not designed to stay in England, may be
withheld from engaging for Ireland by any secret expectation to be continued
in England And partly to the end that those who shall engage the rather, upon
confidence of having the company of such as do agree with them in the same
conditions, may not be deceived in that particular.

At a second Convention of Officers, at the desire of Sir William Waller, and
the rest of the Commissioners at Saffron-Walden: His Excellency being present,
Monday March 22. 1646. And the results following.

Present. Lieut. Genesis Hamond, Com. Genesis Ireton, Col. Hamond, col. Harley, col.
Whaley, col. Rich, col Fortescu^, col. Lilburne, col. Okey, col. Hewson, Leiut.
col. Pride, Leiut col. Grimes, Leiut col Jackson, Major Swallow, Major
Huntington Major Cowell Major Sedascue, Major Waade, Capt. Brown, Capt. Groves,
Cap Lawrence, Captain Ienkins Captain Morgan, Captain Far, Captain Goffe,
Capt Lagoe, Cap. Gladman Capt. Nevill, Capt. Pretty, Capt. Ohara, Capt. Leigh,
Captain Audley, capt. Coleman, capt. Cannon, capt. Wallington, capt: Young,
Leiut Scottin, Leiutenant Lloyd.

At the desire of the commissioners, who now produced the Uotes of the house of
Commons of the 16. of March, concerning the raising of 60000. l. per month
toward the payment of the Forces in England and Ireland, the same were read
unto the Officers, and after some debate, this question was proposed to every
Officer distinctly.

Whether upon the Votes and resolutions of the House of Commons, now read, or
any other consideration, do you find cause to alter or recede from the third
Quaere yesterd y resolved on, concerning assurance of pay, and subsistence? It
was resolved in the Negative by all, except, col. Harley, col. Fortescue, and
capt. Young.

The same question being proposed concerning the fourth Article, viz. To have
satisfaction in payment of Arrears, and indemnity, etc.

Resolved in the Negative by all, except capt. Young.

The like question being proposed, concerning the first quaerie, to know what
particular Regiments, Troops, or companies of this Army are to be continued in
service in this Kingdom.

It past likewise in the Negatives, all referring to the several Votes upon
the same, yesterday delivered.

There* being several Officers now present, who were not here yesterday at the
debates, viz. capt. Rainsborow, capt. Persons, capt. Rawlins, capt. Musket,
capt. Biscoe, capt. Wolf, capt. Kirby.

The several Votes of the House of Commons, concerning the sending seven
Regiments of Foot, and of Horse into Ireland was read unto them, as also the
Votes of the House, concerning the raising of 60000. l. per month, toward the
maintenance of the forces in England and Ireland, the same question and
quaeries thereupon, which were yesterday propounded, were now proposed to the
^^d last me^^^oned Officers severally, and each Officer by himself, declared
his Vote to the first question, viz.

Whether they were now prepared to give their resolution; Negative, and to all
the rest affirmative.

Captain Young coming in, declared, That he receded from these things, wherein
yesterday he concurred to desire satisfaction, and resolves upon the main
question, that he will engage with as many of his Soldiers as he can get.

Captain Denizon, capt. Bushel, capt. Cox, and capt. Pooley, of Colonel
Fortescues Regiment, declare the same resolution with capt. Young.

A Letter from the General to Mr. SPEAKER.
SIR,
I Received your Letter dated the 27. of this instant, with an enclosed Order
from the House of commons, for the making stop of the further proceed in a
Petition, which the House was informed, was carrying on in the Army: In
obedience to which, I sent out orders to the Officers of the Regiments
quartering in these parts of the Kingdom, to meet at my quarters, that I might
enquire into the whole matter, and take such course as might most effectually
conduce unto the accomplishing your commands, where having communicated your
letter and Orders to them, they did generally express a very deep sense of
their unhappiness, in being misunderstood in their clear intentions: which
were no other then by way of Petition to represent unto me those
inconveniences, which would necessarily befall most of the Army after
disbanding; desiring, That as much, as I should judge fit, and seasonable,
might be submissively made known to the House of commons, which otherwise
(your multiplicity of business intervening) might not be remembered: Assuring
me, that they would wholly acquiesce, in whatsoever I should judge reasonable
to offer, or you to grant on their behalf: I have also according to your
commands sent up Leiutenant General Hamond, colonel Hamond, colonel
Lilburne, Leiutenant colonel Pride, and Leiutenant col. Grimes, to attend the
Houses pleasure: who I hope will give you (as far as they are acquainted
therewith) a full and candid account of the whole proceedings in this Petition.
Sir, there is one clause in your Letter, concerning all the Regiments marching
this way, which I do not understand, except it be meant by Sir Hardresse
Wallers Regiment, which I have remanded away at the instance of Major General
Skippon upon the grounds in his enclosed letter, and colonel Hammonds, and
colonel Herbets, now upon their march from Chester, being dismissed from that
service. Sir I trust the Army will ever manifest their affections to the
public, by their constant perseverance in their accustomed obedience unto all
your commands; which shall be ever redily endeavored, by:

Your most humble Servant, Tho. Fairfax.

For the Honorable William Lenthall Esquier, Speaker of the Honorable House
of Commons.
Walden, March 30, 1647.
To His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, General of the Army raised by
the Authority of both Houses of PARLIAMENT.
The Humble Petition of the Officers of the several Regiments lately drawn off
Your Excellencys Army for the service of Ireland in the behal, of themselves
and their Soldiers.
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioners, formerly members of your Army, by your Excellencies
countenance and encouragement did draw off and engage our selves and soldiers
for the service of Ireland, and since that contrary to our expectation, and as
we humbly conceive, your Excellencies knowledge, there has been very high
affronts offered unto us by some of your Excellencies Army that came into our
quarters and by a pretended authority from your Excellency and a special order
from some of the chief Commanders in your Excellencies Army, as they alleged,
did at that time draw away many of our Soldiers, and have by false and
scandalous suggestions and mis-informations endeavored to seduce, corrupt and
draw away many more, as does appear by the late loss of five companies, and
the great discouragement of all the rest from that service, Which your
Excellency endeavored so much to promote, manifested by that never to be
forgotten expression which then fell from you Excellency, that rather then the
service of Irel. should be neglected or retarded; you would willingly trayle a
Pike your self. And whereas it is by some persons or Pamphlets spread abroad,
declaring that we deserted the Army merely on purpose to make a party to stand
in opposition to the Army, and so to involve and engage this Kingdom in another
bloody war: which our consciences tell us to the contrary; and to give your
Excellency and the world satisfaction, we call God the searcher of all hearts
to witness for us, that such an intention never entered in, or came near our
thoughts, neither do we know of any such inclination, or have had such
intimation from any of our superiors, or from any others in the whole world.

We therefore make it our humble suit to your Excellency, that as we have all
along served your Excellency in your just undertakings for the welfare of this
Kingdom, with all integrity and fidelity, we may not now be looked upon as
enemies but as well wishers to the peace of this Kingdom; and now ready, if
not obstructed with our lives and fortuns to endeavor the relief of bleeding
Irel. And to that purpose we furthur beseech your Excel to give command that no
interception be made or interruption given to any person or persons employed to
London or to on our affairs by any of your Excellencies Army, but that at all
times free passage May be allowed to your Petitioners.

And as in duty bound we shall pray for your Excellencys happiness etc,
Wiliam Harbert col. John Melvin, Liuet Col. Richard Lunday Major. CAPTAINS,
Nathaniell Short, Barthol Helbye, John Danklin, Charles Awbery, Thomas Morgan.
Liuet. Wiliam Mathews Lieut. Tho. Vahan Walter Brough Will Hodskins. Peter
Winchester, Richard Onyon, Edward Lo, ENSIGNS. James Short. William East,
William Hall, Thomas Robins. John Stamp. John Williams, Math. Maderson, Thomas
Hodskins, Nich. Kempson, col. Christ. Packham, Lieut Col. Fran. Dormer Major.
CAPT. Robert Fish, Alexand. Frye, Geo. Masters, Abraham Clerk, Francis Wels,
Lindsey Sharples. Stephen coin, John Bistill. LIEVT. Robert Dormer, Thomas
Moon. Jarvis Murrey, George Hope, Timothy clare. ENSIGNS. Robert Chafe,
Andrew Finch, Robert Batts, Bryan Elton, John Mackellan, David Hollan, Robert
cloak.

SIR,
Whereas at the last meeting of the Officers of this Army at Saffron. Walden I
declared in the presence of the Lords and Comors commissioners of Parliament,
to all the Officers then present; as also to such Officers as have since that
time come to the Headquarters, that they should make known to their several
Regiments the intention of the Parliament to send a considerable force of such
of their Army that are willing to go into Ireland for the reducing of that
Kingdom, desiring them also to make known my desire to advance that service,
and to prevent any hinderance thereof, and that if any Officers stand not
disposed to engage in person in that employment, yet that they would promote it
in making known my desire and the Votes of both Houses, for the encouragment of
such as should engage in that service; I do therefore desire you to publish
thiis Letter together with the said votes, by reading the same unto your
Regiment in expectation whereof I remain.

Walden, April 18. 1648. Your Assured Friend, FAIRFAX:

THE APOLOGY.
Right noble and Faithful General,
WE who have for these two years past bin by your Excellence conducted
through many dangers and by providedence hitherto protected, who have often
seen the devouring sword of a raging Enemy drawn forth against us, threatening
destruction to us, and now see them vanquished, and our selves seemingly settled
in peace and safety, are yet sensible of another more dangerous storm hanging
over our Heads then ever the malice of our open enemies could have contained,
or their fury caused to fall upon us; which unless diverted, strike not only
at our liberty, but our lives also; To whom, next to our maker shall we fly
for shelter but to your Excellency the Patron and Protector? From what
secondary means shall we expect our Deliverance; but from thy hand that has
so often bin engaged with us, and from that heart that has as often been
tender over and careful for our security? can we suffer, and you not
sympathize? can we be proclaimed enemies, and your Excellency remain secure? O
dear Sir, let your wonted care for us be further demonstrated, cease not to
speak for us, who together with

self and in obedience to your command have adventured all that is dear to us
for the Kingdoms safety. Has any thing been desired by us that has not been
promised, or then we have just cause to expect; if there has, then both it and
the Autho s thereof perish. but can the Parliament upon misinformation pass us
for enemies; and we not therein perceive our enemies design; can we be
satisfied with a complement, when our fellow Soldiers suffer at every Assize
for acts merely relating to the War?

Is it not our lives we see? For where shall we be secured, when the mere
envy of a malicious person is sufficient to destroy us? Were our enemies in
the Field with their Swords in their hands, we should expect no more then a
bare command, and a divine protection on our endeavors to free our selves, but
it is another and a far worse enemy we have to deal with, who like Foxes
lurk in their Dens, and cannot be dealt withal, though discovered, being
protected by those who are entrusted with the Government of the Kingdom. It is
the grief of our hearts, that we cannot desire our own security without
hazard to your Excellency, if but in speaking in our own behalf. When shall
we see Justice dispersed without partiality, or when shall the Weal of the
public be singly sought after and endeavored? Can this Irish Expedition be
any thing else but a Design to ruin and break this Army in pieces: Certainly
reason tells us it can be nothing else; otherwise why are not those who have
been made instruments in our countries deliverance, again thought worthy to be
employed? or why are such, who for their miscarriages have been cast out of the
Army, thought fit to be entrusted, and those Members of the Army engaged and
preferred to that Service, when they are for most part such, as had they
considered their just demerrits, might rather have expected an ejection then
employment: We are sensible, yea far more sensible of the bleeding condition of
Ireland, crying aloud for a Brotherly assistance, then those forward
undertakers in this present Design manifest themselves to be, and shall
willingly contribute the utmost of our abilities toward their relief, when we
shall see this to be the only thing sought after and endeavored; but we are
confident that your Excellency cannot but perceive this plot is but a mere
cloak for some who have lately tasted of Sovereignty; and being lifted beyond
their ordinary Sphere of servants, seek to become Masters, and degenerate into
Tyrants; we are earnest therefore with your Excellency, to use the utmost
endeavor, that before any other or future Propositions be sent to us, our
expectations may be satisfied, which if they are not, we conceive our selves
and our friends as bad as destroyed.

And shall your Excellency, or any other faithful servant to the State be
appointed for the Service of Ireland, and accept of that employment, we must of
necessity, contrary to our desires, show our selves averse to that service,
until our desires be granted, the just Rights and liberties of the Subjects
vindicated and maintained.

Then (as God and our own consciences bear us witness,) we shall testify to
the Kingdom the integrity of our hearts to the service of Ireland, and our
forward actions in that employment shall demonstrate the sincerity of our
expressions. Once more we are earnest with your Excellency for your assistance,
without which we are like to be wholly ruined; and having obtained it, may be
enabled as in duty we are bound to express our selves, your Excellencies and
the Kingdoms most faithful and obedient Servants.

Edward Saxby, Tho. Moore. Commissioners for the Generals Regiment Samuel
Whiting, Will. Allin. Leivtenant Generals Regiment, Anthony Nixon. Tho
Shepherd. Com. Genesis Regiment, Will. Jones, John Casby, Colonel Fleetwoods
Regiment. Nich. Lokier, Joseph Foster, Colonel Rich his Regiment. H.
Geathings, Edward Star, Colonel Sheffields Regiment. Tho. Kendale, John
Thomas, Colonel Whaley his Regiment. Elias Box, John Willowhy, Colonel Butler
his Regiment.

28. April. 1647.
A Second Apology of all the private Soldiers in his Excellencies Sir Thomas
Fairfax his Army to their Commission Officers.
SIRS.
WE your Soldiers who have served under your commands with all readiness to
free this our Native Land and Nation from all Tyranny and Opressions
whatsoever, and that by virtue and power derived from this present Parliament,
given not only to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, our now present General
but likewise under all the late Generals his predecessors, under whom we,
even the whole Souldery, have served both the State and you faithfully and
diligently: By which means God has been pleased to crown us with Victory,
in dispersing our common adversaries, so that we hoped to put an end to all
Tyranny and Oppressions, so that Justice and Equity, according to the Law of
this Land, should have been done to the People, and that the meanest subject
should fully enjoy his Right, Liberty, and proprieties in all things: which
the Parliament has made known to all the world in diverse of their
Declarations, to which they have so often bound themselves to perform, by
their Oahes, Vows, Covenants, and Protestations. Upon this ground of hope, we
have gone through all difficulties and dangers, that we might purchase to the
people of this Land, with our selves, a plentiful crop and harvest of Liberty
and Peace, but instead of it, to the great grief and sadding of our hearts, we
see that oppression is as great as ever, if not greater, yea, and that upon the
cordial friends to the Parliament and us, and to the just Rights and Liberties
of this Nation, that they with us are slighted, abused, beaten, and dragged to
Jayles; yea, to the utter ruin of their estates, and loss of their lives, yea
the best and most candid intentions, and actions of theirs and ours grossly
and foulely mis-construed, even to such a height as deserving no less then to
be declared as troublers of, and enemies to the State and Kingdom, and such as
have, and are now the enemies of the Parliament and Kingdom, are countenanced
and honourrd, to be in places of greatest trust and are made Judges of them and
us, for our lives and estates, yea, and in the great affairs of the Kingdom,
sitting in the House of Commons, though still under Sequestration, they are
made high Sheriffs, Mayors of several Counties and Towns, Commi^sioners of
Oyer and Terminer, as in Cumberland, and the county of Durham etc.

From whence we believe springs all our miseries, and that so many of our
fellow Soldiers, that have been disbanded, have been so rigorously dealt
withal, as The high Sheriff of Kent, a man that was in the first Rebellion
against the Parliament, and by his means last Assize indicted a Colonel for
taking of Horses, Ex^ter, At Northampton, Wa^wick, Alisbury, And this Assize at
Salisbury. London condemned. All these will be proved, with many more instances.
imprisoned, indicted, and hanged, for things done in time and place of War,
and necessity of the Parliaments service required in their low condition, and
without which, they could not have safely sat in the House of Parliament with
their heads on: and the reason of all this we judge, is, because our very
Enemies are made our Judges. Yea such is our condition, though we be oppressed,
we may not cry: as it is too apparent, when of late we did in an humble and
petitionary way seek to make known our grievances to our General; such was
our offense, as that we must presently without being heard, be declared Enemies
to the State: though notwithstanding by these, our E^emies even such as have
bin Cavaliers in Arms, have promered and framed diverse Remonstrances,
Petitions, and Representations, of dangerous consequence, to the Parliament and
Kingdom, and that against their most real and cordial friends; yet these
have bin accepted, and great thanks returned them: which holds forth to us a
clear design to enslave all the honest party of this Kingdom, and in them
we and you also:

Therefore, brave Commanders, the Lord put a spirit of courage into your
hearts, that you may stand fast in your integrity, that you have manifested to
us your Soldiers; and we do declare to you, that if any of you shall not, he
shall be marked with a brand of infamy for ever, as a Traitor to his Country,
and an Enemy to his Army. Read, and consider; was there ever such things done
by a Parliament, to proclaim us Enemies to the State, as they have done about
the late Petition? the Lords and they could quickly agree to this, though they
will be very tedious when any thing is offered that is for the good of the
commonwealth, and to keep the hirelings As that of 26. months, the Horse are
behind 13, Months pay, and now to have but two Months pay: judge Heaven, and
free people; God be judge of this great evil.
Wages, and not to give them that which they have so dearly bought with their
bloods and lives, even his pay; and not only so, but to leave them to the
merciless malice of their wicked Enemies.

It is not better to dye lke men, then to be enslaved, and hanged like Dogs?
which must and wll be yours and our portion, if not now looked unto, even
before our disbanding: so you may plainly see by this, their malice is great,
yea, against our most honored General, as that in the Lords House they did
more then whisper, he was a Delinquent: If they do so now, and that to him,
what will they not do, not only to him, but to you, if a course be not taken
for our and your security, before we be disbanded, we leave to you to judge.

We have been quiet and peaceable in obeying all Orders and commands, yet now
we have a just cause to tell you, if we be not relieved in these our
grievances, we shall be forced to that, which we pray God to divert, and keep
your and our hearts upright: desiring you to present these things to the
General, as our desires.

1. THat the honor of this Army may be vindicated, in every particular,
especially about the late Petition, and reparations given, and justice done
upon the fomenters. 2. That an Act of indemnity may be made for all things
done in time and place of War. 3. That the Wives and children of those that
have been slain in the service, and maimed Soldiers, may be provided for. 4.
Our Arreares under this General, to be paid us, our Arrears under other
Generals, to be audited and stated, and security given for the payment. 5.
That we that have served the Parliament freely, may not be pressed out of the
Kingdom. 6. That the Liberty of the Subject may be no longer inslaved, but
that Justice and Judgment may be dealt to the meanest Subject of this Land,
according to old Law.
Now unless all these our humble requests, be by you for us your Soldiers and
your selves stood for to be granted, it had better we had never been born, or
at least we had never been in Arms, but that we had by the Sword been cut off
from the misery we and you are like to undergo: So we rest, in hopes of your
faithfulness.

Your Soldiers.

A Copy of a Letter from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, to the Right
honorable, the Earl of Manchester.
My Lord,
YOur Lordships Letter of the 28 I received yesterday, with the Votes of both
Houses enclosed therein. Before the receipt thereof, I had called the Officers
unto a general Council of War, to advise concerning the better transaction
of the business, and prevention of all inconveniences thereupon, and when they
were in consultation, I communicated your Lordships letter, (and the Votes
therewith sent) unto them. After much time spent in debate thereof, this
enclosed was delivered unto me by the Officers, as the Result of the Council
of War; which being of very great concernment, I held it my duty to hasten unto
your Lordships. It is no small grief of heart unto me, that there should be
any dissatisfactions betwixt the Parliament and the Army, and that the late
votes did not give satisfaction. I beseech God to direct your Lordships to
proceed with wisdom, that things may be determined in love, and this poor
Kingdom free from further distraction; which is the earnest desire of

Your Lordships most humble servant. T. FAIRFAX.
Bury May 30. 1647.
For the Right Honorable the Earl of Manchester, Speaker of the House of
Peers, pro tempore.
Mr. SPEAKER,
HAving called the Officers of the Army to Saint Edmunds Bury; I communicated
unto them yesterday the Votes of both Houses, and a Letter of the House of
Peers sent therewith, concerning the disbanding of the Army; After long
consultation had thereof, this enclosed was delivered unto me, as the Result of
the Council of War (where the Officers were very many and unanimous) which
being of importance, I held it my duty to hasten the same unto you, being much
perplexed in my thoughts that dis-satisfactions betwixt the Parliament and the
Army should rather increase, then lessen. I entreat you that there may be ways
of love and composure thought upon; I shall do my endeavors, though I am
forced to yield to something out of order, to keep the Army from disorder, or
worse inconveniences. I desire you to take some speedy resolution for the
composing of things, whereby the Kingdom may be happy in a timely deliverance
from further distraction: for the effecting whereof I could be content to be a
sacrifice, as the last service you can have from.

Your most faithful and humble servant, T. FAIRFAX.
Bury May 30. 1647.
For the Honorable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker of the Honorable House
of Commons.
To his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, Knight, Commander in Chief of the
Parliaments Forces.
The Opinion and humble Advise of the Council of War, convened at Bury,
Saturday 29. May. 1647. In relation to the votes of Parliament, communicated to
us by your Excellency, and the desires of our advice thercon,
Humbly Shows,
1. THat upon the reports come to all quarters of the Army concerning the Votes
and proceedings of the House, May 21. As also of those on Tuesday, May 25. we
find the generallity of the Army [as we are our selves] much unsatisfied in the
one, and something amazed and startled at the other, the first Votes (of
Friday) coming much short of satisfaction as to the greivances of the Army,
then reported to the House, and not taking any notice at all of some that were
most material, and the latter (of Tuesday) importing a resolution suddenly to
disband the Army by peace-meale, before equal satisfaction be given to the
whole in any of the greivances, or so much as any consideration had of some
others most material; And also before any effectual performance of that
satisfaction which the Votes of Friday seemed to promise, as to some of the
grievances, all which we shall be ready (upon a little time given us) to
represent to your Excellency, more distinctly and in particular.

2. That the said distraction, and the jealousies occasioned upon the same
proceedings, as we fear, and by some effects already appearing, do find, may
unhappily produce dangerous disturbances and tumultuous actions amongst
several parts of the Army, as they now lie dispersed and remote from the
Headquarters, especially amongst those Regiments whose principal Officers, by
neglecting or diserting their Soldiers in their necessary concernments, or just
grievances, have disobliged their Soldiers, and lost their interest with them,
in so much as such Officers are in some sort forced to with draw from their
charges and can scarce with safety come at them, and to prevent the
inconveniences or ill consequences which such disturbed or tumultuous actings
might produce, either to the contryes where the Army quarters or to the
Kingdom, We humbly advise your Excellency without delay, to draw the Army (or
at least those parts thereof that are not fixed to certain Quarters, upon
particular duty) unto a closer posture of Quarters, so as each Regiment, Troop,
and Company, may lie under the veiw, and over sight of their respective
Officers that are left with them, and all of them under a nearer view of, and
correspondency with the Head-quarter, which may thus have a readier influence
upon all, for the better preserving of good Order, and prevention of
inconveniences, and in such posture for the Countries ease, to remove and shift
the whole Quarter once a week at least, till upon further satisfaction, the
Army may be quietly and orderly disbanded.

3. That upon the same dissatisfaction and jealousies we find an extreme
earnestness and violent propensity among the soldiers to a general
Rendezvous, and we verily believe, that the first attempt to disband any one
Regiment,before equal satisfaction to all, and assurance against those things
they have cause to fear, will occasion them all to draw together and Rendezvous
of themselves, as it were upon an Alarm. And to prevent the inconveniences or
ill consequences both to these Countries and the Kingdom, of any such
tumultuous or confused drawing to a Rendezvous without order, we humbly advise
your Excellency without delay after the contracting of quarters, to order a
general Rendezvous for those parts of the Army, whose quarters shall be so
contracted: And this we advise and desire the rather because of the scandalous
suggestions of some, importing importing as if the late discontents appearing
in the Army, and the representations of grievances from the Army, were not
really in or from the body of the Soldiery, but a mere delusion or appearance
made by the contrivance and artifice of some factious Officers, or other
Persons in the Army. the truth and falsehood whereof, as also the true temper
and disposition of the Army, your Excellency, and all other, may most clearly
discover by such a General Rendezvous, without the delay or troubl of going to
every Regiment a part as they now lie) the Army may more certainly understand
what they may expect from the Parliament, and both Parliament and Kingdom what
to judge and trust to, concerning the Army, and to that purpose at such a
Rendezvous, we shall (we hope through the grace of God) discharge our duties to
the Parliament and Kingdom, as well as to your Excellency and the Army, and
demonstrate that the good and quiet of the Kingdom, is much dearer to us then
any particular concernment of our own. These two last things we humbly advise
and desire may be done without delay, or that otherwise we may be held
acquitted from all inconveniences that may ensue in our several charges.

4. Since (besides the dissatisfaction to the Army hitherto, in the points of
grievances, and the defect of assurance, as to several of these things promised
for our satisfaction, and besides the jealousies occasioned upon the Votes of
Tuesday last, and all the ill consequences which may follow in proceeding
thereupon) That course of disbanding the Army by peece-meale before the
satisfaction intended, be performed equally to the whole, seems something
strange and unusual (not practiced in disbanding of other Armies, as Major
Genesis Massies Brigade, the Scots Army, etc or used that we have heard of, by any
States toward any Army that was ever accounted faithful; We humbly desire
your Excellency by an effectual Letter to move the Parliament for this, as that
which we humbly offer and do beg at them, both for their own honor, in
relation to what future Armies they may have occasion to employ, for the
reputation of your Excellency, and this Army, as well as for its better
satisfaction, and as they tender the good and assured quiet of this Kingdom,
or the effectual relief and saving of Ireland, that they would be pleased to
resume the consideration of things voted on Tuesday last, and to suspend any
present proceeding thereupon, as also to resume the grievances of the Army,
together with the things proposed in the conclusion of the Narrative from the
Officers, and to give satisfaction, or at least some resolution to each of
them, and that they would not think it fit to put that temptation, those
jealousies, and that dishonor upon the Army, as to take it disbarded in
scattered peieces, before satisfaction be equally given to the whole.

Whereas, what we here desire your Excellency to move, may be said, if admitted
into consideration, to tend to delay the relief of Ireland.

1. We find most clearly, that the great hopes suggested to the Parliament, of
the supply of that svrvice in that way at present intended, will prove as to
any further expectation out of this Army, but vain and delusive, as the loud
noise of so many powerful Officers, with 50. Companies of Foot, and ten of
Horse, so long since engaged for that service, have already proved, and if
herein our judgment be not credited, we have yet discharged our duty to the
Parliament, and both Kingdoms in declaring it.

2. We cannot but for our own, and the Armies further discharge, and clearing,
declare, That if the Parliament had not been abused by many of those they have
employed, and entrusted for the promotion of that service, and had not bin by
such men's false informations, or misrepresentations concerning the Army, or
otherwise diverted from the consideration of, or from giving reasonable
satisfaction to the Army in these things proposed by the generality of the
Officers at the first meeting at Walden in March last in order to that service,
and had not by like mischievous practices of such incendiaries been since then
moved and drawn to such things, and in such a series and succession, as have
conduced to multiply discontents, disobligations, and provocations upon the
Army, (we say had it not been for such persons and such things) we are
confident might have had [if they had pleased] an Army entire, and ready formed
under their old Officers, and conduct, to have engaged for that service, having
found a just consideration for the services past and assurance of pay and
subsistence in that to come.

Saturday the 29. of May 1647. At A Council of War, held at St. Edmunds
Bury, there were present.
Commissary Genesis Ireton. Col. Whaley. Col. Rich. Col. Sir Hardresse Waller.
Col. Hughson. Col. Okyes. Col. Lilburne. Leiut. Col. Jackson. Leiut. Col.
Pride. Lieut. Col. Read. Lieut. col. Salmon. Lieut. col. Jubs. Major Disborow.
Major Read. Major Huntington. Major Tomlinson. Major Swallow. Major Horton.
Major Gooday. Major Smith. Major Cowel. Major VVade. Captain Jenkin. Capt.
Lilburne. Capt. Pretty. Capt. Morgan. Capt. Grove. Capt. Cannon. Capt.
Pitchford. Capt. Dale. Capt. Husbands. Capt. Hawes. Capt. Bethel. Capt.
Coleman. Capt. Laton. Capt. White. Capt. Highfield Capt. Rainborow. Capt. Let.
Capt. Rolph. Capt. Spooner. Capt. Orpin. Capt. Clark. Capt. Hoddin. Capt.
Stodder. Capt. Ask. Capt. Holmes. Capt. Tolhurst: Capt. Gougff. Capt. Grigson.
Capt. Lago. Capt. Davies. Capt. Toppington. Capt. Brafield. Capt. Lieut. Kirby.
Capt. L. Wallington. Capt. L. Audley. Capt. L. Hewes. Capt. L. Knight. Capt. L.
Arnop. Lieut. Scotten. Lieut. Cowell. Lieut. Sheers. Lieut. Ensor. Lieut.
Barton. L. Hooker. L. Miller. L. White. L. Heydon. L. Phillips. L. Wheeler.
L. Singleton. L. Gough. L. Morgan. L. Topping. L. Erwood. L. Hawes L. Aztell.
L. Baber. Corner Moore. C. Southwood. C. Baker. C. Iennings. C. Bush. C.
Warren. C. Green. C. Essex. Ensign Pearth. E. Wright. E. Gregory. E.
Camfield. E. Rawlins. E. Nicholds. Quartermaster Savage. Q. Warren. Q. Hunt.
Q. Samer. Q Master Arther.
To his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, Knight, Captain General of the forces
raised by the Authority of PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition of the Soldiers of the Army, presented to his Excellency
at a Council of War, held at St Edmonds Bury on Saturday 29 May 1647.
Humbly Shows,
THat we your Petitioners considering the late Orders for disbanding the Army
without redressing our grievances, vindicating the Army, or calling to account
such persons who have been intenders, contrivers, and promoters of our
destruction, which [being but reasonable] we humbly conceive we may justly
expect should not be denied before disbanding us apart one Regiment from
another, contrary to the examples of other Armies, disbanding in this Kingdom,
which posture renders us suspicious to the Kingdom, to whom, for some of our
Accounts (though humble and Just) we have already been declared enemies and to
whom (for ought we know) for the rest of our doing, may be presented with the
same constructions.

We your Petitioners humbly beseech your Excellency, you would be pleased to
appoint a Rendezvous speedily for the Army, and also to use your utmost
endeavors it be not disbanded before our sad and pressing greivances be heard,
and fully redressed; which if not done before disbanding, we humbly conceive we
shall be enforced upon many inconveniences, which will (of necessity arise)
when fwe [though unwilling] shall be necessitated (for avoiding of destruction
like to all on the whole Army if not prevented) to do such things our selves,
which if your Excellency (out of your wisdom and prudence) shall prevent, by
granting our just desires in a way of Order, we shall abundantly rejoice in it,
and be (with cheerfulness) enabled by it, to subcribe our selves.

Your Excellencies, and the Kingdoms innocent and faithful servants, whose
names are hereunto annexed, being Agitators in behalf of the several
Regiments. Edward Saxby, Edward Tailor, Agitators of the Generals Regiment of
Horse. William Allen. Sam. Whiting. Liuetenant Generals Regiment. Tho.
Shepherd, Anth. Nixon. Commisary Generals Regiment. Edward Twig, Tho. Jones.
Colonel Fleetwoods Regiment. Thomas Kendall, William Young, Colonel Whaleyes
Regiment. Edward Star, Edward Geathings, Colonel Sheffields Regiment. John
Willoughby, Tobias Box. Col. butlers Regiment. Tho. Brown. Barthol. Wedlock.
Colonel Sir Robert Pyes Regiment. George Steuson, Richard Salter. Colonel
Graves his Regiment. Nicholas Lockyer, John Braman. Col. Rich; Regiment.
Edward Vaughan, John Newson Of the Generals Regment of Foot, Robert Mason,
Henry Anderson, Colonel Wallers Regiment, Nicholas Andrews, Ralph Prentice,
Colonel Harlowes Regiment. Herbert Field, Tho. Walston. Colonel Lilburnes
Regiment. Edward Garn, Daniell Hinksman, Colonel Hewsons Regiment. William
Baker. Colonel Lamberts Regiment.

To the right honorable Field-Martiall, General Skippon Lieut. Gen Cromwell
Commissary General Ireton, and Colonel Fleetwood.
HAving received at the last convention of the Officers of the Army (at Walden)
your commands and directions to our Regiaments; First, for publishing the Votes
of the House of Commons for the satisfaction of the Army in point of Arreares
and Indemnity. And secondly, for a faithful, diligent, and impartial enquiry
into the present temper and disposition of the Army: In which, having
accordingly (with diligence) endeavored to answer your expectation in what you
have enjoined us; we do, to the best of our understandings, represent unto
you, That we find both Officers and Soldiers at present, quiet, and free from
any visible distemper: Nevertheless are sensible of many pressing grievances,
which they having orderly and quietly made known unto us, we humbly in their,
and our behalves, represent unto you as follows.

1 That whereas it pleased the honorable Houses of Parliament, having received
information of a dangerous petition in the Army, to declare and immediately
publish in print to the Kingdom, That that Petition (which indeed was but
only intended to be presented to the General with submission to his
approbation) did tend to put the Army into distemper and mutiny to obstruct the
relief of Ireland, and put conditions upon the Parliament, and declaring the
Petitioners, if they shall continue in their distempered condition, and go on
in promoting and advancing that Petition, and, shall be looked upon, and
proceeded against as enemies to the State, and disturbers of the public peace.
Which said information misrepresenting our intentions, has caused that heavy
charge which remains upon record, as a Memorandum of infamy upon us to
posterity, we cannot choose but with sadness of spirit, be deeply sensible,
that so humble and innocent an address intended to the General, could beget
so strange an interpretation, the substance of those things which we intended
to sue for therein, being no other then what the Parliament promised, and
frequently confirmed unto by their Declarations.

2 That whereas those persons, who have by the foresaid Information, attempted
to our great prejudice, to beget mis-understandings betwixt the Parliament and
their Army, by their surreptitious obtaining and misrepresenting our intention
in the said Petition, and by divulging abroad scandalous Letters from unknown
hands, (the Authors whereof are concealed, and not brought forth to make
judicial proofs of those things laid to our charge, which we cannot but look
upon as a just cause of grief, that the suggesters of such things seemed to
prevail so far as to gain encouragement, and we who are innocent, remain
unjustified in the eyes of the Kingdom.

4 That diverse Officers of the Army of public and known integrity, have been
sent for to the Parliament, some whereof at this present attended there, and
have had no trial, nor any thing considerable, that we know of, laid to their
charge. And more particularly, That Ensign Nichols, a member of this Army,
has been illegally imprisoned by Capt. Dormer, a late Officer of this Army,
(but now engaged for Ireland) his Pockets searched, and his Papers taken from
him contrary to the Laws of the Kingdom, or Discipline of war, and since (by
order of the Commissioners) sent from Derby-House to treat with the Army about
the relief of Ireland; was sent to London, (without the Generals privity,)
where he is still kept Prisoner) at great expenses, and not brought to trial;
which president may equally extend to any or all in the Army. Which said
particular, bearing with it the face of delay and protraction, we cannot but
look upon as a just cause of trouble unto us.

4 That whereas we understand, that the Parliament has voted asudden
disbanding of the ARMY, not having made a sufficient provision for the auditing
of our Arrears, and stating of our accounts so fully, as we may not be liable
to future charges concerning them, our own reason, and the experience of
others, does make us sensible, how difficult, chargeable, and uncerrain the
oftaining thereof will be after we are disbanded, and dispersed to our several
homes.

5 That no provision has been made for the payment of our dearly earned wages,
to the expense of our blood, and often hazard of our lives; saving a Vote of
six weeks pay upon disbanding: Now at the consummation of our work) which is so
small, that it will inevitably expose us (especially the private Soldiers) to
great extremity, being searse sufficient to maintain many of them in their
journey to their own homes.

6 That nothing as yet has been perfected for our future security for things
done as Soldiers in relation to the war, which the exigency thereof, and
difficulties therein, has compelled, us unto the want whereof we cannot choose
but be very sensible of, when we consider the many sad examples of bitter and
rigorous prosecutions at Law, against Soldiers for acts done in order to the
promotion of the Kingdoms service.

7 That we stand in fear, (especially the private Soldiers) of being
impressed or enforced to serve as Soldiers out of the Kingdom; many having
spent themselves freely and voluntarily in the public service, forsaking
their trades, and friends, and livelihoods; to which many desire to return
again for their better future subsistence.

8 That whereas diverse of us (especially the private Soldiers) who were
Apprentices in London, or other parts of the Kingdom, have voluntarily engaged
themselves in this service, being encouraged thereunto by the Parliaments
Declarations, showing that the time they should so spend in the prosecution
thereof, should be as effectual in order to their Freedom, as if they had
remainened with their several respective Masters. Notwithstanding which, many
have refused to give us freedom, who may justly claim it by the aforesaid
Declarations for that purpose.

9 That many Soldiers who have l^st their lives, Widows their Husbands, and
Children their Parents, in this service, and thereby are reduced to great
poverty, (even to beggary) are not sufficiently provided for a future
livelihood.

10 That whereas diverse persons both privately and publicly labored by evil
aspersions and false calumnies to render us odious to the Kingdom, thereby
seeking to alienate their affections from us; in order to which they have
published many Books viz. Ma. Edwards his Gangraena, and diverse others of that
nature: and also very lately a report divulged abroad, that we had petitioned
his Majesty, inviting him to come to the head of the Army, and that we would
restore him to his Crown. Throne and Dignity: A person of eminence averred
before a very great and publik convention in the City of London, that he saw a
Copy of that Petition which was delivered to his Majesty: And that the Army was
no longer a New Model, but had 4000. Cavaliers in it, that he coming from
the Fountains head, perceived, that the King and Cavaliers, have their single
and whole dependency upon this Army. And others priva^ly suggesting the same,
by dispersing several copies of the said pretended Petition; the several
particulars whereof we protest against, as most false, and are most confident,
that it proceeded not from any probable ground which might argue such an
intention in us, but singly from the malice of our enemies.

11 That notwithstanding the great care of the Committee and Treasurers for the
Army, and the cheerful readiness of the most Counties in paying their
Assesments, (as these where we now quarter generally affirm;) nevertheless
through want of pay, the private Soldiers are necessitated to take free
quarter for the present, which is very irksome to be so burdensame to the
kingdom.

Having thus according to your commands, as fully as we are able, accounted
unto you what is the true genuine sense of the Army, and not their imaginary,
but real grievances which inevitably fall upon us, except the Parliament in
their wisdoms take some effectual course to prevent them* and as we, if the
time allowed to us by you, would permit, we could clearly demonstrate unto you:
we therefore assume the boldness to desire you to be sensible with us, of what
we have offered unto you, and to present unto the Parliament the particulars
aforesaid, in such humble way and manner, as you conceive most effectual to
the accomplishment of our future quiet, and welbeing: That you will do us
right if in case any of our actions be misrepresented to the Parliament: That
you will do us right if in case any of our actions be misrepresented to the
Parliament: That you will (as far as justly you c^^) cover (...) weakness,
if any thing of that nature has slipped us in the transaction of this to weighty
and considerable an importance, that the integrity of our hearts is not hid
from you, and which we doubt not, but will clearly appear, (notwithstanding
the malice, or secret workings of any person whatsoever seeking to asperse us,
when our proceedings herein, shall be thoroughly inquired into.) And if any
thing expressed herein, may appear or be understood otherwise, by the
Honorable Houses of Parliament, we desire you will declare the mind and sense
of us all; which is that we have endeavored to our utmost in all our
expressions, to avoid things which might offend, or in the least manner
entrench upon the honor and authority of the Parliament, for which we have
adventured all we have in this world, that is dear unto us. But if any
reflection may seem to touch upon some particulars, our intentions are no
other, then toward those who have abused the Parliament, Kingdom, and a
faithful Army.

A list of the several respective Officers, interested herein.
Collonells, Robert Hammond, Jo. Lambert, Rich. Engolesby, Ed. Whaley Jo. Okey,
Jo. Hewson, Nath. Rich. Lieutenan-Collonels, Isaac Ewer, Mark Grime, Tho.
Pride. Edw. Salmon, Tho. Read, Jo. Jubbs. Majors. Tho. Smith, Wroth Rogers,
Io. Wade, Dan. Axtell, Io. Desborough, Ad. Scroop, Geo. Sedacive, To.
Huntington, Thomas Horton, To Swallow, Will. Cowel. Captains, John Reynolds,
Tho. Disney, Io. Pitchford I. Carter, Hen. Binfield, Sam. Grames, Dan. Dale.
Io. Grove, W^lliam Rainborough, Walter Bethel, Tho. Ireton, Will. Col^man,
Will, Evanson, A^ariah Husbands, Sam. Gardener, Ben. Burgess, Will. St^eetham,
Io. Ienkin, Hen Pretty, Rich. Zanchy, Hen. Cannon, Tho. Pennifather, Io.
Spooner Io. Gladman Cap. Lieuten. Will. Read, To. Kerby Cap. Lieut. Rich.
Ask, Tobias Bridges, Io. Clarke, Edm. Rolse, Joseph Blisset, Oriell Smith,
Rich. Hodden, To. Gibbon, Hen. Davis Lewis Awdeley Cap. Lieut. Io. Wallington
Cap. Lieut. Edw. Orpin, To. Anderson, Tho. Haws Cap, Lieu. Giles Sanders, Rich.
Sanders, Io. Shrimpton Cap. Lieut. Francis-Allen, Io. Grime, Ia. Iermin, Tho.
Price, Fra. Hawes, Will. Arnop. Cap. Lieu. Mat. Cadwell, Io. Biscoe* Sam. Rose,
Will. Wear, Cap. Lieu. To. Read. Io. Toppenden, Alex. Brafield, Will. Goffe,
Tho. Patsons, George Gregson, Roger Alsop, Io. Salkeild, Waldoffe Lagoe, Io.
Mason, Hen. Lilburn, Abra. Holmes, Ier. Iolchurse, Amos Stoddar. Lieutenants,
Griffith Lloyde, Edw. Scotton, Tho. Sheares, Not. Wight, Ben. Gifford, Sampson
Toogood, Hen. Johnson, Ioh. Merriman, Hen. Martin, Edm. Ch llenden, George
Ensor, George Elsemore, Tho. Aldridge, Io. Peck. Io. Frank, Gelm. Tailor,
Stephen White, Io. Barrow, Rich. Kemp, Rich. Moss, Ralph Parker, Martin Iubbs,
Tho. Ellis, Phil. Price, Jo. Hawes, Io. Clark, To. Tailor Io. Friend, Rich.
Tompson, Io. Savage, Tho. Camberlain. Geor. Smith, Ralph Galo Not. Chasse,
Ralph Wilson, Io. Watson, Io. Filkins, Lewis Noreot, William Farley, Brian
Smith, Alex, Davis, To. Lewis, Io. Toppen. Hugh Ienkin, Io. Nichola, Edward
Dornay, Io. Miller, Ia. Clark Edw. Farmer, Tho. Day, Randol Warner, Wil-Giuge,
Will. Skelley, Ethel. Morgan, Adrian Arwood, Ienken Bevon, George Ienkin, Will.
Hill Io. Ward, Tho. Barker, Ed. Singleton, Io. Friend, Rich. Tompson, Tho.
Cossinghurst, And. Edwards, Sam Axtel, Fran. Wheeler, Io. Petter. Cornets, Will.
Barrington Io. Fox. Rich. Southwood, Tho. Barkley, Edm. Winstanly, Will.
Whittington, Io. Sabberton, George Joyce, Chry. Kember, Io. Cord, Geor. Tracy,
Will. Beuck, Io. Clark, Will. Leadbrook, Pet. Wallis, Sam. Packer, Hen. Mills,
Io. Southwood, Ja. Wilson, Io. Spencer, Rich. Webb. Cha. Whitehead, Abel
Warren, Anth. Lacon, Will. Lurna, Sam. Boalley. Ensigns, Cha. Bolton, Rob.
Smith, Geo. Clark. Willi. Jones, Ier. Hand, Sam. Bince, To. Beldea, Tho.
Rawlins, Ier. Camfield, Tho. Newman, Evan Jones, Hen. Cedwath, Fardinando
Green, Geor. Neckthey, Francis Farmer, Hen. Williams. Tho. Lewis, Rich. Bourn,
Will. Joyce, Will. Galhampton, Rob. Banning, VVil. Everard, Io. Mason, VVil.
Cooper, Downhalt Gregory, Abinam Spooner, Will. Beard, Sam. Chase Edw. Evans,
Io. Bishop, Fra. Litler, Will. Disney, Io. Ward, Rich Essex. Tho. Chambers, Io.
Bret, Abel Warren. Quartermasters, Will. Williams, Io. Goodwir, Cales Leigh,
Will. Miller, George Sanders, Rich. Slaynor, Ed. Warren, Tho. Savage, Nath.
Chedis, Philip Ramsey, Tho. Stewars, Io. Ads, To. Agard, Io. Kennet, Hen. Ward,
Io, Due, Tho. Ward, Phil. Ioanes, Rich. Hunt.

A Letter from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, sent to both Houses of
Parliament, concerning the Kings being brought from Holdenby toward the Army.
Mr. Speaker,
BY my last of Friday the 4 instant, I gave you account of what I understood
from Holmby concerning the undertaking of some Soldiers on Wednesday last, to
secure the King from being secretly conveyed away, and that Col. Graves being
thereupon secretly slipped away, I had sent Col. Whaley with his Regiment to
attend the Commissioners, and take charge of the Guards there, On Saturday
morning, being at a Randezvouze, beyond Newmarket, and advancing the Army this
way, in order to quarter about Cambridge, I received advertisement, That the
Soldiers of Holmby had upon Friday morning (with his Majesty's consent)
brought him away from thence, together with your Commissioners, That they lay
at Hinchingbrook near Huntingdon on Friday night, and would be at Newmarket
that day; The ground of this remove was alleged to be an apprehension in the
Soldiers of some Forces gathering toward that place suddenly to fall upon
them, and for^e the K^out of their hands, to withstand which, they thought they
might b^^ ^o weak (having then no notice of Col. Whaleys coming with his
Regiament) upon this immediately I sent after Col. Whaley, to advertise him
thereof, with order to direct his course toward Huntingdon, and (where ere he
met his Majesty and the Commissioners) to desire, that they would come on no
further this way, but rather to return, and suffer him to guard them back.

And to prevent any danger imaginable therein, I sent off from the Rendezvous
two Regiments of Horse more, to march after Col. Whaley toward Huntingdon, and
so on toward Holdenby, to be assistant to him in the Guards about his Majesty,
i^ it should be found needful.

And thus I held on the motion of the rest of the Army this way.

Toward Evening (a f^^t the Quarters of the Army were assigned. and taken up
hereabouts, and the Regiments marching off toward their several Quarters, I
understood from Colonel Whaley, that meeting the King and your Commissioners,
upon their way from Huntington toward New Market, about four miles short of
Cambridge, they had forborne to come on any further; but his Majesty being not
willing to return back for Holdenby, they had taken up his Quarter for present
at Sir John Cuts his house at Childerley, being the next house of any
convenience to the place where we met them.

Hereupon I sent thither Sir Hardres Waller, and. Col. Lambert, to inform the
Commissioners of my coming to Cambridge, and the Armies quartering hereabouts,
and to desire, that they would think of returning back with his Majesty to
Holdenby, and (because there might be many inconveniences in delay) that they
would not make any stay where they were, but remove back that way next morning
(though it were the Lords day) the Commissioners refused to act or meddle any
otherwise in disposing the King, then by their Answer to me, (whereof I have
sent you a Copy here enclosed) you see. And his Majesty declares himself very
unwilling to go back to Holdenby. I have thus given you a true and faithful
account, how his Majesty came to the place where he is, and how the Quarters of
the Army have fallen out to be so near him.

What ever (by the concurrence of events to make it thus) may be suspected of
design therein. This is the exact truth of the business, and I can clearly
profess, (as in the presence of God) for my self, and dare be confident of the
same for all the Officers about me, and body of the Army, that this remove of
his Majesty from Holde^ by was without any design, knowledge, or privity
thereof on our parts, and a thing altogether unexpected to us, until the
notice of it came upon the Randezvouz, as before; neither the Randezvouz or
coming hither to quarter with the Army from any purpose, or with any
expectation to be so near His Majesty as it happens. But the effect is so
far merely providentiall, and (to us) accidental; but the case being as it
is (your Commissioners refusing to intermeddle as before, and the King to go
back) I have placed and shall continue about his Majesty, such a Guard of
trusty men, and under such command, (Collonell Whaley being chief in the
charge) as I may be responsall for to the Parliament and Kingdom, (so far as
can reasonably be expected from me) by the blessing of God to secure his
Majesty's person from danger, and prevent any attempts of such as may design,
(by that advantage of his Person) the best to raise any new War in this
Kingdom. And truly (Sir,) to prevent any such mischief as it is my own most
earnest and humble desire, so I find it to be the unanimous desire and study
of the Army, that a firm peace in this Kingdom may be settled, and the
Liberties of the people cleared and secured accordingly, to the many
Declarations by which we were invited and induced to engage in the late War:
and the Parliaments effectual and speedy application to these two things (I
find) would conduce more fully and surely to a cheerful and unanimous
disbanding; And yet (what ever may be suggested; or suspected). I do certainly
find (and dare assure you; you may depend upon it.) That the sense of the Army
is most clear from any purpose, or inclination, to oppose the settling of
Presbytery, or to have the Independent Government set up, or to uphold a
licentiousness in Religion, or to meddle with any such thing, to the
advancement of any particular party or interest whatsoever, but to leave all
such particular matters to the wisdom of the Parliament.

I shall by the next send you a full Account of the proceeding and unanimous
resolutions of the Army at the late Rendezvouze (being not at present prepared
so fully as is fit.) The letter from both Houses I have received but this
night, the Quarters of the Army being lately altered before, will make the
Heath near New market less convenient for a Randezvouze, yet I shall take
order (according to the desire of the Houses) to have a Randezvouze either
there or not far of on Wednesday next, I remain.

Your most humble and faithful Servant, FAIRFAX.
Cambridge June 6. 1647. Postscript.
I shall according to my duty, and the desires of the Houses, do my utmost to
keep the Army in good order, to which I find it absolutely necessary, that
there be some pay presently sent down.



For the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire; Speaker of the Honorable House of
Commons.
Mr. Speaker:
In my last I promised to send you by the next an Account of the Army at the
late Randezvouze: I have sent you the same in two Papers unanimously agreed
upon there, by both Officers and Soldiers: I find in one of them diverse
things which your later proceedings since the Resolution of disbanding may have
given satisfaction unto: But the Army having then no knowledge thereof, it was
thus passed and delivered to me, and I cannot but send it to them: you may then
see what they then did remain unsatisfied in.

Understanding, that his Majesty and your Commissioners were much straitened
and disaccommodated in the House of Childerley, I went thither yesterday to
advise with your Commissioners about the disposal of his Majesty, for more
convenience to himself and them, then that place did afford: The Commissioners
were pleased wholly to refuse giving of any advise or opinion at all in the
business, and therefore the King declaring his Resolution not to go back to
Holdenby, unless he were forced, yet complaining much of the inconveniency he
suffered where he was, and pressing for a remove to New Market, and your
Commissioners not judging it inconvenient for him to be there: I ordered Col.
Whalley this day to attend his Majesty, and the Commissioners thither, with a
trusty and sufficient Guard of two Regiaments of Horse, which accordingly was
this day done, and his Majesty, with the Commissioners, gone to New Market but
not through Cambridge. This business taking up the whole time yesterday, and
it being necessary his Majesty should be disposed of: before the place of
Rendezvouze could well be resolved on, this morning at a Council of War, it
was judged inconvenient, and scarce possible to draw to a Rendezvouze to morrow
early enough to dispatch any thing; Therefore it is appointed on Thursday
morning at nine of the Clock: and in regard of his Majesty's going to
New Market, it was thought fit by the Council of War, that the place of
Rendezvouze might be altered from New-Market-Heath to Triploe-Heath, five
miles from this Town: I shall take care that your Commissioners if they come
to New Market, may have notice of this alteration from the former appointment,
I remain

Your most humble Servant, T. FAIRFAX.
Cambridge July 8. 1647.
For the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the Honorable House
of Commons.
A Solemn Engagement of the ARMY, under the Command of his Excellency Sir Tho.
Fairfax, Read, assented unto, and subscribed by all Officers and Soldiers of
the several Regiments, at the general Randezvous, near New Market, on June 5.
1647.
WHereas upon the Petition intended and agreed upon in the Army, in March last,
to have been presented to the General, for the obtaining of our due and
necessary concernments as Soldiers; the Honorable House of Commons being
unseasonably prepossessed with a Copy thereof, and (as by the sequel we
suppose) with some strange misrepresentations of the carriage and intentions of
the same, was induced to send down an Order for suppressing the Petition, and
within two or three days after, upon further misinformation, and scandalous
suggestions, of the like or worse nature, and by the indirect practice of some
malicious and mischeivous persons (as we suppose) surprising or otherwise
abusing the Parliament. A Declaration was published in the name of both Houses
highly censuring the said Petition, and declaring the Petitioners, if they
should proceed thereupon, no less then enemies to the State, and disturbers of
the public peace. And whereas at the same time and since, diverse eminent
Officers of the Army have been brought into question and trouble about the said
Petition, whereby both they and the rest of the Officers were disabled, or
discouraged for the time, from further acting or appearing therein on the
soldiers behalf; And whereas by the aforesaid proceedings and the effects
thereof, the soldiers of this Army (finding themselves so stopped in their due,
and regular way of making known their just greivances, and desires too, and by
their Officers,) were enforced to an unusual, (but in that case necessary) way
of correspondence and agreement amongst themselves, to choose our of the
several Troops and Companies several men, and those out of their whole
number, to choose two or more for each Regiment, to act in the name and behalf
of the whole soldiery of the respective Regiments Troops and Companies, in the
prosecution of their rights and desires in the said Petition, as also of their
just vindication and writing in reference to the aforesaid proceedings upon and
against the same, who have accordingly acted and done many things to those
ends, all which the soldiers did then approve as their own Acts And whereas
afterward (upon the sending down of Field-Martiall Skippon, and those other
Officers of the Army that were Members of the House of Commons, to quiet
distempers in the Army, fresh hopes being conceived of having our desires again
admitted to be made known, and considered in a regular way, and without such
misrepresentations as formerly, the Officers and soldiers of the Army (except
some few dissenting Officers) did again join in a representation of their
common grievances, and the Officers (except as before) did agree upon a
Narrative account of the grounds, rise, and growth of the discontents in the
Army, and their proceedings in relation thereunto, with an overture of the best
expedients, to remove or satisfy the same, both which were presented to the
same Members of the House, and by them reported to the House, and whereas the
Parliament having thereupon voted, and ordered some particulars, only toward
satisfaction of our grievances, has since proceeded to certain resolutions of
sudden disbanding the Army by pieces, which resolutions being taken, and to
be executed before full or equal satisfaction given to the whole Army, in any
of the grievances, before effectual performance of that satisfaction in part,
which the preceding Votes seemed to promise, as to some of the grievances, and
before any consideration at all of some others most material, (as by the
result of a general Counsel of War on Saturday, May 29. was in general
declared, and is now more fully demonstrated, in particular by a representation
thereupon, agreed unto by us: we all cannot but look upon the same resolutions
of disbanding us in such manner, as proceeding from the same malicious, and
mischie^^^^ Principles and in^^ntions, and from the like indirect Practices of
the same Persons abusing the Parliament, and is as the former proceedings
against us before mentioned did, and not without carnal and bloody purposts
(for some of them have not stuck to declare or intimate) after the body of the
Army should be disbanded, or the soldiers divided from their Officers: then to
question, proceed against, and execute their malicious intentions upon all such
particular Officers, and soldiers in the Army, as had appeared to act in the
Premises in the behalf of the Army; and whereas upon a late Petition to the
General from the Agitants, in behalf of the ^^uldiers (gro^^d^d upon the
preceding consider a^^^^^, relating to the same resolutions of disbanding the
same general Counsel of war to prevent the danger, and inconveniences of
those disturbings, or tumultuous actings, or con^^^ences which the
dissatisfaction and Jealousy thereupon also grounded, were like fuddainely to
have produced in the Army to advise the General, first to contract the
Quarters of the Army, and then to draw the same to an orderly Randezvous for
satisfaction of all, and that his Excellency would immediately send up to move
and desire the Parliament to suspend any present proceeding upon the said
Resolution of disbanding, to resume the Consideration of the grievances, and
desires sent up from the Army, and not to disband it in pieces before just and
equal satisfaction given to the whole; And where is some of the Regiments
appointed for disbanding upon notice thereof, withdrawing themselves from the
Quarters adjacent to the appointed Randezvous, and drawing toward the Head
Quarters; and the contracting their Quarters according to the said advice of
the Counsel of War.

We the Officers and Soldiers of several Regiments hereafter named, are now
met at a general Randezvous, and the Regiments appointed as aforesaid to be
disbanded, have not appeared, not can appear; but are resolved not to appear at
the several and respective Randezvous, appointed as aforesaid for their
disbanding; and diverse other things has been done by several other parties,
or Members of the Army, necessarily relating to the good and concernment of the
whole in these affairs: Now for as much as we know not how far the malice,
Injustice, and Tiranical Principles of our enemies, that have already prevailed
so far to abuse the Parliament and the Army (as is before mentioned) in the
past proceedings against the Army, may further prevail to the danger and
prejudice of our selves, or any Officers, or Soldiers of the Army, or other
persons that have appeared to act any thing in behalf of the Army, or how far
the same may further prevail to the danger or prejudice of the Kingdom in
raising a new war, or otherwise: Therefore for the better prevention of all
such dangers, prejudices, or other inconveniences that may ensue: and withal
for better satisfaction to the Parliament and Kingdom, concerning our desires
of conferring to the Authority of the one, and providing the good and quiet of
the other, in the present affairs of disbanding, and for a more assured way
whereby, that affaites may come to a certain issue, (to which purpose we
herein humbly implore the present and continued assistance of God, the
Righteous Judge of all) we the officers and soudliers of the Army subscribing
hereunto; do hereby declare, agree, and promise, to, and with each other, and
to, and with the Parliament and Kingdom as follows.

1. That we shall cheerfully and readily disband when thereunto required by
the Parliament, or else shall many of us be willing (if desired) to engage in
further services either in England or Ireland, having first such satisfaction
to the Army in relation to our Grievances and desires heretofore presented, and
such security; That we of our selves (when disbanded, and in the condition of
private men) or other the freeborn people of England (to whom the consequence
of our Case does equally extend) shall not remain subject to the like
oppression, in jury or abuse, as in the Premises has been attempeed and put
upon us while an Army by the same men's continuance in the same credit and power
(especially if as our Judges) who have in these past proceedings against the
Army so far prevailed to abuse the Parliament and us, and to endanger the
Kingdom; and also such security that we our selves, or any Member of this Army
or others, who have appeared to act any thing in behalf of the Army in
relation to the premises before recited, shall not after disbanding be any way
questioned, prosecuted, troubled, or prejudiced for any thing so acted, or for
the entering into, or necessary prosecution of this necessary agreement; (we
say) having first such satisfaction and security in these things as shall be
agreed unto by a Counsel to consist of those general Officers of the Army
(who have concurred with the Army in the Premises) with two Commission
Officers, and two Soldiers to be chosen for each Regiment, who have concurred,
and shall concur with us in the Premises and in this agreement; And by the
major part of such of them, who shall meet in Counsel for that purpose, when
they shall be thereunto called by the General.

2. That without such satisfaction and security, as aforesaid, we shall not
willingly disband, nor divide, nor suffer our selves to be disbanded or divided.

And whereas we find many strange things suggested or suspected to our great
prejudice concerning dangerous Principles, interests and designs in this Army
(as to the overthrow of Magistracy, the suppression or hindering of Presbytery,
the establishment of Independent government, or upholding of a general
licentiousness in Religion under pretense of Liberty of Conscience, and many
such things; we shall very shortly tender to the Parliament a Vindication of
the Army from al such scandals, to clear our Principles in relation thereunto,
and in the mean time we do disavow and disclaim al purposes or designs in our
late or present proceedings, to advance or insist upon any such interest,
neither would we (if we might and could) advance or set up any other particular
party or interest in the Kingdom (though imagined never so much our own) but
shall much rather (as far as may be within our sphere or power) study to
promote such an establishment of common and equal right and freedom to the
whole, as all might equally partake of, but those that do by denying the same
to others, or otherwise render themselves incapable thereof.

An humble Representation of the Dissatisfaction of the Army, in relation to
the late Resolutions for so sudden Disbanding: showing the particulars of
their former grievances wherein they did remain unsatisfied, and the Reasons
thereof.
Unanimously agreed upon and subscribed by the Officers and Soldiers of the
several Regiments, at the Rendezvous near Now-Market, on Friday and Saturday,
June 4. and 5. Presented to the General, to be by him humbly represented to
the Parliament.
WHereas upon the Report made to the House of Commons on Friday May 21.
concerning the grievances of the Army, that House was pleased to pass several
Votes seeming to tend toward the satisfaction of the Army in some particulars:
and on the Tuesday following ( May 25.) to pass diverse Resolutions upon a
Report from the Committee at Derby-House concerning the disbanding of the Foot
of this Army each Regiment apart at several times and places: We humbly
declare, that the said Votes of Friday do come far short of satisfaction, (as
to the said grievances) or to the desires proposed by the Officers in the
conclusion of their Narrative. And that the latter Votes of Tuesday importing a
resolution to disband the Army in part, before equal satisfaction be given to
the whole in the greivances, or so much as any consideration had of some others
that are most material, and also before any effectual performances of that
satisfaction with the Votes of Friday seemed to promise as to some of the
Greivances, we cannot but be much unsatisfyed and troubled at it, as in the
particulars following it may appear we have cause.

1. The proportion of but Eight weeks Arrears to be paid at disbanding, as it
is unreasonably short of what is most due, and what we conceive may be paid, or
might easily have been provided since the Parliament has so long had the whole
Kingdom cleared, all trading and commerce opened, vast sums of money brought
in upon Delinquents, Compositions and otherwise, and great foundations of
security in their hands, (besides those formerly engaged for the Scots) And as
it is but a mean reward for all our labors, hardships and hazards in the
Kingdoms cause, and a very slender supply to carry us to our homes, in a
condition suitable to the Parliaments honor and our success, and much less to
enable those that have left good trades or other ways of livelihood, and
suffered much in their trades or stocks, by so doing, to set up again in their
former callings and conditions; so it is but little (if any thing) more then
what has been due to us since that time that we first went about to have
petitioned for our Arrears, and so not to be accounted in satisfaction toward
former Arrears, which the Petition was meant for.

2. In the Orders given for the stating of our Accounts, giving Debertures for
our Arrears by the Committee of the Army, we find no consideration or regard
had of our Arrears incurred in former Army or services, which to the most of us
are much greater then those under the New-Model, intended to be stated by the
Committee for the Army, (as the Narrative of the Officers,) printed by mistake
under the name of their Declaration, did intimate before.

3. We cannot but consider, that (whatever the Officers, expectances upon
Debentures may prove) the private Soldiers may well make little account of
whatever part of his Arrears he receives not before disbanding, as the Reasons
express in the Narrative do show. And whereas we hear of some instruction past
man Ordinance for stating of Arrears, we understand that they direct 3. s. a
week to be abated to Foot-Souldiers for Quarter, which being 6 ^. or 8 d per
diem above the rate they should have paid for themselves, if they had timely
had Pay wherewithal; It seems very hard the poor Soldier should allow
interest for the forbearance of his own due.

The like disproportion we find in the abatements to Sergeants of Foot for
their Quarters: in the abatement for Quarters to Officers of Horse and
Dragoons, we find one third part of the whole Pay to them due both for
themselves and their Horses is to be defalked, though the full pay for their
Horses is not allowed in the Account, unless they make it appear by Musters
that they kept their full numbers; and the third part of their full pay,
amounting to the half or near the half of their present pay, seems an
unreasonable allowance for Quarters, especially in the case of Captains and
Field-Officers. We find also no provision made for private Soldiers of Horse,
or Foot, or any Officers in Commission or not in Commission, in relation to any
Quarters discharged by them, but all such are left absolutely to abate the
respective Rates for Quarters during their whole time whether they have paid
Quarters for any part of the time or no, whereas we know assuredly and can make
appear, that all of them during their service in this Army, (and most of them
in their service in the former Armies) have really discharged their Quarters
for a very great part of the time, and many of them for more time then by the
proportion of pay received, they were bound to have done; having without
respects to that many times paid freely, as far as their money would hold
out, partly out of desire not to be burdensome at all to the Country as far
as they could, and partly upon expectation (grounded on the many promises and
often renewed, of constant pay for time to come) that money would come in time
to pay them up, and reimburse them their full pay again without defalcation
for Quarters; we find is also provided, that no Trooper is capable of allowance
or debenture for Arrears unless he deliver in such Horse and Arms, with which
he has served or a Certificate, what such Horse and Arms did not appertain
to the State, or else was lost in actual service which extends to the total
taking away from them those Horse and Arms of the S^ates, which they have used
and preserved in the Service, contrary to the favor allowed; and never (that
we knew of) denied in the disbanding of any other Army: and if that being but a
matter of favor, the horsemen in this service be thought unworthy of it, and
must upon account for their Arrears, rebate for such Horse and Arms as upon
disbanding they thought to have been given them, yet it seems hard that such as
cannot delives in those States Horse and Arms, which at disbanding they so
understood to be their own, and so perhaps have sold or otherwise disposed of,
should for that lose their whole Arrears, or be incapable of account or
debenture for any part thereof.

Fourthly, The visible security for what Arrears should not be paid at
disbanding (which the Votes of Friday, May 21. seem to promise) as in stands
propounded in the Votes of Tuesday May 25. appeare^ not to be either a
security sufficient or to us visible.

1. Because that security of the Excize in Course (proposed for the Arrears of
private Soldiers and inferior Officers, is known to be already pre-ingaged
for vast sums amounting to above a Million that are to take place before
those Arrears, not do we know certainly that the Excize (which is yet but
temporary) will be continued for so long time as till our Arrears shall come
out in course after the preceding engagements satisfied.

2. Because that security proposed for Officers Arrears, viz. the profits
arising out of Delinquents estates in the first Exception, (especially being
limited to such as are not already disposed of, it does not appear what they
will amount unto, or what the pre-ingagements or pre-disposures by the
Parliament may be, or what encumbrances of Debts, or limitations of Estates (as
they were in the hands of the Owners) may lie upon the same, none of which we
would be any occasion to defeat or avoid, so as to have the curses and grudges
of defrauded Creditors or ruined Families to lie upon us or our Posterities.

3. Neither the one security nor the other are yet, for ought we find, or could
well before the appointed times of disbanding, be so settled by Ordinance to the
uses proposed (as the other Securities for moneys borrowed by the Parliament
have been) which we conceive requisite to render the same indeed visible
security.

The two first of these Reasons we should not urge so much, if we did not see
other matters of Security within the Kingdom that would be much more clear,
(as Cathedrals and their Revenues, Forrest-Lands etc.)

5. The Ordinance voted to exempt from pressing (1.) is not, for ought we
derstand, brought in and passed before the appointed Disbanding. Next, by the
Vote it seems not to intend the exempting of voluntier Horse men from being
pressed for Foot-service. And lastly, we understand not how it can be effectual
to particular Soldiers (when dispersed about the Kingdom, and sojourning or
traveling where perhaps their former relation to this Army, or condition as
Volunteers in it may not be known, or not credited upon their words) unless
the Ordinance intended shall provide, that a testimonial of their service
under the General's or their respective Field-Officers or Captains hands (which
they might ever carry about, or keep by them,) shall be their sufficient
discharge from any Press (if they shall fall under it.) And whereas such
Testimonials cannot easily be got by them after Disbanding; The said Votes for
so sudden Disbanding, and at such distances, do not mention or admit any thing
of that kind more then Passes from the Commissioners to carry them whom.

6. The Ordinance voted to give Apprentices the benefit of their time spent in
the Parliaments service, as also that for the maintenance of maimed Soldiers,
and the Widows and children of men slain in the service, were not brought in
and passed before the appointed Disbandings, nor do we yet hear, that they yet
are, though we hope they will be.

7. The Ordinance passed for Indemnity seems to make but slender provision for
our quiet, ease, or safety in relation to things done in the War as Soldiers.

1. Because the things it provides for throughout the Ordinance, comprised only
in these terms (viz.) things done by virtue of any Ordinance of Parliament or
for the service and benefit of the Parliament; We conceive, that upon every
trespass, or other thing done in the War (which we may be questioned for) it
will be very chargeable and difficult, either to derive a clear Authority for
the same from Ordinance of Parliament, or to bring proofs sufficient to make up
such a constructive conclusion, as that it was for the service and benefit of
the Parliament, especially to do this so fully, as to meet with all the
evasions and elusions of a subtle Lawyer, or to convince the senses of a
Country Jury, whom we know not by what rules or measure they may go in judging
what was for the service and benefit of the Parliament, or what not; perhaps
some of them may be of that mind, that it had been for the service and benefit
of the Parliament, to have had no War at all, or to have had fewer or no such
Garrisons or Forces as some of us have been engaged in. In some, We cannot
think it safe to be left to the sense or construction of a Country Jury,
concerning the exigencies of War, or duty of a Soldier upon so doubtful an
Issue; We should rather think, that the old Issue, which (as we understand)
ancient Laws have provided for in such cases, viz. (Whether the thing were done
tempore and loco belli) was much-more clear and sure; and an act or Ordinance
of Oblivion for all trespasses or other things so done by Soldiers in this
War, would be most safe and satisfactory.

2. That the provision in the sald Ordinance now past for Relief, by Complaint
to a Committee of Parliament at London (which seems to be meant for saving of
charges to poor men) we doubt will prove a very remote help, and far more
chargeable for a poor Soldier Imprisoned or Arrested in the Country, then the
former: And though we highly honor that Committee named in the Ordinance (for
the major part of it) yet we confess we shall be sorry that our relief (if it
may otherwise be provided for) should be the occasion of setting up more
arbitrary Courts, then there are already, with so large a power of imprisoning
any Freemen of England, as the Ordinance gives to that Committee, let the
persons entrusted appear at present never so just and faithful, or though all
that Committee were as good Patriots, as we hold the major part to be.

2. In the matter of Accounts, we are wholly left (as before) to the mercy of
the Committee for Accounts, and their sul-Committees, whose constitution (in
most Counties,) being at least of Neuters (disaffected to the War, and
consequently to the Soldiery) and whose vast and Arbitrary power to vex,
delay, fine and imprison at their own Pleasure or judgment, any that they can
bring within the compass of Accomptants, and to proceed upon their own
judgment of the default, to sequester, sell and dispose of his Estate, as upon
a Commission of Bankrupt, (we confess) we tremble to think of more then of
any Enemy. And though we are as jealous as any to have all men brought to an
Account, for what may clearly be accounted for (as Treasurers, Keepers of
stores, Sequestrators, or such like Accomptants) yet we cannot but think it
hard for us, or other the Parliament Soldiers, to be required to so strict
Accounts for all things received, taken and used in the War by our selves, or
any under our command (though but temporarily upon a part) for many of which
things neither we, nor any other that minded the public service, and have been
engaged in hazardous services, where many have lost those Accounts they did
keep, can give or could keep so strict Account, or for want of such Account to
be so cruelly vexed and prosecuted, even to utter undoing, as any man that is
accomprable for any thing may be, and diverse of the Parliaments most faithful
and active Servants in our condition have been before our eyes: And though we
would not wish that any Soldiers or Officers who have by Plunder, or other
Injury to the Country, abused the name of the Parliaments service, and
converted any thing they have taken or received to their own private benefit
or advantage, (more then for necessary subsistence or supplies) should go away
with it, in being exempted from Account; yet we cannot but think it reasonable
and necessary, that for those many others that have not done so, but have
employed all faithfully for the public service, such provision should be made,
as that what Arms, Ammunition, Horse^, Furniture, or other things received or
taken by them, they could not keep, or cannot give a clear or distinct
Account for, it should be sufficient for their discharge, if they make Oath
that they have not imbezelled, or wittingly converted to their private benefit
or advantage, any part thereof, more then what things, or to what value they do
or shall (for saving of their Oath) charge upon themselves in their Account.

We find another thing mainly necessary for our and other men's Indemnity (for
which there is no provision at all made in this Ordinance) viz. That all Acts
of Councels or Courts of War, either in censure or discharge of any person, for
any cause subject to their Judgment, and the Warrants of the General, or chief
Commander, for execution or remission of such censures, may be valid and good,
both as to the Instification of those that have been employed in execution of
such censures, and also the full and small acquittall of the persons so
discharged or remitted.

Eigthly, Though those Officers of the Army at several times sent for, or send
up to attend the Parliament as Delinquents, have been indeed, discharged (for
which we render our thanks, and acknowledge the Parliaments Justice in the
discharge) yet for men of such credit and integrity to have their names brought
so highly into public question or suspicion, and the cause not known, (which
might make it imagined greater) to be kept long in attendance under that
notion, and not obtain by their daily solicitations to know their Accusers or
any Charge, and (for one of them) to be made a Prisoner, searched and sent up
so far in a disgraceful manner, without Authority (against the right both of
a Soldier and Subject) and at last to be only dismissed (without any word of
Vindication or clearing) seems but a slender Reparation.

Ninthly, There has yet been nothing declared by the Parliament (a^ in the
Narration or Declaration of the Officers was desired) to clear (...), as to
our right of Petitioning, or to clear the sense and intention of the
Parliament in their Order for suppressing the Petition, or the ground of their
censure in the Declaration against it; though we think no man can deny the
matter of the Petition to be just and Parliament-proceeding, since upon the
several heads of it does imply as much, And if our Liberty of Petitioning for
our due be denied us now, and the attempting of it reddred such a Crime (as by
the said Order and Declaration appears to be, while the ground or intention of
them stands not explained otherwise) we cannot but expect the same or worse
hereafter, not only to our selves (when being disbaned and dispersed, we shall
have the like occasion to petition (...) private and single men,) but also to
all the Freeborn People of the land in the like case; and so this president
(if it stand good) would extend (...) the consequence of it, to render all
Soldiers under this Parliament, the worst of slaves, and all subjects little
better. And though there have been of late in other men's Cases too many
dangerous presidents of suppressing Petitions, and punishing or censuring the
Petitioners, yet (we think) few or none so full and clear against all just
Liberties, as this in our case, whose Petition was not, as many (that yet have
been received with large thanks) without any foundation in real grievances or
dues, tending and serving merely to declare the Petitioners opinions and
inclinations in relation to matters of State (then in transaction, or intended
to be put on the Parliament) nor yet subject to any of those exceptions, which
at other Petitions (seeming better grounded, more necessary or concerning then
the former, and yet rejected) might be: But ours not meddling with matters of
State, with proceedings of Parliament, or any bodies concernements but our
own, tended but to obtain our particular dues (often promised, dearly and
fully earned, long forborne) and some of which ( viz. the matter of indemnity)
we could not (without danger of utter ruin) want after disbanding; and these
but desired in an humble and submissive way, without any language, scandalous
or offensive, or any other particular exception (for matter or form) that we
have ever yet been told of, or could any way learn; so as though we are
willing to believe the Parliament was misinformed, abused or surprised in the
businesses (as the Narrative does express) yet we cannot hitherto understand,
from whence such proceedings against such a Petition, or against us for it,
could arise, except (in those that moved and drew the Parliam. thereunto) from
some principles of Malignants envy or dislike against us, the Petitioners for
the things God has done by us, carrying them (above all other considerations
of just or unjust, dangerous or safe) to this end, as the greatest good, that
this Army must not pass with that Reputation God had given it, but must (upon
any occasion that could be catched hold on) have a dishonor put upon it, and
by discontents and provocations be put into distemper, so as to do something
that might render it odious, or bring a blemish upon it.

Tenthly, The declaration yet standing in force, and nothing published by the
Parliament to clear the Army from the censure it thereby lies under, there
remains a brand of Ignominy upon this Army to posterity: And those Soldiers
that have proceeded to act any thing in pursuance of their just desires in that
Petition, or in Representation of their just Grievances thereupon; as also
those Officers that have any way concurred with, or countenanced, or not
deserted them therein, remain subject* to question, and to the highest censure
that may be for so doing.

Eleventhly, were all other our greivances duly considered, yet nothing be done
to the discovery or censure of those that have wronged the Army, and abused the
Parliament, to the procuring of such proceedings against us, in relation to so
just and innocent Petition, but that the same persons remain still in the same
credit and power, we appeal to all reasonable men, what hopes, either of right
or safety (we when disbanded and dispersed) or any private man, can hereafter
promise to himself in the like case? Let every honest English man lay his hand
on his heart, weigh our case, and make it his own (as in consequence it is,)
and then judge for us and himself.

First, We may confidently say; Never any private man had or can have any thing
more clearly due to him, then what we went about to petition for; nor could
seek it in a more regular, humble or inoffensive way (as has been showed
before:) Now for a private man petitioning for his right in such a way, to be
denied, or fail of his right (in Courts where Corruption sways) is perhaps not
rare; yet for such a man to be debarred or interdicted beforehand from suing
for his acknowledged right (we think) is not usual in Courts sufficiently
corrupt: But not only to be denied his right, and the liberty to Petition it,
but withal by a censure, (no less then Capital) to be exposed to a forfeiture
of Estate, Liberty, Life and all, for but going so to ask what he conceives,
and the Court it self will not deny, to be his due, and this without ever
asking or hearing, what he can say in his excuse, would carry so high a face of
Injustice, Oppression and Tyranny, as we think is not easy to be exampled in
the proceedings of the most corrupt and Arbitrary Courts, toward the meanest
single man. Now* if we have found men of those desperate Principles, and
confidence to attempt, and in that credit and power to carry on such
proceedings against an Army, (standing then in full strength, in reputation,
and some little merit, also) and to engage the Authority of Parliament therein,
whose present power has, under God, been upheld, and but newly established
through that Army: What can we, or any honest man, expect hereafter, as private
persons, if the same men shall continue to be our Judges, or in the same credit
and power, when we are disbanded (as now) we say, what good can be expected, or
what ill may not be expected in any future case, that shall cross the pride,
passions or interests of such men, of whose unjust Principles, and desperately
tyrannical Spirits, we have in this case had the most perfect taste that can
be imagined: We have both here and before plainly Remonstrated our case in this
particular, as it stands, appearing to those that understand not upon what
grounds, and in what manner such things were carried in the Parliament, in
relation to the Petition: We are still willing to believe the Parliament has
been some way strangely misinformed, surprised, or otherwise abused in that
business (as was expressed before in that Narrative) We are still tender of
Parliament Privileges; but we shall yet hope and desire, that the wisdom of
the Parliament would had how to disingage the honor of the Parliament, from
the desperate Practices of such Incendiaries, and cause them to be discovered
and censured, so far as may secure the Parliament from being again so abused,
and both us and the Kingdom from the like or worse Oppressions or Dangers by
them, (which is the utmost ill we wish them:) And if herein our belief or
hopes, from or concerning the Parliament, do fail us, we shall be sorry; but
yet the case and consequence is still as it is, or the more sad to us and the
Kingdom. And having in this particular expressed both the case and consequence
very plainly, we leave it at the Parliaments Door, until they shall be pleased
to fix the blame on those particular Persons that have abused them herein, as
before.

Twelfthly and lastly, We find nothing as yet done, or thought of for
Reparation or Vindication of the Army, in reference to the many Scandals cast
upon it, or to punish or discountenance the Authors and Publishers, though
diverse of them be sufficently known.

A Declaration or Representation from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and
the Army under his Command: Humbly tendered to the Parliament concerning the
Just and Fundamental Rights and Liberties of themselves and the Kingdom, With
some humble Proposals and Desires. June 14. 1647.
THat we may no longer be the dissatisfaction of our friends, the subject of
our enemies malice (to work jealousies and misrepresentations upon) and the
suspicion (if not astonishment) of many in the Kingdom, in our late or present
transactions and conduct of business; we shall in all faithfulness and
clearness profess and declare unto you, these things which have of late
protracted and himdered our disbanding, the present greivances which possess
our Army, and are yet unremedied; with our desires, (...) to the complete
settlement of th^^ Liberties and peace of the Kingdom, which is that blessing
of God, then which (of all worldly things,) nothing is more dear unto u^, or
more precious in our thoughts, we having hitherto thought all our present
enjoyments, (whether of life or livelihood, or nearest relations) a price but
sufficient to the purchase of so rich a blessing, that we, and all the
Freeborne people of this Nation may sit down in quiet under our Vines, and
under the glorious administration of Justice and Righteousness, and in full
possession of those fundamental Rights and Liberties, without which we can
have little hopes, (as to humane considerations) to enjoy either any comforts
of life, or so much as life it self; but at the pleasures of some men, ruling
merely acording to will and power.

It cannot be unknown what has passed betwixt the Parliament and Army, as to
the service of Ireland; by all which, together with the late proceedings
against the Army, in relation to their Petition and grievances all men may
judge, what has hindered the Army from a ready engagement in that service, and
without further account or Apology as to that particular, then what those
passages and proceedings themselves (already made public) do afford, we do
appeal to your selves whether those courses, to which the Parliament has (by
the designs and practice of some) been drawn, have rationally tended, to
induce a cheerful and unanimous undertaking of the Army to that service, or
rather to break and pull the Army in pieces with discontent and dishonor, and
to put such dis-obligations, and provocations upon it, as might drive it into
distemper, and indeed discourage both this Army, and other Soldiers from any
further engagement in the Parliaments service. And we wish all men would (with
us) upon the whole carriage, seriously consider, whether (in the intentions of
those who have by false informations and mis-representations put the Parliament
upon such ways) the timely and effectual relief of Ireland seem really to
have been intended, or rather with the breaking or disbanding of this Army,) to
draw together or raise such other forces, and of such a temper as might serve
to some desperate and destructive designs in England; For which (besides the
probable suspicions from their carriage of the business) we have beforehand
in the transaction thereof had more then hints of such a design by clear
expressions to that purpose, from many of those Officers of the Army, that have
been persuaded, and appeared most forward to engage as for Ireland on the
terms proposed: And that such a design has all along been driven, seems now
too evident by the present disposing of those Forces that have been engaged for
Ireland, by the endeavors of some to gain a power from the Parliament of
ordering those Forces for some service in England, and by the private listings
of men for service here, without any public authority of Parliament. And (all
this) by the same persons who have all along appeared most active and violent
in the late proceedings against the Army.

As to the just Discontents and Dissatisfactions of the Army in relation to
their Grievances, and their Noncompliance to the late Orderers for sudden
Disbanding by peece-meale, before more full and equal satisfaction were given
to the whole,) we desire you to look back to the Papers already published of
the grievances themselves, the Narrative of the Officers, and to the later
Papers from the general Counsel of War at Bury, and the late general
Randezvous near New Market; And, we think, your late resuming the
consideration of those things, as to a further satisfaction, does much justify
the desires and proceedings of the Army, in those past particulars hitherto.

And though, had we upon our first addresses, for our undoubted rights and
duesc found a free and candid reception, with a just consideration* and a
reasonable satisfaction, or at least a free Answer therein, we should have been
easily persuaded to have abated or forborne much of our dues, and not to have
enquired into or considered, so far as we have, either the possibilities
there are for more present satisfaction of Arrears, or the credit of future
Securities proposed: yet since upon these former Addresses we have found such
hard dealing as in the said Papers is set forth, and those additionall, though
hitherto but partial, satisfactions, coming so hardly as they have; we find no
obliging reasons, in the least, to decline or recede from what is our due, but
rather still to adhere unto our desires of full and equal satisfaction in all
the things mentioned in the aforesaid Papers; not only in behalf of our selves
and the Army, but also of the whole Soldiery throughout the Kingdom, who have
concurred or shall concur with us in the same desires. And to all our former
Desires at Soldiers we cannot but add this, (wherein we find our selves so
nearly concerned in point of Justice and reputation) That more care and a
stricter course may be taken for making good, all Articles granted upon
Surrenders, according to the true intent and meaning of them; at also for
remedy and reparation, in case of any breach, and this without those delays
which diverse have found as prejudicial to them, or more then if they had been
totally denied the performance of them.

Nor will it now (we hope) seem strange or unreasonable to rational and honest
men, who consider the consequence of our present case, to their own and the
Kingdoms, (as well as our) future concernments in point of Right, Freedom,
Peace and safety, (if from a deep sense of the high consequence of our present
case, both to our selves (in future) and all other people) we shall, before
disbanding, proceed in our own and the Kingdoms behalf, to propound and plead
for some provision for our and the Kingdoms satisfaction and future security,
in relation to those things, especially considering that we were not a mere
mercenary Army hired to serve any Arbitrary power of a State, but called forth
and conjured by the several Declarations of Parliament, to the defense of our
own and the peoples just Rights and Liberties; and so we took up Arms in
judgment and conscience to those ends, and have so continued them, and are
resolved according to your first just desires in your Declarations, and such
principles as we have received from your frequent Informations, and our own
common sense, concerning those our fundamental rights and liberties, to assert
and vindicate the just power and rights of this Kingdom in Parliament for
those common ends premised against all arbitrary power, violence and
oppression, and against all particular parties or interests whatsoever. The
said Declarations still directing us to the equitable sense of all Laws and
Constitutions, as dispensing with the very letter of the same, and being
supreme to it, when the safety and preservation of all is concerned; And
assuring us that all Authority is fundamentally seated in the Office, and but
ministerially in the Persons. Neither do or will these our proceedings (as we
are fully and in conscience persuaded) amount to any thing not warrantable
before God and men; being, thus far, much short of the common proceedings in
other Nations, to things of an higher nature then we have yet appeared to; and
we cannot but be sensible of the great complaints that have been made to us
generally in the Kingdom from the people where we march, of Arbitrarinesse and
Injustice, to their great and insupportable oppressions.

And truly such Kingdoms as have according both to the law of Nature and
Nations appeared to the vindication and defense of their just Rights and
Liberties, have proceeded much higher, as our brethren of Scotland, who in the
first beginning of these late differences associated in Covenant, from the very
same grounds and principles (having no visible form, either of Parliament or
King to countenance them) And as they were therein justified and protected by
their own and this Kingdom also, so we justly shall expect to be.

We need not mention the States of the Netherlands, the Portugals, and others,
all proceeding upon the same Principles of right and freedom; And accordingly
the Parliament has declared it no resisting of Magistracy, to side with the
just principles and law of nature and Nations, being that law upon which we
have assisted you, and that the soldiery may lawfully hold the hands of the
General who will turn his Cannon against his Army on purpose to destroy them,
the Seamen the hands of that Pilot, who wilfully rune the Ship upon a rock, (as
our Brethren of Scotland argued:) And such were the proceedings of our
Ancestors of famous memory, to the purchasing of such Rights and Liberties, as
they have enjoyed through the price of their blood, and we (both by that and
the later blood of our dear friends, and fellow Soldiers with the hazard of
our own, do now lay claim unto.

Nor is that supreme end, the glory of God, wanting in these cases, to set a
price upon all such proceedings of righteousness and justice, it being one
witness of God in the world, to carry on a Testimony against the injustice and
unrighteousness of men, and against the miscarriage of Governments, when
corrupted or declining from their Primitive and Original glory.

These things we mention, but to compare proceedings, and to show that we are
so much the more justifiable, and warranted, in what we do, by how much we come
short of that height and measure of proceedings, which the people in free
Kingdoms and Nations have formerly practiced.

Now having thus far cleared our way in this business, we shall proceed to
propound such things as we do humbly desire for the settling and securing of our
own and the Kingdoms common right, freedom, peace, and safety as follows.

1. That the Houses may be speedily purged of such Members as for their
delinquency or for Corruptions, or abuse to the State or undue Elections ought
not to sit there, whereof the late Elections in Cornwall, Wales, and other
parts of the Kingdom afford too many examples, to the great prejudice of the
peoples freedom in the said Elections.

2. That those persons, who have, in the late unjust and high proceedings
against the Army appeared to have the will, the confidence, credit and power, to
abuse the Parliament and the Army, and endanger the Kingdom in carrying on
such things against us (while an Army, may be some way speedily disabled from
doing the like or worse to us) when disbanded and dispersed, and in the
condition of private men) or to other the freeborn people of England in the
same condition with us, and that for that purpose the same persons may not
continue in the same power (especially as our and the Kingdom Judges in the
highest trust) but may be made incapable thereof for the future.

And if it be questioned who these are, we thought not fit particularly to name
them in this our Representation to you, but shall very speedily give in their
names; and before long shall offer what we have to say against them to your
Commissioners, wherein we hope so to carry our selves, as that the World shall
see we aim at nothing of private revenge and animosities, but that justice may
have a free course, and the Kingdom be eased, and secured by dismabling such
men (at least) from places of Judicature, who desiring to advantage, and set up
themselves and their party in a general confusion, have endeavored to put the
Kingdom into a new flame of war, then which nothing is more abhorrent to us.

But because neither the granting of this alone would be sufficient to secure
our own and the Kingdoms rights, liberties, and safety, either for the present
age or posterity; nor would our Proposals of this singly be free from the
scandal and appearance of faction or designs only to weaken one Party (under
the notion of unjust or oppressive) that we may advance another (which may be
imagined more our own) We therefore declare, That indeed we cannot but wish,
that such men, and such only, might be preferred to the great power and trust
of the Commonwealth, as are approved, at least for moral righteousness; and
of such we cannot but in our wishes prefer those, that appear acted
thereunto by a principle of Conscience and Religion in them. And accordingly we
do and ever shall bless God for those many such Worthies, who, through his
providence have been chosen into this Parliament; And, to such men's endeavors
(under God) we cannot but attribute that Vindication, (in part) of the peoples
Rights and Liberties, and those beginnings of a just Reformation, which the
first proceedings of this Parliam appeared to have driven at, and tended to,
though of late obstructed, or rather diverted to other ends and interest by the
prevailing of other persons of other principles and conditions.

But yet we are so far from designing, or complying to have an absolute or
Arbitrary power fixed or settled for continuance, in any persons whatsoever, as
that (if we might be sure to obtain it) we cannot wish to have it so in the
persons of any, whom we could most confide in, or who should appear most of our
own opinions* and principles, or whom we might have most personal assurance
of, or interest in, but we do, and shall much rather wish, that the Authority
of this Kingdom in Parliaments (rightly constituted, that is, freely, equally
and successively chosen according to its original intention) may ever stand
and have its course. And therefore we shall apply our desires, chiefly to such
things* as (by having Parliaments settled in such a right Constitution) may give
most ho^es of Justice and Righteousness, to flow down, equally to all, in
that its ancient Channel, without any Overtures, tending either to overthrow,
that foundation of Order and Government in this Kingdom, or to ingrosse that
power for perpetuity into the hands of any particular persons, or party
whatoever.

And for that purpose, though (as we have found it doubted by many men, minding
sincerely the public good, but not weighing so fully all consequences of
things) it may and is not unlike to prove, that, upon the ending of this
Parliament, and the Election of New, the Constitution of succeeding
Parliaments, (as to the persons Elected) may prove for the worse many ways;
yet since neither in the present purging of this Parliament, nor in the
Election of New, we cannot promise to our selves, or the Kingdom, an assurance
of Justice, or other positive good from the hands of men, but those who for
present appear most righteous and most for common good (having an unlimited
power fixed in them during life or pleasure) in time, may become corrupt, or
settle into parties, or factions; or, on the other side, in case of new
Elections, those that should so succeed, may prove as bad or worse then the
former. We therefore humbly conceive that, (of two inconveniences the less
being to be chosen) the maine thing to be intended in this case (and beyond
which humane providence cannot reach, as to any assurance of positive good)
seems to be this, viz. to provide, that however unjust or corrupt the persons
of Parliament Men, in present or future may prove; or whatever ill they may do
to particular parties (or to the whole in particular things,) during their
respective terms, or periods, yet they shall not have the temptation or
advantage of an unlimited power fixed in them during their own pleasures,
whereby to perpetuate injustice and oppression upon any (without end or
remedy,) or to advance and uphold any one particular party, faction or interest
whatsoever, to the oppression or prejudice of the Community, and the enslaving
of the Kingdom, unto all posterity, but that the people may have an equal
hope, or possibility, if they have made an ill choice at one time, to mend it
in another; and the members of the House themselves may be in a capacity, to
taste of subjection as well as rule, and may so be inclined to consider of other
men's cases, as what may come to be their own. This we speak of, in relation to
the House of Commons, as being entrusted, on the peoples behalf, for their
interest in that great and supreme power of the Commonwealth, (viz. the
Legislative power, with the power of final judgment,) which being, in its
own nature, so arbitrary, and in a manner unlimited, (unless in point of
time) is most unfit and dangerous (as to the peoples interest) to be fixed in
the persons of the same men during life, or their own pleasures. Neither by
the original Constitution of this State, was it, or ought it to continue so,
nor does it (where ever it is, and continues so) render that State any better
then a mere Tyranny) or the people subjected to it, any better then Vassals:
But in all States, where there is any face of common freedom, and particularly
in this State of England (as is most evident, both by many positive Laws, and
ancient constant custom) the people have a right to new and successive
Elections unto that great and supreme trust, at certain periods of time, which
is so essential and fundamental to their freedom, as it is, cannot, or ought
not to be denied them, or withheld from them, and without which the House of
Commons is of very little concernment to the interest of the Commons of
England. Yet in this we would not be mis-understood, in the least, to blame
those Worthies of both Houses, whose zeal to vindicate the Liberties of this
Nation, did procure that Act for continuance of this Parliament; whereby it was
secured from being dissolved at the Kings pleasure, (as former Parliaments had
been) or reduced to such a certainty, as might enable them the better to assert
and vindicate the Liberties of this Nation, (immediately before so highly
invaded, and then also so much endangered.) And these we take to be the
principal ends and grounds, for which, in that exigency of time and affairs,
it was procured, and to which we acknowledge it has happily been made use of;
but we cannot think it was by those Worthies intended, or ought to be made use
of to the perpetuating of thai supreme trust and power in the persons of any
during their own pleasures, or to the debarring of the people from their right
of Elections (totally new) when those dangers or exigencies were past, and the
affairs and safety of the Commonwealth would admit of such a change.

Having thus cleared our Grounds and Intentions (as we hope) from all scruples
and misunderstandings, in what follows we shall proceed further to propose
what we humbly desire for the settling and securing of our own and the
Kingdoms Rights and Liberties (through the blessing of God) to posterity; and
therefore, upon all the Grounds premised, we further humbly desire as
follows;

3. That some determinate period of time may be set for the continuance of this
and future Parliaments, beyond which none shall continue, and upon which new
Writs may of course issue out, and new Election^ successively take place
according to the intent of the Bill for Tricaniall Parliaments.

And herein we would not be misunderstood to desire a present or sudden
dissolution of this Parliament, but only (as is expressed before) that some
certain period may be set for the determining of it, so as it may not remain
(as now) continuable for ever, or during the pleasure of the present Members;
And we should desire that the Period to be now set for ending this Parliament,
may be such as may give sufficient time for provision of what is wanting and
necessary to be passed in point of just Reformation, and for further securing
the Rights and Liberties, and settling the peace of the Kingdom. In Order to
which we further humbly offer.

4. That secure provisions may be made for the continuance of future
Parliaments, so as they may not be adjournable or dissolveable at the Kings
pleasure, or any other ways then by their own consent during their respective
periods, but at those periods each Parliaments to determine of course as
before. This we desire may be now provided for (if it may be) so as to put it
out of all dispute, for future, though we think of right, it ought not to have
been otherwise before.

And this a firm foundation being laid in the authority and constitution of
Parliaments for the hopes, at least, of common and equal right and freedom to
our selves and all the freeborn people of this Land; we shall for our parts
freely and cheerfully commit our stock or share of Interest in this Kingdom,
into this common bottom of Parliaments, and though it may (for our
particulars) go ill with us in one Voyage, yet we shall thus hope (if right be
with us) to fare better in another.

These things we desire may be provided for, by Bill or Ordinance of Parliament
to which the Royal assent may be desired: when his Majesty in these things,
and what else shall be proposed by the Parliament, necessary for securing the
Rights and Liberties of the people, and for settling the Militia and peace of
the Kingdom, shall have given his concurrence to put them past dispute. We
shall then desire that the Rights of his Majesty and his Posterity may be
considered of, and settled in all things so far as may consist with the Right
and Freedom of the Subject, and with the security of the same for future.

5. We desire, that the right and freedom of the People, to represent to the
Parliament by way of humble Petition, their grievances (in such things as
cannot otherwise be remedied then by Parliament) may be cleared and vindicated,
that all such grievances of the people may be freely received and admitted into
consideration, and put into an eq^itable and speedy way, to be heard, examin^d,
and redressed (I if they appear real) and that in such things for which men
have remedy by l^w, they may be freely left to the benefit of law, and the
regulated course of Justice, without interruption or check from the Parliament,
except in case of things done upon the exigency of War, or for the service
and benefit of the Parliament and Kingdom in relation to the War, or
otherwise in due pursuance and execution of Ordinances or Orders of Parliament,

More particularly (under this head) we cannot but desire, that all such as are
imprisoned, for any pretended misdemeanor, may be put into a speedy way for a
just hearing and trial, and such as shall appear to have been unjustly and
unduly imprisoned, may (with their liberty) have some reasonable reparation
according to their sufferings, and the demerit of their oppressors.

6. That the large powers, given to the Committees or Deputy Lieutenants during
the late times of war and distraction, may be speedily taken into
consideration, That such of these powers as appear not necessary to be
continued, may be taken away, and such of them as are necessary may be put into
a regulated way, and left to a^ little Arbitrarinesse, as the nature and
necessity of the things wherein they are conversant will bear.

7. We could wish that the Kingdom might both be righted and pubbickly
satisfied in point of accounts, for the vast sums that have been levied and
paid, as also in diverse other things wherein the Commonwealth may be conceived
to have been wronged or abused; But we are loath to press any thing, that may
tend to lengthen out further disputes or contestations, but rather such as may
tend to a speedy and general composure, and quieting of men's minds, in order
to Peace, for which purpose we further propose.

8. That (public Justice being first satisfied by some few examples to
posterity out of the worst of excepted persons; and other Delinquents having
past their Compositions) some course may be taken (by a general Act of
Oblivion or otherwise) whereby the seeds of future War, or fewds, either to
the present age, or posterity, may the better be taken away, by easing that
sense of present* and satisfying those fears, of future Ruin or Undoing, to
persons or families, which may drive men into any desparate ways for
selfe-preservation or remedy, and by taking away the private remembrances and
distinction of parties, as far as may stand with safety to the rights and
liberties we have hitherto fought for.

There are (besides these) many particular things which we could wish to be
done, and some to be undone; all, in order still to the same ends, of common
right; freedom, peace, and safety. But these proposals aforegoing, being the
principal things we bottom and insist upon, we shall (as we have said before)
for our parts acquiesce for other particulars in the Wisdom and Justice of
Parliaments. And whereas it has been suggested or suspected, that in our late,
or present proceedings, our design is to overthrow Presbytery, or hinder the
settlement thereof, and to have the Independent government set up, we do
clearly disclaim, and disavow any such design; We only desire that according
to the Declarations (promising a provision for tender consciences) there may
some effectual course be taken according to the intent thereof, and that such,
who, upon conscientious grounds may differ from the established forms, may not
(for that) be debarred from the common Rights, Liberties, or Benefits belonging
equally to all, as men and Members of the Commonwealth, while they live
soberly, honestly, and inoffensively toward others, and peacefully and
faithfully toward the State.

We have thus freely and clearly declared the depth and bottom of our hearts
and desires in order to the Rights, Liberties and peace of the Kingdom,
wherein we appeal to all men, whether we seek any thing of advantage to our
selves, or any particular party whatever, to the prejudice of the whole, and
whether the things we wish and seek, do not equally concern and conduce to the
good of others in common with our selves, according to the sincerity of our
desires and intentions (wherein as we have already found the concurrent sense
of the People in diverse Counties by their Petitions to the General, expressing
their deep representment of these things, and pressing us to stand for the
Interest of the Kingdom therein, so, we shall wish and expect to find the
unanimous concurrence of all others, who are equally concerned with us in these
things, and wish well to the public. And so trusting in the mercy and
goodness of God to pass by and help any failings or infirmities of ours, in
the carriage or proceedings hereupon,) we shall humbly cast our selves and the
business upon his good pleasure, depending only on his presence and blessing
for an happy issue to the peace and good of this poor Kingdom, in the
accomplishment whereof, we desire and hope, that God will make you blessed
instruments.

June 14. 1647. By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, with
the Officers and Soldiery of his Army,Signed, John Rushworth Secretary.

A Charge delivered in the name of the Army under the Command of his Excellency
Sir Thomas Fairfax, Unto the Commissioners of Parliament with the Army, at S.
Albans June 14. 1647. and by them sent up to the Parliament, against several
Members of the Honorable House of Commons.
Also a Paper delivered to the said Commissioners of Parliament, June 15. from
his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Army under his Command, of some
farther humble Proposals and Desires to the Honorable Houses of PARLIAMENT.
Denzil Hollis Esquire, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William Lewis, Sir John
Clotworthy, Sir William Waller, Sir John Maynard, Knights; Major General
Massey, Mr. Glyn Recorder of London, Colonel Walter Long, Colonel Edward
Harley, and Anthony Nichol Esquire, Members of the House of Commons, jointly or
severally as follows.

FIrst, That contrary to the trust reposed in them, the persons above named,
Members of the House of Commons, have jointly or severally invaded, infringed
or endeavored to overthrow the Rights and Liberties of the Subjects of this
Nation, in Arbitrary, violent or oppressive ways (and in this case where no
pretense was, or could be of the Exigence of War, or other necessity which
might justify or excuse the same;) and they have likewise endeavored by
indirect and corrupt practices to delay and obstruct Justice, to the great
damage and prejudice of diverse of the poor Commoners of England, petitioning
for the same.

2. That this Army being until the middle of March last, in a quiet and
orderly condition and posture, free from any color or appearance of distemper
or disorder, or from offense to any, and ready (upon reasonable satisfaction in
their necessary dues for service past) either quietly to have disbanded, or
else to have engaged in the service of Ireland. The persons above named have
jointly or severally indeavored by false informations, misrepresentations, or
scandalous suggestions against the Army; to beget misunderstandings,
prejudices, or jealousies in the Parliament against their Army; and by
deluding, surprising, or otherwise abusing the Parliament, to engage the
Authority of Parliament to such proceedings, as to put insufferable injuries,
abuses, and provocations upon the Army, whereby to provoke and put the Army
into a distemper, and to disoblige and discourage the same from any further
engagement in the Parliament service: By all which, and other the like
particulars and proceedings of theirs the Peace of this Kingdom has been
eminently endangered, and the relief of Ireland retarded.

3. That whereas the Parliament might otherwise have had out of this Army an
entire force, and answerable to their proportion designed to have engaged for
Ireland as aforesaid, under their old officers and conduct; the persons above
named for advancement of their own ends, faction, and design to the prejudice
of the Public, have jointly or severally, under pretense of the service of
Ireland, endeavored by such evil practices as before, to break and pull this
Army in pieces, to the weakening of the power, and indangering of the safety of
the Parliament and Kingdom; and have likewise endeavored to put the
Parliament and Kingdom, to the trouble hazard, delay, and vast expense of
raising a new force for that sereice.

4. That with the breaking of this Army, as aforesaid, they have in the like
manner endeavored under the pretense of the service of Ireland, to raise a new
force as before, to advance and carry on desparate designs of their own in
England, to the prejudice of the Parliament and Public: and in pursuance of
the same have endeavored to divert the forces engaged as for Ireland, and unto
such their purpose as aforesaid here in England; and have in like manner
endeavored to have gained a power from the Parliament for themselves, or some
of them, of diverting and misimploying those forces aforesaid, and to raise new
forces under pretense to guard the Parliament, and (not having obtained that)
have in like manner endeavored privately to list and engage Officers and
Soldiers, or procure them to be listed and engaged without Authority of
Parliament, for the raising of and imbroiling this Kingdom in a new and bloody
War, and to interrupt, and hinder the settling and securing the Rights,
Liberties, and peace of the Kingdom; and for the settling, upholding, and
protecting of themselves and their accomplices, in their unjust, oppressive,
and Factious designs and proceedings.

5. That they have jointly or severally invited, encouraged, abetted or
countenanced diverse Reformadoes, and other officers and Soldiers tumultuously
and violently to gather together at Westminster, to affright and assault the
Members of Parliament, in passage to and from the House, to offer violence to
the House it self, and by such violence, outrages and threats, to awe and
enforce the Parliament.

The several Heads of Charge, the Army will by such Solicitors as they shall
appoint (when the House of Commons shall admit thereof) make good in
particulars each Head against some of the persons, and some one Head or more
against each of the persons; and shall shortly give in the several particulars
against each person respectively, which shall be made good by proofs; the Army
desiring to save and reserve to themselves the liberty of exhibiting any
farther Charge against all or any of the said persons.

A Paper delivered to the Right Honorable Commissioners of Parliament now with
the Army at S. Albans, June 15. 1647. From his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax,
and the Army under his Command.
Showing,
I. THat in pursuance of the Representation delivered in, we have prepared the
Heads of a Charge against diverse persons, Members of the House of Commons (to
whom many passages in the said Representation do relate) which we have
delivered in to be speeded to the Parliament, and shall (when the Parliament
shall have admitted thereof) appoint fit persons to our and the Kingdoms
behalfs to prosecute and make good the same.

II. That if the Parliament shall be pleased to admit these things into Debate
and Consideration at the desire of the Army, in behalf of themselves and the
Kingdom, and to proceed thereupon for a general satisfaction therein; we
shall then desire,

1. That the persons impeached in the said Charge may be forthwith suspended
from sitting in the House, without which we cannot reasonably expect such a
proceeding upon any the things we have proposed, as may probably bring the same
to an happy or timely issue to the Kingdom or our selves, or as may prevent the
present Designs and practices so imminently indangering the Peace of this
Nation, if those same persons (who have notoriously appeared most active in all
the late proceedings, to the prejudice and provocation of the Army, and
hazarding thus far the Peace of the Kingdom) shall continue in the same power
Judges of those things relating to the Armies satisfaction, and peace of the
Kingdom.

2. That there may be at least a months pay immediately sent down to the Army
for a present supply, out of which the Army shall pay fourteen days quarter
for time to come, and the other Fourteen days pay shall be accounted as part
of Arrears. And to this we must desire a present Resolution to be with us on
Thursday next by noon at farthest.

3. That if the Officers and Soldiers of the Army who have engaged for
Ireland, or those who have deserted the Army and come to London, have since
then received more then a Months pay, there may be so much more money sent
down to the Army (above the Months pay aforementioned) as make up that
Months pay to the Army equal to what such Officers and Soldiers have so
received at London or elsewhere.

4. That no Officers or Soldiers who have deserted the Army shall have any
more paid them, as for Arrears, until the rest of the Army shall first be
satisfied in point of their Arrears.

5. Whereas there have been several designs and Endeavors, without Authority
from the Parliament, to raise and list new Forces within this Kingdom: to draw
together the Forces engaged for Ireland, and march them toward London, and
other secret practices to engage the Kingdom in a second War; We further
desire, that during the Debates and Transaction of this business betwixt the
Parliament and the Army, the Parliament would not suffer any new Forces to be
raised within this Kingdom, or any Forces to be invited or admitted out of any
other Kingdom to this, or any thing else to be done, that may carry the face
of a new War, or of preparations thereunto, which may endanger or interrupt the
present proceeding to the settlement of the Liberties and peace of this Kingdom.

6. That the Parliament would be pleased (without delay to put the things
contained in our several Representations and Papers already given in, into a
speedy way of resolution and dispatch. The present posture and condition of the
Kingdom and Army, As also of his Majesty himself not admitting delays.

By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Tho. Fairfax and Soldiers of the
Army under his Command.

Signed by me John Rushworth.
S. Albans, June 17. 1647.
Several Letters sent from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Officers
of the Army, To the Right Honorable the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of
the City of London, in Common Council assembled.
With their Answer to the said Letters.
Right Honorable,
WE received yours of the Eighteenth of this instant, whereof, though all
passages were not so answerable to our expectation as we hoped, yet we
apprehend the same good affection in you toward this Army, as was expressed in
your former Letter: And that not only from the assurance of the worthy
Gentlemen, (your Commissioners) again sent to us; but also from that
information we have received of your extraordinary endeavors to procure money
for the Army: To prevent further raising or listing of Soldiers, and to
procure those already Listed to be disbanded, (some persons of your Militia
only, having been active for the raising of them without your privity:) As
likewise from that Letter (filled with respect) which you prepared and intended
to us; and being sent to the Parliament, was obstructed by some persons, (who
laboring to imbroyle the Kingdom in a new War) would not have the Forces
already raised to be disbanded, who excepted against your discovery to the
House, That some persons only of the Militia had joined in the raising of the
new Forces, who also would prevent a right understanding between your City and
this Army, knowing a firm correspondence between them, would make the
Designs of all such men hopeless. And though our taking notice of these
things seems not regular, yet being so publicly done, we thought fit to mind
you of them.

Now although we have confidence of the real and clear intentions of your
Lordship, the Aldermen, and the Commons of your City to promote the peace of
this Kingdom, and the just desires of this Army; Also to prevent all
tendencles to a new War, or any further blood, and therefore hold our selves
obliged to yield all possible compliance to what you desire of us; yet adding
to the former grounds, the many informations which daily come to us of the
continued underhand workings of some Persons still to list men, that diverse
Agents are sent into several parts of the Kingdom to levy forces, and
Worcester the place appointed for a general Randezvouz, whither the Forces
designed for Ireland, (that were part of this Army) are by some of the
Committee at Derby house ordered to March: and several of those Companies who
went out from us for the service of Ireland, having it intimated to them, and
by diverse carriages perceiving they were intended a foundation for a new Army,
and a new War, they so much abhorred the thoughts of it, as both the Officers
and Soldiers of diverse Companies, are of late entirely returned to us:
Likewise, that no means is left unattempted to bring in Forces from Ireland,
France, and Scotland, against the Peace of this poor Kingdom.

We (upon the whole matter) offer to yours, and all men's Considerations,
whether with yours, ours, or the public Safety, we can remove further
backward, until upon yours, and our joint endeavors with the Parliament,
those things of immediate, and pressing necessity be provided for, which we
desired in our Paper last given in to the Parliaments Commissioners in order to
the better proceeding upon the Heads of the Representation and Charge, with
more hopes of safety, and of a timely and happy issue to our selves, and the
Kingdom, (viz.) That the persons impeached by us, may not continue in power
and capacity to obstruct due proceedings against themselves: And for their own
escape from justice to threaten ruin to the whole Nation.

That all forces lately raised or listed in, or about the City, may be
forthwith discharged, except the usual number of Trained Bands and
Auxiliaries, and that all endeavors publicly or privately to raise any
further forces may cease and be suppressed.

And that the same measure may be allowed to this Army, in paying them up to
the same foot of account, as is already given to those who have deserted the
same.

And for the things expressed in our Representation though of weighty importance,
yet because they will require time, they shall be no occasion to impede our
remove, and in the mean time both by Proclamation from his Excellency, and all
other ways we shall deavour, That the accustomed supplies to your City, may be
freely sent up.

To conclude, we say from our hearts, That as our especial ends are the glory
of God, and the good of this whole Land, so our endeavors shall be to
prosecute the same without prejudice to the being or well-being of Parliament
in general, (the maintenance whereof we value above our own lives) or (as we
have formerly said) of this Parliament in particular, but altogether in order
to the good and peace of this Nation, and with a most tender regard to your
City, to which we profess we shall by all actions make good all engagements
tending to the security thereof, in what way your selves shall desire,
consisting with the good of the whole Kingdom, you making good your mutual
correspondency with us, not doing any thing to our prejudice in the prosecution
of our just desires and endeavors.

St. Albans, June 21. 1647.
WE hear (even now) since the writing of this Letter, that (yesterday) diverse
of the Reformadoes came again (in a threatening manner) to Westminster, the
House of Commons then sitting, to the great affrightment and terror of diverse
faithful Members then present, and to discouragement of others from their
attendance there; so that we cannot but perceive that the freedom of this
Parliament is no better then that those Members (who shall according to their
consciences endeavor to prevent a second War, and act contrary to their ways,
who (for their own preservation) intend it, they) must do it with the hazard
of their lives; which indeed is a thing so destructive to Parliaments, and
Freedom, that we conceive our selves in duty bound to endeavor to the utmost
to procure redress therein.

June 22. 1647. By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax and the
Council of War. Jo. Rushworth, Secretary.

For the right Honorable the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council of the
City of London.
My Lord and Gent.
WE have in all things dealt clearly and plainly with you, and hope we shall
continue still to do so. As soon as the worthy Aldermen, and the other two
Gentlemen, your Commissioners came the last night to us; we acquainted them
with our purpose to draw the Head quarter to Vxbridge, that so we might
contract our Quarters which have hitherto lien scattered: at which place we
hope to receive that which will be satisfaction to the whole Kingdom, and will
remove obstructions out of the way of Justice; wherein if right were done, we
should let you and all the world see, that we would be so far from pressing
near your City of London, it should be indifferent to us to march not only to
the distance already prescribed, but to any part of the Kingdom we should be
commanded to by the Parliament; we have asked nothing hitherto but right in the
things that are known, as if they were proved an hundred times before them from
whom we have sought them, which if granted would not only be a Justice to the
Army, but would let the Kingdom see the Fountain in a way to be cleared,
without which nothing of force or power would be a security to any man. We wish
the name of privileges may not lie in the balance with the safety of a
Kingdom, and the reality of doing justice, which as we have said too often, we
cannot expect whilst the persons we have accused are the Kingdoms and our
Judges; A little delay will endanger the putting the Kingdom into blood,
notwithstanding what has been said, if it be considered that in Wales (besides
underhand workings in your City) and other places, men are raised, and that in
no small numbers. And are not those men in the Parliament who have continued
faithful to the common interest from the beginning of the Parliament to this
very day, still awed by the concourse of Reformado Officers and others to their
doors? Expense of time will be their advantage only who intend to bring evil
purposes to pass: we have written this to you for your satisfaction, that so
nothing may be done without giving you a perfect account of our intentions and
ends; And still to continue our assurance to you, that should necessity bring
us nearer to the City, our former faith given you shall be observed inviolably
there being nothing more (next the good of the Kingdom) in our thoughts and
desires, then the prosperity of your City.

By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Counsel of
War. Signed, Jo. Rushworth
Barkehamstead June 25. 1647.
For his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, Knight General of the Forces raised by
the Parliament, and his Honorable Council of War.
May it please your Excellency, and the honorable Council of War.
WE the Major, Alder. and Commons in Common Counsel assembled, having received
yours to us of the 21. and 22. and your Excellencies to our Committee of the
23. instant; with a Copy of a Remonstrance directed to the Parliament; did send
three of that number yesterday to acquaint you with our resolutions thereupon,
since which we have caused Copies of those Letters to be presented to both
Houses, desiring their direction concerning the residing of some of that
Committee continually with you in the head Quarter; and that according to our
former requests the Reformadoes and other Officers and Soldiers raised for the
service of the Parliament, might be required forthwith to repair into their
several Counties, there to receive such satisfaction as is or shall be
appointed by Parliament; and that if any Soldiers be listed upon the Votes of
the Committee of Lords and Commons, and Committee of the Militia, that they may
be forthwith discharged. Whereupon several Votes were made, unto which we
desire to be referred.

We have also taken those Letters (with another received from those we sent
yesterday, and a Copy of a Letter dated the 24. instant, delivered to the
Commissioners of Parliament, and yours of the 25. instant) into further
consideration, thereby observing the constancy of your expressions, to do
nothing in prejudice either of the Parliament or the City, and of your purpose
by Proclamation, and otherwise, to endeavor that the accustomed supplies of
this City may be freely sent up; all which we do with all due thankfulness
acknowledge, and to preserve a right understanding with you, we have appointed
the said Committee or six of them at the least, continually to reside in your
head Quarter; and do intend to make it our request to the Parliament, that
whoever have or shall endeavor to raise any forces to engage this Kingdom in
a new War, may be discovered and prevented therein; and that you may receive
satisfaction equal to those that have left the Army, so soon as it is
possible for the Parliament to perform the same; relying upon the assurance
you have given us, that your special ends are the glory of God, the good of
this whole land, and the safety of Parliament and City. To conclude, the near
approach of your Army to this City, causes us once more to desire you to take
it into your most serious consideration; for albeit you do not come to offer
any violence to us, yet we have and shall suffer very much in our trade and
price of Victuals by reason thereof, which we hope you will be so sensible of,
as to prevent it in the future by removing further off, and by taking such a
course that we may receive no further prejudice either in the one or the other,
which is our earnest desire, and that in your endeavors to save the Kingdom
from ruin, you do not overthrow the fundamental constitution of Parliament,
which is essential to the well-being thereof.

By command of the Major, Aldermen and Commons of the City of London, in
Common Council assembled. Michel.
London 25. June, 1647.
To the Right honorable the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council of the
City of London.
IT was last night resolved by the General and Council of War, for present
not to Advance any of the Army nearer London; but whereas the Foot (being all
quartered then at Watford, Vxbridge, and Colebrooks were very troublesome and
burdensome to those places, It was only Ordered, that the Quarters of the Foot
should be enlarged for the ease of those places; whereupon (by a mistake of
that Resolution in the setting out of quarters) some Regiments had quarters
assigned for enlargement at places lying much forwarder toward London, as
far as Harrow on the Hill, Hayes, Cranford, Harlington, Bedfont, Feltham, and
Hanworth; This morning so soon as this was understood by the General, and the
Officers, there were Orders immediately sent out to stop the Regiments, and now
none quartered nearer London, then Watford, Rislip, Ikeham, Hellindon, Cowley,
Drayton, Hamsworth, Stanwell and Stanes, which make a line about fifteen or
sixteen miles distance from London; And to avoid any disquieting to the
Parliament or City upon future apprehensions, His Excellency and his Officers
do promise, That there shall be no further Advance, either of the Army or any
quarters of it, any nearer to London, without timely notice thereof, and of the
Reasons of it, to the Parliament and City.

By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax and the Council of
War, John Rushworth
Uxbridge June 26. 1647.
An humble Remonstrance from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax and the Army
under his Command, concerning the present State of affairs in relation to
themselves and and the ^^^gdom, with their desires and present Resolutions
thereupon.
Presented to the Commissioners at S. Albans June 23. 1647. to be by them
humbly presented to the Parliament.
Present, his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax.
LIeutenant General Cromwell. Lieut. Genesis Hamond. Com. Genesis Ireton. Sir
Hardresse Waller. Col. Lambert Col. Rich. Col. Lilburn. Col. Okey. Col. Hewson.
Col. Scroope. Col. Harrison. Col. Tomlinson. Col. Horton. Col. Pride. Quarter
Master Genesis Grosvenor. Scout Mr. Genesis Watson. Adjutant Genesis Deane. Lieutenant
Col. Jubbs. Lieut. Col. Cobbet. Lieut. Col. Ewers. Lieut. Col. Salman. Lieut.
Col. Goffe. Major Barton. Major Rogers. Major Sanders. Capt. Cannon. Capt.
Husbands. Capt. Disney
The Remonstrance of the Army was this day read, and after debate thereof by
the Council of War, was agreed unto, and afterward by direction of the
General and Council of War, was delivered unto the Commissioners of
Parliament residing at St. Albans, by the hands of Sir Hardresse Waller, Col.
Rich, and Col. Tomlinson.

OUr Desires as Soldiers in behalf of our selves and other Soldiers that
have faithfully served the Parliament in this Kingdom; as also our remaining
dissatisfactions in relation thereunto, may be clearly collected out of our
several Papers that have formerly been presented to the Parliament concerning
the same, to which particulars we have not yet received any further
satisfaction.

2. In our last Representation it may appear what our Desires are, a^ Members
of the Commonwealth in behalf of our selves, and all others for the clearing,
settling, and securing of the Rights, Liberties and peace of the Kingdom: for
the Justness, Reasonableness, Necessity, and Common concernement whereof unto
all, we dare appeal to the whole Kingdom, and to the World: yet we have
hitherto received no Answer thereunto, nor can we hear of any consideration
taken thereupon, to put the things ^^ntained therein into any way of resolution
or dispatch.

3. We have since, in pursuance of the first and second head of our desires in
the said representation, delivered in a charge against diverse persons, Members
of the House of Commons, for diverse designs and Practices to the abuse and
dishonor of the Parliament, the insufferable injury of the Army, the
infringement of the Rights and Liberties both of Soldiers and Subjects, the
breach or hazard of the peace of this Kingdom, and the hinderance of the
relief of Ireland, and.

4. Upon which though the maine things charged, with the mischievous effects
and further dangerous consequences of them, as also the constant and continued
activity of all, or most of the persons charged in relation to those things,
for the most part are suffici^ntly known, esp^cially to the Parliament it
self, yet we find neither any thing done upon what is so known, nor any way
resolved on or admitted by the Parliament for the examination or discovery of
what may be less known: But rather (as if neither the things charged nor the
present sad effects nor future ill consequences thereof were at all
considerable) the whole business seems to be slightly past over or set aside.

Lastly, we did with these deliver in another paper (whereof here is a Copy
annexed) containing diverse just and necessary things which we did desire might
be provided for, and done for the better proceeding in the Premises with more
safety to our selves and the Kingdom, and with more assurance or hopes of a
timely and happy issue.

To which things desired (which we suppose all men reasonable will think just
and necessary,) we have yet received no Answer or resolution, nor can find any
consideration at all had of them; save that a Months pay is sent down to the
Army, whilst those that have deserted the Army, receive at London much more,
and that some Votes have been passed for the annulling the Committee pretended
for safety about listing of men, and drawing of Forces together; which Votes we
find rendered but vain and delusive by the continued underhand practices of
those whom we have charged, and their accomplices in listing and engaging men
for a new War, and by a later days Votes, not admitting that the Forces so
listed or engaged should by public Order be dismissed or discharged: which with
other things we cannot but attribute chiefly to the prevalent influence of the
same persons.

Now whereas we find that our first desire in the Paper last mentioned (for
present suspending the persons impeached from sitting in the House) is judged
by some to be against the course and privilege of Parliament, or of ill
consequence in the president of it, (the charge being but general, and no
particular proofs as yet produced to render the proceedings Legal) we cannot
but remind the Parliament.

First, That as the most and maine things charged (with the sad effects and
consequences of them) so the constant and continued activity of all or most of
the persons charged in relation thereunto, (in misinforming, deluding, abusing
or supprising the House, and otherwise, are sufficiently known to the
Parliament it self,) so as the House might upon their own past and present
cognizance of the same, most justly proceed to suspend them,) as (in many other
cases upon far less occasions which never could have produced such sad
effects to the Kingdom,) they have done many other of their Members merely for
words spoken of things moved in the House alleged to be but against Order or
Custom of the House, and this without any trial, proof or charge, but merely
upon the Houses own cognizance of the things, as we could instance in many
cases since this Parliament began.

Secondly, Whereas many of the things to which the Charge relates, are things
spoken, moved or done in the House, so as yet we have no clear way opened
particularly to charge or mention them, or to produce proof^ to them, without
some pretense against us of breach of privilege, and therefore (though we
think no privilege ought to protect wicked men in doing wrong to particulate,
or mischief to the publiq^e, yet) we have been hitherto so tender of
Parliament privileges, as that we have only remonstrated the evil of such
things done, and supposing the House to have been (as we did, and do believe,
and if way were open, without breach of privilege, should not doubt to prove
it was) some ways misinformed, deluded, surprised, or otherwise abused in
these things by evil Members, we have frequently in former papers, (before the
Charge) put the Parliament upon it, (who without color of breach of priviludge
might do it,) to find out and discover who they were that had so abused them,
and to disingage the honor of Parliament from the evil practices and designs
of such Insendiaries.

Now since the same difficulties or prejudices lie yet in our way, (as to the
particular charging or proof of such things against Members,) And the
Parliament (though so often put upon it in our former Papers, yet through the
powerful interest of the persons guilty,) has not taken any cognizance what
Members or others have so abused them, to draw the Parliament to such dishonor
and inconveniences, we cannot but again more fully and clearly assert (as we
have in former Papers, and shall more particularly if need be, remonstrate)
that diverse things lately done and passed from the Parliament against this
Army, (as particularly the Order for suppressing the Petition, that high
Declaration against it, and against all that should proceed in it, putting the
faithful servants of the Parliament and Kingdom out of the protection of the
Law and exposing them as enemies to the State, etc. to the forfeiture of
Estates, Liberties, Life and all, but for going about in an humble, peaceable
and inoffensive way, to desire what was undeniably their do, and dearly
earned, and many other such like proceedings both against the Army and others,)
do carry with them such a face of injustice, oppression, arbitrarinesse and
tyranny, as (we think) is not to be paralleld in any former proceedings of the
most Arbitrary Courts against any private men, but have brought insufferable
dishonor upon the Parliament, (which we are, and others ought to be deeply
sensible of,) has tended to disoblige all men, especially Soldiers from the
same, to destroy all just freedom either of Soldiers or Subjects, and has
conduced to all other the sad effects and worle consequences, expressed in the
Charge, and gives us and others cause to conclude that those worthies, who have
formerly acted and carried on things in Parliament for Public good, Right and
freedom, are now awed or over-borne by a prevailing party of men of other
private interests crept in, and that neither we nor any other can reasonably
expect right, freedom or safety (as private men) or to have things acted in
Parliament for public good while the same persons continue there in the same
power to abuse the name and authority of Parliament, to serve and prosecute
their private interests and passions; and (under the privileges of Parliament)
to shelter themselves under the worst of evils or mischiefs they can do,
though to the ruin of the Kingdom. We are in this case forced (to our great
grief of heart) thus plainly to assert the present evil and mischief, together
with the future worse consequences of the things lately done even in the
Parliament it self, (which are too evident and visible to all.) And so (in
their proper colors) to lay the same at the Parliaments doors, until the
Parliament shall be pleased either of themselves to take notice and rid the
House of those who have any way misinformed, deluded, surprised, or otherwise
abused the Parliament to the passing such foul things there, or shall open to
us and others some way how we may (regularly and without the scandal of
breaking privileges, come to charge and prosecute those particular persons,
that (in truth) have so abused the Parliament, (as well as our selves) even for
those misinformations, and other evil and indirect practices or proceedings in
Parliament, whereby they have so abused the same (as in our said Charge and
former papers is set forth.

And here (if we may) we should humbly offer to consideration whether it were
not a necessary expedient, for prevention or remedy of such evils in future,
that in things so clearly destructive to the common Rights and Liberties of the
people, and the safety of the Kingdom, there should be a liberty for
dissenting Members in the House of Commons (as it is allowed in the House of
Peers) to enter their dissent, and thereby to acquit themselves from guilt and
blame of what evil may ensue, that so the Kingdom may regularly come to know
who they are that perform their trust faithfully, and who not. And this
provision for the future, (as also our desires for remedy in the present cases)
as it were clearly good and necessary in the respects premised, so (we think)
the same may well be without future prejudice or discouragement in any other
respects to succeeding Members of Parliament. Providing always that no man
shall be questioned or censured for any thing said or done in Parliament any
further then to exclusion from that trust, which is all that in the present
case we should desire upon any such grounds. And that future liberty of entering
dissents we do not here propose as a thing we any way insist on to the
prejudice of Parliament privileges, we only offer it to consideration, and
that from good wishes to the privileges of Parliament, to render them more
lasting by being less nocent. And indeed whoever most adores or tenders those
privileges, will best express his zeal toward them in taking care they be
not abused or extended to private wrong or public mischief. (For we clearly
find and all wise men may see it) that Parliament privileges, as well as
Royall-prerogative, may be perverted and abused to the destruction of those
greater ends for whose protection and preservation they were admitted or
intended (viz.) the Rights and Liberties of the people and safety of the whole)
and in case they be so, the abuse, evil, or danger of them is no less to be
contended against, and a remedy the^^of no less to be endeavored, then of the
other.

And whereas the injustice (in that particular of the Declaration against the
Army for the just and innocent Petition) may seem to have been recompensed in
the late expunging thereof out of the Journall books. We confess it had been
so in great measure, as to the particular or present injury done to the Army
therein, and (we cannot but acknowledge therefore the justice that lies in
those Votes for expunging thereof, and for our own or the Armies particular
reparation, we should neither wish more, nor scarce have insisted on so much to
any dishonor of Parliaments in future, and we should rather have been
satisfied with the Parliaments declaring how, and by whom they have been
misinformed, surprised, or otherwise abused in the framing, proposal or passing
thereof as it was, but as to that particular, or any other of that nature, we
say as follows.

1. We never did nor do value or regard our own injury or reparation in any
comparison to the consequence of the one, to the prejudice of the other, or to
the future security of common right and freedom in this Nation, And
accordingly we do not account any reparation considerable that extends but to
our selves in the present case, and does not in some sort secure our selves,
and all others from danger of the same or worse injuries or oppressions, (as
private men from the wills and passions of the same persons that have offered
and acted such things against us while an Army.

2. We cannot but imagine and consider (according to general report) how the
expunging of that Declaration was carried and obtained, and upon what grounds
and intentions it was given way to, but had those that procured it been all for
expunging it (and that freely) yet how can we expect better but that the same
men who at one time carried such a Declaration, and another time expunged it,
may the next day obtain the like or worse (upon any occasion wherein it may
serve their private ends or interests) if they continue in the same power and
sway and be let pass in deluding and surprising the Parliament as they have
done in the past particulars.

3. The apparent dishonor and prejudice brought upon the Parliament, in having
such a Declaration so passed as they should soon after, (without any
alteration) in the pretended ground of it find cause (for shame of the world)
to expunge (we think) should engage those Members that love Parliaments in
point of honor, to find out and discover, how, and by whom the Parliament had
been abused or otherwise brought into such an inconveniency. And the Parliament
may in this see the temper, (as bystanders do the prevalence) of those
Members that abused the Parliament in that Declaration, who will and can make
the authority of Parliament still lie under the dishonor of it (in a bare
expunging or retracting) rather then to admit any consideration to acquit the
authority of Parliament that would tend to six the blame on those particular
Members that had deserted it. And this certainly will be admitted and done
rather then to slight it over in a bare expunging, were not some men more
tender of, and more swayed with such considerations and consequences as may
tend to the prejudice of persons, then such as tend to the general prejudice
and dishonor of Parliaments.

As to these particulars included in our charge, which depend on things done
without the Parliament, we are ready, and should most willingly, proceed in the
particular charging and proving thereof if (first from the Justice of the House
in a present proceeding against the persons charged for those things that are
already known to the House being done in it) we could find encouragement to
expect any good issue upon those other things, and did we not (on the contrary)
find that (notwithstanding what is so known to the House as before expressed)
the same persons continue in such power and prevalence both in the House, and
in all Committees of the highest trust, as leaves little hope of Right* or
satisfaction to the Army or Kingdom in other things, and much less in any
just proceeding against themselves, while they continue Judges of their own
and our concernements, so as we cannot, while they remain in the same power,
expect any other but a continued perverting and making advantage of all things
(and especially of those delays which a regular proceeding against them would
necessarily induce) altogether to our own and the Kingdoms prejudice and
danger disable or weaken us for those things, which the safety and settling of
the Rights, Liberties, and peace of the Kingdom requires: And to strengthen
themselves by underhand practices and preparations both at home and abroad the
be^ter to oppose us, and engage the Kingdom in a new War, thereby to
accomplish their designs or at least to save themselves from Justice in a
common confusion: We say were it not for these and other considerations, that
leave little hopes of Justice to our selves or the Kingdom (while they
continue in the same power,) and render all delays dangerous and destructive
to ourselves and peace of the Kingdom, we should be contented that the
business concerning the Members we have charged should be laid aside, till
those other things were first settled, which our Declaration does propound for
the common Rights and Liberties of the Kingdom.

But finding things still so carried as they are, and as we have before
expressed, and that while they are Judges in their own causes they (with that
party which they make) will do what they please, and yet render it a breach of
Privilege to be accused for it, we cannot but upon all these considerations
and for all the reasons before expressed insist upon it* that the members charged
may first be forthwith suspended from fitting in the House otherwise we cannot
expect any fair proceedings against them, upon a more particular charge, nor
think there is any good intended to our selves or the Kingdom.

As to our desire of having the Army presently paid up equally with those that
have deserted it, we appeal to all men for the Justice, reasonableness, and
necessity thereof.

The Justice in that the former service (for which there arrears are due) has
been (at least) as faithfully and diligently performed by the Army as by those
late deserters of it, and in our present posture (though they have appeared
indeed more officious and serviceable to the interest and will of particular
men then we, yet we are sure) the Army is and (we hope) will at last appear to
be more faithful to the true interests of Parliaments and the Kingdom (which
we were at first called out and engaged for) then they in deserting the Army
have hitherto appeared.

For the reasonableness of our desires though we have ground to claim more
then they, or rather that they or some of them should forfeit their Arrears;
yet we ask (for present) but equal, nor should we (at present) insist much on
that (as to Officers) if our Soldiers were but first paid up. Our necessity to
insist on that, is obvious to every man, and therefore (unless we should
betray our own and the Kingdoms cause) we cannot but positively insist upon
it, that the Army should forthwith be paid up, (at the least equally to those
desertor^ of it, which if denied or delayed, we shall be thereby inforc'^ upon
present ways of instant remedy and right to the Army therein.

And whereas the Parliament has lately ordered and publicly declared that all
that shall desert the Army, shall have present satisfaction in their Arrears
(the Officers three Months pay, the Soldiers all their Arrears deducting for
free Quar^er^) which still continues unrecalled, we cannot but look upon it as
a most clear evidence of the contin^ing malice and prevalence of ours and the
Kingdoms Enemies. And we must and do insist upon it, that that order or
Declaration may forthwith be publicly recalled, otherwise we cannot believe
that any thing but ruin and destruction is designed to our selves and all
others in the Kingdom, who every where call upon us, not to d^^band till we
see the Rights, Liberties, and peace of the Kingdom s^^led according to the
many Declarations by which we were first called forth, and invited to engage in
the late War.

Next we cannot but take (...) that (in stead of gra^ting or Answering our
desires in the last Paper,) in order to the be^^^r and more ^^se proceeding to
a composure and settlement of all things for the good and peace of the
Kingdom, and for prevention of a now War, the Army being first commanded to
forty miles distance from London, his Majesty's perion is demanded immediately
to Richmond house within eight miles of London, which (as we cannot but impute
it) to the prevailing interest of the same enemies to our and the Kingdoms
peace, so all men may easily discern (with us) how directly it ^ends (in
pursuance of their former private design) upon the King ere he came from
Holdenby to put his Majesty within the reach of those men's power who have
underhand Listed about London, already very considerable numbers both of horse
and foot, and are daily listing and engaging more both there and in many parts
of the Kingdom to serve their designs: And therefore we appeal to all
uningaged men whether we can in this give way to have the King put so far
within those mem power, without giving them the so long sought for advantage of
his Majesty's Persons, whereby to imbroyle the Kingdom in a new and bloody
War, and to strengthen themselves in their mischeivous designs, the better to
uphold and establish their faction and intended domination, so that in this
case we cannot but importune the Parliament (as they tender, the peace and
safety of the Kingdom and the avoiding of Iealousies or worse inconveniency in
the Army) that they would resume the consideration of this business concerning
the Person of the King, and not propose any place for him ^^^ter to London then
they would have the Quarters of the Army to be.

And whereas (by the procurement of the same persons, or others of their party)
there has been scandalous informations presented to the Housea, and
industriously published in print, importing, as if his Majesty were ^ep^ (...)
a p^^sones amongst us, and barbarously and uncivilly used, we cannot but
decla^e that the same, and all other suggestions of that sort are most false
and scandalous, and absolutely contrary, not only to our declared desires, but
also to our Principles which are most clearly for a general right and just
freedom to all men, And therefore upon this occasion we cannot but declare
partic^larly, that we desire the same for the King, and others of lift ^arty*
(so far as can consist with common right or freedom) and with the security
of the same for future,) and w^ do further clearly profess we do not see how
there can be any peace to this Kingdom, firm or lasting without a due
consideration of, and provision for the P^igh^s, Quiet, and Immunity of his
Majestie^ Royal Family; and his l^t^ (...), and here in ^e think that ^^nder
and equitab^e dea^ing (a^ supposing th^re ^^ses had been ours) and a spirit of
common love and justice diffusing it self, to the good and preservation of
all, will make up the most glorious conquests over their hearts, (if God in
mercy see it good) to make them, and the whole People of the Land, lasting
friends.

Now to draw to a conclusion: since we can yet obtain no satisfection or
answer to the things desired as before, but contrariwise find all things
carried on by the prevailing interest of those our enemies, to the prejudice
and danger of our selves and the Kingdom, since (notwithstanding some Votes of
Parliament against the late Orders of the Committee of safety, for listing of
Forces, and notwithstanding the earnest desires and endeavors of the City,
concurrent with our own, to have the same prevened or remedied, yet the said
Committee of safety, being continued still in the same power) we find that by
the appointment or contrivance, and under the protection or countenance of the
same persons whom we have charged, and their accomplices, there are still
manifold practices underhand to list and raise new Forces, and
(notwithstanding the discovery thereof to the Parliament from the City, yet)
the same persons have prevailed so far in the House, as not to admit the
Question for discharging of them, but the same practices still continue, and
with double diligence are enforced since: also diverse forces (pretended to have
engaged for Ireland) are by the same persons ordered to Randezvouz about
Worcester, there to lay the foundation of a new Army. And to that purpose their
Emissaries and correspondents in all Counties, are busy and active to raise
forces for them. And though for these things the actors of them have no present
public authority, yet they have some way, such countenance or assistance to be
justified in Parliament, (if questioned for it) as that they have the
confidence to act openly, since they have likewise their Emissaries or Agents
abroad in Scotland, France, and other Countries, very active to draw in
sorraine Forces for their assistance; since in the mean time, they are
endeavoring by Spies and secret agents in all our Quarters, to inveigle and
invite the Soldiers of this Army to desert their Officers and come to London,
and for that purpose do improve the advantage of the Order or Declaration of
Parliament aforementioned, for satisfaction of Arreares to such as shall
desert the Army. And we find they have the public purse so much at their
disposal, as to make good that, and other their undertakings of that nature;
and yet such as have so deserted the Army and received their Arrears, are not
discharged or dispersed, but continued together in bodies, and under command,
in or near the City, (as in particular some of Sir Robert Pyes men, Coll,
Greaves his, Cap. Farmers and others still quartered upon Ke^^) Since likewise
they have Agents, and Correspondents, laboring with the King to make contract^
with him to draw his Majesty to engage, and declare for them, or at least to
declare himself a prisoner amongst us, whereby to stir up and engage his
party against us, since in all these respects we find all delatory ways (which
they industriously devise) to be designed and made use of only to our
disadvantage, weakening, and ruin, and the Kingdoms prejudice, and to their
own advantage, and strengthening in their designs, the better to prepare for
a new War.

And lastly, considering the multitudes of Reformadoes and other Soldiers,
swarming about the City (whom the persons we have charged and their
accomplices, have at their beck, to bring up to Westminster when they please)
and that by their frequent tumultuous confluences thither, (besetting, and
sometimes blocking up the Parliament doors threatening and offering violence to
the persons of the most faithful Parliament men (the just freedom of
Parliament seems to be taken away, or ar least for the present abrogated, in so
much that those Members who have served the Kingdom hitherto with most
faithfulness, diligence and integrity for the public good, many of them dare
scarce come to the House; or (if they do) they come in fear and peril of
their lives, and when they are there, are awed, discharged, or disabled from
discharging their consciences, or doing their duties to the Kingdom.

Upon all these considerations, we are clearly convinced and satisfied, that
both our duties and trust for the Parliament and Kingdom calls upon us, and
warrants us, and an imminent necessity (for our own and the Kingdoms safety,
and a prevention of a new war) inforceth us to make or admit of no longer
delays, but upon these foundations God has given us with vigor and speed, to
endeavor in some extraordinary way, the vindicating of Parliament freedom
from tumultuous violence, the breaking of these designs and preparations that
otherwise threaten a present imbroilement of the Kingdom in more blood and
war, and a future perpetuable inslaving of it under faction and Tyranny. And so
(if God see it good) to put the Parliament into a freedom and capacity (with
his Majesty's wished and hoped concurrence) to settle the Rights, Liberties and
peace of the Kingdom.

Upon all these grounds, and for all these ends premised, we shall be enforced
to take such courses extraordinary, as God shall enable and direct us unto, to
put things to a speedy issue, unless by Thursday night next we receive
assurance and security to our selves and the Kingdom, for a more safe and
hopeful proceeding in an ordinary way, by having those things granted, which
in order thereunto we have before insisted on. And shall here for more brevity
and clearness, repeat as follows.

1 That the declaration, inviting men to desert the Army, and promising their
Arrears in case they do so, may be recalled and annulled. 2 That the Army may
be presently paid up equally to those that have deserted it. 3 That his
Majesty's coming to Richmond may be suspended until affairs be better settled
and composed. And in the meant time no place may be appointed that may be
nearer to London than the Parliament will allow the Quarters of the Army to be.
4 That the Members charged may be forthwith suspended or sequestered the House.
5 That those that have deserted the Army, may be instantly discharged and
dispersed and receive no more of their Arrears till the Army be first
satisfied. 6 That both Parliament and City, may be speedily and effectually
freed from those multitudes of Reformadoes and Soldiers before mentioned, that
flock together about London, by a speedy dispatch and discharging of them from
the City. 7 That all such listings or raising of new forces, or drawing
together of any before mentioned, and all preparations toward a new warte may
be effectually declared against and suppressed, as also all invitations or
endeavors to draw in foreign forces. 8 That the present perplexed affairs
of the Kingdom and those concerning the Army as also all the things desired in
our late representation in behalf of the Kingdom may be put into some speedy
way of settlement, and composure.
St. Albans June 23. 1647. By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax and the Council of War. John Rushworth, Secretary

A Manifesto from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax and the Army under his
command, etc. With seven Propositions for the present Peace and settlement of
the Kingdom; which being granted, they assure the Parliament to draw back. June
27.
WHereas the Right Honorable Commissioners of Parliament have desired to know
from us, what things we do desire to be granted, before our drawing back the
Quarters of the Army to a further distance from London, upon the granting
whereof we will engage to draw back. We do in answer thereunto humbly propose
these particulars following, as what are of present necessity to us, and we do
desire at present to be granted, in order to the Armies and Kingdoms present
safety, in the further debate, transaction, and settlement of those other
things contained in our former representations and Papers, which will require,
and may admit more time; Upon the granting of which things we shall willingly
draw back (as is desired) to have those other mattere debated and transacted at
a further distance, with deliberation answerable to the nature and weight of
them.

I. That the Parliament would be pleased to recall the Declaration inviting men
to desert the army, and promising their arrears in ease they do so, and to
declare for future, that whoever shall desert their Colors or charges in the
army, without the Generals particular license, and discharge, shall not have
any of their Arrears paid them.

II. That the army may be paid up, equally to those that have deserted it: This
we desire may be immediately granted, or resolved before we draw back, and to
be performed (at least) to the private Soldiers fully, and in part, to the
Officers with all speed convenient.

III. That those that have deserted the army may be instantly discharged, and
dispersed, and receive no more of their arrears, till the army may be first
satisfied.

IV. That both Parliament and City, may be speedily and effectually freed from
the multitude of reformadoes, and other Soldiers before mentioned, that flock
together in, or about London, by a speedy dispatch and discharging of them from
the City.

V. That all such listings and raisings of new forces, or drawing together of
any (as in our Remonstrance and all our Papers are expressed) and all
preparations toward a new war, may be effectually declared against, and
suppressed; as also all invitations and endeavors to draw in foreign forces,
either from Scotland or other foreign parts.

IV. That the continuation of the army, in the pay of the State for some
competent time, (while the matter in debate relating both to the army and
Kingdom, may be concluded and sitled,) be at present ordered and declared for,
(before our drawing back) and the some with all speed to be effectually put
into one established may, that the army may be enabled to pay Quarters for the
ease of the Country where it must lie, and the Soldiery the better kept from
abuse to the Country, and reduced to that good order and discipline, which
has formerly been happily kept in this ar^y, though of late (through want of
pay, and other just discontents, which the lat^ provocations put upon them,)
unhappily interrupted.

VII. That during the same space the Parliament would resolve not to propose
any Place for his Majesty's residence nearer to London then they will allow the
Quarters of the army to be.

NOw for our former desire of present suspending the impeached Members from
sitting in the House.

1. Whereas we understand the House has voted, that it does not appear that
any thing has been said or done by them within the House, touching any matter
contained in the Papers from the Army, for which the House can in Justice
suspend them, though (if way were given, and opened without breach of
Privilege for us to charge them with, and for others to be examined freely to
testify unto such things,) we should not doubt to make such proceedings and
Practices of theirs in the House to appear, for which according to former
Presidents, they justly might and ought to be suspended; yet we are so render
of Parliament Privileges, as that we shall at present for bear, to reply or
press further upon that point for the houses proceedings therein, upon their
own cognizance.

2. Whereas the house of Commons has voted, that by the Laws of the Land, no
Judgment can be given to suspend those Members from sitting in the House upon
the Papers presented by the Army, before particulars produced, and proofs
made; though we think good reasons may be given, and presidents found to the
contrary, even in the Proceedings of this Parliament, as in the case of the
Earl of Strafford the Archbishop of Canterbury, the L. Keeper Finch, and
others; Yet we do declare, that we have both particulars and proofs against
them ready to produce; but considering that the proceedings thereupon, will
probably take up much time; and the present unsettled affairs of the Kingdom,
in relation to those greater matters proposed by us, do require a speedy
consideration. We shall be willing, that those greater and more general matters
of the Kingdom be first considered of, and settled, before the Cesure of those
Members be determined; and therefore because they m^^^ apprehend it some
prejudice to them to have their particular charges given in, and lie upon them
so long undetermined, we shall be willing to forbear the giving in of the
particulars against them, till they may without interruption to the general
affairs, be immediately proceeded upon; but if the house do think fit the
particulars against them be first delivered in, we shall be ready to do it.

3. Whereas we understand, that the Members charged have desired leave from the
houses to withdraw themselves: We cannot but take notice of the modesty
thereof, so far, as that we are contented therewith, for the present more
quiet proceeding to s^ule the perplexed affairs of the Kingdom (which without
any private animosities against persons) is our greatest end in what we do;
only we declare, that (as we suppose the Gentlemen themselves from the same
grounds that induced them to offer this, will still forbear to offer the
contrary, till the matters concerning them be heard and determined, or to make
any new interruption or disturbance to the proceeding upon, or settlement of
the general affairs of the Kingdom. So we hope and shall confidently expect
that the wisdom and justice of the House, will not admit any thing to the
contrary, or leave it to an hazard thereof, but will use sufficient care and
caution, against such things, and for the bringing of those Members to trial,
when the House shall judge it more seasonable and safe, as before expressed.

By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax and his Council of
War. Signed, John Rushworth Secr.
Vxbridge June 27. 1647.
WHereas without Order from the General, or the Council of War, Nicholas
Cowley Commissary General of provisions, has issued out Warrants to some
Hundreds within less then a mile of London, to bring provisions from thence
into the Army, which he pretended to be Randezvouzed between London and
Vxbridge; Whereas there was no such thing ordered by the General, or his
Council of War. It is therefore this day ordered by the General and his
Council of war, that the said Commissary Cowley shall stand committed, and he
is thereby committed to the Marshall, from whence he is not to be discharged,
until he has given satisfaction to the Commissioners for the City of London,
residing at Vxbridge.

By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Council of
War. Signed, John Rushworth Secr.
Vxbridge Junii 27.
The Kings Majesty's most gracious Letter to his Son his Highness James, Duke
of York, written with his Majesty's own hand; read in both Houses of Parliament.
C. R.

James, I am in hope, that you may be permitted, with your Brother, and Sister,
to come to some place, betwixt this and London, where I may see you.

To this end therefore; I command you, to ask leave of the two Houses, to make
a journey (if it may be) for a night or two.

But rather then not to see you; I will be content that ye come to some
convenient place to dine, and go back at night.

And foreseeing the fear of your being brought within the power of the Army,
as I am, may be objected, to hinder this my desire.

I have full assurance from Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the chief Officers, that
there will be no interruption, or impediment, made by them, for your return,
how, and when you please.

So God bless you. Your loving Father Charles Rex.
Casam July 4. 1647.
Two Letters from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, One to both Houses of
Parliament; giving an account of what Transactions and Proceedings have been
betwixt the Kings Majesty and the Army, since his coming into their Quarters.
With some farther Proposals in relation to his Majesty, and the speedy
settlement of the Peace of the Kingdom, etc.
Master Speaker,
I Was sent unto by the King on Friday last, to desire the Parliament to give
way to Him to see his children; and that they might for that purpose be sent to
Him: If I may be bold humbly to offer my Opinion, I think the allowance of
such a thing may be without the least prejudice to the Kingdom, and yet gain
more upon his Majesty then denying it; and if it be in the prayers of every
good man, that his heart may be gained, the performance of such civilities to
him is very surable to those Desires, and will hear well with all men, who (if
they can imagine it to be their own case) cannot but be sorry, if His Majesty's
natural affections to His Children, in so small a thing should not be complied
with, and if any question should be concerning the assurance of their return,
I shall engage for their return within what time the Parliament shall limit.

Upon this occasion give me leave, I beseech you, to take notice of some
reports spread abroad, as if my self and the Officers of the Army were upon
some underhand Contract or Bargain with the King; and from thence occasion is
taken to slander our Integrities, and endeavor a misunderstanding betwixt the
Parliament and their Army, the fidelity of which to the Parliament and
Kingdom, and their affection to it, are the great objects of many men's Envies,
because they see nothing so likely to settle Right and Freedom, with Truth and
Peace to us and Posterity, and to hinder their Designs against the same, as an
Harmony or good accord between the Parliament and Army, which is the joy of
good men, and it shall be our study to preserve against all Designs and
Designers to the contrary.

To prevent therefore all misunderstandings of that kind, I thought fit with
all clearness to declare unto you, That we have done nothing, nor shall do any
thing which we desire to hide from you or the world, or shall not avow to the
faces of our greatest Adversaries.

Our Desires concerning a just consideration and settlement of the Kings Rights
(His Majesty first giving His concurrence to settle and secure the Rights and
Liberties of the Kingdom) We have already publickely declared in our
Representation and Remonstrance. Since the first of those Papers sent to the
Parliament, there have been several Officers of the Army upon several
occasions sent to His Majesty, the first to present to Him a Copy of the
Representation, and after that some others to tender Him a copy of the
Remonstrance; upon both which, the Officers sent were appointed to clear the
sense and intention of any thing in either Paper, whereupon His Majesty might
make any question. Since then, there have also been some Officers at several
times sent to His Majesty about His remove from Hatfield, to dissuade (if
possibly) from Windsor or any place so near London, to some place of further
distance, answerable to what we had desired of the Parliament.

In all which addresses to his Majesty, we care not who knows what has been
said or done; for as we have nothing to bargain for or to ask, either from His
Majesty or the Parliament, for advantage to our selves, or any particular party
or interest of our own; so in all those Addresses to His Majesty, we have
utterly disclaimed and disavowed any such thing, or any Overtures or Thoughts
tending that way; but the only intent and effect of those our Addresses has
been, to desire and endeavor His Majesty's free concurrence with the
Parliament, for establishing and securing the common Rights and Liberties, and
settling the peace of the Kingdom; And to assure Him. That (the public being
so provided for, with such His Majesty's concurrence) it is fully agreeable to
all our Principles, and should be our desires and endeavor, That (with, and in
such settling of the Public) the Rights of His Majesty's Royal Family should
be also provided for, so as a lasting Peace and Agreement might be settled in
this Nation: And that, as we had publicly declared for the same in general
terms, so (if things came to a way of settlement) we should not be wanting (in
our sphaeres) to own that General Desire, in any particulars of natural or
civil right to His Majesty's person or Family, which might not prejudice or
again endanger the Public, and in the mean time, That his Majesty should
find all personal civilities and respects from us, with all reasonable
freedom that might stand with safety, and with the trust or charge lying upon
us concerning His Person.

You have here the utmost sum of what has passed from us to His Majesty; and
we could wish all men did rightly understand (without misrepresentations) every
particular wherein (as we know nothing not agreeable to Reason, Justice,
Honesty, or Conscience, so) we thought our selves concerned the rather to say
and do, as we have toward his Majesty since He came within our Quarters,
because of those common prejudices suggested against us, as if we were utter
Enemies to Monarchy, and all Civil Order and Government.

And for that particular of the Duke of Richmond, and the Two Chaplains lately
permitted to attend His Majesty, It was not done without much reluctance,
because therein we doubted we might be misunderstood by the Kingdoms best
friends.

But upon His Majesty's continuing importunity for it (as a thing very nearly
concerning His present inward and outward contentment: and conceiving those
persons such (as we hoped) would not do ill offices to prejudice the Peace of
the Kingdom, we did give way to it, and the persons (before they came) had
notice of the permission: And as we then thought, so we still do think, that
to allow him some such company of persons least dangerous, whom former
acquaintance may make him take pleasure in, and the allowance of some such
Chaplains of His own are things reasonable and just; and the debarring of that
liberty in the latter (We doubt) will but make him more prejudiced against
other Ministers.

In general; We humbly conceive that to avoid all harshnesse, and afford all
kind usage to his Majesty's Person, in things consisting with the Peace and
Safety of the Kingdom, is the most Christian, Honorable and Prudent way: And
in all things (as the Representation and Remonstrance of the Army does
express) We think that tender, equitable and moderate dealing, both toward
His Majesty, His Royal Family, and His late party (so far as may stand with
safety to the Kingdom, and security to our common Righrs and Liberties) is the
most hopeful course to take away the seeds of War or future Feuds amongst us
for posterity, and to procure a lasting Peace and Agreement in this now
distracted Nation, To the effecting and settling whereof (with a secure
provision first to be made for the common Rights and Liberties of the Kingdom,
and a due care to preserve and propagate the Gospel of Truth and Peace amongst
us) we shall hope that neither the Parliament nor his Majesty will be wanting:
And if God shall see it good to make us any way isntrumental thereunto, or
that we may otherwise see the same accomplished, we shall then think our selves
indeed discharged from the public engagements we have been called out unto,
more clearly and effectually then (before such things were settled) we could
have thought our selves to be, and (to demonstrate our clearness from seeking
self-advantages in what we did) we shall thenceforth account it our greatest
happiness and Honor (if God see it good) to be disingaged and disinist, not
only from our military charges, but from all other matters of Power or public
employment whatsoever.

I have in these things spoke, not in my own Name alone, but in the Name
(because I find it to be the clear sense of generality, or at least of the most
considerable part of the Army, and I am confident you and the Kingdom will
never find it otherwise, I shall leave it to your favorable construction, and
commit all to the goodness of God for an happy issue, I remain.

Your most humble servant Thomas Fairfax.
Reading, July 8. 1647.
For the Right Honorable, The Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament.
For the Right Honorable the Lord Major, Aldermen and Common Counsel of the
City of London.
My Lord and Gentlemen,
TO the end we may continue a right understanding betwixt you and us, all along
in the management of this great business with the Parliament, (the happy
proceedings thereof so much concerning the safety and peace of this Kingdom)
we have given your Commissioners this day the copy of a Paper, which we
presented to the Commissioners of Parliament residing with us; wherein we take
notice of the true reasons of the slow progress in the Treaty, and declare
where the stop remains. And to the end that nothing may be wanting in us; which
might work toward the speedy settlement of the quiet of this Kingdom: we have
humbly offered what we can say will most effectually tend to remove those
encumbrances and letts which stand between us and the universal good of the
Kingdom, and till that be done, it cannot be expected that we should procure
the Peace of this Kingdom by a Treaty, but rather give occasion and
opportunity thereby to others to engage us in a second War, which must
necessarily hazard the ruin of this Kingdom, as also the certain
destruction of Ireland, the relief whereof we should most effectually apply
unto you, were the affairs of England but once put into an hopeful posture. It
is a sudden and substantial settlement of the whole we desire in a general,
safe, and well-grounded Peace, and the establishment of such good Laws, as may
duly and readily render to every man their just Rights and Liberties: and for
the obtaining of these, not only our intentions had led us to, but we think
that all the Blood, Treasure and Labor spent in this War, was for the
accomplishing those very things, which are of that concernement both to our
selves and posterity, that neither we nor they can live comfortably without
them; and thereof we hope your selves, will have the same sense, and therefore
improve your interest for the obtaining our just Desires in the Proposals now
sent unto the Parliament; which being granted, and we secured from the danger
of a War, we shall proceed with cheerfulness to the Treaty, and doubt not in
a short time to see an happy Conclusion, to the satisfaction of all honest men's
Expectation, and that in all our undertakings we shall be found men of truth,
fully and singly answering the things we have held forth to the Kingdom in our
several Declarations and Papers, without by or base respects to any private
end or interest whatsoever.

By the appointment of his Excellency Sir T. Fairfax, and his Council of War.
Signed, J. R. Secre.
Reading, July 8. 1647.
A Paper delivered in by the Commissioners of Parliament, Wednesday, July 7.
1647.
THat finding the expectation of the Parliament and Kingdom to be very great
upon the speedy progress and happy issue of this Treaty; in consideration
whereof, we have made it our care constantly to tend at the appointed times of
meeting, and to press all dispatch therein: And we cannot but take notice that
the proceedings on your part have been and are very slow, and that little or
nothing has been done in the Treaty since our entrance thereupon: and
therefore in discharge of our Duty, and the Trust reposed in us, we do very
earnestly desire that the Treaty may be effectually proceeded on with all
expedition, and the times for meeting punctually kept; there being nothing that
shall be wanting in us, according to the power given us, to further a work of
so great importance, and which may perfect a right understanding betwixt the
Parliament and the Army.

By the appointment of the Commissioners residing with the Army
Reading, July 7. 1647.
An Answer of the Commissioners of the Army to the Paper of the Commissioners
of Parliament about a speedy proceeding.
BY the last Paper delivered in unto us from your Lordships at Reading July 7.
we perceive you find, that the Expectation of the Parliament and Kingdom is
great upon the speedy progress and happy issue of this Treaty. We answer, that
we do really apprehend the same things with you, neither can we but witness
that you have constantly attended the appointed times of meeting, and pressed
dispatch therein: Nevertheless we cannot but be very sensible that you seem to
reflect upon us further then there is just cause, in your taking notice that
the proceedings herein should be slow and dilatory on our part, as if we should
not seem to desire and labor the quick and speedy settlement o the affairs of
the Kingdom in a safe and well-grounded Peace as cordially as any persons
whatsoever. We shall therefore desire you to remember with what forwardness we
have in the first place presented to you those things which we did in our
hearts conceive necessary in order to a Treaty, and without which being
granted, we could not with safety to the Kingdom and satisfaction to our
selves proceed in Treaty; and further pressed you to present them to the
Parliament with speed, that a quick dispatch might be had therein, as being in
our thoughts the chiefest and surest way to prevent the engaging this Kingdom
in a second War; when contrary to our expectation we have found little
effectually done, in relation to our Desires, in those things most concerning
the safety and peace of the Kingdom.

To the end therefore we may acquit our selves from being guilty of the delay
you mention, and that it may appear to all men where the stick is, of not
proceeding in the Treaty to a settlement of the Peace of the Kingdom, so much
thirsted after by us all, we thought fit to reminde you of these following
proposals which we have formerly insisted upon, and to which satisfaction is
not given.

I. That there is nothing done with effect, notwithstanding the Votes of the
House, to the dispersing of the Reformado Officers, who continue in and about
London, ready to head Forces, to the apparent hazard of a new War.

II. That notwithstanding the Votes of the House for the speedy sending into
Ireland, or disbanding those forces which have left the Army, and their
special Order to the Committee at Derby House to take speedy care therein, yet
they are still continued in bodies in and about London, and as we hear, are
daily listing more Forces pretending the service of Ireland.

III. That notwithstanding the Votes of the House of the tenth of June, and
those since of the fifth of July, for the present purging of the House, yet
diverse persons comprised in these Votes continue still to sit there.

So long as we remain unsatisfied in the two first of these particulars, we
cannot be secured from those doubts, we have expressed of the danger of a new
War, especially if it be considered, that the end of inviting so many
Reformado Officers to London, was to lay a foundation of a new War, and was
principally carried on by the design of some of those Members of the house of
Commons we have impeached. And likewise that diverse of the Officers and
Soldiers which left this Army were procured by promises of pay, and other
engagements, which were likewise designed by the same persons aforementioned,
if possibly they might thereby have broken this Army.

And for the last, what comfortable effect may we expect of a Treaty, so long
as the Parliament (the supreme Judicatory of the Kingdom) is coustituted of
some that are men of interests, contrary to the common good thereof, from whom
we can expect nothing but banding and designing; to obstruct and frustrate all
proceedings (contrary to their interest) though never so essential to the
happy settlement of the Kingdom: and if a seasonable remedy be not given
herein, we despair of any good to the Kingdom by way of Treaty.

Signed, By the appointment of the Commissioners of the Army. W. Clerk, Secre.
Reading, 7. July, 1647.
A PARTICVLAR CHARGE OR IMPEACHMENT In the Name of his Excellency Sir THOMAS
FAIRFAX, And the Army under his Command, against Denzill Holles Esquier, Sir
Philip Stapleton, Sir William Lewis, Sir John Clothworthy, Sir William Waller,
Sir John Maynard, Knights, Major General Massy, John Glynne Esquire, Recorder
of London, Walter Long Esquire, Colonel Edward Harley, and Anthony Nicoll
Esquire, Members of the Honorable House of Commons.
WHereas on the fifteenth day of June last, the Heads of a Charge were
delivered in the name of the said Army, unto the Commissioners of Parliament,
to be sent up to the Parliament, against the Persons above named Now in
prosecution and maintenance thereof, and according to the power thereby
preserved: It is in the Name of the said Army more particularly charged against
the said persons as follows:

1. That the said Mr. Denzill Holles during the late War in prosecution of
the evil designs expressed in the general Heads or Articles formerly
exhibited, contrary to the trust reposed in him, contrary to his Oath taken in
June 1643. and contrary to the Ordinance of Parliament, dated in October 1643.
has assisted the King in the late unnatural War, and held correspondency
and intelligence with the Enemy against the Parliament in manner following,
(viz.) He the said Mr Holies being one of the special Commissioners for the
Parliament, to present Propositions of both Houses to the King at Oxford, did
privately and contrary to his instructions, at several times make his
addresses unto the Kings party the ^^^^en in Arms against the Parliament;
namely, unto the Earl of Lyndsey, the Earl of Southampton, the Lord Savill,
and others, and did secretly plot and advise them against the Parliament; and
did intimate unto them, or one of them, that the said Propositions then sent
unto his Majesty by the Parliament, were unreasonable. And the said M. Holles
being demanded, what Answer he would advise the King to make to the
Propositions, he the said M. Holles did advise, that the King should demand a
Treaty however, and then declare how unreasonable the Propositions were; and
that yet for the peace of the Kingdom his Majesty would Treat upon them, but
withal wished the said Treaty might be in London, whether the King himself
should come upon security. He the said M. Holles adding, that there was nothing
in the world, that the violent party (meaning the well-affected party to the
Parliament against the Enemy) did so much fear, as his Majesty's coming to
London, which would be a certain dissolution of their authority and power. And
the said Mr. Holles bad those said persons, or one of them, assure the King,
that if his Majesty knew as much as he (the said Mr. Holles) knew, his Majesty
would take his Horse and be at London the next day, or words to that effect.
And it being again demanded, whether (if the King should be willing to come)
it would be accepted of. He the said Mr. Holles thereto answered, that
certainly it would be much opposed; but yet he the said Mr. Holles was
confident, that he and his party (meaning some of the members above named, and
others) should carry it, and wished the King to put it upon that trial. And
the said Mr. Holles was desired by the said Earl of Lindsey, Earl of
Southampton, and Lord Savill, or one of them, that he would be pleased to draw
such an Answer in writing to the said Propositions, as he desired the King
should send, and the said Earl of Southampton (who was that night to lie in
the Kings Bedchamber) would persuade the the King to condescend unto it, and
thereupon the said Mr. Hollas withdrew, and either the same day, or the next
day following, the said Mr. Holles accordingly carried in his hand, unto the
said Lords, or one of them, a paper ready written, which (as he said) was such
an Answer to the said Propositions as he had drawn for the King to send to the
Parliament, which was taken by the said Lords, or one of them, and carried to
the King, to be considered of, and so much thereof as advised the Kings coming
to London was laid by, (the King fearing to adventure himself) but the rest of
the said Paper the Lord Digby (who writ the Kings Answer to the said
Propositions) made use of in the same words as the said Mr. Holles had set
down; And the said Mr. Holles to ingratiate himself with the Kings party, did
about the same time revile the well-affected Members of the House of Commons,
declaring unto the said Kings party at Oxford, or some of them, that those
well-affected Members (which to render them the more odious as he conceived, he
named the violent Independent party) had ill intentions and greater aversenes
to Peace, and that nothing would be more pleasing to them, then for the King
to refuse the Propositions, how unreasonable soever the same were, and he also
then said that the Commissioners of Scotland were very weary of that violent
party, and that they being desperate to establish their Presbytery here as in
Scotland, made their addresses to him the said Mr. Holles, and his party. All
which tended to the protracting of the said late War, and to the hindrance of
an happy Peace, and the said Mr. Holles did also after that receive from the
Earl of Lindsey a letter written in white ink, concerning some secret
design, and kept it from the knowledge of the House, from February till about
July after, when it was discovered by him that brought it: but the Letter it
self was by Mistress Holles said (after he had read it) burnt. And the said
Earl of Linsey moved the King for a pass for the said Master Holles to go to
Oxford: but the King refused to grant it, saying, that Holles did him better
service in the Parliament, then he could do him at Oxford.

2. That the said Mr Holles and Sir Philip Stapleton during the said late War
(when the said Earl of Lindsey went from the Tower of London to Oxford) sent
several Messages of intelligence to the Earl of Dorset, and Lord Digby,
thereby assuring them, that they, the said Mr. Holles and Sir Philip Stapleton
did better service for the King here in Parliament, then they could do him if
they were at Oxford. And the said Sir Philip Stapleton desired that the said
Earl of Dorset, would preserve him the said Sir Philip and his friends, in the
good opinion of the party at Oxford (which was then the Kings Garrison) and he
the said sir Philip would do as much for his Lordship, and his friends here
with the Parliament, and the said Mr. Holles, and Sir Philip Stapleton the more
to ingratiate themselves into the favor of the Enemy, did of their own accord
without any direction of the Parliament, draw up other Propositions then those
mentioned in the precedent Articles, which they affirmed were in their
judgments fit for the King to grant, and for the Parliament to desire, and
being so drawn up sent them privately to his Majesty, without any authority of
Parliament to warrant the same.

3. That the said Mr. Holles, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William Lewis, Sir John
Clotworthie, Sir William Waller, Sir John Maynard, Major general Massy, Mr.
Glyn, M. Long, Colonel Edward Harley and Anthony Nicholls in the Months of
March, April, May, and June last past, and at others times in prosecution of
the evil designs in the several general heads mentioned, have frequently
assembled and met together at the Lady Carliles Lodging in White Hall, and in
other places with diverse other persons disaffected to the State (without any
authority of Parliament,) for holding correspondencie with the Queen of
England now in France, and her participants with an intent by such secret and
clandestine treaties amongst themselves to put conditions upon the Parliament,
and to bring in the King upon their own terms, and having a great power upon
the Treasure of the Kingdom, have therewith maintained and encouraged by
Pensions and otherwise the Queens party in France, thereby to beget a second
and more bloody War in this Kingdom, and they or some, or one of them
assured the Queen 40000. l. per annum, if she would assist them in their
design, and that they would do more for the King then the Army would do, and
that they would find out some means to destroy the Army and their friends.

4. That in further pursuance of the same evil designs, they the said Mr.
H^lles, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William Jews, Sir John Clotworthie, Sir
William Waller, and Major general Massey, by the combination aforesaid, within
the space of three months last past without any authority of Parliament:
Invited the Scots and other foreign forces to come into this Kingdom in a
Hostile manner, to abett and assist them in the prosecuting and effecting of
their said designs. And the said Mr. Holles very lately sent to the said
Queen of England then and still in France, advising her amongst other things
speedily to send the Prince into Scotland to march into this Kingdom in an
head of an Army. And did send a special Messenger to her for such ends and
purposes. And the said Mr. Holles Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William Lewis, Sir
John Clotworthy, Sir William Waller, Sir John Maynard, Mr. Glin, Major general
Massey, Mr. Long, Colonel Edward Harley and Anthony Nicholls, have underhand,
of their own accord without authority of Parliament listed, or caused, or
procured to be listed diverse Commanders and Soldiers, endeavoring thereby to
leavy, and raise a new War in this Kingdom, to protect themselves, in their
unjust oppressions, and factions designs, and have at several times within
the space of two Months last past invited, encouraged, abetted and councelled
multitudes of reformado-Officers and Soldiers and other rude persons
tumultuously and violently to gather together at Westminster, to affright and
assault the members of Parliament in their passage to and from the house, to
offer violence to the house it self, locking the door thereof upon them, and
so imprisoning them, and by such violences, out rages and threats to awe and
enforce the Parliament.

5. That the said Mr. Holles, Sir Philip Stapleton, and M. Glyn, have been and
are obstructers and prejudgers of several Petitions to the Parliament for
redress of public grievances; And the said Mr. Holles and Sir Philip
Stapleton, in the Month of May last past, did abuse and affront diverse
Petitioners, who in a peaceable manner then attended the Committee, whereof
Colonel Lee was Chaireman, not only reviling and reproaching them, but
violently haling, and boisterously assaulted them, and offered to draw their
Swords upon Major Tuleday, and others of the said Petitioners, and without any
power or authority committed Nicholas Tew, one of the said Petitioners, And
soon afterward, by the procurement of the said Mr. Holles and Sir Philip
Stapleton, and upon their misinformation to the House, the said Major Tuleday
and Nicholas Tew were imprisoned, not being permitted to speak for themselves;
And the said Mr. Glyn about three Months since, caused the said Nicholas Tew
to be imprisoned in Newgate, and to be detained a long time there, for no other
cause, but for having a Petition about him which was to be presented to the
House.

6. That the said Sir John Clotworthy, Sir William Waller, and Major general
Massey, have lately, in prosecution of the said designs in the said general
Heads mentioned (against the Laws of this Realm, and Rules and Articles of
War made by the Parliament) by an Arbitrary Power imprisoned some Members of
the Army without any authority particularly, Ensign Nichols, whose pockets they
without authority caused to be searched, and several papers to be taken from
him, contrary to the liberty of every Subject, and caused him to be sent a
prisoner from the Headquarters to London, without the authority or privity of
the general, or the chief Officers of the Army commanding in his absence.

7. That in or about the Month of Marth last, there being a Petition intended
from the Officers and Soldiers of the Army to their General, for such things
only as were justly due unto them, and concerning them merely as Soldiers, the
said Sir William Waller, Sir John Clotworthy, and Colonel Edward Harley, a
Member of the Army, having gotten into their hands a Copy of the said Petition,
by combination with the other Members above mentioned, and with an intent to
abuse the Parliament into prejudices and jealousies against the proceedings of
the Army concerning the said Petition (they well knowing that the said Army
stood in their way, and hindered them from bringing to pass the designs in the
said general Charges expressed) did untruly and maliciously inform the House,
That the said Petition was contrived and promoted to debauch and disoblige the
Army from the Parliament; and that it was managed and carried on by diverse
principal Officers in the Army, that Orders were given out for reading of it in
every Regiment, and whosoever would not subcribe it should be put out of their
Musters, and cashiered the Army; and by those and other aggravations did
represent it to the House as a Design against the Parliament: further adding,
That some Regiments (which were remote) were sent for to join with the rest of
the Army for that purpose; by which misinformations they the said Members did
the same day procure a peremptory Order to the General, to suppress the said
Petition.

8. That some few days after, Colonel Edward Harley, by the combination
aforesaid, and in pursuance of the same Designs, did procure to the House a
Letter supposed to be written from within the Quarters of the Army to him the
said Colonel Harley, by a person not named, whereby it was informed, that
Colonel Harley's Lieutenant Colonel had drawn his R^giment to a Rendevouz, and
had caused the said petition to be read at the head of it, and that he
threatened to cashier and put out of the Musters all that would not subscribe
it; and that the design of the Army therein, was to enslave the Parliament and
King (if the Parliament proceeded not to some high Resolutions) or to that
effect, as by the said Letter, relation being thereunto had, may appear: And
although the substance of the said Letter was most untrue, and no Author
thereof appeared, nor could be produced (although a Committee was appointed for
examination thereof, and it was much pressed the Author should be discovered)
yet the said Colonel Harley, Sir John Clotworthy, and Sir William Waller, did
so avow the reality of the said Letter, and that the contents thereof would be
made good, as that thereby, and by other false Suggestions of theirs against
the Army, they procured the House (upon a long Debate, which held till about
Eight of the clock at night) to Order, That a Committee of five Members,
whereof the said Mr. Holles was one, should prepare a Declaration to be brought
into the House the next morning, signifying the Houses dislike of the
proceedings of the Army upon that Petition, as by the said ORDER dated the
(...) day of (...) last, may appear; Upon which settling of the said business
for that night, most of the Members departed, as conceiving nothing would be
done thereupon, till the next day, and that then they might have a free Debate
concerning the same; but the House still continuing to sit upon dispatch of
some Letters formely Ordered, the said Mr. Holles, by the same combination, and
in farther prosecution of the said evil Designs, having of himself (without
the Committee) prepared a Declaration against the Petition is self, contrary
to the intention and direction of the said Order, and contrary to the Rules of
Justice, and usual course of Parliament, did the same night, about Ten of the
clock (on purpose to surprise the House,) present the same Declaration to the
House, whereby the said Petitioners were (without being heard) declared Enemies
to the State, and Obstructers of the relief of Ireland (if they still persisted
therein) as by the same Declaration (relation being thereunto had) may appear,
and did procure it to be then passed accordingly, to the great dishonor of the
Parliament and their proceedings, to the insufferable injury, the just
provocations, discouragement, and discontent of the Army, to the trouble and
danger of the whole Kingdom, to the hindering of the relief of Ireland, and
other the evil consequences in the said general Charges expressed.

9. That by the same and the like false informations and Suggestions, the said
Colonel Harley, then still a Member of the Army, Sir John Clotworthy, Sir
William Waller, and the said other persons, did shortly after the said
Declaration so made as aforesaid; procure diverse eminent and faithful Officers
of the Army, namely, Lieutenant General Hamond, Colonel Hamond, Col. Lilburn,
Lieut. Col. Pride, and others, to be sent for from their charges in the Army,
to appear at the Bar of the House, to make answer in relation to the said
Petition, against whom (when they came thither) they could charge or prove
nothing at all, insomuch as the House thought fit immediately to discharge
them. And whereas there was a Committee appointed to examine and consider of
the truth or falsehood of them, and the said Members informing were appointed to
produce their Proofs and Evidence to the same before the Committee, though they
have since then been often urged, called upon, and demanded to produce their
Proofs and Evidence thereto (if they had any) and have been plainly told, That
if they did not proceed effectually to do it, they should be accounted the
Authors and Devisers of the said falsehood, and reparation would accordingly be
demanded against them; yet they have not to this day produced any Proofs or
Evidence to any of the said Informations or Suggestions, whereby the Parliament
and the Army were so much abused as before is declared; nor could they or any
of them be hitherto persuaded to give into the said Committee any Charge
against the said Officers of the Army, which they have then or since procured
to be sent for as aforesaid, but have held diverse of them in a long and
chargeable attendance upon the House, without any thing laid to their charge,
until the House was pleased to discharge them.

10. That the said Mr. Holles, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William Lewis, Sir
William Walle^, Sir John Clotworthy, and Major General Massey (in further
pursuance of the Designs mentioned in the general Heads charged against them)
have been great instruments in the obstructing the relief of Ireland; And
within the space of two months last past did untruly inform the House, That
by their procurement there were Fifty Companies of Foot, and Ten Troops of
Horse of this Army engaged for Ireland, upon the terms and under the conduct
then by the Parliament propounded; and the more to delude the Parliament
therein, they or some of them, by the combination aforesaid, did procure diverse
Officers then in this Army, namely, Colonel Butler, Lieutenant Colonel
Jackson, Major Goodday (...) and others, to give in their Names, as Litting
themselves for Ireland on the said terms and conduct propounded: when as those
Officers did at the same time declare themselves as unwilling thereunto, and
resolved not to go serve in Ireland on any terms whatsoever, they the said
Members underhand assuring them, That though they made use of their Names, yet
they should not go for the service. They have likewise untruly informed the
House, and given in the Names of many considerable Officers of this Army,
namely, Captain Pennyfather and Captain Burges of Colonels Butlers Regiment;
Captain Clarke, and four or more Com^ Officers of Sir Hardres Wallers
Regiment and others, as having been subscribed for Ireland, who did not so
engage or subscribe, nor give any consent thereunto; but did then, and have
ever since utterly disavowed and denied the same: And about the same time they
also reported to the House, the Name and offer of Lieu. Col. Farrington of this
Army, and engaging for himself and his Regiment for Ireland, whereas the said
Farrington had been cashiered the Army a year and a half before, by which
and other their false informations and reports of that nature the Parliament
was abused and misled into a conceit and confidence of a strength out of the
Army, then supposed to be engaged and ready for Ireland on their own terms,
whereas in truth the same was but a mere delusion, and which was so contrived
on purpose to occasion a slighting and neglecting of the Army as supposing no
further use for them.

11. Whereas part of three Regiments of Foot (viz.) Colonel Harberts, Colonel
Kemps, and Colonel Grays, were by order of the House advanced toward the
relief of Ireland as same as Bromsgrave in the County of Worcester, the said
Sir Phillip Stapleton, Mr. Holles, Sir John Clotworthy, Sir William Lewis, and
Major General Massey, Sir William Waller, and Mr. Glyn, by combination
aforesaid, did of their own accord without the knowledge or direction of the
House, on the sixth day of June last being Sabbath day, without summoning a
Committee, command those forces back again as far as Reading, with an evil
intent to draw forces together to beget a new war in England.

12. That the said Sir John Clotworthy in prosecution of the designs in the
said general charges expressed, has in the year 1642, 1643, 1644. and since,
converted several great sums of money (which by several Orders of
Parliament, and of the Irish Committee were designed for the relief of
Ireland) to his own particular use, namely the sum of 280. li. which by
Order of both Houses dated the eleventh of February, 1642. was to be paid for
20. Buts of Sack for Ireland, 700. li. which the same day was also Ordered for
two thousand swords, 300. li. which by Order of the said Irish Committee dated
the fifth of April 1643. was designed for 120. pair of Pistols, and diverse
other sums of money upon several other Orders which he the said Sir John
Clotworthy from time to time received for the use and relief of Ireland, but
were not employed to the uses by the said Orders intended and directed, but to
his the said Sir John Clotworthies own private use as aforesaid; and that he
has within two years last past received several sums of money, Arms and
other provisions for a troop of horse which he pretended he had raised in
Ireland, when as he had not, nor did raise or furnish any such Troop as he
pretended, and that he the said Sir John Clotworthy for money and other
rewards has preferred John Davis, and William Summers and others to be
entrusted with the Irish affairs who have kept correspondency with the Enemy,
and have defrauded the State of other great sums of money, and he has been
privy to and a sharer in such their actions.

13. That about November last past the said Sir John Clotworthy, being by the
Parliament sent a Commissioner with others into Ireland, who all had a joint
power and authority to treat with the Earl of Ormond for the space of four
days and no more, he the said Sir John Clotworthy contrary to the special
trust reposed in him, held secret intelligence with the said Earl of Ormond by
Cipher or Character without the consent or knowledge of those others in
commission with him, and many weeks after the time so limited was expired, and
about the same time he the said Sir John Clotworthy held secret intelligence
with George Lord Digby then in Ireland beyond the time prefixed, and without
the consent of the said other Commissioners, and in order thereunto, the said
Ormond and Digby lately employed one Slingsby to come into this Kingdom about
a design concerning the Prince as he pretends.

14. That the said Sir John Clotworthy, Mr. Holles, Sir Philip Stapleton by
combination with the rest of the Members before named, in further prosecution
of the designs before mentioned, well knowing that the Lord Lyle late
President of Ireland was both faithful and vigilant while he was trusted in
the same Kingdom, and had now this last spring made provisions ready to march
into the field, and that the Lord Baron of Brohill General of the Parliaments
Horse in Munster, and Col. Sir Arthur Loftus persons of honor and reputation,
and of great fortunes in the said Kingdom, lately came purposely into this
Kingdom to exhibit and did exhibit many Articles of high treason against the
Lord Inchiquin for betraying the Parliaments Army to the enemy (as formerly he
had done) yet by the great power and violent interposition of the said Sir
Clotworthy, Mr. Holles Sir Philip Stapleton, by the practice and combination
aforesaid, the said Articles have been obstructed, and the business not
suffered to come to a hearing, and the said Lord Lisle hastily called out of
Ireland, and the power and command of the Parliaments forces in that Kingdom
committed to the said Lord Inchiquin to the loss of this summers service, and
the expense of much treasure to make new preparations: and whereas the said
Lord Lisle being so suddenly called from thence as aforesaid, did design and
depute Sir Hardres Waller Knight, Major General of the forces there (a man of
known integrity and courage both for his service in England and Ireland, and of
considerable Fortunes there) to take care of the said Lord Lisles Forces till
the pleasure of the Parliament may be further known; but the said Lord
Inchequin upon the receite of a Letter from the said Sir John Clotworthy; Mr.
Holles and Sir Philip Stapleton, or one of them (or from some other person by
their, or one of their direction, privity or procurement) did express that he
had order or direction from London, that no man that favored the Independents
(under which name the said Lord of Inchequin has comprehended all men that
have showed themselves opposite to Tyranny and Arbitrary government) should
have any trust or command there. Nay, although they were of another judgment,
yet if they would not prosecute the Independents they should not be employed
there, or words to that effect. And under color thereof, the said Sir Hardres
Waller, and all others that had their Commissions from the said Lord Lisle
while he commanded were displaced, to the discouragement of those and other
faithful persons to the Parliament, and to the great dis-service and hazard of
the loss of that Kingdom.

15. That whereas a Committee of the House of Commons has been lately
appointed by the Parliament to consider of Propositions for the settling and
preservation of Wales, whereof the said Sir William Jews and Mr. Glyn were and
are Members, and to report the same to the House, They the said Sir William
Jews and Master Glyn with others of the said Committee did on the thirtieth
day of April now last past without any authority of Parliament, before any
report made to the Houses, of their own accord, in stead of settling and
preserving Wales, order that all Committees for Sequestrations should forbear
all proceedings of Sequestrations against all or any the Inhabitants of Wales.
And although some few persons were (upon general heads) excepted; yet by
virtue of that illegal Order all the Commissioners of peace, Commissioners of
Association (though never so active in pressing men, and raising money for
Forces against the Parliament) all the Commissioners of Array that did or
should at any time come in and submit to the Parliament, or their Commanders in
chief, all that had born arms against the Parliament, unless they were
Governors or other Officers of War that held some Town, Castle, or Fort
against the Parliament, all disaffected and scandalous Mini^ters, though in
their Sermons they usually reviled and scandalized the Parliament and their
proceedings, calling them Rebels and Traitors; and not only incensing the
people against the Parliament, but usually taking up Arms, and leading their
Parishioners in arms upon any Alaram against the Parliament; and many other
desperate Delinquents have been, and still are taken off and freed from
sequestration: and the said Order was sent to every several Committee in
Wales, in several Letters from the said Committee, contrary to several Orders
and Ordinances of Parliament, and contrary to the Rules of justice and equity
which should impartially be administered as well in Wales, as in other places of
this Kingdom, whereby the ill-affected Gentry and Ministry of that Country
are grown so high and insolent, that honest men dare scare live amongst them:
so as that which was intended by the Parliament to settle and preserve Wales,
is by the practice of the said Sir William Jews and Master Glyn perverted to
the danger and destruction of it.

16. That the said Sir William Lewis and Master Glyn have further ingratiated
themselves with the Delinquents of Wales, and prepared them for their said
designs in manner following; (viz.) he the said Sir William Lewis has within
two years last past countenanced and protected many of the most notorious and
dangerous Delinquents within the several Countries of Southwales; namely the
Lord of Carbery, and others in Carmarthinshire, Master Crane and others in
Glamorganshire, Master Morgan late Knight of the shire, Master John Herbert and
others in B^ecknockshire, Master Gwin, Master Lewis, and diverse others in
Radno^shire, by freeing some of them altogether from compositions, though
sequestered, by laboring diverse Members of the House and of Committees to be
favorable in compounding with others, and to admit of such to their
compositions as were incapable thereof. And the said Sir William Lewis has
animated and encouraged some of the said persons to continue their fidelity
unto the Kings cause, promising them, That if they would be friends with the
King for him, he and his would be their friends in the Parliament: in so much
as his friends the Delinquents in those parts have lately looked upon him as a
rising man when the King shall come to London, which has lately been their
constant boasting. And the said Sir William Lewis has within two years last
past caused diverse that had been Commissioners for the King, and had pressed men,
and raised monyes to promote the late War against the Parliament, namely, his
Brother Master Thomas Lewis, Master Gwyn, Master Charles Walbiffe, Master
Meridith Lewis, Master Edward Williams, and many others to be Commissioners of
the peace, and Committee men for the said County of Brecknoc, insomuch as those
that have been most active and faithful to the Parliament, have been and still
are outvoted in those places, and can do no considerable service for the
Parliament: and the rather for that the said Sir William Lewis has also
procured one Edward Williams his own kinsman, and one much disaffected to the
Parliament, to be Solicitor of Sequestrations in that County, who is, and has
been very remiss and corrupt therein. And the said Sir William Lewis has by
the means aforesaid lately procured Master Edward Lewis his son, though
unfit for that employment, to be chosen and returned Burgess for Brecknoc;
which that he might the better effect, he kept the Writ for election of the
said Burgess above eight months in his own custody before it was delivered
to the Sheriff of the said County. And likewise that the said Master John Glyn
within two years last past has procured several persons that have lately
been Commissioners of Array, and in Arms against the Paliament in Northwales,
(viz.) (...) and others to be named in the Commission of the peace for the
Counties of Denbigh and Carnarvan, and other Counties there, and to be put in
other great places of Trust and command there, and amongst others, Colonel Glyn
his Brother, who was lately a Colonel in the Kings Army, is by the said Master
John Glyns procurement become Governor of the Town and Castle of Carnarvan,
and Admiral or Vice Admiral of the Irish Seas, to the endangering of those
countries lying upon the Coasts toward Ireland, and to the fear and
discouragement of the well-affected inhabitants of those places.

17. That the said Sir William Lewis, being heretofore during these troubles,
Governor of Portsmouth, a Garrison for the Parliament (in which time he
received much of the public treasure, for which he has not yet given an
account.) did while he was Governor there, frequently hold correspondence and
intelligence with the Kings party, about the delivery up of the said Garrison,
insomuch as although Sir William Waller and diverse others in that Garrison
were proclaimed Traitors to the King, yet he (by the Kings special command)
was spared, the King affirming that the said Sir William Lewis was his friend,
and that he was confident he would do him good service, or to that effect, and
although he then was a Parliament man, and Governor of Portsmouth, as
aforesaid, and his estate in the said County of Brecon. (being of the value of
above six hundred pounds per an.) was three years in the Kings quarters, yet
the same was never sequestered. And since the Parliament has prevailed,
Colonel Harbert Price Esquir, having been Governor of Brecknock for the King
against the Parliament being sequestered, the said sir Williem Lewis by his
solicitations to the Committee procured the personal estate of the said
Colonel Price, (which the Committee of the County had found out and caused to
be brought to Morgan Aubreyes house in Brecon. to be restored unto him without
any satisfaction to the State and has procured his the said Colonel Prices
Lands in the said County of Brecon. being worth about three hundred pounds per
annum, to be let to a friend of the said Col. Prices, to his wives use, at 50
pounds per annum, contrary to the directions of several Ordinances of
Parliament, made in that behalf.

18. That the said Mr. John Glyn, or some other person or persons, by his
direction, consent, or privity, or to his use, has during his being a member
of the House of Commons taken rewards of several persons for service done them
in the House, as namely amongst others drivers Drovers from Wales who by his
means and procurement had an allowance by order of the House for 3000. l in
satisfaction of losses they had sustained by the Enemy, did pay unto the Wife
of the said Mr. Glyn the sum of one hundred pounds as a reward for his said
service.

19. That the said Mr. John Glyn as he has been most active to bring into the
Commissioners of Peace and into other places of authority diverse notorious
Delinquents in North Wales as aforesaid, so he has been as active (as much
as in him lies) to put out and keep out of the Militia and Common Counsel of
London, and out of the Commission of the peace for Middlesex, many eminent and
faithful men that have laid out their Estates and adventured their lives for
the defense of the Parliament and City in the time of their greatest necessity,
namely Alderman Pennington, Col. Tichborne, Mr. Eastwick, Mr. Moyer, and others
contrary to the Declaration of both Kingdoms, which has assured all lawful
favor and encouragement to those that have been faithful and shall so
continue to the Parliament, which doings must needs tend to the giving a fresh
occasion and power to the Enemy against the Parliaments best friends, to the
dishonor of the Parliament and endangering of the Kingdom.

20. That the said Sir Philip Stapleton, Mr. Holles, and Sir William Lewis have
by their power and countenance, as Members of the House of Commons, both
jointly and severally used means to obstruct the course of Justice, and have
interposed themselves in several causes, and by word of mouth moved and
persuaded Judges and other Officers, on the behalf of such as they conceive to
be their friends amongst others, whereas a great cause was lately depending in
the House of Lords between Alderman Langham and Captain Lymery, and Counsel
was met for the pleading thereof: The said Sir Philep Stapleton, Mr. Hollis,
and Sir William Lewis, did repair to the Earl of Rutland about the same, and
the said Sir P^i^ip Stapleton told the said Earl that they (meaning himself
and the said Mr. Hollis and Sir William Lewis) were fully satisfied concerning
the justness of Langhams cause, and therefore as the said Earl did respect
them, the said Sir Philip Stapleton, Mr. H^llis, and Sir William Lewis, or
expected from them, he the said Earl of Rutland should give his Vote for
Langham, or used words to that effect, which also was seconded by the said
Master Hollis in words, and agreed unto by the said Sir William Lewis, as
appeared by his presence and ges ure, and the said Sir William Lewis did
exercise the same power in a cause of Joon Gunter and others.

21. That the said Mr. Anthony Nicholls (although about 4. years since he was
(by the Committee of privileges) Voted that he was not a Member sit to sit in
the House by reason his election was void, yet he the said Mr. Nicholls does
not only sit and Vote there as a Member, but by his power and threats in the
West-countreyes, and by his solicitations and indirect practi^es has brought
in, or procured to be brought in about 28. Members more out of Cornwall, on
purpose to carry on the designs and practices before mentioned, and to make a
faction in the said House. And notwithstanding the selfe-denying Ordinance, he
the said Mr. Nicholls does still hold a place in the Tower formerly conferred
upon him by the House, and receives the profits thereof to his own use.

22. That the said Mr. Nicholls has since his sitting in the House as
aforesaid, taken rewards for his service done there, namely, whereas Sir
William Vvedall Knight, for deserting the Parliament, and going to York with
the King, was suspended the House. He the said Mr. Nicholls, for the sum of one
hundred pounds, or an hundred and fifty pounds paid unto him, or to his use by
the said Sir William Vvedall, or some for him, did by misinformations to the
House, procure the said sir William Vvedall to be readmitted a Member of the
said House; And the said Mr. Nicholls while he was a Member of the Committee
for safety, he and others of the said Committee, having issued forth a warrant
for searching Greenwich house: he the said Master Nichols did underhand
acquaint one of the Queens Officers therewith, and thereby prevented the
Design of the said Committee, to great disservice of the Parliament and
Kingdom.

23. That the said Mr. Long, at the beginning of the late Wars, not having
courage sufficient to perform his duty in Militia affairs, did out of
covetousness, or other unworthy end, procure a command of a Troop of horse,
under his Excellency, the late Lord General, the Earl of Essex, but when ever
his said Troop came upon any service, he the said Master Long out of fear or
treachery, unworthily absented himself, and never was seen or known to charge
the Enemy in person, though his Troop often engaged, namely at the Battle of
Edgehill, when he saw there were like to be blows, he the said Mr. Long left
the field, and never charged before his Troop; and at the Battle, or fight at
Brainford, though his troop were there, yet he staid at London till the danger
was past, and fighting done. And when his Troop was sent into the West, he took
no other notice of it but to receive his pay, and in the mean while he
repaired into the County of Essex, and procured a commission to be a Colonel of
Horse and in stead of fighting against the Parliaments enemies, he betook
himself to plunder and oppress the Parliaments friends there, and contrary to
Order, and without any authority, or exigencies of War compelling him
thereunto, enforced great sums of money, and many Horses and other provisions
from the country, namely from Mr. Thomas Manwood, a man well affected, who had
the Generals protections, and (whose horses were taken from his plow) and
others, to the great losses and oppression of the people, and to the great
dishonor of the Parliament, whose service he nevertheless neglected, and has
not hither to given an account of the great sums of money, and other things,
that he so exacted of the country as aforesaid.

24. That the said Master Long afterward upon pretense of some losses
sustained by the enemy, and some great service he had done for the State, did
procure of the House a great office in the Chancery; namely to be the chief
Register of that Court, wherein his skill was little, and whereof he was, and
still is altogether incapable; and although for a time upon the selfe-denying
Ordinance he was displaced; yet, upon the motion, or by the power and means of
the said Master Hollis, he has obtained the same office again to the great
prejudice of skillful Clerks that have been bred up in the said Court, to the
disservice of the commonwealth and the dishonor of the House.

25. That the said Master Long on purpose to drive on the designs in the said
several charges expressed, has for the space of two years last past, usually
pressed and urged several members to give their votes such ways as he
pleased, and to that end and purpose does constantly place himself near the
door of the House, that when any debate is concerning any design wherein his
party is engaged, he the said Master Long has used much tampering and violence
to such of his own party as would go out of the House, and has persuaded
them to continue there for their Votes, and he the said Mr. Long in case any
such have gone out of the House, has been very inquisitive where they might be
found, that so he may go for them when the business in debate comes near to
be put to the Vote; and if they come not according to his expectation, does
ordinarily and speedily run out of the House himself to call them and drive
them in again, that he has been commonly called (by those that are without the
House, and have taken notice of his actions) the Parliament Driver; whereby the
freedom of the Members is taken from them, the manner of Parliaments
proceedings much scandalized, and many times evil and dangerous designs drove
on in a faction by Votes, to the great prejudice of the Commonwealth.

All which matters and things the said Army shall and will be ready (in
convenient time) to make good by proof upon Oath, as this Honorable House
shall direct. And for that by reason of the straitness of time, and other more
weighty affairs of the Army, they could not so fully finish and accomplish the
said Articles, therefore the said Army still reserves further liberty to add
other Articles against the said Members or any of them at any time before their
Trial, as occasion shall serve.

BY the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Counsel of
War. Signed John Rushworth, Secr.

Mr. Speaker,
HAving this day received papers from the Northern Forces, under Col. Genesis
Pointz his command, with some other papers from Col. Thornhaghs Regiment (which
is already marched up to Buckingham) wherein they express their resolutions to
associate themselves with this Army, for the more speedy and happy effecting
of a true, lasting, and well grounded Peace, to the King, Parliament, and
Kingdom; and in order to that, have delayed obedience to the command of many
of their Officers, who for some reasons best known to themselves, have refused
to join with them in their just desires; and have also, as formerly, now
again petitioned me to exempt them from further obedience to any other
command, then what may conduce for the obtaining of the just desires, and
establishment of the peace of the Kingdom, as in the enclosed papers is more
fully expressed, and further desiring to march up speedily to the Army. All which
being of so great concernment to the Kingdom, and not well admitting delay,
thought fit to represent unto you with speed their several Papers and Desires,
that I might receive your pleasure concerning the things they desire, and your
commands for their present disposal; to the end they may be better kept in
Discipline and obedience, and such disorders prevented, as by reason of their
want of Officers they may be subject to run unto; and likewise to continue them
in the North, lest by their motion to the Army they might draw a greater
concourse and burden of Soldiers Quarters upon these parts then they will be
well able to bear, and thereby the disaffected in those parts (during their
absence) may take that advantage to make insurrections, or any disturbance of
the peace there. For the prevention whereof, and disposition of the whole, as
well in order to the peace of this Kingdom, as speedy relief of Ireland, I
shall humbly make bold to offer my opinion, that since there are many several
distinct, and (through these late distractions) disjoynted Forces within this
Kingdom, which were sufficient, together with this Army (being united and well
managed) both to preserve the peace of this Kingdom, and give present relief
to Ireland (without putting this Kingdom to the charge of raising new Forces
at present for that service) That the Parliament would speedily put all the
Forces under one and the same Command, Discipline, and equal establishment for
future pay and maintenance, which being done, it would give much encouragement
to some of the Forces that may be spared out of all the Forces mentioned from
England, to go more cheerfully into Ireland, and if with this there were some
present course taken to provide for Arrears for such Forces as might be spared
for Ireland, there might in probability be an effectual relief sent over into
Ireland before this Summer be quite spent. All which I humbly tender to your
consideration, and desire your speedy Answer, that no time may be lost in so
good and necessary a work, both for the quiet of this Kingdom, and relief of
Ireland, wherein none shall be more ready to express their forwardness, then

Your most humble servant T. FAIRFAX.
Reading, July 16. 1647.
These several ensuing particulars, being considered, debated, and resolved
upon at a General Council of War (his Excellency being present) we the
Commissioners of the Army were appointed (in the name and behalf of them) to
present the same to your Lordships, and the Commissioners to be tendered with
all speed to the Parliament; which we accordingly offer and desire your speedy
care therein; That so an Answer (accarding to the desire and expectation of the
Army) may be speedily returned to these Particulars.
1. THat there be an effectual Declaration forthwith published to the whole
Kingdom, against the inviting, bringing or coming in of any foreign Forces,
under any pretense whatsoever.

2. That the Army may be paid up equal with the Desertors thereof, according
to the late Votes of Parliament: And that the Army may forth with be put into a
constant course of pay, that they may not be so burdensome and oppressive to
the Country; for the more speedy performance whereof; We desire, that the
House of Peers would be pleased to concur with the desires of the House of
Commons, (so often proposed to them) for the reviving of the Committee for the
Army, that so the Assessements and great sums in Arrears, both in the City
and elsewhere, may be by their endeavor collected for the speedy and necessary
supply of the Army: and also, that the Treasurers, and the Committee of
Weavers-Hall, may be speedily called to account, in what manner, and by what
Warrant the two hundred and thirty thousand pounds, lately entrusted in their
hands, have been in so short a time consumed.

3. That the Militia of the City of London, and the Committee of the same, may
consist of such persons, and speedily be returned into those hands, who
formerly during the worst of times, have therein given large Testimonies of
their fidelity to the Parliament and Kingdom: which besides the real
security, will be to the Parliament and Kingdom in preventing of dangers
repreparing toward a new War, would conduce so much to the remooving of
jealousies, and give such a ground of confidence to the army, as that we might
the better dispose it to larger Quarters in several parts, for the ease of the
Country.

By the appointment of the Commisisioners for the Army. William Clarke.
Reading 18. July 1647.
According to and in pursuance of the particular mentioned under the fifth Head
of the Representation of the Army, we do earnestly desire:
THat all persons imprisoned in England, or Dominion of Wales, (not for
Delinquency in relation to the late War, but for other pretended
misdemeanors) and whose imprisonment is not by the Regulated Course of law, but
by Order from either Houses of Parliament, (or of Committees flowing from them)
may be put into a speedy Regular and equitable way of trial, or (if the
necessity of settling the general affairs of the Kingdom admit not their
present trial) then they may have present liberty (upon reasonable security)
for their appearance at a certain day, to answer what shall be charged against
them in a legal way. And that when they should be tried, if they appear
wrongfully, or unduly imprisoned, they may have reparation according to their
sufferings.

In particular, we desire this may be done in behalf of Lieutenant Colonel
John Lilbourne, Mr. Musgrave, Mr. Overton, and others (in their condition)
imprisoned in and about London

By the Appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and his Council of
War. Signed, John Rushworth.
Reading July 18. 1647.
A Letter to the Lord Major, Court of Aldermen, and Common-Counsell, of the
City of LONDON.
My Lord and Gentlemen;
IN the carrying on of the great business of the Kingdom toward a general
and happy settlement, it has been a fixed principle with us to make it our
first endeavor with the Parliament, that all things which threaten an
engagement of the Kingdom in a second War, might be removed before we could
have a confident expectation of a good issue; upon a Treaty with their
Commissioners, which course of ours, although it might have some appearance of
delay: yet by men that are zealous of the Kingdoms good (we hope) no endeavor
will be judged ^^^ecessary, that may secure the Kingdom from the danger of any
new imbroylements.

We are now come thus far, that the most material particulars which we have
in preparation to propose, for the general settlement of the affairs of the
Kingdom, have bin communicated to the Parliaments Commissioners; and we hope
they are satisfied, that they contain in them things tending to a general
good, and to lay an hopeful Foundation for common Right, and Freedom, to the
people of this Land for future; and for a lasting peace amongst us. But before
we can securely intend and without interruption apply our selves, unto the
proceedings and dispatch of the Treaty, there upon we have delivered into the
hands of their Commissioners, the Paper which consists of three particulars, in
the last whereof (which is the Militia of the City) you being most immediately
concerned, to the end you may see we would ask nothing which relates to you,
without giving you a just account thereof, and all possible satisfaction
therein; we have also given a Copy thereof to your Commissioners, to be
herewith sent unto you. We should not desire this, or any thing else of that
nature, were we not persuaded that what we desire is seasonable, and for yours
and the Kingdoms good and quiet. And we should willingly have been silent (as
to this) but considering the just jealousies which lie against some persons,
now authorized in the exercise of that power amongst you, and those attempts
which have been made by some, who would have engaged, your City, to a War,
had not your Lordships and the Court of Aldermen and Common-Couns^ll, by your
wisdom prevented it, by getting those Votes which were passed by the Militia,
made Null* We cannot in a case of this importance but deal freely with you,
in desiring your concurrence with ours to the Parliament; that the Militia may
be changed into those hands, out of which it was taken, of whose care and
fidelity to the Public, there has been so long and large experience, as few
ages have paralleled. And if the interest we have so long fought for be still
the same, let it not seem strange that we desire both of the Parliament and
Cit^, that those may be in places of such a Trust, who have given the best
proof of their courage and constancy in prosecation of the same.

Having thus far declared our selves with all freedom and clearness to you,
as we do not dobut of your good acceptance of our intention therein, so we
desire your forwardness in a work so much tending to mutual confidence; and
to prevent the designs of any who would be glad to put obstructions in the way
to a happy conclusion, and envy nothing more then the continuance of a right
understanding between you and us.

By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Council of
War. Signed, John Rushworth, Secr.
Reading, July 19. 1647.
A further Proposal from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Counsel
of War of the Army under his Command.
WHereas diverse persons really affected to the weal and peace of this Kingdom
(many whereof have engaged their estates and lives with the Parliament in the
late war) are now imprisoned, indicted, and otherwise very grievously vexed
(and many others liable to the like trouble) by force or pretense of several
Statutes (especially intended) against those who repair not to some Church or
Chapel to hear the Book of Common Prayer, or against those who are Popish
Recusants, and by their not going to Church might be discovered: and against
those who should hold any Conventicles of meetings to plot and conspire some
mischief to the State. Now forasmuch as the Parliament has declared against
the Book of Common Prayer, and that the said Act against the Conventicles, was
not intended against people meeting only for Religious Exercises: We therefore
desire, That all persons proceeded against upon the Statutes of 35. Eliz. 3.
Jacobi, or upon any other Statutes or Acts whatsoever of the same Tenor with
the premises, may be forthwith discharged from their imprisonments,
indictments, or any other molestation whatsoever, by virtue of the
forementioned Statutes, unless such persons shall be proved either Popish
Recusants (and that by some other way then by their not coming to Church) or
to have in such private meetings as aforesaid some perjurious design,
conspiracy and practice against the State.

And for a more effectual course herein, We desire that the Parliament would
be pleased to give Orders accordingly to all the Judges of Assizes for this
next Circuit throughout the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales (as part
of their Instructions) to acquit all persons suffering as aforesaid, by virtue,
or under pretense of the said Statutes, otherwise then as before excepted: and
to give the whole matter so in charge, that all Justices of the Peace, and whom
else the same shall concern, may not henceforth attempt to bring the like
trouble upon any other of the well-affected people of this Kingdom, under the
like pretense, as they will answer the contrary at their peril.

Redding, July 21. 1647. By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax, and his Council of War. Signed, John Rushworth, Secr.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
We received this enclosed paper the last night, from the hands of a very
well-affected Citizen, it was delivered him by an Officer of the City Militia,
who being invited to meet some Citizens at Skinners Hall upon Wednesday last,
with diverse others to sign the same, and offering to dispute against the
matter of it, to show how dangerous and illegal it was, was silenc't and told
that it was not to be disputed, but to be signed and joined in, there being
diverse Citizens and others at the same place for that purpose, which when he
understood, he took this printed copy away with him.

By the contents of which when you read it, you will easily pereeive what it
tends to, and how desperate and dangerous it is to the hazard of the whole
Kingdom, and to frustrate all those endeavors of the Parliament, the Army and
Kingdom for an happy settlement, and likewise to precipitate all into a new
and bloody War, we cannot therefore but acquaint you that we look on this as
a business set on foot by the malice of some desperate minded men, this being
their last Engine for the putting all into confusion, when they could not
accomplish their wicked ends by other means. To this have all secret listings
tended, and we wish that the needless and superfluous li^ing of Auxiliaries
and connivance at the continuance of the Reformadoes about the Cities of London
and Westminster, have not had the same aim, and by this we hope it will
appear that our jealousies and fears of some such desperate design to be
hatched in and about the City (considering the temper of men there) have not
bin groundless, nor our desires to draw near the City of London with the army
to disappoint and break all such plots, and to free the Parliament from the
violence of them, have not been without just cause, and we desire all
indifferent different men to judge whether our withdrawing from the City in
obedience to the Parliaments command was for their and the Kingdoms security or
not: we wonder that diverse men did calumniate, that our marching so near the
City, and put so bad Representations upon it, as that it tended to force the
Parliament, or to plunder the City: seeing our doing so, was to break that
black design which now begins to show it self in its colors, whereas indeed
our consciences witness with us, that our aims were clear and honest, tending
to restore the Parliament into its just liberty, which was much abated in the
eyes of all the Kingdom, and no doubt by the Authors and contrivers of this
new Covenant and engagement; some whereof have been so far from assisting to
put the Reformadoes and other dangerous persons out of the Lines, that now they
are called to join in this conspiracy: we entreat you to give the Parliament a
full representation of these things, which that you may do; we have sent you
the Papers, together with such informations as may give them an opportunity to
discover the bottom of this business, we were marching from London (when we
received this information) in obedience to the Parliament, and to give the City
more content, and to stop the mouths of slanderers; But if such Designs, so
destructive to the Parliament, and the work in hand be suffered to go on, or
that the Parliament be interrupted in the freedom of their debates and
proceedings as we hear within these few days they were, by those that are
invited to partake in this confederacy: We beg it of the Parliament, as they
tender their own safety, the peace of the Kingdom, and preventing of a second
War, as they would not have the Kingdom lose the fruit and benefit of all
the blood and treasure that has been spent in this cause, that they would not
suffer their freedom and liberty to be endangered by such designs as these,
they having an Army which by the blessing of God, in spite of all that theirs
and the Kingdoms enemies can do, will stand and fall with them, and be found
faithful and obedient to them in all things, and as ready to relieve Ireland
when the Peace and rights of this Kingdom are settled: We write not this to
desire the Parliament to invite us to march up to them, we care not how great
a a distance we are from London, if it be the Parliaments pleasure, and
consists with their security, and the breaking of those combinations which are
hatched in the bowels of the City, we are hastening our Proposalls which are
for the general settlement, and which (we are confident) will satisfy all
that love truth and peace: but we see plainly, we need more to intend
security, then have cause to expect to bring things to an happy issue by
Treaty, while such designs are on foot: We pray you therefore that the
Parliament would speedily and thoroughly enquire into, and break these designs
wherein as in all things else, we shall be ready to serve them as they shall
judge it needful, and when they shall command us.

By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and his Council of
War. Signed. John Rushworth, Secr.
Alisbury, July 23. 1647.
BY a printed paper come to our hands this day (a Copy whereof you receive
herewith) we still find, and clearly and evidently perceive that some evil
spirits within the City of London, maliciously disaffected to the peace of
this Kingdom, do secretly and wickedly endeavor to bring about that mischief
upon the Kingdom which we have so much feared, and by all our several
addresses unto you sought to prevent; which indeed are of that dangerous
consequence as we can expect no other issue from, then the unavoydable engaging
the Kingdom in a second War, if not timely and effectually prevented by your
wisdom and diligence. We must further observe unto you, that whatsoever
designs intended in the foresaid paper, is contrary to the authority of
Parliament, and indirect opposition to the proceedings of the army (which the two
Houses have owned as theirs and approved of their fidelity by committing the
forces of the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Islands of Garnsey
and Jersey, under the Generals care and command) and therefore cannot be
effected, but by force of arms against the Parliament and their Armies, which
in probability may involve the whole Kingdom in blood; but must necessarily
begin within your own bowels, and draw the Seat and misery of war upon you and
your City.

Also we desire you would consider, whether we have not just cause to suspect
that an evil party lurkes within the City ready to distemper it and the whole
Kingdom upon every occasion, and whether it be probable such persons desire a
happy close between the King and the Parliament (at least such as will be for
the Kingdoms good) when they take upon them the boldness to make new offers to
his Majesty with solemn engagements to make good the same, during the time
that this Parl. had given us leave to make tender of, and treat with their
Commissioners about those things which tend to a general settlement. And
therefore we cannot but desire, that you would take a speedy course timely to
suppress this great evil, and to prevent all of this nature for the future,
and by making some of those examples who have been active to carry on this
business: we have not had time to enquire into particulars, but shall give
you only one instance of a meeting at Skinners Hall concerning this business,
where some persons have been very active, (the names of some of whom we have
given to your Commissioners) and also the names of other Citizens who will
testify their carriage there.

Lastly, we cannot but desire you to concur with us in our desires to the
Parliament, to put the Militia into the hands of those that had it before;
without which we can have no assurance that the City will be free from designs
of this nature, nor can we expect to see a happy Close.

By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax and his Council of
War. Signed, John Rushworth.
Alisbury, July 23. 1647.
To the Right Honorable the Lord Major, the right Worshipful the Aldermen and
Commons of the City of London, in the Common or Guild Hall of the City of
London assembled.
The humble Petition of the Citizens, Commanders, Officers, and Soldiers of
the Trained Bands and Auxiliaties, the young men and Apprentices of the Cities
of London and Westminster, Sea-Commanders, Seamen and Watermen, together with
with diverse other Commanders, Officers and Soldiers within the Line of
Communication, and Parishes, mentioned in the Weekly Bill of Mortality,
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioners (taking into serious consideration how Religion, his
Majesty's Honor and safety, the privileges of Parliament, and liberties of
the Subjects are at present greatly endangered, and like to be destroyed, and
also sadly weighing with our selves, what means might likely prove the most
effectual, to procure a firm and lasting Peace, without a further effusion of
Christian English blood, have therefore entered into a solemn engagement which
is hereunto annexed, and do humbly and earnestly desire, that this whole City
may join together by all lawful and possible means as one man, in hearty
endeavors for his Majesty's present coming up to his two Houses of
Parliament, with Honor, safety, and freedom, (and that without the nearer
approach of the Army) there to confirm such things as he has granted in his
Message of the twelfth of May last, in answer to the Propositions of both
Kingdoms, and that by a Personal Treaty with His two Houses of Parliament,
and the Commissioners of the Kingdom of Scotland, such things as yet are in
difference may be speedily settled, and a firm and lasting Peace established;
All which we desire may be presented to both houses of Parliament from this
honorable Assembly.

And we shall pray.
A solemn engagement of the Citizens, Commanders, Officers and Soldiers of
the Trained bands and Auxiliaries, the young men and Prentices of the Cities of
London and Westminster, Sea Commanders, Seamen and Watermen, together with
diverse others, the Commanders, Officers and soldiers within the lines of
Communication, and Parishes mentioned in the Weekly Bill of Mortality.
WHereas we have entered into a solemn League and Covenant, for Reformation
and defense of Religion, the honor and happiness of the King, and the peace
and safety of the 3. Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, all which we
do iminently perceive not only to be endangered, but ready to be destroyed; we
do therefore in pursuance of our said Covenant, oath of Allegiance, oath of
every Freeman of the Cities of London and Westminster, and protestation
solemnly engage our selves, and vow unto Almighty God, that we will to the
utmost of our power, cordially endeavor that His Majesty may speedily come to
his 2. Houses of Parliament, with Honor, safety, and freedom, (and that
without the nearer aproach of the Army) there to confirm such things as he has
granted in his Message of the 12. of May last, in answer to the Propositions of
both Kingdoms, and that by a Personal Treaty with his 2. Houses of Parliament,
and the Commissioners of the Kingdom of Scotland, such things as yet are in
difference may be speedily settled, and a firm and lasting peace established,
for the effecting hereof we do protest and reobliege our selves as in the
presence of God the searcher of all hearts, with our lives and fortunes, to
endeavor what in us lie to preserve and defend His Majesty's Royal Person,
and authority, the privileges of Parliament, and liberty of the Subject in
their full and constant freedom, the Cities of London and Westminster, lines of
Communication, and Parishes mentioned in the weekly Bill of Mortality, and all
others that shall adhere with us to the said Covenant, and oath of Allegiance,
oath of every Freeman of London and Westminster, and Protestation. Nor shall
we by any means admit, suffer, or endure any neutrality in this common cause
of God, the King, and Kingdom as we do expect the blessing of Almighty God,
whose help we crave, and wholly devolve our selves upon in this our undertaking.

I. Do hereby require the chief Officer present with every Troop and
Company, to make strict enquiry what Cavalliers have been listed and
entertained in their Troops or Companies, since the Muster preceding the last
Muster; And that all such chief Officers shall presently upon such enquiry as
before, put forth of their Troops or Companies of such Cavalliers as they
shall find in their Troops or companies from such Musters (as before) And
before they receive any pay upon this last Muster, they shall expunge all such
Cavalliers out of their Muster Rolls, as they shall have put out of their
Troops or Companies. And if it shall hereafter appear (that any chief Officer
present with their Troop or Company) shall neglect is put forth, or cashiere
such Cavalliers in manner as before, or receive any for the time to come upon
proof thereof made, he shall be liable to a Council of War, and be
accordingly proceeded against.

Given under my Hand the 21. of July, 1647. Tho: Fairfax.

For the Commissioners of Parliament residing with the Army.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
HAving resolved upon this enclosed dispatch from the City of London, I thought
it my part to give you an account of it, and to give you all assurance that my
heart is deeply affected with the late carriages toward the Parliament. And
how-ever others have neglected their duty toward them for their security and
defense; yet as God shall enable me, it shall be my great business to improve
all that is in my hand for the preserving of them, and in them the interest of
this Nation. And what construction soever some formerly may have put upon the
proceedings of this Army: I trust the Lord will by his good hand lead us into
such good actions as shall witness our end answerable to all our professions,
to wit, for the good of the Kingdom, and thereinto be an effectual saving to
great authority of the Kingdom in the Parliament.

I rest, Your most assured friend, Tho. Fairfax.
Bedford, July 29. 1647.
To the Right Honorable the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council of the
City of London.
My Lord and Gentlemen,
YOu may please to remember the forward compliance of this Army with your
desires, to remove to this distance, and that upon the assurance you gave them
of your concurrence with their declared desires, for the settling the liberty
and peace of this Kingdom, (against which you never yet offered us one
exception, or any ground of dissent) as also of your great tenderness and
resolution to secure the Parliament and their Privileges, from any violence or
attempt, the chief reason given us of your late listing of new forces, and
wherein we did most acquiesce.

That upon this confidence we had disposed the Army into several parts of the
Kingdom; for the ease of the whole, to above 100. miles distance: we had given
up our selves to the effecting of such proposalls as might tend to the
comfortable settlement of this poor Kingdom, and we were in a hopeful way for
the speedy relief of Ireland.

We cannot then but be deeply sensible of the unparalled violation acted upon
the Parliament, upon Monday last, by a rude multitude from your City, because
therein (the guards sent from the City did not only neglect their duty for the
security of the Parliament from such violence, and the whole City to yield any
relief to the houses in that extremity, but I am assured from eye and
ear-witnesses, that diverse of the Common Council gave great encouragement to
it, which does not only gainsay your former professions, but does violence to
those many obligations that (by your Charter, Protestation, and sundry other
ways) lie upon you to protect the Parliament.

For my part I cannot but look on your selves (who are in authority) as
accountable to the Kingdom, for your present interruptions of that hopeful
way of Peace and settlement, things were in for this Nation, and of relieving
Ireland, occasioned by the late Treasonable and destructive engagement:
Especially the lately prodigious and horrid force done upon the Parliament,
tending to dissolve all government, upon which score we and the whole Kingdom
shall have cause to put every thing of the like nature that may happen to the
Parliament, or to any who are friends to them and this Army, except by your
wisdom, care, and industry, the chief acters in the Premises may be
detected, secured and given up to the procuring of justice for the same, and
the best endeavors used to prevent the like for the future.

And so I rest, Your most assured friend to serve you, Tho. Fairfax.
Bedford, 29. July, 1647.
A Declaration of William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the Honorable House of
Commons.
ALthough it may happily be contrary to the expectation of some, that I attend
not the service of the House of Commons at this time, as I have constantly done
for almost 7. years last past, yet can it not be reasonably expected by any
that well consider the violence offered to both Houses of Parliament, and to my
self in particular on Monday last, insomuch that I can safely take it upon my
conscience, and so I doubt not may all the Members of both Houses also, they
sat in continual fear of their lives, and by terror thereof were compelled
to pass such Votes as it pleased an unruly multitude to force upon them; which
as I did then openly declare in the House, so I cannot but believe that they
are all void, and null, being extorted by force and violence, and in that
manner that they were, and I cannot any longer dispense with my self to be an
instrument in passing such Votes, or to give any color or shadow of
Parliamentary authority unto them, which are not the Votes of the
representative body of the Kingdom, but of a tumultuous multitude as those must
needs be accounted, that seemed to pass the House on Monday last, and which
shall pass hereafter until better provision be made for the safe and free
sitting of the Houses of Parliament, there being no effectual course taken by
the City since the last adjournment of the Houses to prevent the like tumults
for the future, no nor so much as a Declaration from them to show their dislike
thereof, but on the contrary it is generally voyced in the Town, that there
will be a far greater confluence of Apprentices, Reformadoes, and others, on
Friday at the Parliament doors; and particularly notice was given to me, that
after they had made the House vote what they pleased, they would destroy me; I
had likewise information given me, that there would be a great number of
Apprentices of a contrary Opinion and affections, to the other about the
Parliament doors on Friday mornings, which I foresaw must of necessity cause a
great combustion, and in probability occasion much bloodshed; the preventing
of which mischiefs, together with the considerations aforesaid, have weighed
more with me then any thing which may concern my particular, and esp^cially
having served the House faithfully and diligently for the space of very near
seven years, in a true and Parliamentary way of proceedings, that I might not
now be made a servant to such a multitude to transfer upon them the color of
Parliamentary authority, therewithal to abuse and deceive the minds, and to
destroy the lives, liberties, and estates of the people of this Kingdom; And
having taken a solemn Protestation and Covenant in my place and calling to
maintain the privileges of Parliament, and the rights and liberties of the
Subjects, I could not now satifie my self, but by absenting my self at this
time, rather then by my presence to give any shadow or countenance of the
authority of Parliament to such apparent violations thereof; neither can the
omission of a circumstance, or some fo^mality in the adjournment of the House,
(when through force and violence it cannot meet and sit in any sort as a
Parliament) be any prejudice to the future meeting and proceedings thereof,
when it may meet and sit again as a free Parliament, it being well known that
nothing can dissolve this Parliament but an Act of Parliament.

When a company of Apprentices, Reformadoes and others, shall call the
Ordinances of Parliament pretended Ordinances, shall lock the doors of the
houses upon them, shall swear not to let them out till they had passed what
they pleased concerning the Militia of London, and other things, (though the
Houses had immediately before voted otherwise) shall threaten the Houses in
case they did not instantly satisfy their demands; shall knock, whoot, and
hollow continually at the Parliament door that the Members could not be heard
to speak or debate; and after that the House of Commons had passed a Vote
concerning the Militia of London, and that the Speaker by the Vote had judged
the major part to be for the Negative, shall not suffer the House to be
divided, but in a threatening way require those that gave their votes against
them to come out to them if they would; when after the House was adjourned,
they shall by main force thrust back the Speaker again into the House, and
force the Members in their presence and sight (diverse of them thrusting into
the House to vote what they demanded, when they shall justly pull and hale the
Speaker all the way he went down to his Coach, and force him to avoid their
violence to betake himself to the next coach he could get into for refuge,
when they shall breath forth bloody threats against the Members as they came
out of the House, and since against me in particular at the next meeting of the
House (as I am credibly informed) and when there is no appearance, but that
they will continue to do as formerly they have done, or far worse on Friday, I
could not in discharge of my Trust, Protestation, and Covenant, sit in the
Chair of the House of Commons whilst it shall be in such a condition: but so
soon as it may sit again in freedom and safety, I shall be ready to attend the
service thereof; but till then as I have upon the forementioned grounds, fully
satisfied my own conscience, so I doubt not but I shall give the whole Kingdom
(whose interest is most concerned in it) ample satisfrction in the necessity of
my absence.

William Lenthall, Speaker.

For his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and his Council of WAR.
Right Honorable,
BY those of our Committee which came from you this day, we understand your
Excellencies and your Honorable Council of War, their expectation to be
possessed of all Forts from Giles fort, and that to be one down unto the River
side by six of the clock this Evening. And we take notice for what reasons your
Excellency is led to insist thereupon. For our parts that we may manifest how
ready we are to comply with all things which may beget a good understanding,
we have readily consented thereunto, as far as the cognizance thereof belongs
to this court, and have given directions accordingly to the Committee of the
Militia, for drawing off all Forces and Ordnance, unto which work they do now
instantly apply themselves, and we are confident your Excellency will find
performance acordingly. The Committee of Militia will also give order for
quitting such Forts on Southwark side, as are not as yet in possession of your
Forces. And now next unto Almighty God we do rely upon your Excellencies
honorable word for our safety, and to be protected from all violence of the
Soldiery.

Michel.
4. August, 1647.
For the Right Honorable the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council of the
City of London.
My Lord and Gentlemen,
I Am very glad to find so ready a compliance in answer to my last desire sent
to the Common Council, and have accordingly given order for 3. Regiments of
Foot and two of Horse, to possess those Forts you mentioned in your last, and
to lie thereabouts; I am with the rest of the Army marched up to Hammersmith,
in order to the security of the Lords and Commons, who I suppose will to morrow
sit in Parliament, the preserving of their privileges, and securing them from
violence, that with freedom they may sit to discharge their trusts, has been
the cause of my near approach to your City; And whereas you are pleased to
express your hopes of preservation from violence, you may be confident nothing
shall pass from this Army, but what shall be for the safety of your City! And
I doubt not, though some disaffected persons to the peace of this Kingdom have
endeavored to beges a misunderstanding between this Army and the City, hoping
thereby to embroyle the Kingdom in new troubles; Yet that this Army may always
behave themselves as to witness to the world the integrity of their hearts, in
having no other design but the quiet and happy settlement of a firm and lasting
peace, wherein both the whole Kingdom, and your City in particular will have
cause to rejoice in the goodness of God: the accomplishment whereof will truly
glad the hearts of this Army, and in particular of

Your most humble Servant, Tho: Fairfax.
August 5. 1647.
A Declaration from His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and his Council of
War.
Concerning the Proposalls of the Army for settling of a Peace, and the grounds
of publishing the heads thereof.
SInce our drawing back to Reading, we have applied our selves with all
diligence to frame, and hasten an entire body of all the particular proposals,
which we would tender to the Commissioners of Parliament residing with the
Army, to be treated on in pursuance of those general desires, expressed in our
former Declarations and Papers, for the securing of the common rights and
liberties, and a present settling of the peace of the Kingdom. In which
business, (notwithstanding, the many interruptions and disturbances, with
daily advertisements of the indirect and treacherous practices and preparations
of the Committee of Militia, and others in and about the City of London, and
elsewhere tending to a new War, have occasioned; to the diverting or retarding
of our proceeding therein, yet,) we have made a progress as speedy as the
nature and weight of such a work would admit, and having finished the same, we
have delivered in an abstract of the Heads thereof unto the said Commissioners
of Parliament to be treated upon.

But the late pernicious Engagement for on ^^o^^ in the (...) and (much more,)
that prodigious violence do^e to both Hou^^ (...) on Monday last, having wholly
taken us off for present, and rendered all proceeding in the way of Treaty
thereupon n^^erely vain and hopeless, until it shall please God, the
Parliament be righted and vindicated against that violation done to it, and
restored into a condition of freedom, so as the unquestioned Members of it may
repair together with safety, and proceed according to their just freedom.
We have thought good in the mean time to make this public tender of the
Heads of the Proposalls to the Consideration of the whole Kingdom, wherein
though all circumstances requisite to be determined in an actu^ll settlement,
^e not so fully and perfectly expressed, as upon the Treaty intended (if not
interrupted, as before,) they might speedily have been, yet all men may see and
understand in these the effect and bottom of our desires, whereupon we have
sincerely studied, that a present peace might be satled; which same thing,
(with and after such vindication of the Parliament, as may again render it
into a capacity to establish the same,) we shall still faithfully endeavor
to the utmost of our powers, and accordingly shall expect the cheerful and
hearty concurrence of all those who are or shall be satisfied, concerning the
integrity of our intentions to the peace and welfare of the Kingdom in these
Proposalls, or who shall (for the maine) desire or approve of the same things
with us in order to a settlement.

And to these Proposalls which we here first tender as necessary to a Peace,
and upon which we desire the seal of peace, (in the restitution of his
Majesty and others to their Rights, and in an Act of Oblivion to be past,) we
cannot but add the further expression of our desires in some other
particulars, which (though not so essential to peace, as necessarily to
precede the settling of it, yet) being matters of very public, and (most of
them) of general grievance to the Kingdom (which we every where find the
Outcries of,) and being contained in, or pursuance of the same things
expressed in our former Representations, and Papers: We shall desire, that
(the Parliament being set free) no time may be lost for a speedy Consideration
of them, so as the former things for the present settling of peace be not
delayed thereby.

Signed by the Appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the
Council of War. Jo: Rushworth, Secretary.
Colbrooke August 2. 1647.
The Heads of the PROPOSALLS agreed upon by his, Excie Sir THO: FAIRFAX, and
the Council of the Army, to be tendered to the Commissioners of Parliament,
residing with the Army, and with them to be treated on by the Commissioners of
the Army.
Containing the particulars of their desires in pursuance of their former
Declarations and Papers: In order to the clearing and securing of the Rights
and Libertles of the Kingdom, and the settling a just and lasting peace. To
which are added some further particular desires (for the removing and
redressing of diverse present pressing grievances) being also comprised in, or
necessary pursuance of their former Representations and Papers appointed to be
Treated upon.
1.THat (the things hereafter proposed, being provided for by this Parliament)
a certain period may (by Act of Parliament) be set for the ending of this
Parliament, (such period to be within a year at most,) and in the same Act
provision to be made for the succession and constitution of Parliaments in
future as follows.

1. THat Parliaments may Blennially be called, and meet at a certain day, with
such provision for the certainty thereof, as in the late Act was made for
Trienniall-Parliaments, and what further or other provision shall be found
needful by the Parliament, to reduce it to more certainty; and upon the
passing of this, the said Act for Trienniall-Parliaments to be repealed.

2. Each Bienniall Parliament to sit 120. days certain (unless^ adjourned, or
dissolved sooner by their own consent) afterward to b^ adjournable or
dissolveable by the King; and no Parliament to sit past 240. days, from their
first meeting or some other limited number of days now to be agreed on: upon
the expiration whereof, each Parliament to dissolve of course, if not otherwise
dissolved sooner.

3. The King upon advice of the Council of State in the intervalls bewixt
Bienniall-Parliaments, to call a Parliament extraordinary, provided it meet
above seventie days before the next Bienniall day, and be dissolved at least
sixty days before the same, so as the course of Bienniall-elections may never
be interrupted.

4. That this Parliament and each succeeding Bienniall-Parliament, at, or
before adjournment, or dissolution thereof, may appoint Committees to continue
during the intervall, for such purposes as are in any of these Proposalls
referred to such Committees.

5. That the Elections of the Commons for succeeding Parliaments, may be
distributed to all Counties, or other parts or divisions of the Kingdom,
according to some rule of equality or proportion, so as all Counties may have a
number of Parliament Members allowed to their choice, proportionable to
therespective Rates they bear in the common charges, and burdens of the
Kingdom, according to some other rule of equallity or proportion, to render
the House of Commons, (as near as may be) an equal Representative of the
whole, and in order thereunto, that a present consideration be had to take off
the Elections of Burgesses, for poor decayed, or inconsiderable Towns, and to
give some present addition to the number of Parliament-Members for great
Counties, that have now less then their due proportion, to bring all (at
present) as near as may be, to such a rule of proportion, as aforesaid.

6. That effectual provision be made for future freedom of Elections, and
certainty of due returns.

7. That the House of Commons alone have the power from time to time, to set
down further orders and rules for the ends expressed in the two last preceding
Articles, so as to reduce the Elections of Members for that House, to more and
more perfection of equality in the distribution, freedom in the Election,
order in the proceeding thereto, and certainty in the Returns, which orders
and rules (in that case) to be as Laws.

8. That there be a liberty for entering dissents in the House of Commons with
provision, that no Member be censurable for ought said or voted in the House,
further then to exclusion from that trust, and that only by the judgment of
the House it self.

9. That the judicial power, or power of small Judgment in the Lords and
Commons (and their power of Exposition and Application of Law) (without further
appeal) may be cleared: And that no Officer of Justice, Minister of State, or
other person adjudged by them, may be capable of Protection, or pardon from the
King, without their advice and consent.

10. That the Right and liberty of the Commons of England, may be cleared and
vindicated, as to a due Exemption from any Judgment, Trial, or other
proceeding against them by the House of Peers, without the concurring
Judgment of the House of Commons. As also from any other judgment, sentence,
or proceeding against them, other then by their equals, or according to the
Law of the Land.

11. The same Act to provide, that grand Jurymen may be chosen by, and for
several parts or divisions of each County respectively, in some equal way
(and not remain as now at the discretion of an under-Sheriffe, to be put on or
off;) And that such Grand Jurymen for their respective Counties, may at each
Assize present the names of persons to be made Justices of Peace, from time to
time, as the Country has need for any to be added to the Commission, and at
the summer Assize to present the names of three persons, out of whom the King
may prick one to be Sheriff for the next year.

II. For the future security to Parliaments, and the Militia in general in
order thereunto, that is be provided by Act of Parliament.

1. That the power of the Militia by Sea and Land, during the space of ten
years next ensuing, shall be ordered and disposed by the Lords and Commons
Assembled, and to be Assembled in the Parliament or Parliaments of England, or
by such persons as they shall nominate and appoint for that purpose from time
to time during the said space.

2. That the said power shall not be ordered, disposed, or exercised by the
Kings Majesty that now is, or by any person or persons by any Authority derived
from him during the said space, or at any time hereafter by his said Majesty,
without the advice and consent of the said Lords and Commons, or of such
Committees, or Council in the intervals of Parliament, (...) they shall
appoint.

3. That during the some sp^^ce of ten years, the said Lords and Commons may
by Bill or Ordinance raise and dispose of what moneys, and for what Forces they
shall from time to time find necessary; ^s also for payment of the public
debts and damages; and for all other the public uses of the Kingdom.

4. And to the end the tempor^^y security intended by the three particulars
last precedent may be the better assured, it may therefore be provided, That no
Subjects that have been in Hostility against the Parliament in the late war,
shall be capable of bearing any Office of power ^s public trust in the
Commonwealth during the space of five years, without consent of Parliament,
or of the Council of State, or to sit as Members or assistants of either House
of Parliament, until the second-^ituniall Parliament be past.

III. For the present form of disposing the Militia in order to the peace and
safety of this Kingdom, and the service of Ireland.

1. That there be Commissioners for the Admiralty with a Vice Admiral and
Rere^ Admiral, now to be agreed on, with power for the forming, regulating,
appointing of Officers, and providing for the Navy, and for ordering the same,
to and in the ordinary service of the Kingdom. And that there be a sufficient
provision and establishment for pay and maintenance thereof.

2. That there be a General for command of the Land Forces that are to be in
pay, both in England, Ireland, and Wales, both for Field and Garrison.

3. That there be Commissioners in the several Counties, for the standing
Militia of the respective Counties (consisting of Trained Bands and Auxiliaries
not in pay,) with power for the proportioning, forming, regulating, training,
and disciplining of them.

4. That there be a Council of State with power to superintend and direct the
several, and particular powers of the Militia last mentioned for the peace and
safety of this Kingdom, and of Ireland.

5. That the same Council may have power as the Kings privy Council, for and
in all foreign negotiations; provided, That the making of war or peace with
any other Kingdom or State, shall not be without the advice and consent of
Parliament.

6. That the said power of the Council of State be put into the hands of
trusty and able persons now to be agreed on, and the same persons to continue
in that power (si been se gesserint,) for a certain Term not exceeding seven
years.

7. That there be a sufficient establishment now provided for the salary Forces
both in England and Ireland, the establishment to continue until two Months
after the meeting of the first Bienniall Parliament,

IV. That an Act be passed for disposing the great Offices for ten years by the
Lords and Commons in Parliament, or by such Committees as they shall appoint
for that purpose in the intervalls, (with submission to the approbation of the
next Parliament) and after ten years, they to nominate three, and the King out
of that number to appoint one for the succession, upon any vacancy.

V. That an Act be passed for restraining of any Peers, made since the 21. day
of May 1642. or to be hereafter made, from having any power to sit, or Vote in
Parliament, without consent of both Houses.

VI. That an act be passed, for recalling and making void all Declarations, and
other proceedings against the Parliament, or against any that have acted by, or
under their authority in the late War, or in relation to it. And that the
Ordinances for indemnity may be conffirmed.

VII. That an Act be be passed for making void all Grants, etc. under the
Great-Seale, that was conveyed away from the Parliament, since the time it was
so conveyed away (except as in the Parliaments Propositions) and for making
those valid that have been, or shall be passed under the Great-Seale made by
the authority of both Houses of Parliament.

VIII. That an Act be passed for confirmation of the Treaties between the two
Kingdoms of England and Scotland, and for appointing Conservators of the peace
betwixt them.

IX. That the Ordinance for taking away the Court of Wards and Liveries be
confirmed by Act of Parliament; Provided his Majesty's Revenue be not damnified
therein, nor those that last held Offices in the same left without reparation
some other way.

X. An Act to declare void the Cessation of Ireland etc. and to leave the
prosecution of that War to the Lords and Commons in the Parliament of England.

XI. An Act to be passed to take away all coercive power, authority and
jurisdiction of Bishops, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers whatsoever,
extending to any civil penalties upon any; and to repeal all Laws, whereby
the Civil Magistracy has been, or is bound, upon any Ecclesiastical censure
to proceed (ex officio) unto any civil penalties, against any persons so
censured.

XII. That there be a Repeal of all Acts, or Clauses in any Act, enjoining the
use of the Book of Common Prayer, and imposing any penalties, for neglect
thereof; as also of all Acts, or Clauses in any Act, imposing any penalty for
not coming to Church, or for meetings elsewhere; for Prayer, or other
religious duties, excercises, or Ordinances: And some other provision to be
made for discovering of Papists and Popish Recusants, and for disabling of
them, and of all Jesultes, or Priests, from disturbing the State.

XIII. That the taking of the Covenant be not enforced upon any, nor any
penalties imposed upon the Refusers, whereby men might be constrained to take
it against their judgments, or consciences, but all Orders, or Ordinances
tending to that purpose to be repealed.

XIV. That (the things here before proposed, being provided, for settling and
securing the Rights, Liberties, Peace, and safety of the Kingdom) his
Majesty's person, his Queen, and Royal issue, may be restored to a condition
of safety, Honor, and freedom in this Nation, without diminution to their
personal Rights, or further limitation to the exercise of the Regal power,
then according to the particulars aforegoing.

XV. For the matter of Compositions.

1. That a lesser number out of the persons excepted in the two first
qualifications, (not exceeding five for the English,) being nominated
particularly by the Parliament, who (together with the persons in the Irish-
Rebellion, included in the third qualification,) may be reserved to the further
judgment of the Parliament, as they shall find cause: All other excepted
persons may be remitted from the exception, and admitted to Composition.

2. That the rates for all future Compositions may be lessened and limited,
not to exceed the several proportions hereafter expressed respectively. That is
to say.

1. For all persons formerly excepted, not above a third part.

2. For the late Members of Parliament, under the first branch of the fourth
qualification, in the Propositions, a fourth part.

3. For other Members of Parliament, in the second and third branches of the
same qualification, a sixth part.

4. For the persons nominated in the said fourth qualification; and those
included in the tenth qualification, and eight part.

5. For all others included in the sixth qualification, a tenth part.

And that real debts, either upon record, or proved by witnesses, be
considered, and abated in the valuation of their estates, in all the cases
aforesaid.

3. That those who shall hereafter come to compound, may not have the Covenant
put upon them, as a condition without which they may not compound, but in case
they shall not willingly take it, they may pass their Compositions without it.

4. That the persons and estates of all English, not worth two hundred pounds
in Lands or Goods, be at liberty and discharged: And that the Kings meniall
Servants, that nere took up Arms, but only attended his person according to
their Offices, may be freed from Composition, or to pay (at most) but the
proportion of one years Revenue, or a twentieth part.

5. That in Order to the making and perfecting of Compositions at the rates
aforesaid, the Rents, Revenues, and other Duties, and Profits of all sequestered
Estates whatsoever, (except the Estates of such persons who shall be continued
under exception as before) be from hence forth suspended and detained in the
hands of the respective tenant, occupants, and others from whom they are due,
for the space of six months following.

6. That the Faith of the Army, or other foroes of the Parliament, given in
Articles upon surrenders to any of the Kings party, may be fully made good, and
where any breach thereof shall appear to have been made, full reparation and
satisfaction may be given to the parties injured, and the persons offending
(being found out) may be comeplled thereto.

XVI. That there may be a general Act of Oblivion to extend unto all (except
the persons to be continued in exception as before) to absolve from all
Trespasses, Misdemeanors etc. done in prosecution of the War, and from all
trouble or prejudice for, or concerning the same (after their compositions
past) and to restore them to all privileges etc. belonging to other Subjects,
provided, as in the fourth particular under the second general Head
affore-going concerning security.

And whereas their have been of late strong endeavors and practices of a
factious and desperate party, to imbroyle this Kingdom in a new War, and for
that purpose to enduce the King, the Queen, and Prince, to declare for the
said party, and also to excite, and stir up all those of the Kings late
party, to appear and engage for the same, which attempts and designs, many of
the Kings party, (out of their desires to avoid further misery to the
Kingdom,) have contributed their endeavors to prevent, (as for diverse of them
we have had particular assurance,) we do therefore desire, that such of the
Kings party who shall appear to have expressed, and shall hereafter express
that way, their good affections to the peace and welfare of the Kingdom, and
to hinder the imbroyling of the same in a new War, may be freed and exempted
from compositions, or to pay but one years Revenue, or a twentieth part.

These particulars foregoing are the Heads of such proposalls as we have
agreed on, to tend in order to the settling of the peace of this Kingdom,
leaving the Terms of peace for the Kingdom of Scotland to stand as in the
late propositions of both Kingdoms, until that Kingdom shall agree to any
alteration.

Next to the Proposalls aforesaid for the present settling of a peace, we shall
desire, that no time may be lost by the Parliament for dispatch of other things
tending to the welfare, ease and just satisfaction of the Kingdom, and in
special manner.

1. That the just and necessary liberty of the people to represent their
grievances and desires by way of Petition, may be cleared and vindicated,
according to the fifth Head in the late Representation or Declaration of the
Army, sent from St. Albans.

2. That (in pursuance of the same Head in the said Declaration) the the common
grievances of the people, may be speedily considered of, and effectually
redressed, and in particular:

1. That the Excise may be taken off from such Commodities whereon the poor
people of the Land do ordinarily live: and a certain time to be limited for
taking off the whole.

2. That the oppressions and encroachments of Forrest-Laws may be prevented for
future.

3. All Monopolies (old or new) and restraints to the freedom of trade to be
taken off.

4. That a course may be taken, and Commissioners appointed to remedy and
rectify the inequallity of rates lying upon several Counties, and several
parts of each County, in respect of others, and to settle the proportions for
Land rates, to more equallity throughout the Kingdom, in order to which we
shall offer some further particulars, which we hope may be useful.

5. The present unequal, troublesome, and contentious way of Ministers
maintenance by Tithes, to be considered of, and some remedy applied.

6. That the rules and course of Law, and the Officers of it, may be so reduced
and reformed, as that all suits and questions of Right may be more clear and
certain in the issues, and not so tedious nor chargeable in the proceeding as
now, in order to which we shall offer some further particulars hereafter.

7. That Prisoners for Debt, or other Creditors (who have estates to discharge
them, may not by embracing imprisonment or any other ways have advantage to
defraud their Creditors, but that the Estates of all men may be some way made
liable to their Debts, (as well as Tradesmen are by Commissions of Bankrupt)
whether they be imprisoned for it, or not. And that such Prisoners for Debt,
who have not wherewith to pay, or at least do yield up what they have to their
Cred^tors, may be freed from imprisonment, or some way provided for, so as
neither they, nor their Families may perish by their imprisonments.

8. Some provision to be made, that none may be compelled by penalties or
otherwise, to answer unto questions tending to the accusing of themselves, or
their nearest relations in criminal causes; And no man's life to be taken away
under two witnesses.

9. That consideration may be had of all Statutes, and the Laws or Customs, of
Corporations, imposing any Oaths, either to repeal, or else to qualify and
provide against the same, so far as they may extend or be construed to the
molestation, or ensnareing of religious and peaceable people, merely for non
conformity in Religion.

3. That according to the sixth Head in the Declaration of the Army, the large
powers given to Committees, or Debuty Lieutenants during the la^e times of
war and distractio^, may be speedily taken into consideration, to be recalled
and made void, and that such powers of that nature as shall appear necessary
to be continued, may be put into a regulated way, and left to as little
Arbitrarinesse as the nature and necessity of the things (wherein they are
conversant) will bear.

4. That (according to the seventh Head in the said Declaration, an effectual
course may be taken, that the Kingdom may be righted and satisfied in point of
Accounts, for the vast sums that have been levied.

5. That provision may be made for payment of Arreares to the Army, and the
rest of the Soldiers of the Kingdom, who have concurred with the Army in the
late desires and proceedings thereof: And in the next place for payment of the
public debts and damages of the Kingdom, and that to be performed, first to
such persons whose debts or damages upon the public Account are great, and
their estates small, so as they are thereby reduced to a difficulty of
subsistence; In order to all which, and to the fourth particular last
preceding, we shall speedily offer some further particulars, (in the nature of
rules) which we hope will be of good use toward public satisfaction.

Signed by the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the
Council of War Jo. Rushworth, Secret.
August 1. 1647.
A DECLARATION From his Excellency Sir THO: FAIRFAX, And his Council of War.
WHen this Army was formerly led by the manifold dispensations of Gods
providence, and the grounds then declared, to advance toward the City of
London, we held it our duty, to yield the Kingdom, the sum of those desires
which we had to propose on behalf of it, and our selves, wherein we should
acquiesce: And having received from the Parliament, some hopes of due
satisfaction therein, and some assurance from the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Common Council of the City of London, of the ready concurrence with us in
those things; and also great resolution professed by them of their care and
tenderness, to preserve all the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, safe,
free, and inviolated, from attempts of all kinds, we do appeal to God, to
the City, and to all men, what a speedy compliance to their desires for our
removal to a further distance, found in this Army, for preventing all fears,
jealoufies, and other inconveniences to the City, and to give clear
testimony, that we had nothing in our breasts, but thoughts of peace, and the
good and welfare both of Parliament, City, and Kingdom, notwithstanding many
false and scandalous reports raised, that we sought our selves, that we had
vile and wicked ends, and that nothing would satisfy the Soldier but the
plunder of the City; the contrary whereof did manifestly appear, when they
readily marched back upon hopes of satisfaction in their desires of public
concernment.

Having then upon the aforesaid confidence so withdrawn, and out of a just
sense of the Countries suffering (by quartering) removed the Head-quarter of
the Army above forty miles from London, and dispersed the rest well nigh two
hundred miles, for the more ease of all parts, and that we might give the
better satisfaction to the Kingdom. And being in this secure way, and
laboring after the sudden settlement of the Kingdom, we had even brought to
perfection the particular Proposals (included in the generals of our first
Representation) to be sent to the Parliament, for a final conclusion of all
our troubles. And also had made good progress toward the present relief of
distressed Ireland, by assigning a competent force, both of horse and foot,
forthwith to have advanced for that service.

But the Kingdoms, and our Enemies being most vigilant and active, to prevent
and frustrate those good intentions, and endeavors of ours; (that they might
carry on their former evil designs) and underhand practices, and also
preserve themselves from the hand of justice, they have endeavored to cast the
Kingdom into a new and bloody war: And for that end have procured the
under-hand-listing of several Reformadoes, and others, have contrived,
promoted, and caused to be entered into by several persons, a wicked and
treasonable combination, as is sufficiently manifested by a Declaration passed
thereupon by both Houses of Parliament, the 23. of July last, for the
prevention of the disturbances that were like to ensue thereupon; from which
kind of disorders the City had been well preserved, during the space of
almost four years, whilst the Militia was in the hands of the old
Commissioners, whereby it appears there was cause for the Army to entreat the
Parliament, that the Militia might be returned into the hands it was in before;
as also for diverse other good Reasons.

1. The old Commissioners of the Militia (that have been since left out) were
not only persons with out all exception, having been formerly chosen and
approved by the Parliament and City; but also men of whom the City,
Parliament, and Kingdom, have had above four years experience in the
faithful discharge of their trust, men that ever from the beginning, in the
worst of times, and in the occasions of greatest difficulty, had faithfully
and constantly engaged for, and with the Parliament in this cause; M^n that
were always most desirous of a Peace, but of a safe and well grounded one, and
that had always testified a great care to prevent all occasions of embroyling
the Kingdom in a new War.

Now that on a sudden this trust which they had so faithfully discharged so
long, should be taken out of their hands, and put into the hands of others,
some whereof (at the best) have been very cool in the service of the
Parliament at the beginning of this War; That this should be pressed, and in
a manner forced upon the Parliament with such importunity from the
Common Council, that some out of every Ward should be assigned to solicit
the Members of the House of Commons every day as they went in and out at the
House; with professions that they would never leave the door of the House,
till they were satisfied in their desires. That they would not be contented
with the Militia of the City of London only, unless they might have power
also over that of the Suburbs and and out parts: and all this before the peace
of the Kingdom was settled, or the Propositions sent to the King for that
purpose.

These things ministered great cause of suspicion, that this alteration of the
Militia was in order to a design, and to make the terms of the Peace, and
agreement with the King, (on which the security of the whole Kingdom, and
their posterity is to be bottomed) more suitable to the private bargainings and
undertakings of some men, then to the public welfare of the whole Kingdom,
in its security and prosperity, for the present, and in future times. But this
design discovered it self more clearly by such things as accompanied the
pursuit of this alteration of the Militia, and ensued upon the obtaining
thereof: At the same time that the alteration of the Militia of London was set
on foot, the same persons with as much earnestness pressed for the disbanding
of this Army, before any thing was settled for the security and liberty of the
Kingdom. At the same time the Common Council was new modulized, and a Lord
Mayor chosen that might suite with the present design in hand: At the said
time (under color of differences in some circumstances of Church Government)
it was earnestly endeavored, that such as had been constantly true and most
faithful to the interest of the Kingdom should be disabled, to have any
employment in Church or Commonwealth, either in England or Ireland, and
without any such color or pretense, diverse persons were left out of the
Common Council, and Militia, of eminent deserts and fidelity: and others
brought into their rooms that had either testified an ill affection, or little
affection to the Parliament, and their cause: and such as seeking to withdraw
themselves from all employment in the beginning of this War, now at the
winding up thereof, are ambitious to thrust themselves into employment, with a
design (as may justly be suspected) to frustrate and overthrow in the close of
all, the fruit and effect of all the cost and blood that has been spent and
spilt in this cause: and after that with difficulty, and not without
reluctance, in the Houses of Parliament they had obtained the power of the
Militia, in the City of London, and also in the out parts for the space of one
year. Many Officers and under. Officers in the Trained Bands, of known trust
and fidelity were displaced, and others of more doubtful affections placed in
their rooms, little care was taken of the honor of the Parliament, which was
continu^lly trampled under-foot, and their authority affronted by every rabble
of Women, Apprentices, Reformadoes, and Soldiers, which latter sort of persons
were thereby so encouraged to rise higher and higher, in their tumultuous
carriages against the House, till at length it is risen to that height of
barbarous and monstrous violence against the Parliament, that they might set
themselves on work, and the Kingdom on fire again. And now at length the
design appears open faced, and though the Militia be made as the principal
ground of the quarrel, yet by the late vows and engagements set on foot
before any alteration of the Militia, and the pressing so much the Message of
the 12. of May, and the Kings coming to London to confirm the same, show,
that the Militia is desired but in order to that design, and to force the
Parliament (being wholly in their power) to such Terms of peace as they
pleased.

2. In the next place when the interest of the Common Council, in their change
of the Militia shall be claimed as the Birthright of the City of London,
(which they never had any color to pretend to, saving by the indulgency of the
Parliament unto them since this Parliament, in respect of the great use they
have had of them, and the many good services they have received from them.) It
is time for all the Kingdom to look to their Birthrights, if such a claim
shall be held up against both the Houses of Parliament, That upon no occasion
whatsoever, nor in no time of danger and distraction whatsoever, they may
appoint those that shall have the power of the Militia of London, without the
consent of the Council; especially when as the Houses shall sit under their
power.

The late Example may evidence to all the World* who shall be Masters of the
Parliaments freedom and Resolutions: And common reason will teach every man
who shall be Masters of the Birthrights of the whole Kingdom, when there
shall be no Army on foots, when they have the confidence to dispute for the
Mastery, notwithstanding such an Army as this to check and balance them in
behalf of the Kingdom and Parliament.

3. Lastly, The Army discerning how intimate some of the new Militia were with
some of the 11. accused Members, how forward they were to comply and act with
them in their endeavors, to raise a new War; how they made 18. or 19. Votes
in order thereunto together with them in one night.

All which, the Common Council and Parliament disliked and revoked, how
notwithstanding afterward they secretly promoted their Designs by private
Listings, which now appear to have been still working under ground.

The Army, we say, observing this, and having nothing more in their thoughts
and desires, then to settle a speedy, safe, and well-grounded peace, and to
prevent a new War, found it necessary to desire,

That the Militia might be put into the hands wherein it was formerly, who had
approoved themselves both to the Army, Parliament, and Kingdom, to be
sober-minded men, and not given to any practice whereby a new War might be
kindled.

To the intent, that the Army being secured by that means from that danger,
might with the more confidence retire further from the City, enlarge their
Quarter for the greater ease of the Kingdom, and intend wholly the settling of
a sure peace in this Kingdom, and a speedy and effectual relief of Ireland,
which was almost brought to a period, and nothing in the sight of man could
have hindered, but this cursed practice of violence upon the Parliament, under
pretense of the Militia, which according to our desire, being restored again
into the hands of the old Commissioners, by an Ordinance of both Houses, dated
the 21. of July, (in pursuance of the aforesaid treasonable combination)
several Petitions were presented to the Common Council of the City of LONDON,
in the name of the Apprentices and others, importing their Desires, that the
Militia of the City might continue in the hands of the former Commissioners,
according to the Ordinance of the 4. of May last.

Whereupon Monday July the six and twentieth, the Common Council of the City
presents their Petitions to both Houses, for changeing the Militia, wherein the
House of Lords refuse to alter their resolutions; the House of Commons
answered, they would take it into consideration the next morning.
Notwithstanding which, the City and Kingdom cannot be ignorant with what rage
and insolency the tumult of Apprentices the same day forced both Houses. They
blockt up their doors, swearing they would keep them in, till they had passed
what Votes they pleased; they threatened the Houses, if they granted not their
desires, knocking, hooping, and hallowing so at the Parliament-doores, that
many times the Members could not be heard to speak or debate, not suffering
the House of Commons to divide for determining such Questions, as were put,
crying out, That those that gave their Votes against them, should be sent out
to them; very often and loudly, saying, Agree, agree, dispatch, we will wait no
longer; and in this outrageous manner, they continued at the House door above
eight hours together, the City-Guards there present, nor the City relieving
them, by reason whereof the House was forced to Vote what that rude multitude
would demand, and then adjourned the House till the next morning; After which
the House rising, the Speaker and many Members going out of the House, they
forced them back again into the House: Many of the Apprentices pressing in
with them, where they stood with their hats on their heads, and compelled the
Speaker to take the Chair, and the House to Vote in their presence what they
pleased, committing many other insolences, as is published by the Speaker of
the House of Commons in his Declararation, and is too well known by all then
present; And during the time of this execrable violence done by the said
Apprentices, Westminster Hall and the Pallace-yard was sild with Reformadoes
and other ill-affected persons designed to back them.

After this the Houses being adjourned till Friday following, upon the Thursday
the Apprentices printed and posted a paper in several places of the City,
requiring all their fellows to be early at the Parliament the next morning,
for that they intended to adjourne by seven of the clock, and that for a
month. Thus the Speakers with many of the Members of both Houses were driven
away from the Parliament.

This in brief being the true state of things, as they have broke forth within
these few days, (which are so contrary to all those pretenses of Peace, and
detestation of a new War, of late so frequently held forth on all sides,) all
men may observe to what maturity the long projected Design of some men, (of
whom are those that are impeached by us,) is now brought, and may be traced in
the several steps thereof, as it has tended to the enslaving this Kingdom,
and the destruction of all such well-affected people, who would not comply with
them therein; so as by what now is come to light, the justness of that cause,
this Army had engaged themselves in, and the great and wonderful mercy of God
in continuing them together, we assure our selves does now clearly appear to
all me^^ eyes and apprehensions, and will every day more and more be
acknowledged, even by those that have heretofore made a question of it.

And if when this Kingdom has spent so much of its blood and treaure, has
past through such un heard of dangers, and overcome such difficulties so many
years together; All that they must now hope for and rest in, must only be what
the King grants in his Messege of the 12 of May last: And if this must be
imposed upon men's judgments and consciences by an oath, and now entered into in
a tumultuous and unlawful way, and by outrage maintained in desp^ght and
contempt of the Parliament. If rather then this should not be accomplished, the
Parliament it selse must be violated and forced into the hands of such of the
Members thereof as have secretly abetted and fomented those practices to that
end; That these hidden counsels and works of darkness might, when they come to
their full bi^th, have the image of highest authority in the face of them, the
better to gain credit thereunto, and secure the Authors of them from
punishment; For the evidence of all which, we refer our selves to the
particulars in our Charge against the 11. Members, compared with those passages
of late broke forth, before rehearst, unto which we shall now only add (and
leave it to the consideration of all wise and good men) with what artifice and
boldness these Members have served themselves of those horrid ^umul^s and
violences of their own creating (instead of showing their detestation of them)
again to intrude themselves into the public managing of affairs, and
Inevitably to embroyle the Kingdom in a new war; which their own revenge and
the compassing of their former plots and designs makes them so greedily thirst
after. If these things (we say) must be the end and up-shot of all, what then
remains to this poor Kingdom and all true hearted Englishmen, but to join
together as one man with their counsels, estates and lives in this way, as our
last refuge under God, which he by his wise and gracious providence has
provided and reserved by keeping up this Army even to a Miracle, so to prevent
the aforesaid evils, and to procure to this dying Kingdom, yet a settled peace
and happiness, if it be his blessed will?

These things being seriously considered by us, we have thought fit in the
name of the Army to decla^^, that all such Members of either House of
Parliament as are already with the Army for the security of their persons, and
for the ends aforesaid, are forced to absent themselves from Westminster, that
we shall hold and esteem them as persons in whom the public trust of the
Kingdom is still remaining, though they cannot for the present sit as a
Parliament with freedom and safety at Westminster; and by whose advice and
counsels, we desire to govern our selves in, in the managing these weighty
affairs, and to that end we invite them to make repair to this Army, to join
with us in this great cause, we being resolved, and do hereby faithfully
oblige our selves to stand by them therein, and to live and die with them
against all Opposition whatsoever, and in partticular we do hold our selves
bound to own that honorable act of the Speaker of the House of Commons, who
upon the grounds he himself expressed in his Declaration sent unto us, has
actually withdrawn himself; and hereupon we do further engage to use our
utmost and speedy endeavors, that he and those Members of either House, that
are thus enforced away from their attendance at Westminster, may with freedom
and security sit there, and again discharge their trust, as a free and a
legal Parliament, and in the mean^ time we do declare against that late
choice of a new Speaker by some Gentlemen at Westminster, as contrary to all
right Reason, Law, and Custom, and we profess our selves to be most clearly
satisfied in all our judgments, and are also confident the Kingdom will
herein concur with us, that as things now stand, there is no free nor legal
Parliament sitting, being through the aforesaid violence at present suspended:
And that the Orders, Votes, or Resolutions, forced from the Houses on Monday
the 26. of July last, as also all such as shall pass in this Assembly of some
few Lords and Gentlemen at Westminster, under what pretense and color soever,
are void and null, and ought not to be submitted unto by the freeborn
Subjects of England.

And that we may prevent that slavery designed upon us and the Nation, that the
Kingdom may be restored to a happy State of a visible Government, now eclipsed
and darkened; we hold our selves bound by our duty to God and the Kingdom, to
bring to condign punishment the Authors and Promoters, of that unparalleld
violence done to the Parliament; and in that to all the freeborn Subjects of
England, that are or hereafter shall be; and therefore we are resolved to march
up toward London, where we do expect that the well-affected people of that
City will deliver up unto us, (or otherwise put into safe Custody, so as they
may be reserved to a legal Trial,) the eleven impeached Members that have
again thrust themselves into the management of public affairs by this wicked
design.

And that all others will give us such assistance therein, that the Members of
both Houses may receive due encouragement to return to Westminster, there to
sit with all freedom, and so to perform their trust, as shall conduce to the
settlement of this distracted Kingdom; and to inflict such punishments upon
these late Offenders, as shall deter any for the future to make the like
attempt.

Our lives have not been dear unto us for the public good, and being now
resolved by the assistance of God, to bring these delinquents to their deserved
punishments, as that, then which, there cannot be any thing of more public
concernment to the Kingdom, we trust (if it shall come to that,) our blood
shall not be accounted too dear a price for the accomplishment of it. And if
any in the City will engage themselves against us to protect these Persons, and
so put the Kingdom again into a new and miserable War. The blood must be
laid to the account of such persons, as the Authors thereof.

And lastly, Because it is the maine Engine of ours and the Kingdoms enemies,
to render us odious by possessing the minds of men, that we gape only after
the plunder of this great and wealthy City, as the experience of the contrary
carriage in all Towns that we have taken yields unto us a Testimony beyond
the example of any Army, so we do from our hearts declare, that we abhor
the thoughts thereof, and we doubt not but the world shall see our actions
answerable to our professions, and that we shall not cause any man to suffer,
but by his own default; and that God will manifest we have only in our eyes,
that Justice may have a free course, the Parliament a free sitting and voting,
and a full vindication of the late violence done to them.

And as for the City of Westminster, the Borough of Southwarke, the Hamlets,
and the rest of the Suburbs and out-parts, as we are informed, that they are
not so ready to engage themselves in a new war, as some would have them, so
we are sensible of the hard condition that they are brought into, even by them
that claim a Right against both Houses of Parliament, (a strange claim against
a Parliament, though more reasonable against others,) not to be subjected to a
Militia without their own consent, and yet will not be contented, unless they
may have others subjected unto them, and lay what burdens they please upon
them, without allowing them any part of vote or consent with them; In which
points of common Right and Equity, we shall not be wanting (in a due way) to
assist them for the obtaining of their just desires and immunities, it being
our chief aim to settle Peace with Truth and Righteousness throughout the
Kingdom, that none may be oppressed in his just freedom and Liberties, much
less the Parliament it self, which things being duly settled, we shall be as
ready also to assure unto the King his just Rights and authority, as any that
pretend it never so much, for the better upholding of an ill cause, and the
countenance of tumultuous violence against the Parliament, the which our
honest, just, and necessary undertakings, as we are resolved to pursue with the
utmost hazard of our lives and fortunes, so we doubt not, but we shall find
Gods accustomed goodness and assistance with as therein, till we have brought
them to a good and happy conclusion, for this poor distracted and languishing
Kingdom.

A REMONSTRANCE From his Excellency Sir THO: FAIRFAX, And the Army under his
Command.
WHen (by the blessing of God upon the endeavors of this Army, and other
forces of the Parliament) the adverse forces and Garrisons within this Kingdom
were dissipated, and reduced, a present quiet, and freedom of Trade, and all
Commerce, and business restored to all parts of the Kingdom, and an hopeful
way made for settling of a sound and lasting Peace, on good terms for the
Interest of the Kingdom, instead of the hoped fruit of our labors, and
hazzards, and of the Kingdoms vast expense (in the dispensing of Justice and
Righteousness, and the settling and upholding of common Right and freedom to
the Subjects of this Nation) we found immediately the crosse-workings of a
strong and prevalent Party in the Parliament, and Kingdom, who walking (under
the mask of the Parliaments (friends; but being in truth men of corrupt, and
private ends, and Interests, different from, and destructive to the real and
common Interest of the Kingdom) made use of their power to obstruct, and
pervert Justice, to injure, oppress, and crush the peaceable, and
well-affected people of the Kingdom, to abridge and overthrow all just
freedom and liberty, and drive on designs to set up a Party, and faction in
the Parliament, and Kingdom, and (by the advantage of a perpetual Parliament)
to domineere over, and inslave the Kingdom to posterity. And for that end to
make such a Peace with the King (if any) as without any just provision for the
common and true Interest of the people, and the security thereof for future,
would serve only to make up, and establish their own greatness, and the
affected domination of themselves, and their Party over all others.

To all which ends (as before this Parliament, the ignominious names of
Puritan, and Nonconformist, and the specious pretenses for settling of Order,
Decency, and Uniformity in Religion were made use of, to the prejudice,
trouble, and suppressing of all, that appeared, either for the Truth and power
of Religion, or for the Rights, and Liberties of the Kingdom, and toward the
advancing at once, both of an Ecclesiastical, and Civil tyranny. So this
generation of men in the application of the Parliaments Power (succeeding the
former in the exercise of the Kings, have made use of the odious names of
Brownists, Anabaptists, Independents, Heretics, Schismatics, or Sectari^s of
one sort or other, to blast such men, in whom the Truth, and power of Religion,
or a just sense of the common Interest of the Kingdom, has appeared, and have
held forth the pretenses of Reformation, and Uniformity to color and
countenance their Designs, of setting up their own irreligious, or
pharisaicall domineering faction, to the oppression of all other people; And
herein they have had a great advantage, to further their aforesaid Designs, by
reason of the jealousies, which many Conscientious men of the Presbyterian
Judgment, have enterrained concerning this Army, and concerning diverse other
eminent, and worthy Instruments of the Kingdoms good, who (being in places of
public trust and power) were supposed to be of the Independent way.

In pursuance of their aforesaid designe^ they endeavored, and by their power
and influence upon the Parliament, and the advantage of such pretenses as
aforesaid, very much prevailed to put out of all places of power, or public
trust, the most sob^^, and co^sciencious men, and such as had approved
themselves faithful to the public interest throughout all the late troubles;
and to put in debauched, and dissolute men, or such as would for advantage
serve their prevate interests; and for that end (in cases where they could not
otherwise prevail) procured such Garrisons to be slighted, and such powers to
be recalled (though more necessary to have been continued) which they found in
the hands of persons of the former sort, and such to be continued (though less
necessary) as they found in the hands of the later. And the better to
strengthen themselves in their designs, closing with a very po^^^^ul party in
the City of London, they first, with much activitie, endeavored and prevailed
to new model the Common Council, and form the same to their own party, and
then stirred them up to Petition (amongst other things concurrent to their
ends) for the alteration of the City Militia, who, by their continual,
violent, and pressing Importunity at the Parliaments doors, wrung from the
Parliament an Ordinance for that purpose, whereby they procured the power of
that Militia (the special influence whereof upon the City and Kingdom, and
upon the Parliament it self (being the only guard they had for their safe
sitting) is evident to all men, to be taken out of those hands in which it had
been continued without out prejudice, and with great, and known security, and
advantage, both co the Parliament, City, and Kingdom, throughout the late
troubles (and this, without any exception, either then or since made against
them) and to be put into the hands of such others as were (at best) of
doubtful affections to the interest of the Parliament, and Kingdom, but
indeed men given up, and engaged to the private interests, and designs of the
said factious party, as has since too evidently appeared, and as in the late
Declaration of the Army, concerning the grounds of our advance toward London,
is more fully remonstrated. And (finding this Army not for their turns) they
made it their maine work to dis-band or break it in pieces, (even before the
relief of Ireland were provided for, or the peace of this Kingdom settled.)
And though all this went under the pretense of easing the present burthen^ of
the Kingdom, yet at the same time they designed and went about to put the
Kingdom to the expense, and trouble of raising and forming a new force (under
pretense as for the service of Ireland) but evidently designed, and so framed
as to serve their own ends and purposes aforesaid in England. And (being many
of them filled and acted with personal envy, and others with malignity of
principles and interests against this Army, and the work of God by it.) It
would not serve their turn to break or dis-band it, but it must be with all
possible dishonor, injury, oppression, and provocation that they could put
upon it. And it was too evident, that their endeavor was not only to put it
off without the honor, or satisfaction due to it, for the service it had done,
but to dis-band it on such terms, as to subject, and expose all (and even the
most faithful) servants of the Parliament, and Kingdom, both in the Army, and
elsewhere, unto oppression, and undoing, or to the mercy of their own, and such
other men's malicious and envenomed spirits, which could promise no better; for
the more full and particular Demonstration of all which, we refer all
knowing men to the practices and proceedings against this Army, unto the times
(by their procurement) appointed for the dis-banding of it in several parts,
without just and equal satisfaction, which have been in part remonstrated in
papers sent from this Army, and published before our coming up to St Albans.

Upon consideration of all this, and upon the resolution, (which their own
abuses and provocations put upon the Army, had raised in the whole body of it)
not to dis-band without further satisfaction, and security from the like abuses
in future; We did in our Representation or Declaration sent from St Albans,
express in general what things we desired, (besides our concernments as
Soldiers) to see done or provided for, before our dis-banding for the peace of
the Kingdom and a securing the common rights, and liberties thereof, which we
were called out to defend and vindicate, and had so long sought for. And having
(therewithal) impeached several Members of the house of Commons for their
unjust practices and designs to such purposes as are before expressed, and for
indeavoring in prosecution thereof to engage this Kingdom in a new war; we
added some further desires for the prevention of that mischief (of a new
war) to the Kingdom, and for our own present security from immediate ruin,
while those other things might be treated on or considered. And upon the
granting of some of them in part, and hopes given of some others (though we
could not obtain the rest, and especially not that which we held most just,
equal and necessary; viz. The positive suspension of those impeached members
from sitting in the House, as Judges in their own cause, and from their power
in Committees, whereby they had the advantage to raise war against us, and to
make new disturbances in the Kingdom, yet) the said impeached Members
pretending to withdraw themselves from the Parliament, until their causes
should be heard and tried, and the House giving consent thereto; We, out of
our tenderness to Parliament Privilidges, and our earnest desires to yield all
observance to the Parliament and satisfaction to the City (who pretended a
full concurrence with us in our declared desires for settling the peace and
liberties of the Kingdom) did at the Parliaments command, and the Cities
request, withdraw the Army to the desired distance from London, and dispersed
it further to several parts of the Kingdom for the ease of the Country, and
proceeded in a peaceable and regular way, to prepare and prosecute more
particular Charges against the said Impeached members, which within a few days
after we accordingly sent up to the House: And the said Impeached Members,
(having put in a delatorie answer thereto with a plea and demurre to diverse
particulars therein) pretended, that (to avoid any disturbance or interruption
to the present proceedings for settling the public affairs, by the
interposall of their private cause,) they desired leave and passes to travel
for some Months, which accordingly the Speaker of the House of Commons was
ordered or authorized to give them, and we (presuming on the Houses caution
for their forth-comming to be tried, when the affairs of the Kingdom were
settled (which upon their first motion of withdrawing we had insisted on,) did
not gainesay. And thereupon we proceeded in a quiet and hopeful way to prepar
more particular proposalls (in persuance of our former general desires) for
the present settling of the peace of the Kingdom to be tendered to the
Commissioners of Parliament residing with the Army for that purpose. But
finding that while we were thus peaceably proceeding, the said impeached
members (notwithstanding their pretended desires to travel) did continue in
and about London very active and busy to raise war, or make disturbances in
the Kingdom, and that the Committee of the Militia there did comply with them
therein (by daily listing of men and other preparations toward war, and
sheltring to that end, yea, and entertaining into service those same
Reformadoes, who (by Ordinance of Parliament,) were by them to have been put
out of the Lines of Communication) and finding continual jealousies and
disturbances to our said proceedings, bred in the Army by the daily reports and
alarms thereof from the City, we made a particular address to the Parliament
for the restoring of the City Militia into those hands, in which it was before
the Ordinance of the fourth of May last. For the reasonableness of our desires
wherein, supposing that we had such cause to insist on some removal of that
power out of the hands in which it was then put (as here before is partly
expressed, and in our late Declaration is more fully set forth) we dare
confidently appeal to all men (not engaged or prejudiced against us) whether,
for the present safety and quiet of the City upon such a change, and to prevent
those dangers or disturbances to, or in the City, which the want of a Militia
during the intervall (betwixt the ceasing of one, and new forming of another)
might give occasion and advantage unto, (especially in such a juncture of
affairs) there could be any other way so expedient, as to render that change
but an immediate reverting into those hands in which it was so lately before
(who would make up a Militia ready formed to succeed immediately in place of
the other, without any considerable intermission or delay) and whether, at a
time when jealousies and distrusts were both so rife and hurtful (as they
might occasion no less distraction or interruption to any quiet settlement or
proceedings thereunto, then real attempt of mischief would) there could be
any proposal more reasonable or hopeful to beget a confidence and
acquiescence (as to that point) both in the Parliament, City, and Army, then
to have that power restored (for the present) into those hands of whose
fidelity to the common interest, we had all found so ample and unquestioned
proof throughout the most dangerous times: upon our address therefore to the
Parliament for that purpose (the Army being at such distan^^ as aforesaid) both
Houses were pleased on the 23. of July last, to pass an Ordinance for
returning of the Militia into those hands, and repe^ling the Ordinance of the
4. of May, by which it had been changed as before: hereupon hoping all would
quietly succeed to a settlement in this Kingdom, we went on securely to
finish our Proposalls for that purpose, (the heads whereof have been since
published) withdrew the head quarter to a further distance, dispersed the Army
to larger Quarters for more ease to the Country, and upon a recommendation of
the business of Ireland from the Parliament, we had in less then a weeks
space prepared and ordered a considerable force (no less then 4000. horse and
foot, as Sir Thomas Temple, employed from the Parliament about that business
to us, can testify) for a present relief thereunto: But the restless^ and
treacherous malice of the enemies to our and the Kingdoms peace, (taking their
supposed advantage of our distance, and dispersed posture (which their fair
pretenses of peaceable intentions had induced us into) first, they did without
all color of authority, contrive and set on foot in the City, and many of them
entered into a mischievous and desperate now and engagement, tending to the
subversion of the freedom of Parliament, and the liberties of this Nation, to
the frustrating of those just and public ends, for which so much blood and
treasure has been spilt, and spent, in the late Wars, and to the raising of
a new War against the Parliament and their Army (which said engagement both
Houses of Parliament, did by their Declaration of the 23. of July, adjudge and
declare to be high Treason in all that should promote or abet the same; and
within a few days after, (to wit, on Monday July 26.) there was a Petition
brought to the Parliament, by the Sheriffs, and some Aldermen, and
Common-Councell-men, in the name of the City of London, for the recalling of
the said Ordinance of the 23. of July, concerning the Militia, and the
returning of the Militia into those hands, in which it was put by the Ordinance
of the 4. of May, which Petition was immediately followed and backed with a
tumultuous confluence of Apprentices, and other dissolute and desperate
persons, who committed most horrid and unheard of violence upon both Houser,
enforcing them to recall both the said Declaration of the three and twentieth
day of July, (concerning the said engagement:) and also the said Ordinance of
the same date, concerning the Militia, and compelling the Speaker of the House
of Commons to resume the Chair, after the House was adjourned, and the House
to pass such further Votes concerning the Kings present coming to London, etc.
as the said Rioters did please, neither the Guard from the City, that then
attended the Houses, nor the Lord Mayor, Sheriffs, or any Authority in the
City (though sent to for that purpose) taking any course to suppress the said
tumult, or relieve the Parliament against that violence, though it was
continued for the space of eight or ten hours.

And the Houses having next day adjourned till Friday, July 30. There were
printed Tickets fixed upon posts, in and about the City the day before,
inviting the same persons to the like confluence at Westminster, against the
House, next meeting, all which has been more fully and more assuredly made
known, by the Declaration of the Speaker of the House of Commons concerning the
same.

By this means the Speakers of both Houses, together with most of the Lords,
and a very great number of the most faithful and unquestioned Members of the
House of Commons were driven away, so as they could not with safety attend
their service in Parliament, nor with freedom discharge their trust to the
Kingdom therein, but were forced to fly to their Army for safety, so as there
was not, nor could then be, and free meeting or legal proceeding of a
Parliament. Notwithstanding which diverse Members of both Houses, (who by the
carriage and sequel of the business, will appear to be of the same party and
confederacy with the aforesaid Enemies to our and the Kingdoms peace, and with
the Authors and Actors both of the said treasonable engagement, and the
tumoltuous force upon the Parliament.) Taking this opportunity of time, to
carry on their designs, when very few were left, but of their own party, did
continue to meet in the usual places in Westminster. And (having under
pretense of a necessity for continuing the Parliament, by adjournement, they
drawn in some few well-minded Members to sit with them, out of a scruple least
the Parliament should fall for want of adjournement,) took upon them the name
of both Houses of Parliament.

And having on Friday July 30. chosen a new Speaker, did proceed to Vote and
Act as a Parliament, and adjourned from time to time; But of what party and
confederacy the most of them were, and to what ends and interests they acted,
will appear by what they did whereof we shall for present give a taste in some
particulars, hoping that shortly the whole Journall of their proceedings may be
made public.

First, the said Members of the House of Commons (conveening as aforesaid)
immediately Voted and called in (as to the service of the House, the Eleven
impeached Members. And also those who upon former Votes of the House were
suspended, or under Question to be put out for Delinquency, and had put in
their cases; with this pretended House of Commons thus composed, and four or
five Lords of the same. Model (for an house of Pears) they proceed to set up
a Committee for safety, (whereof almost all of the said impeached Members were
apart) this Committee they appointed to join with that same pretended
Committee of the City Militia, whose power was obtained only by the tumultuous
force and violence aforesaid: To these Committees the most or many of their
proceedings refer, and by diverse pretended Votes, Orders, and Ordinances,
procured in the name of one or both Houses of Parliament, large powers were
given to these two Committees for raising of Forces, appointing chief
Commanders and other Officers, and other vast, unlimited, and unusual powers
were given them, all tending to the raising and levying of a new War within
this Kingdom: upon which many forces both of Horse and Foot, were actually
levied, and other preparations of War made; all which, that they were
intended and designed in Justification, prosecution, and maintenance of the
aforesaid treasonable engagement, and of the said force and violence done to
the parliament, or of the very same ends and interests, and to oppose and
hinder the restitution of the Houses of Parliament, to their honor and
freedom and the advance of this their Army for that purpose (being then upon a
March. Besides the consideration of the persons, into whose hands these powers
were committed. It is abundantly evident many other ways, but especially by
that Declanation of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council of London,
which was first, by that pretended Committee of safety, ordered, and then by
the pretended Houses (without reading a word of it) approved to be published in
the Parish Churches, with an exhortation to the people to take up Arms, in
maintenance of the ends therein expressed, which (though the pretense were for
the defense of the King, Parliament and City, then alleged to be in great
danger, (when as indeed none were in danger, but only the Authors, Actors, and
Abettors of the traiterou^ practices aforesaid, yet) the true ends thereof
appear clearly to be the same with the said treasonable engagement, and
tumult against the Parliament, all of them concentring (as in other things, so
especially in this) viz. To have the King brought up to London without delay,
or any nearer upproach of the Army. And to all these, the succeeding Votes of
the pretended Houses, for the same thing did speedily echo the same note:
Concerning which matter (not to examine the alteration of the case, since both
Houses, and both Kingdoms also (of England and Scotland) resolved, that it was
not safe the King should come to London, until he had given satisfaction and
secutity to his people in relation to those public ends, for which so much
blood and treasure had been spent) we shall only say thus much to those men's
intentions and designs in the business: That had the King come up to London
(as they have so often desired and attempted) it is apparent they intended and
would have made use of it, rather to lay the stronger foundations of a new
War (upon the ruins of that public interest contended for in the former,
and of all those that had with most candor, clearenesse, and simplicity of
heart, appeared and acted for the same, then any way to settle thereby a safe
and well-grounded peace. And since they could not rationally expect so easy an
obtaining of the Kings person to London, upon such a pretended Vote or
Declaration of their desire thereof, it is as evident that they could intend
nothing thereby, but a more plausible pretense, and foundation of quarrel
against this Army, whereby to engage or incline to their assistance the Kings
party, and such others, who might be caught with the apprehension thereof, as a
speedy way to Peace (the thing so generally longed for) and by such assistance
gained the better to ruin this Army, and those faithful Members of
Parliament, who were retired to it. For our parts we shall rejoice as much as
any, to see the King brought back to his Parliament (and that) not so much in
place, as in affection and agreement on such sound terms and grounds, as may
render both Him and the Kingdom, safe, quiet and happy, and shall be as ready
as any to bring his Majesty to London, when his being there may be likely to
produce (not greater disturbances, but) a Peace indeed. And that such as may
not (with the shipwreck of public interest) be shaped and molded only to the
private advantages of a particular party or faction. But bottomed chiefly on
grounds of common and public welfare and security. And if (without regard to
these considerations) we would have brought his Majesty with us to London, in
our late advance thither (which our enemies could not hinder or prejudice us
in) we had no cause to doubt, but (as to men) we might have had all the
advantages which our adversaries promised to themselves, thereby added to the
strength and interest of the Army, and have inverted the disadvantages upon
them that they intended against us thereby; so as his Majesty's so much desired
to come to London, might have been much to their prejudice, and our advantage
and security, if we had regarded only our own particulars.

But (as at present our consciences bear clear witnesses to our selves,) so
we hope God will in the issue make it clear to others, that we have not
minded, nor been acting our own works or interests, but the Kingdoms, and
every honest man's in it. Mean while (to return to our purpose) we think it is
sufficiently cleared, that the proceedings of those members, or the major part
of them (that continued to sit at Westminster during the absence of the
Speakers) the powers by them given, the forces thereupon levied, and other
preparations of War thereupon made, were all designed and driven on in
prosecution and maintenance of the said treasonable engagement, and of the
force done upon the Parliament, or for the same ends and interest with them,
and to oppose the advance of this Army toward London, for restitution of the
Parliament to honor and freedom, and indeed to raise a new war in the
Kingdom against the Parliament and their Army for the destruction thereof. And
the same may (yet further) appear by this that those very Appentices,
Reformadoes, and others about the City, who were the chief actors in the said
engagement and tumult, were afterward most trusted and employed, and most
active in their preparations for War.

By what we have here said and what has been declared and published from us,
and from the Speakers, and aforesaid Members of both Houses, and by the whole
series of our own, and our enemies actions and carriages, (compared together)
it may appear how tender we have been not only of the authority and just
Privileges of Parliament, and of the safety, peace, and welfare both of the
Kingdom and the City, but even toward those our enemies themselves (seeking
only things necessary for the common good of the whole, (and that if possible)
without ruin or hurt to any, and yet how maliciously and unworthily we have
that while been dealt withal by those our enemies, and by a factious and
powerful party (especially) in Parliament and City combining with them: And
what clear cause we have had both for all that we have formerly desired or
done in prevention of our own ruin and the Kingdoms disturbance, and also
what just grounds for our late advance to London. The good service whereof
(especially in restoring the Parliament into a condition of safety, honor and
freedom, thereby has been, (without any seeking of ours) acknowledged by both
Houses with thanks to us, and public thankesgiving to the Almighty for it;
And a further trust has been thereupon committed to the General for taking
care with his Army to safeguard the Parliament.

The Houses being thus restored to a condition of present safety, honor and
freedom; Two things seem clearly remaining to be done, (which our own and
most men's expectations are most set upon) viz.

First, to vindicate the honor, freedom, and safety of Parliament from the
like affronts or violences in future, and the Army and Kingdom from danger of
the like disturbances (whilst things shall be in a debate or treaty for a
settlement) and then to proceed unto a speedy settlement of the peace of the
Kingdom.

The latter of these is first in our intentions (being nearest to the ultimate
end. And we shall earnestly desire in order thereunto, the proposals of the Army
(whereof the heads are published) may be speedily considered and brought to a
resolution. But considering that the debates of them may take up some time ere
they be agreed on all hands, and the framing of them into Bills, and perfecting
of the same will require much more. Something must first be done in the former
for a present security to the Parliament from like affronts or violence, and to
the Army and Kingdom from the like disturbances to the peace thereof by any
farther advantage, which the time like to be spent in the settling of peace, may
afford to our watchful, restless, and (we doubt) implacable enemies.

First, therefore to those ends (unless it should be thought fit to secure the
Parliament by keeping the whole body of the Army, or so great a part thereof,
to remain continually in and about London, as might be sure to overpower any
future tumults or force that may arise out of the City and ease of the parts
adjacent, nor the safety of the Kingdom in respect of the present posture of
affairs will admit).

It is absolutely necessary that there be speedy and exemplary justice done
upon (at least) the chief authors or abettors of the said treasonable
engagement, and of the said force done to the Parliament, and upon the chief
actors, in maintenance and prosecution thereof (whereby men may be deterred
from the like in future.

And this is also as necessary to the security of the Army, and peace of the
Kingdom, since it is apparent by all that has been said, and by infinite
other evidences (too many to recount.) That both the said engagement, and the
force done to the Parliament, and the power of the City militia thereby gained,
and the succeeding votes and orders of the pretended Houses (but indeed of that
faction that are our professed enemies) in maintenance and prosecution thereof,
and the Forces thereupon levied, (put under the command of Major Genesis Massey
and others our professed adversaries) were all designed and directed to the
ruin and destruction of this Army, and the raising of a new war against us in
this Kingdom; And having had such experience of their restless malice and
cruel intentions toward us (notwithstanding our tenderness and lenity
toward them) and of their treacherous dealing (so soon as they thought they
had the advantage) notwithstanding all their semblances of compliance to a
composure; what reason is there to expect, but that if by our patience and
delays they apprehend in future the like or other advantage, they will break
out again into the like or worse attempts of violence and war, if all escape
with impunity for these.

But, as to this point of security by exemplary justice in an ordinary, way, we
see our hopes almost frustrated, whilst (though our desires and resolutions to
that purpose expressed in our late Declaration of the grounds of our advance
toward London, were then seconded with the declared approbation and concurrent
resolutions of the Speakers and Members of both Houses that were driven away to
the Army, and with their engagement to live and die with us therein. And though
in pursuance thereof the Right Honorable House of Peers, have since their
restitution began and proceeded to declare null and void all that was done in
the name of both Houses, while they lay under the power of that tumultuous
violence, and to give their more authentic approbation to our said Declaration
made in behalf of the said Speakers and Members while they were with the Army,
and in behalf of the honor and freedom of the Parliament, and to give their
like approbation to the concurrent Declaration and Engagement of the said
Speakers and Members made to us while they were with us; yet the House of
Commons have not only concurred with the Lords in any of those things, but
rather seem to have cast them aside; and upon the Question concerning those
very Votes of July 26. to which the Houses were by the said violence enforced,
[whether they should be declared null and void] it was carried in the Negative,
that the Question should not be put in; by the consequences whereof (which are
many ways very sad to this poor Kingdom, and more then we can recount) and by
all subsequent proceedings in that House in relation to the whole business, we
clearly find that the Members of that House, who (after the violence done to
it, and during the absence of the Speaker and the other Members thereby driven
away) proceeding in the name of that House as aforesaid, procured the pretended
powers, and did make the pretended Votes, Orders and Ordinances aforementioned,
and (many of them) were chief actors thereupon for the levying of war in
prosecution and maintenance of the aforesaid treasonable Engagement and force
done to the Parliament, and for the opposing, resisting and destroying of this
the Parliaments Army in its advance to London, for the restitution of the
Parliament to its honor and freedom, being conscious of their own guilt, and
danger thereby; yet presuming on their interest in the House, and the patience
and lenity of this Army, do continue to intrude themselves to sit and Vote
there, and by their present interest in the House, do use their utmost
eudeavours and very much prevail to obstruct and avoid the bringing of any to
justice who have acted under their pretended authority, (knowing it to be their
own case and concernement in point of impunity, as well as conducency to their
faction and interest) And for that cause they labor (as for life) to uphold
the things past and done; and the authorities given by them and their faction
(in their and the Apprentices pretended Parliament,) yea even those very Votes
and authorities wrested from the Parliament by that palpable force of July 26.
to be good and valid till they be repealed (as if past in a free and legal
Parliament.) In which point and all Questions touching upon it, we find they
presume upon, and are strengthened by the concurrence of diverse other Members,
who having (perhaps with harmless intentions,) continued to sit with them
during the speakers absence as aforesaid, (though they consented not to any of
their mischievous Votes, Orders, or Treasonable proceedings aforementioned (may
yet fear themselves, to be involved in the same case and danger by having sat
with them; and thus by the concurrence of these two parties in the House, (as
to that point) and the interest which both these parties have with others in
the House (especially upon a matter of saving one another,) and by the partial
respects of some others in the House, for the saving of their friends out of
the House, who have acted under the authority, and for the evil ends
aforementioned, we find an absolute obstruction to the bringing to justice, or
questioning of any who have acted in the late levying of war against us, and
against the Vindication of the Parliaments freedom, or in the said Treasonable
engagements, yea, or in abetment of the tumultuous violence upon the Parliament
it self, neither can we find or hear of any one person brought to justice or
question for my of those things, but all seem to be either justified, or at
least protected from Justice by the power and prevalence of those Members in
Parliament, who are (many of them, as we can make appear) equally guilty of,
and (others) in some kind obnoxious for the same things; and thus not only our
just expectations of Vindication to the Parliament, and security to our selves
and the Kingdom from the like treasonable and turbulent practices in future,
(by Exemplar justice for what has been so done) are frustrated, but even the
safety and immunitie of the Speakers, and those faithful Members of both
Houses that were driven away by the violence aforesaid, and the immunitie of
the Army in advancing to London, to bring them back and restore the Parliament
to its honor and freedom; (which have been acknowledged, with public
Thankesgiving to God for it as aforesaid) is subjected and exposed to question
(wherein theirs and ours and the Kingdoms enemies obtrude themselves to be the
Judges, (for if those pretended Votes, Orders and Ordinances, whereby werre was
levied against them and us, were then good and valid (though they should now he
repealed, yet) we, with the Speakers, and those Members aforesaid, in opposing
of them while they were of force, must needs remain transgressors still, and
yet God and we are thanked for it. [what a Mock is this to God and man?] but to
return to the more serious consideration of our case, in relation to the
security of the Parliament, Kingdom and our selves, against the like
turbulent and treasonable practices in future, since by the means aforesaid, no
security by exemplary justice can at present be had (to deter any from the
like) we wish all men to consider what straights we are in this case put upon.

That which is the maine work of the Kingdom, and which we most earnestly
thirst for and attend upon: ( viz. the settling of a peace and consideration of
our Proposals in Order thereunto,) will ask time to bring it to an issue, and
that done, the relieving or remedying of the pressing grievances of the
Kingdom, will take up and require the sitting of the Parliament for some
further time, though upon the settling of a peace, a period be set for the
certain ending of it.) Now for the body of this Army, or so great apart of it
(as may serve to overpower any future tumults or force that may arise in or
from the City to continue hereabouts so long, the condition of the Country
hereabouts, and the nceessities of the City (in point of provision) cannot well
bear it, and (we doubt) Foreign forces (that are already upon the wing) and
turbulent Spirits that in several parts of the Kingdom are beginning
insurrections (if we continue fixed here) will have such opportunity and take
such encouragement therefrom, as that they may ere long necessarily call us
off; should we now or hereafter (while the Parliament sits) draw off the Army
from about the City (without exemplary justice upon some; would not the same or
more dangerous tumults and violences probably return upon the Parliament, and
the like or worse practices of raising a new war be revived (with more
advantage to our enemies, more danger to us and the Kingdom, and less hopes
of appeasing it so easily and happily as the former) while the same violent and
factious spirits both in the Parliament and elsewhere shall continue in the
same power and opportunities as formerly, and both they and all others shall
have before their eyes the encouragement of that impunity and protection (yea
rather that Justification,) which they have hitherto found from within the
Parliament it self in the past practices aforementioned, though as grossly
treasonable as any they can hereafter run into? should we or any others (for
the obtaining of exemplary justice upon some) proceed to impeach any for their
past treasonable practices, what hopes of justice or of a timely dispatch
therein can we have; while such a prevailing party of men, interessed and
concerned in the same things, shall in the House of Commons continue to be
judges thereof, or at least be ready to avow and justify the offenders
therein, as having acted, under their pretended authority? In this straight
therefore (though we ever have been and shall be most tender of all just
privileges of Parliament, yet) finding the root of these and other
difficulties to the Parliament, Kingdom, and our selves to lie in this, viz.
That those Members of the House of Commons, who (during the forced absence of
the Speakers of both Houses) continuing to sit ^n^ act as a Parliament, did
procure and consent to the pretended Votes, Orders and Ordinances
aforementioned for levying of war, and that (as is before demonstrated) in
direct prosecution or maintenance of the for^-said treasonable Engag^-ment, and
the violence done to the Parliament, and for the opposing, resisting, and
destroying of this the Parliaments Army in its advance toward London, (to
return the Speakers and Members of both Houses which were driven away, and the
Houses themselves to their honor and freedom) and who are thereby, and by
their late owning and avowing of the same, and many of them (as we can prove)
by acting personally* the said treasonable practices, become p^r^ies to the
same, do yet take the boldness to sit and Vote in Parliament, especially in
the House of Commons. We say, finding the main root of our difficulties and
dangers to ^ye in this.

First, we appeal to all men, whether it be just or tolerable, that any
privilege of Parliament should (contrary to the Law of nature) make a man
judge in his own case and concernment; and we wish those Members themselves
to consider if we had come to engagement with the Forces raised by virtue of
their pretended Votes and Ordinances, and that thousands had been shine, and we
had made our way by the sword) whether they would then have expected to have
sat as Judges upon us therein? and we are sure it is no thanks to them that it
has been otherwise, and had we found those Members in Arms against us, and
subdued and taken them, whether had they not been in the condition of
prisoners of War? and if so) then having put Arms into the hands of others
against us, and still maintaining it, whether can they in strict justice
challenge any better condition from us? but that (contrariwise) we should
suffer either that those whom by the course of War, (which they had chose to
engage in against us) we might justly make our prisoners; should in a course
of Law become our Masters and Commanders, or that those who the other day did
in an hostile manner endeavor to have been our Executioners, should (now we
have by force broke their prepa ations against us) become our Judges (we
suppose no reasonable man, nor themselves, (when they well consi^er it) can
expect from us.

Upon all these Considerations of the justness of the Cause, and the necessity
of the thing, for the safety of the Parliament, Kingdom and this Army; (having
no other way left timely to remedy the difficulties we are put upon, or prevent
the growing dangers of future violence unto the Parliament, and disturbances to
the Kingdom, or to secure the Parliament in a quiet proceeding to settle the
peace of the Kingdom; And (in such case the safety of the people being the
Supreme Law) we do protest and declare, That if any of those Members, who
during the absence of the Speakers, and the rest of the Members of both Houses
(forced away by the tumultuous violence aforesaid) did sit and Vote in the
pretended Houses then continuing at Westminster, shall hereafter intrude
themselves to sit in Parliament (before they shall have given satisfaction to
the respective Houses, wherefore they are concerning the grounds of their said
sitting at Westminster, during the absence of the said Speakers, and shall have
acquitted themselves by sufficient evidence, That they did not procure or give
their consent unto any of those pretended Votes, Orders, or Ordinances tending
to the raising and levying of a war (as is before declared) or for the Kings
coming forthwith to London) we cannot any longer suffer the same, but shall
do that right to the Speakers and Members of both Houses who were driven away
to us, and to our selves with them, (all whom the said other Members have
endeavored in an hostile manner, most unjustly to destroy) and also to the
Kingdom which they endeavored to embroyle in a new War,) as to take some
speedy and effectual course whereby to restrain them from being their own,
^urs, and the Kingdoms Judges in those things wherein they have made
themselves parties, by this means to make way that both they and others that
are guilty of, and parties to the aforesaid treasonable and destructive
practices and proceedings against the freedom of Parliament and peace of the
Kingdom may be brought to condign punishment (and that at the judgment of a
free Parliament, consisting (duly and properly) of such Members of both Houses
respectively, who stand clear from such apparent and treasonable breach of
their trust as is before expressed.

By the appointment of his Excellency and the General Council of his Army,
Signed John Rushworth, Secr.
At the head quarters at Kingston upon Thames, Aug. 18. 1647.
A Declaration from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax concerning the Excise.
WHereas it has pleased the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons in
Parliament assembled, in and by their Declaration of the 28. of August last
concerning the Excise, to appoint me to order and enjoyne all Colonels,
Captains, Officers and Soldiers under my command, upon application made to
them or any of them, speedily to suppress all tumults, ryots, and unlawful
assemblies which shall be attempted or acted in opposition against the
Commissioners of Excise, their Sub-commissioners, Collectors or Officers in
execution of the Ordinances of Parliament for the Excise, and to apprehend all
such ryoters and tumultuous persons, that they may be proceeded against
according to law. In pursuance whereof, I do hereby require all Colonels,
Captains, Officers and Soldiers under my command, upon application from time
to time of the said Commissioners of the Excise, their sub-commissioners,
collectors or officers unto them or any of them, to be ayding and assisting as
well in preventing of such tumults and ryots, as in the suppressing thereof.

Given under my hand and seal the fourth day of September. 1647. Tho: Fairfax.

A Letter from Hampton Court containing the substance of His Majesty's most
Gracious Answer to the Propositions, presented to him from both Kingdoms.
Right Honorable,
THe Commissioners of both Kingdoms came hither on Tuesday nigh^ last,
September 7. instant, and delivered a Letter to the rest of the Commissioners
whom they found here with His Majesty from both Houses of Parliament, that the
said Propositions should be presented to the King that night, and that the
Scots Commissioners would be there to join with them to present them to his
Majesty.

They also showed the instructions from the Houses to their
fellow-Commissioners, which were to present them that night, and to certify
His Majesty that they were to expect a positive Answer thereunto within six
days The Sc^ts Commissioners were also here ready to join with our in
presenting them to His Majesty.

About five of the clock that night they all came to the King. The Prince
Elector had been there, but was returned to Richmond, His Majesty's children
were also there, who had dined with His Majesty that day, and the Countess of
Northumberland with them, and they were then with his Majesty, being not at
that time returned to Sion House. And Mr. Maxvill was then come to the Court,
who is Chamberlain to his Majesty.

The Commissioners acquainted his Majesty with their Message from both
Kingdoms, and desired audience, which his Majesty granted, and presently met
them in one of the chambers where His Majesty was with his Children: and there
the Propositions were presented and read; and his Majesty told them that he
would give them an Answer as soon as he could.

Then the King withdrew for some time, so that His Majesty went late to Supper
that night. The Commissioners wrot^ letters to the Houses to acquaint them what
was done, and what his Majesty said, and desired that they might all return to
the Parliament when his Majesty gave them a dispatch.

Wednesday, September. 8. instant, the King was up early in the morning, being
very desirous to dispatch the Commissioners with all possible speed, his
Majesty walked forth a little before Dinner, and so a little again in the
afternoon to refresh himself; Diverse came from London, and elsewhere, and
some obtained leave to kiss his Majesty's hand.

Thursday, Sept. 9. His Majesty called for the Commissioners, and gave an
Answer to them, which is to this effect:

That His Majesty takes notice of these Propositions to be very little
differing from the former presented to him at Newcastle, to which his Majesty
returned Answer when he came to Holdenby, That his Majesty conceives they
cannot but take notice of the Proposalls of the Army, which all rational men
cannot but confess are much more reasonable, and tending to a firm and settled
Peace. And therefore his Majesty desires that Commissioners from the
Parliament, and Commissioners from the Army may be s^n^ to His Majesty to treat
with him upon the Proposalls from the Army, that a firm Peace may be settled.

This Thursday the 9. instant, the Earl of P^mbrooke and Major General Brown,
returned with his Majesty's Answer bet^mes in the morning, for it was toolate
before they could return over night, by reason of some things which were to be
done by the Commissioners that night. The Letter is directed to the Earl of
Manchester, Speaker of the House of Peers, pro tempore, to be communicated to
both Houses of Parliament, (the like to the Scots Commissioners) His Majesty is
very confident that his Answer will give much satisfaction, and His Majesty
does exceedingly approve of the proceedings of the Army.

Dated at Hampton Court, Sept. 9. 1647.
Twelve Proposalls from His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Council of
his Army, which His Majesty seems better to approve of, then any thing which
has hitherto been presented to Him.
1. AN Act to be passed to take away all coersive power, authority and
jurisdiction of Bishops, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers whatsoever,
extending to any civil penalties upon any; and to repeal all Laws, whereby the
civil Magistracy has been, or is bound, upon any Ecclesiastical censure to
proceed (exofficio) unto any civil penalties against any persons so censured.

2. That there be a repeal of all Acts; or Clauses in any Act, enjoining the
use of the Book of Common Prayer, and imposing any penalties for neglect
thereof, as also of all Acts or Clauses in any Act, imposing any penalties for
not coming to Church, or for meetings elsewhere, for prayer or other
religious duties, exercises or Ordinances, and some other provision to be made
for discovering of Papists, and Popish Recusants, and for disabling of them,
and all Jesuits or Priests, from disturbing the State.

3. That the taking of the Covenant be not enforced upon any, nor any penalties
imposed upon the Refusers, whereby men might be constrained to take it against
their judgments, or consciences, but all Orders or Ordinances tending to that
purpose to be repealed.

4. That (the things here before proposed, being provided for settling and
securing the Rights, Liberties, Peace and safety of the Kingdom) His Majesty's
person, his Queen, and Royal Issue, may be restored to a condition of safety,
Honor and freedom in this Nation, without diminution to their personal
Rights, or further limitation to the exercise of the Regal power then
according to the particulars afore-going.

5. That a less number out of the persons excepted in the two first
qualifications (not exceeding five for the English) being nominated
particularly by the Parliament, who (together with the persons in the Irish
Rebellion, in the third qualification) may be reserved to the further judgment
of the Parliament, as they shall find cause. All other excepted persons may be
remitted from the exception, and admitted to composition.

6. That the rates for all future composition may be lessened and limited not
to exceed the several proportions hereafter expressed respectively: That is to
say. 1. For all persons formerly excepted, not above a third part. 2. For the
late Members of Parliament, under the first branch of the fourth qualification
in the Propositions, a fourth part. 3. For other Members of Parliament, in the
second and third branches of the same qualification, a sixth part. 4. For the
persons nomina^ed in the said fourth qualification, and those included in the
tenth qualification, an eighth part. 5. For all other included in the sixth
qualification, a tenth part. And that real Debts either upon Record, or proved
by witnesses, be considered and abated in the valuation of their estates in all
the cases aforesaid.

7. That those who shall hereafter come to compound, may not have the Covenant
put upon them, as a condition without which they may not compound: but in case
they shall not willingly take it, they may pass their compositions without it.

8. That the persons and Estates of all English, not worth two hundred pounds
in Lands or goods, be at liberty and discharged: And that the Kings meniall
Servants, that never took up Arms, but only attended His Person, according to
their Offices, may be freed from Compositions, or to pay (at most) but the
proportion of one years Revenue, or a twentieth part.

9. That in Order to the making and perfecting of Compositions at the rates
aforesaid, the Rents, Revenues, and other dues, and profits of all sequestered
Estates whatsoever, (except the Estates of such persons, who shall be
continued under exception as before) be from henceforth suspended and detained
in the hands of the respective Tenants, Occupants, and others, from whom they
are due, for the space of six months following.

10. That the faith of the Army, or other forces of the Parliament given in
Articles upon surenders to any of the Kings party, may be fully made good, and
where any breach thereof shall appear to have been made, fult reparation and
satisfaction may be given to the parties injured, and the prsons offending
being found out, may be compelled thereto.

11. That there may be a general act of oblivion to extend unto all (except
the persons to be continued in exception as before) to absolve from all
Trespasses, Misdemeanors, etc. done in prosecution of the War, and from all
trouble or prejudice for or concerning the same, and to restore them to all
privileges, etc. belonging to other Subjects, provided, as in the fourth
particular under the second general head afore-going concerning security.

12. And whereas there have been of late strong endeavors and practices a
factious and desperate party, to imbroyl this Kingdom in a new War, and for
that purpose to induce the King, the Queen, and Prince, to declare for the
said party, and also to excite and stir up all those of the Kings late party
to appear and engage for the same, which attempts and designs many of the
Kings party (out of a desire to avoid further misery to the Kingdom) have
contributed their endeavors to prevent, (as for diverse of them we have had
particular assurance) we do therefore desire, that such of the Kings party who
shall appear to have expressed, and shall hereafter express shat way their
good affections to the peace and welfare of the Kingdom, and to hinder the
embroyling of the same in a new War, may be freed and exempted from
compositions, or to pay but one years Revenue, or a twentieth part.

The humble Proposals of the Adjutators in the Army. Presented to his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, concerning diverse that suffer in matters
concerning the King.
May it please your Excellency,
HAving received information from some persons of good affections, and fidelity
to the Army, and Kingdom, that several persons are now under unmercifull
sufferings, by confiscating their goods, and imprisonment of their Persons, for
words spoken against the King (acting in His Tyrannical practices in the late
War, they having been Soldiers.)

We being made sensible of their misery, not knowing how soon it may be our own
condition, there as yet being no provision for their or our own indemnity.

For want of which our Enemies have so great advantage of all the well-affected
in the Kingdom, That if not timely remedied, they will recover more upon our
words, then we of them by our swords.

We are engaged to supplicate your Excellency in the behalf of these Prisoners
named in this enclosed paper, that you would be pleased to use some means for
the restoring them to their freedom, and to deliver them from their
Tyrannical sufferings, according as your Excellency shall find agreeable to
Justice and reason.

Presented to His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax sighned by these Adjutators.
John Reynolds Francis White Edward Chillendon Tobias Birdge Richard Nixon
Nicholas Andrews John Wilson Not. Underwood George Stenson Richard Grant Thomas
Raulings William Young J hn Tailor Robert Stedman John Wells John Dober
Edward Vaughan William Pryar. Thomas Shepherd Timothy Thornbury John
Willoughby William Jones Edward Twigge Henry Gethings.


A Declaration from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax and the Council of his
Army, held at Putney, Sept. 9. 1647. Concerning the fundamental Authority and
Government of the Kingdom.
Whereas a Member of the General Council of this Army has publik^ly
decl^red, and expressed himself, That there is now no visible Authority in the
Kingdom, but the power and force of the sword.

We therefore the said General Council (to testify how far our hearts and
minds are from any design of setting up the power of the sword, above, or
against the fundamental authority and government of the Kingdom: And our
readiness to maintain and uphold the said authority.)

Have by a free Vote (in the said Council, no man contradicting) judged the
said Member, To be expelled the said Council.

Which we hereby thought fit to publish as a clear manifestation of our
dislike; and disavowing such principles or purposes.

Putney, September. 9. 1647. By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax, and the General Council of his Army, Signed, John Rushworth,
Secretary.

His Majesty's Message in Answer to the Propositions presented to him at
Hampton Court, Sept. 7. 1647. by the Earls of Pembrook and Lauderdale, Sir
Charles Erskin, si^ John Holland, sir John Cook, sir James Harrington, Mr.
Richard Brown, Mr. Hugh Kenedy, and Mr. Robert Barkley. In the names of the
Parliament of England, and in behalf of the Kingdom of Scotland.
Charles Rex.

HIs Majesty cannot choose but be passionately sensible (as he believes all
his good Subjects are) of the late great distractions, and still languishing
and unset^ed State of this Kingdom; and he calls God to witness, and is
willing to give testimony to all the world of his readiness to contribute His
utmost endeavors for restoring it to a happy and flourishing condition.

His Majesty having perused the Propositions now brought to Him, finds them the
same in effect which were offered to him at Newcastle. To some of which as He
could not then consent without violation of His conscience, and honor; so
neither can he agree to others now, conceiving them in many respects more
disagreeable to the present condition of affairs, then when they were formerly
presented to Him, as being destructive to the main and principal interests of
the Army, and of all those whose affections concur with them. And His Majesty
having seen the Proposals of the Army to the Commissioners from His two houses,
residing with them, and with them to be treated on in order to the clearing and
securing the Rights and Liberties of the Kingdom, and the settling a just and
lasting peace. To which Proposalls as he conceives His two Houses not to be
strangers, so he believes they will think with him that they much more conduce
to the satisfaction of all interests, and may be a fitter foundation for a
lasting peace then the Propositions which at this time are tendered unto Him.

He therefore propounds (as the best way in his judgment in order to peace)
that His two Houses would instantly take into consideration those Proposalls,
upon which there may be a personal Treaty with His Majesty, and upon such
other Propositions as His Majesty shall make, hoping that the said Proposalls
may be so moderated in the said Treaty, as to render them the more capable of
his Majesty's full concessions, wherein He resolves to give full satisfaction
unto his people for whatsoever shall concern the settling of the Protestant
profession, with liberty to tender consciences, and the securing of the Laws,
Liberties, and properties of all His Subjects, and the just privileges of
Parliament for the future. And likewise by His present deportment in this
Treaty, He will make the world clearly judge of His intentions in matter of
future government: In which Treaty His Majesty will be well pleased (if it be
thought fit) that Commissioners from the Army (whose Proposals are) may
likewise be admitted.

His Majesty therefore conjures his two houses of Parliament by the duty they
owe to God, and His Majesty their King, and by the bowels of compassion they
have to their Fellow Subjects, both for relief of their present sufferings,
and to prevent future miseries, that they will forthwith accept of His
Majesty's offer, whereby the joyful news of peace may be restored to this
distressed Kingdom.

And for what concerns the Kingdom of Scotland mentioned in the Propositions,
His Majesty will very willingly treat upon those particulars with the Scotch
Commissioners, and doubts not but to give reasonable satisfafaction to that His
Kingdom.

Given at Hampton Court Sept. 9. 1647.
For the Speaker of the Lords House pro tempore, to be communicated to both
Houses of the Parliament of England, and the Commissioners of the Kingdom of
Scotland.
Master Speaker,
THe sad condition and sufferings of diverse well-affected to your affairs in
the Kingdom is very grievous, and particularly the cases of James Simbal,
Francis Wade, Robert White, and Roger Crab, as they are presented unto me,
which has induced me to present the enclosed paper to your consideration,
wherein you may see the manner, nature and pretenses of their sufferings, (as
presented) and withal the exorbitancies of some in places of Judicature
toward such, who in the worst of times expressed much affection and reality to
your proceedings.

And I humbly desire you to move the House to take their condition into
consideration, if they be committed merely for speaking words against the King
in time of War (which thing I in no sort approve of, yet) it would do well if
the men might have some enlargement, so as they may not perish by a languishing
imprisonment, and such cruel usage as some of them suffer, especially,
considering the offenses, for which they suffer, were but in express of zeal
for your Cause, and that upon apparent provocation, from such (as I am
informed) as were your professed enemies.

With all due submission to you, I desire their speedy enlargement; and
freedom of their Estate.

Your humble Servant, Tho: Fairfax.
Putney, Sept. 12. 1647.
For the Honorable Will: Lenthall Esquire; Speaker of the Honorable House of
Commons. The particular cases of several prisoners returned in the Calendar to
the County Gaol at the White Lion in Southwark, the last Assizes held at
Darking for the County of Surrey. Represented by his Excellency to the
Parliament.
James Simball Deputy Keeper of Winchester house, lying sick, hearing a
Cavallier, there a prisoner, then say, That the Parliament were Rebels and
Traitors, and that if the King came to London with his Army, he would make the
Parliament a poor Parliament, and Exemplary for their Rebellion, by chopping
off their heads at the door: The said Cavallier near two years after, boasting
of a design intended against the Parliament, and being questioned for the same
by the said Simball, out of malice did accuse him for speaking against the King
in these words, viz. That he ( the said Simball) hoped to see the Kings head
upon the Tower block: When indeed the said words were spoken in Answer to
those above mentioned, and upon these conditions: That if the King had any such
intention, then he the said Simball hoped as aforesaid; and thus much the said
Cavalier himself did confess, but afterward denied. Now the said Simball
being indicted without any cognizance, taken of these circumstances, stands
convicted by the only testamony of the said Cavallier ever since the Assizes
held in March last, and adjudged with Francis Wade, and Robert White, by
Sergeant Creswell, to forfeit their whole estates, and remain prisoners during
the Kings pleasure.

Francis Wade being urged to drink the Kings health, denied it, saying, that
King James said, That the King which ruled not according to his Laws, is no
longer a King, but a Tyrant: and that the King had put the Parliament out of
his protection, and in them the whole Kingdom. Therefore no King.

Robert White having been a soldier in the Parliaments service, was demanded
upon his return, what he would have done to the King: had he met him in the
head of his Army, answered, he would as soon have killed him as another man.

Roger Crabb, for comparing the King to the golden Calfe (which the Israelites
worshipped: or words to that purpose) stands convicted by Justice Bacon, since
July 1646. and fined at an hundred marks, and to lie in Jail till payment.

James Simball being at this instant a prisoner, and in Irons at the said
Jail, was indicted by one Wimball, formerly a Cavallier, son in law, and
partner to Richardson, Keeper and Bailiffe of the prison called the Clinke, now
under sequestration, and they (keepers for the State, the said Symbals goods
being within their liberty as aforesaid) have seized and made stay thereof, as
being confiscated to the King.

The said Richardson and Windball commencing suites in their own Court, for
that the said Symbals brother defending part of the said goods in right of
himelfe, having formerly lent them to the said James his brother.

Francis Wade, Robert White, and Roger Crab, are returned as prisoners in the
Calendar to the White Lion by Justice Bacon, who fined Mr. Devinish, late
Keeper of the said County Jail, threescore pounds for suffering the said
prisoners to have some liberty.

In Crabs case the Jury brought him guilty of the words spoken by him, but they
were neither seditious, scandalous, nor pernicious; Justice Bacon used much
Argument to persuade the Jury to find the judgment, they having formerly
twice returned him. And caused the said Jury to be locked up all night without
meat, drink, fire, or candle, until they had returned him, as he stood
indicted.

The Explanation or Declarations of the sense of His Excellency and the
general Council of the Army upon several particulars in the Proposalls
afore-going, in answer to certain Queries thereupon made by the Commissioners
of Parliament residing with the Army, agreed upon at the general Council held
at Putney, on Thursday Septem. 16. 1647.
1. Upon the first general Head.

TO the Quere concerning the time of commencement of the year within which a
period to this Parliament is desired.

The explanation was thought fit to be suspended, until it should appear what
expedition will be made in the settlement of the things proposed.

2. Upon the first particular under the first general Head:

To the Quere [Whether not rather Trienniall Parliaments and the act for that
purpose to be continued with supplementall additions according to the effect of
the particulars contained under this general Head.]

Resolved, That as to the circumstance of time we are satisfied with either
Bienniall or Trienniall Parliaments, provided, that (in case Triennialls be
preferred) there be a proportionable addition to the time for the certainety of
their sitting to, viz. to be (at least) for six or eight months.

3. Upon the second particular under the first general Head.

To the Quere concerning the prejudice of laying a limitation upon Parliaments
not to sit past 240. days.

Resolved, That that limitation is to be understood with this exceptions, viz.
unless any Parliament shall find it necessary for the safety of the Kingdom
to sit longer, but still with this proviso, That each Parliament shall dissolve
of course at least 80. days before the next Bienniall or Trienniall if not
otherwise dissolved sooner, so as that course of new Elections may never be
interrupted.

4. Upon the eighth particular under the first general Head.

To the Quere concerning the prejudice to Parliament freedom, which this
particular might induce.

Resolved, That the liberty of entering dissents is not desired, but in case
where the major vote may be to the destruction or prejudice of the Common
Right or liberty of the Subject.

5. Upon the first particular under the second general head, viz. concerning
the Militia.

To the Quere concerning what is meant by the power of the Militia.

Resolved, That by these words [the power of the Militia] is meant the power of
raising, arming, etc. according to the expressions used in the Proposition of
both Kingdoms concerning the Militia.

6. Upon the third particular under the same Head.

To the Quere concerning the expressing of that power of raising and disposing
moneys by both Houses.

Resolved, That we are well satisfied in the expressions thereof used in the
Propositions of both Kingdoms concerning that matter.

7. Upon the fourth general Head.

To the Quere, what great Officers are meant.

Resolved, The same that are named in the Proposition of both Kingdoms together
with the office of High Admiral, or Commissioners for the Admiall.

8. Upon the fourteenth Head concerning the King.

To the first Quere concerning the extent of these words [without diminution to
their personal rights.

Resolved, That those words were not intended to extend to any part of the
Revenues that have come, or shall become due before the settlement, so as to
invalid or question any disposure thereof made by the Houses of Parliament, or
by authority derived from them.

To the second Quere upon the same head concerning the extent of these word
[without further limimitation to the exercise of the Royal power.]

Res. That these words are intended only as exclusive to any farther new
limitations, not to any that have been made heretofore by the Laws of the Land.
Putney, 16. September. 1647.

By the appointment of His Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax, and the general
Council of the Army.

A Declaration from His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the general
Council of the Army held at Putney on Thursday, Sept. 11. 1647.
THe extreme wants of the Soldiery (both of the Army and other Forces and
Garrisons that have concurred with us, as also the sufferings of the Countries
in respect of free Quarter, and the necessities of the Kingdom for a speedy
supply of money in relation to the disbanding of superfluous forces, the
sending over of others for the relief of Ireland, and for the supplying of
those Forces that are there already, so as to prevent the danger of those
distempers lately raised amongst them) are such as we are and have been very
sensible of, and exceedingly pressed with the consideration of them.

Yet the care the Houses have so many ways expressed for providing a present
supply of moneys, in relation to all these affairs, have made us hitherto
silent as to that point, in expectation to have found ere this time an
answerable effect thereof in actual supplies. But finding that notwithstanding
all their care, yet through the neglect or delay of those on whom the Houses
have depended in that particular, there is little or nothing hitherto effected
therein: and especially considering the delays made by the Lord Major,
Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London, in the advancing of that
sum which the Houses have demanded of them upon the security of their Arrears
(so long since) due from the City to this Army, and for that tax whereupon all
or most other places have long since paid in their proportions: We are enforced
to make this present address to the Houses in relation thereunto.

1. We cannot but consider the notorious readiness of that Court to the
advancing of far greater sums for the raising of a new War, and prosecution of
the late mischievous practices and designs against the Parliament and Army. And
that as their precipitate forwardness therein, was the occasion of the Armies
coming into these parts: so their backwardness to the raising or advancing of
the money now required for the service of the Parliament and supply of the
Army, has been, and is the occasion of the Armies continuance here; And
therefore we cannot but offer it as what we humbly conceive most just and
reasonable.

That for what time their default or delays have occasioned and shall further
occasion the Armies stay hereabouts (so much as to the burden and oppression
of these parts) the charge thereof should some way be laid upon them and their
adherents in and about the City, together with those persons from whom the said
Arreares are due, and those in whose default it lies that they have hitherto
been either not assessed, or not collected. And for that purpose that at least
in case the sum required for so long time as the payment thereof shall be
further delayed. Next forasmuch as the Lord Major, Aldermen, and
Common Council, may perhaps conceive themselves not so much obliged (either to
execute the authority given them by the Parliament for levying of money upon
others, or to advance it themselves by way of loan in behalf of others, until
it can belevied) as they would be to provide what should justly be charged upon
themselves: We therefore humbly offer (at least) in case the sum required upon
the Arreares be not paid in by the time limited,

2. That the Houses would be pleased speedily to consider of the delinquency of
that Court and Council, in those things that were lately done by them as a
Court, and set such Fine upon them for the same as shall be agreeable to
justice, which money being chargeable so properly upon themselves, we presume
they will not have the like excuse not to provide; Lastly, since it is most
evident that for the speedy bringing in of the money required upon the arrears,
there wants not in the said Major, Aldermen, and Common Council, either
authority to levy it, or ability to advance it by way of Loan, til it can be
levied: nor do the persons from whence the arrears are due, want ability to
pay them, but the only fault and defect lies in the want of will to the thing,
both in the one and in the other, and want of power in the hands of willing men
to enforce it, without which we see little hopes that it will in any tolerable
time be effected; We therefore offer,

3. That in case the money be not brought in (by the time limited) the
Parliament would be pleased to give leave and power to the General (with the
advice and directions of the Committee for the Army) for the levying of the
said arrears, together with such penalties and fine as the Houses shall find
cause to impose as aforesaid, or (at least) the penalties allowed by the
Ordinances for that tax for the Army, and then (...) the money be not speedily
brought in for the Parliament to dispose of, let us bear the blame.

And all these things we desire the rather, because we have grounds both of
reason and evidence from the speeches of many in the City, to believe that in
this long withholding of money, the designs and hopes of the Parliament and
our enemies, are to raise the Army into distempers, and the Country about into
a flame, whereby at least to hinder and interrupt all proceedings to the
execution of Parliamentary justice, or settlement of the Kingdom, and to
expose the Parliament again into tumultuous violence, of all which the danger
is very evident and imminent, if not speedily prevented by some such vigorous
and effectual remedies as aforesaid.

By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax, and the General
Council of his Army, Signed, John Rushworth, Secretary.
Putney, September. 16. 1647.
A Representation from his Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax, and the General
Council of the Army. Expressing the Desires of the Army in relation to
themselves as Soldiers; in which they desire satisfaction before disbanding.
Tendered to the Right Honorable the Commissioners o^ Parliament residing with
the Army, Sept. 21. to be by them represented to the Parl.
Right Honorable,
IN our Representation or Declaration sent from St. Albans, we did express in
general terms, what we desired for the settling and securing of the Rights,
Liberties, Peace and Safety of the Kingdom; and since then, as the Distractions
and interruptions we have met withal would admit; We have proceeded to
prepare, and have lately delived to your Lordships in particular, Proposal. In
pursuance of these general Desires, and in order to the same Ends, having in
these set forth what our Desires are, in the things which concerns us as
members of the Commonwealth, and in common with all others, we shall now desire
your Lordships to remind the Parliament of our humble Desires in these things
which concern us as Soldiers; and of our dissatisfaction in relation
thereunto: which remained upon us, when some Regiments of the Army are voted to
be disbanded.

For which purpose, we have now prepared, and do herewith tender to your
Lordships our particular desires, in pursuance of our former papers, published
before our coming to St. Albans; in order to the satisfaction and security of
the Army, and other the Parliaments forces in point of Arrears, and other
things that concern us as Soldiers. Which we desire may be humbly represented
to the Parliament, to be taken into a speedy consideration; as may be a matter
of the first Article, concerning the present stating of Accounts, and giving
Debentures for Arrears to be speedily put in execution, or set in a way of
dispatch; and the rest of them to be agreed upon, and provided for, and
included in any settling of a Peace, which we shall heartily pray for.

By the appointment of His Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax, and the general
Council of the Army. Signed, John Rushworth, Secr.
Putney, September. 21. 1647.
Putney, September. 21. 1647.
FIrst, That a Committee or Commissioners be appointed by the Parliament to
come down and abide at the Headquarters of the Army, with full power and
authority to Audite and State the Accounts thereof, and to give Debentures, at
well for the pay respited upon the P^blique Faith, as otherwise for their
service under the command of his Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax, or any other
respective command, wherein they or any of them have formerly served the
Parliament; that so what shall appear justly due upon the said Debentures, may
be made an unquestionable Debt unto them: And for the more effectual
accomplishment thereof, we desire, that the respective Treasurers and
Commiassries of Musters of the several Armies, may be commanded to attend the
said Committee or Commissioners; That thereby the Arrears of any person of this
Army incurred in other Armies or Garrisons, who by his or their continual
attendance upon the service, have not had their Accounts audited and stated,
may now be fully accounted for, without further trouble. And for as much as the
Accounts of many who are now Members of this Army, and have formerly served the
Parliament under other Commands, through the neglect o^ want of Musters, loss
of papers, death of Officers, taking of Garrisons, etc. and will be very
difficult to be cleared, to what they will be for the service under the command
of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, where Musters have been certain and
Accounts better kept, and such contingencies as aforesaid have not happened.
We humbly offer that the said Committee or Commissioners may have such full
Instructions that where Certificates from superior Officers cannot possibly be
obtained, or other sufficient testimony had, the oath of such persons may be
taken and valid as to the stating of their Accounts. And in regard there
remains a dissatisfaction upon the Army, grounded upon the Instructions made
for the auditing of our Accounts, and published at the Randezvouz of the Army;
(...) Triplee-Heath in order to ou^ sa^i^faction, wher^^^ ca^e is (...) for the
(...) ^^^es have been ^^ceived, and Quarters no^ (...) ding^^ (...) ^^ce taken
of payment of Quarter^ (...) any (...) beyond our pro^^^ (...) ^^ay received,
or any r^^a^d had of the (...) ^eami^^es we have been upon in t^mes of (...),
viz. ^^fficul^ Marches, continual Motions, and tedious Le^guers, etc. whereby
the greatness of our Body, or closeness of posture in quartering, there has
been ^^h scarcity in provision, that both Officers and Soldiers have been
put to extreme expenses in procuring necessaries to live upon; and all this at
such time when no moneys have been sent us, and hereupon proceed made to the
several large deductions thereafter specified, which we neither then, nor yet
can see good grounds for. We humbly offer, That the two Houses will be pleased
to reassume the Consideration of the said Instructions, and think upon some
expedient whereby our Deductions for free Quarter may be moderated, as to the
Instructions aforesaid; and that no person who has constantly paid Quarters
may be put upon any Deduction, or any Officer be accountable for any thing,
save that which particularly concerns himself.

And further, we desire there may be effectual course and provision made for
the stating the accounts, and securing the Arreares of those the Soldiers of
the Kingdom, who have faithfully served the Kingdom, and concurred with this
Army in their late Engagement.

That whereas diverse of the Horsemen of this Army, upon the loss of their
Horses in the Parliaments service, have at their own charge furnished
themselves with others for the said service, and happily have again lost
certain of the said horses so bought, whereby the State has been served, and
the Soldiers much damnified, We humb^^ ^esire the two Houses will be pleased
to take it into their consideration, that some convenient satisfaction may be
thought upon for such as by sufficient testimonial shall make it appear they
have been damnified as aforesnid.

2. That provision may be forthwith made, and a visible security given to
satisfy the Arrears of the Army, in such way and manner as may be least
burthensom to the Commonwealth; in order to which we offer, That Bishops
Lands, Deans and Chapters lands, and Forest lands, may be speedily set to
Sale, or otherwise made over for the use aforesaid, or any other way the
Parliament in their wisedoms shall think meet, appearing satisfaction for the
security of the said Army.

3. That these may be an Ordinance for securing all and every person in this
Army, who have willingly served the Parliament from being imprested out of this
Kingdom to any Foreign service, and that no Horseman shall be forced to serve
on foot in any future Case; and for the more real effecting hereof, we desire,
every such person as aforesaid as shall have a Certificate under the Generals,
or his respective Field-officers or Captains hand, that he has served in this
Army, which he may carry about him or keep by him, or producing such a Ticket,
he may be discharged: and that if any Officer shall detain any such person
after the sight of such testimonial, there may be a certain penalty inflicted
upon him.

4. That the Ordinance concerning Apprentices freedom that have served the
Parliament, may be made an Act before, or at the settling of a Peace.

5. That the Ordinance concerning provision for maimed Soldiers, and the
Widows and Orphans of men slain in the Parliaments service, may be made an Act.

6. That to the Ordinance lately passed for indemnity, there may be an
additional provision for saving harmless and indempnified the Army and all the
Members of it, as also all that have acted in concurrence with it, and for
securing of them from all trouble, question, or prejudice for or concerning any
thing done, in, upon, or in pursuance of the petition of the army, agreed upon
at Walden in March last, or upon the Papers find then presented and published
from the army, or any the things therein contained; or for or concerning any
thing spoken or done in relation to or in vindication of the army from the
injuries or extremeties put upon it about the said Petition, or since; which
additionall provisions we desire may (together with the said Ordinances for
Indemp^ity) be past into Acts at the settling of a Peace, so as we nor others
may not (for what we have done or insisted on in necessary defense or
vindication of our selves, as Soldiers, from ^^ine or insufferable injuries
and oppressions, or in behalf of the Commonwealth, for the settling and
securing of the Rights, Liberties, and Peace and safety thereof,) remain
subject to the malice or pressures of ours and the Kingdoms Enemies (whom we
have opposed) upon any future advantage.

By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax, and the General
Council of the Army. John Rushworth, Secretary.
Putney, September. 21. 1647.
FINIS.
Die Lunae, 27o Septembris. 1647.
Whereas Matthew Simmons has been at great charges in printing the
Declarations and Papers from the Army in one Volume. It is ordered by the Lords
in Parliament Assembled, that the said Matthew Simmons shall have the Printing
and publishing thereof for the space of one whole year from the date hereof.
And that none other shall reprint the same during that time.

John Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.


