A DECLARATION OF THE Order of the Treaty Appointed to be Between the Kings
most gracious Majesty, and the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons,
Commissioners, from both Houses of Parliament, at Sir William Hodgesse House at
New-port in the Isle of Wight.

Which Commissioners set out from London, on Wednesday, September. 13. 1648.

C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown
and flanked by the English lion on one side and the Scottish unicorn on the
other

Sept ye 14th London Printed for R. Smithurst, near Pye-corner, 1648.

A DECLARATION OF THE Order of the Treaty.
1THe Kings Majesty was set at liberty on Wednesday Sep. 6. 1648 at Sir William
Hodges house at Newport in the Isle of Wight (where His Majesty's Court is to
be during the Treaty) whither the Commissioners from the Parliament are to make
their addresses to him.

2 The Earl of Northumberland, the Earl of Pembrooke, the Earl of Salisbury,
the Earl of Middlesex, and the Lord Viscount Sea from the House of Lords. And
the Lord Waynmor, Sir Henry Vain, jun. Sir John Pots, Mr. Crew, Mr. Perepoint,
Mr. Hollis, Sir Harbottle Grimston, Mr. Glin the Recorder, Mr. Bulkley, and Mr.
Samuel Brown, of the House of Commons, are chosen to be Commissioners from the
two Houses of Parliament during this Treaty. And went from London on Wednesday
Sep. 6. 1648.

3 These Commissioners are to Treat immediately with the Kings person, To
deliver what both Houses of Parliament shall command, to His Majesty, and none
else. And take account of His Majesty's Answer or what he shall propound, from
none on His Majesty's behalf, but from the King immedi^tly

4 The Kings Majesty being acquainted that they are come from the Parliament to
join with him in a personal Treaty, His Majesty is to appoint them a time
when, and place where to wait upon Him, The place is made ready at the
aforesaid Mr. Hogesse at Newport in the Isle of Wight.

5 The said Commissioners from Parliament are then to meet the King according
to directions from His Majesty.

6 The Commission^rs so soon as they have met His Majesty at the place and
the time appointed by His Majesty for the Treaty, They are to present the
Propositions to the Kings, from both Houses (which Propositions are the same,
that was delivered at Hampton Court.

7 At the delivery of the Propositions one of the Lords is to make a speech,
showing the cause of their coming to His Majesty; and to declare to His
Majesty how much the Parliament do desire that the said Treaty may procure an
happy peace.

8 That Lord who makes the said speech, (or some other of the Commissioners) is
to read over the said Propositions to His Majesty before all the rest of the
Commissioners, and such attendants as His Majesty shall have to wait upon Him.

9 The rest of the Commissioners from the Parliament are to make such speeches
to His Majesty as they think fit.

10 His Majesty is then to give some Answer by speech thereunto (as to the
matter of Resolution) when and how he will return them an Answer to the said
Propositions.

11 His Majesty then is to withdraw, and the Commissioners return to their
lodgings.

12 The Commissioners are presently to send a messenger to the Parliament with
letters to give account to both Houses of the said overtures

13 His Majesty then advises with such as he shall desire of those that are
appointed to wait upon Him, (viz.)

Gentlemen of his Majesty's Bedchamber. Duke Richmond, Mar. Hertford, Earl
Lindsey, Ear. Southampton. Grooms of his Bedchamber. M. George Kirk, James
Levenston, Henry Murry, His Barber. Thomas ^avis. Pages of his Back-staires.
Hugh Hen. Humph. Rogers. William Levett. Yeoman of his Robes. Rives. Queries,
with four or six of his Footmen, as they find fittest to wait. Sir Ed.
Side^ham, Robert Terwit, John Housdon. Mistress Wheeler, Laundresse, with such
M^ids as she shall choose, The Groom of his Presence, Parsons. To wait as they
did, or as he shall appoint them, Sir Foulk Grevill, Captain Titus, Cap.
Boroughs, Mr. Cressert, Hanstid, Firebrace, Chaplains, Bishop of London, Bishop
of Salisbury, Dr. Hamond, Dr. Saund^rson, Dr. Turner, Dr. Haywood. Lawyers, Sir
Tho. Gardener, Sir Ort. Bridgeman, Mr. Jeff. Palmer, Mr. Tho. Cook, Mr. John
Vaughan, Advocate Reeves D. Duck. Clerks and Writers, S r Ed. Walker, M. Phil.
Warwick, Nic. Oudart, Charles Whittacre. To make ready the house for Treating,
Petor Newton, Clem. Kenersley.

14 Time being come for the Commissioners to wait again upon the King: They go
to the place appointed, and there His Majesty delivers such Answer to their
Propositions as he shall think fit and does also propound such things in
relation to the Treaty as he shall please.

15 The Commissioners from the Parliament receiving H^s Majesty's Answer, and
Propositions, proceed to treat with the King on such particulars as shall be
inserted on^ in rel^tion to what they have presented from the P^rliament; The
first of which is, to be for His Majesty to recall ^ll his Propositions,
Declarations, etc. against the Parliament, and them or settling the Militia,
and Church-Governm^n^.

16 The Commissioners are to give reasons w^^ these should be first insisted
on, and why his Majesty should grant the passing of them.

17 What Propositions the Commissioners receive from his Majesty that are not
included in the Propositions from the Parliament, they are to communicate to
the Parliament, before they conclude any thing therein.

18 Whatsoever the answer is from his Majesty, and what he does propound to the
Commissioners, they are forthwith to acquaint the Parliament therewith.

19 After the first meeting of the Commissioners with his Majesty. The Treaty
is to continue 40 days. And every day to be spent in the Treaty, for
concluding of a safe and well-grounded peace; And bringing his Majesty home to
join with his Parliament.

20 As each Proposition is concluded, his Majesty and the Commissioners are to
pass on to the next, and so to the next, until all be finished, or the time
expended. And if it please God, that a peace be concluded, and all agreed; Then
after the conclusion of all, His Majesty and the Commissioners are to sign to
the Agreement.

21 Messengers are appointed to come daily with Letters from the Commissioners,
and to pass between them and the Parliament, to give account of the Treaty,
and how things go on from day to day.

22 Concerning any doubts which the Commissioners shall scruple in the Treaty,
they are to make their applications to the Houses for instructions therein.

23 The Commissioners are to Treat upon such Propositions as they shall
receive from his Majesty, accordingly as they shall receive Instructions from
both Houses of PARLIAMENT.

24 During this Treaty his Majesty is to have hi^ liberty with freedom,
honor, and safety to his person.

25 If it please God so to bless this Treaty that a^^ shall be agreed and a
Duplicate signed by His Majesty and the Commissioners, then His Majesty is to
have that signed by the Commissioners. And the Commissioners are to communicate
that signed by His Majesty to the Parliament, to be ratified and confirmed by
both Houses of Parliament.

26 Both Houses are to draw those Propositions into Bills, without any
alterations at all, save only such verbal expressions as are usual to
Statutes, That is to say, to add such words as these (viz.) Be it Enacted by
His Majesty and the Lords and Commons in Parliament, etc.

27 All being thus drawn into Bills His Majesty is to give His Royal assent
for the passing of them, they being either sent to Him in the Isle of Wight (or
else where, as shall be agreed by His Majesty and both Houses of Parliament)
for after all is concluded (if it please God to give so good an issue to the
Treaty) it is then very probable that his Majesty will come to London, or to
some of his Courts near London, for if all shall be agreed and signed, all
jealousy then is ended and vanished.

28 His Majesty having passed these Bills. Then are Commissioners Royal to be
chosen by his Majesty for the passing of them the Great Seal.

29 All being thus concluded, his Majesty is to sit, and join with his
Parliament, and all our sad differences between the King and Parliament, to be
ended. And King and Parliament to go hand in hand against the common Enemy.
(which God grant they may do, that we may see sweet and golden days again.

30 If it please God that England shall be so happy to see such comfortable
days of agreement between the King and Parliament, There will be a joyful day
of Thanksgiving unto Almighty God. And then will all that fear God say,

God bless the KING and PARLIAMENT.
FINIS.

