A DECLARATION OF THE OFFICERS OF THE ARMY IN SCOTLAND To the Churches of
Christ in the three NATIONS.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Christopher Higgins in Harts-Close, over against the
Trone Church, Anno Dom. 1659. 9ber 2

A Declaration of the Officers of the Army in Scotland to the Churches of
Christ in the three Nations.
ALL the great works the Lord Jesus has been doing in these three poor
Nations, has been to make his Churches in them a glory, that he might
establish Jerusalem a praise in the Earth, and we are confident his heart will
never be at rest, nor his providence shortened till upon this Glory he creates
a defense, and that so strong that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against
it: The establishing of his Churches we conceive to stand upon a double
foundation, Truth, and Peace, the Defense he will create upon it, is his own
presence with them in Christ, and the Instruments in his hand which he has
raised to be a shelter to them in the worst of times.

Of this latter we may speak it to the praise of free grace, that no persons
in their capacity have been more Instrumental in the hand of God then the Army,
through whose faithful endeavors for Christ and his Ordinances, and the
Liberties of his people, God has been pleased to redeem the precious
privileges of his Saints, (upon whose account all other Rights are only
valuable,) from mixture in their Ordinances, from un just and Antiscriptural
usurpation upon their consciences, to a State of Freedom, to profess and
practice any thing that is warranted by the word, though diversely interpreted
according to that measure of the spirit, which Jesus Christ the head is pleased
to dispense.

The prosecution of which, while God gives us an opportunity to serve our
Generation, we must still hold forth to be the principle and practice of the
Army, however different they may seem in the ways they pitch upon to promote
it.

The blessing also that has followed it, though it is not the alone motive to
make us at this time declare it to you, because we know Christ's work is wages
(let it be sucess'd how he pleases, by sowing in tears or reaping in joy) Yet
is it enough to encourage us as to the issue let it be what it will, the work
carrying in it acceptance with him whom we would only please, and engagements
of your selves, as to your prayers coincident with the end of all his glory,
which the Churches are to hold forth in all ages.

In order to this we do (as in the omniscient eye of our dear Lord Jesus who
walks in the midst of you) declare.

First, That we own and assert the Authority of this present Parliament which
is now through sad mistakes and misapprehensions interrupted; and principally,
because We do judge that a well regulated Commonwealth is the safest Government
to secure the just Liberties of all the Churches of Christ though in differing
forms, and to ball ance the Lamented and circumstantial differences (whose
wounds are yet bleeding) in the great scale of Christian and spiritual Love,
and as far as we know our own hearts, the security it may give to our civil
rights as men, are dear to us only as they relate to this most desired and
promised unity amongst Gods people though very diverse in their judgments.

Secondly, That to this end, if the Lord again please out of reserved mercy to
his poor Churches, to unite the Parliament and Army together, We do declare,
that we shall assert it as the undoubted right of the Churches, and humbly
represent it to the Parliament as our great request, that an impartial and just
countenance according to the Word, and the nature of their Privileges, may be
afforded to all that may encourage the Ministry of the Churches, and that may
hedge about the flock of Christ, that they may feed quietly in all godliness,
and this with the largest allowance that Gods Word will admit of both to
Pastors and people in what way soever constituted and congregated.

Thirdly, As further conducing to this end, We do profess our selves to be
persons that would follow Truth in Love, and therefore can readily and heartily
allow that in affection to all who profess Christ, and walk in him as they have
received him, which we may not possibly in Judgment; for as far as we have
attained we would walk up, and where we think not the same things, we shall til
God reveal further, pray for a Spirit to practice that which is unquestionably
revealed, that we love one another even as Christ has loved us.

Fourthly, We do further Declare, however the present exigent may enforce us to
the restraint of some of our Brethren and Friends, whose mistakes about their
way to this end, appear to our Consciences to be such as we cannot reconcile
either by the Word or their promises and protestations to such a purpose as we
Declare for, That it is not upon the least account out of disrelish of their
Judgments as to any profession of Christ, which they hold forth, but only to
preserve the civil peace and unity of the Army, that there may be a due time
left to the Parliament the supreme Authority of the Nation, to put in Execution
the forementioned Ends which they have promised and obliged themselves to, to
settle this birthright, which we have asserted in the possession of the
Churches, as a fundamental we prize and value as part of the Testament in the
blood of Jesus Christ, and we should account it a greater mercy to have it as
free born sons of Christ's visible Kingdom, then whatsoever we as mere Subjects
of this Commonwealth may challenge were our Outward Liberties never so much
advantaged.

Of which, that we may see the Topstone as well as the foundation. We would
desire all the Lords Remembrancers to give him no rest till he makes Sion a
praise in the Earth, and shall account it no small encouragement to our
endeavors, let what difficulty soever attend them, to have your prayers as our
strength in the Lord, whose cause and work we hope we own: however we can
truly say we really intend it, and shall believe God will pardon the upright
in heart, and if we be mistaken so ought you: forgiving one another even as God
for Christ's sake has forgiven you.

Edinb. October. 20. 1659.
FINIS.

