A DECLARATION Sent to the Lord Clifford, Earl of CUMBERLAND. From the
General Assembly of the Kingdom OF SCOTLAND Holden at Edingburgh November the
ninth, 1642.

VVherin is declared their Resolution to raise Forces to secure the peace of
that Kingdom, and to assist the Parliament against the Cavaliers, and all
other evill-affected persons.

Also a List of the Names of the Earls, Viscounts, and Barons, which have
subscribed, to raise 12. thousand Horse and Foot, for the removing evil
Counselors from about his Majesty.

LONDON, November. 28. Printed by T.F. for L.W. 1642.

A Copy of a Letter sent from the Nobility of SCOTLAND for the Right Hon: the
Earl of CVMBERLAND.
Our most noble Lord:
AS in all these great Affairs which have been much noysed abroad, our
chiefest care has been to walk warrantably according to the laws that are
still in force for that effect, so we are certainly persuaded that amongst our
selves there are none, who can justly complain of what has passed, and for
those of our countrymen, who are now in England, if they be of that number as
they are evil Subjects to our gracious Sovereign, and worse compatriots to
us, so of all other the worst Guests among you, whilst they endeavor the
remedy of their evils, and the escape of their deserved punishment, the
beginning of an incureable disease betwixt the two Nations, to whom the quarrel
should no way extend; Jf the Informations, and Protestations, made by us for
this end, and the Bond of our Covenant, sworn to God and M^n, have not cleared
all scruples in the mind of our gracious Sovereign hitherto, and of all good
Subjects, it is not our fault, but rather our joined misfortune, hat there are
to many among you also in greatest place and credit, whose private Byas runs
quite contrary to the public good, and who are those wicked ones rising early
to poison the public Fountain, and to sow the tears of unhappy Jealousy
and Discord, betwixt you and us, before the good seed of our love, and respect
to our Neighbor Nation can take place in your hearts, among all the evils of
this kind which daily overtakes us, next to the present undeserved displeasure
of our Prince against us, (which God in his mercy to both, will take of in his
own time) there could nothing be fallen so strange and unexpected to us, as
the drawing together of your Forces upon our Borders, which whether to defend
your self, or annoy us, and so prepare and gather those Clouds which threaten
a sore tempest to both we for our part wish they may first perish in the
Shipwreck, who began first to dash the one side against the other.

As for you my Lord, although your Place, Person, and Quality, the Honor, and
Reputation of your former Life, may gain us some assurance that your Lordship
will be wary to begin the quarrel, whereat only Enemies to both Nations will
rejoice, and catch advantage.

Yet give us leave to doubt the fears that makes us thus strengthen our
Borders, or rather suspect those pregnant presumptions of a further project
intended against this Nation by your power, which needs must make us bestir our
selves betimes at all hands for our safety, God is our witness that we desire
no National quarrel to arise betwixt us, or to taste of that bitter fruit
which may set both ours and your Childrens teeth on edge, but rather hold our
selves obliged in conscience of our duties to God, our Prince and all your
Nation, our Brethren, to try all Just and lawful means for the removal of
all causes of difference betwixt His Majesty and the Parliament, who are yet
linked together, and should be still in all the bonds of a second and common
interest, and to be always ready to offer the occasion of greater
satisfaction, this kind of clearing our loyal intentions to all to whom it
may concern, and namely your Lordship in regard of your place and command at
this time by any means whatsoever would be thought expedient on both sides,
thus far we thought good to represent to your Lordship, being occasionally
together so few of us as in this place, for our selves and in the name of the
rest of our number, who altogether with us will endeavor our selves to raise a
considerable force for removing of His Majesty's ill council now attending his
Royal person, seeking the ruin of all His Majesty's Kingdoms, we whose Names
are under written expect your Lord-ships answer, and rest

Edingburgh, the 9th of Nov. 1642. Your Lordships affectionate Friends. Argile,
etc.

A List of the Nobillity of the Kingdom of Scotland, which have subscribed and
stands affected to the King and Parliament.
The Names of the Earls.
THe E. of Argile. The E. of Arth. The E. of Buckham. The E. of Lethgoe. The E.
of Perch. The E. of Dunfarlin. The E. of Haddington. The E. of Carricke. The
E. of Lowthiew. The E. of Dalhouse. The E. of Castills. The E. of Glencarne.
The E. of Murray. The E. of Moreton. The E. of Gatnes. The E. of Nechesdale.
The E. of Abercorne. The E. of Tillibarne. The E. of Roxbrough. The E. of Mar.
The E. of Marshall. The E. Mountrosse. The E. of Eglenton. The E. of Atholl.
The E. of Dunfres. The E. of Quinbrough. The Earl of Wems.
Viscounts.
Viscount Aboyne. Viscount Kenmore. Viscount Dunbar. Viscount Bethaven.
Viscount Thormand.
The Names of the Barons.
Baron Lowdon. Baron Lindsey. Baron Forbes. Baron Semple. Baron Sinekeleere.
Baron Harris. Baron Horet. Baron Ogeleby. Baron Rosse. Baron Thorphicken. Baron
Londore. Baron Halliradhouse. Baron Cowyer. Baron Gray. Baron Ockletry. Baron
Oliphant. Baron Burleigh.

THe Horse and Foot ready raised for the assisting of his Majesty and the
Parliament, are nere upon 12000. under the Command of the Earl of Dunfarlin,
General of the Regiments of Foot, and the Earl of Roxbrough, General of the
Horse, the Earls of Moreton, and Mountrosse, chief Commanders of the 5000.
soldiers to lie upon the Borders of Northumberland, Cumberland, and
Westmerland, to hinder the proceedings of the Lord Clifford, who has a great
Army of Horse and Foot, pillaging and plundering the Country thereabouts, with
daily other misdemeanors, as rapines* and such like, etc.

Die Martis xxij. November. 1642.
An Order of the Commons House of Parliament, concerning the Restitution of
such Goods to the Owners, as have been violently taken from them, having been
plundered or pillaged by the Soldiers.
Whereas the houses of diverse of his Majesty's good Subjects in the several
Counties of England have been plundered, and their goods taken from them by
strong hand by Soldiers.

It is this day Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, That all such goods
(in whose possession soever they be) being found by any party from whom they
were taken, and denial made of restitution upon sight hereof; It shall be
lawful for them, or any of them, to call the Constables, and other Officers,
and all other his Majesty's good people, to be assisting, for the gaining the
possession of them, by way of Examination of any that can give any information
before any Officer, or otherwise, in whose hands they shall be found to
remain, and such as shall assist in this business, shall be saved harmless
by virtue of this Order.

Hen. Elsing, Cler. Parl. D.C.

FINIS.

