A DECLARATION PRESENTED To the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons, in the
high Court of Parliament of ENGLAND ASSEMBLED OF THE Humble Representations of
the Grand Inquest of the County of YORK.

Concerning The Kingdom of Scotland, and settling the Government of the
Kingdom of ENGLAND.

May 8. 1648.
Imprimatur

Gil. Mabbot.



Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, near the Queens-head
Tavern. 1648.

A DECLARATION Presented To the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons in the
High Court of Parliament, of England, assembled.
Of the humble representations of the Grand Inquest of the County of York.
WHO do with all humbleness Remonstrate, and present unto your Honors, an
humble acknowledgement, and hearty thankfulness for your uncessant and
unwearied labors, for our and this Kingdoms safety, unpresidented by any
former time, and not to be parallelled, as we believe, by any future age; and
particularly that you have, to our inestimable comforts, extirpated Prelacy,
and Pope^y, and eased us of a thirty Courts. The Court of Wards, and of free
Quarter. And that you have made good progress in settling the Kingdom in a
way toward peace.

And yet it is our earnest and humble desires, as the most desirable of all
earthly blessings that you will proceed to the full and final finishing
thereof, And to the settling Government in relation to Magistracy both over
Church and State, for the effecting whereof, And of all other your honorable
and Christian endeavors for public good, our uttermost abilities, lives, and
fortunes shall be always ready to do you service.

And inasmuch as the honor of God, the establishment of true Religion, and the
propagation of the Gospel, is and ought to be the first and highest of our
desires and endeavors.

We therefore humbly supplicate your honors, that you will be pleased in your
grave wisdoms, to provide, that as much as possibly may be, insufficient,
scandalous and seditious Ministers may be removed from the places where they
are, and pious and able Ministers settled in every parish, and competent
maintenance appointed for them, and that two, three, or four Ministers may be
appointed in each Riding in the mean time, to preach throughout each Riding,
where able Ministers are not, with sufficient allowance to them also, for the
raising whereof, we humbly present our best conceptions to your Honors
wisdom, that all augmentations which have been granted, or shall be granted,
by authority of Parliament, out of impropriate Rectories belonging to
Delinquents, for Ministers maintenance may be continued, with allowance in
their Compositions.

And that the Lands belonging to the Dean and Chapter, may be improved to their
best values, and appointed also for their maintenance: all which we humbly
refer to your honors grave consideration.

And albeit our sufferings and losses since the beginning of the late troubles,
are beyond our skill now exactly to measure, and immunerate, yet we acknowledge
with all thankfulness, that next under God, the very subsistence and enjoyment
we now have, were, and are preserved unto us, by the care and vigilency of your
Honors. And we doubt not but in fitting time your honors will provide some
way toward our further reparation.

And we do further humbly represent, that in respect of the many rumors
spread abroad among us, of some intended foreign invasion, which have begot in
us many fears and doubts, least any sudden surprise should fall upon us, we do
most humbly desire, that if it may stand with your Honors pleasure, to which
we shall unanimously submit, and in whom under God, we repose our safeties,
that besides the present model of the Army, some speedy and effectual course
may be directed for putting this County into a posture of defense, and for
settling the Militia among us, in such hands as the well-affected of this County
shall make choice of, with his Excellency the Lord Fairfax his approbation.
And that though we can expect nothing from our Brethren of Scotland, but
Brotherly concurrence in order to public Peace and safety, they being joined
with us in the National Covenant, yet for that many Delinquents, Papists, and
others, ill and disaffected persons, have lately withdrawn themselves, from
hence into that Kingdom, and do there now remain, and gives forth, as we are
given to understand, that many twenty thousands in England are ready to join
with any visible, though never so small a force, for raising new troubles in
this Kingdom, therefore we do with all humility, and submission to your
Honors, desire, that those English Incendiaries, for we cannot style them with
any other name, may be called home, and others intending to go for the same
end, may be restrained, and all of them dealt withal as to your Honors wisdom
shall be thought meet: And inasmuch as this great County is now destitute of
Knights of the Shire, and long has wanted one. We do humbly represent to
your Honors our desires for supply herein, that the Affairs in Parliament
relating to this County, may be specially intended by the Representatives
thereof.

FINIS,
May 8 1648
Imprimatur

G M.


