A DECLARATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF Major General Massey, Sir Marmaduke
Langdale, And Lieut. Col. John Lilburn,
TOUCHING The King of Scots; and the present Engagement between the States of
Holland, and the Parliament of England; with the coming in of Prince Philip
(son to the Queen of Bohemiah) the creating of him Vice Admiral; And three
famous English ships taken.

Likewise a Remonstrance and Declaration of the Presbyterians, and XV
Propositions sent to the most illustrious Princess the Queen of Sweden.

London, Printed for G. Horton, 1652. December. 22.

A DECLARATION OF Major General Massey, and Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn,
to the States of Holland, touching the present war and engagement with the
Parliament of England.
Right Honorable,
THe Royal party are so puffed up with thoughts of Victory from the
Netherlands, that I fear it will go near to cast them by their thoughts of
Humanity. For many dangerous papers are published to asperse your Government,
and bring an odium upon it; Amongst the rest, Major General Massey has
presented a Declaration to the States, showing the great interest of the United
Provinces, in the restitution of the King of England; for so they are pleased
to call him; but alas poor Gentleman, I dread their integrity, and am
opiniated, that the great bandying on all sides, tends more to by-ends, then
his interest; for certainly, the imperious Statists of the present Times,
endeavor to wax greater by the peoples ruin, rather then by the Royal
Restoration: However, little Massey has reduced some Lord-like Resolves to the
obedience of Sovereignty, insomuch that he now begins to appear again in his
wonted posture for his declared Majesty, and vigorously does he negotiate with
the States for the restoring of him to his dis-joynted Throne. Sir Marmaduke
Langdale has declared likewise for his young Masters Interest, and since his
leaving of the Venetian service (whose heroic Achievements in that honorable
and Christian Warfare against the Turk, will remain as a memorable Trophy for
all Christendom, and eternize his everlasting fame throughout all Ages; for
with four and fifty thousand men, even in the space of seven hours, he totally
routed two hundred and fifty thousand Turks, and killed and took prisoners
above threescore thousand men, etc.) has summoned in diverse of the English
Cavalry, and has manned forth eight statlely ships that he brought with him from
Venice.

Prince Philip, brother to Prince Rupert, and fourth son to the most
illustrious Princess the Qu. of Bohemia, is Vice Admiral, and Sir William Page
Rear-Admiral. They vaunt it out high, as if they were already Masters of the
Sea, and seem to limit the bounds of the English, and give Law to the Ocean.

Prince Rupert is coming to join with them, whose Highness presented 15
Propositions to the Queen of Sweden, inciting aid and assistance for his Cosen
Charles; and diverse have arrayed themselves, in obedience to Sovereignty.

Lieutenant Col. Lilburn is very active, and great is the concourse of people
toward him; he has set forth a Declaration, touching the Liberty of the
People, and the Freedom of Nations, which gives ample satisfaction to the
States.

The Dutch Fleet we understand have taken a gallant Merchants ship of Hull, and
two other ships coming from the Barbados; which are ^steem^d to be worth one
hundred and fifty thousand pound.

Amsterdam 18 December, 1652.
The Results of the Presbyterian Assembly at York.
ON the 15 of this instant December, a great dispute was held by diverse
Ministers in York Minster, where they insisted upon a very high Argument, to
prove the true and visible monarchy of the Church, and after a clear
demonstration, given in by Mr. Cotton, and some other Presbyterian Ministers,
of the infallibility thereof; the said Mr. Cotton declared as follows:

Beloved, dwell there for ever; but the Tyrants of the World have destroyed the
Temple, to adore the Chapels of their own hearts; for that house is no longer
thought worthy to be a house of prayer, but is become a den of thieves; A witty
Age, but a wicked world. For many there are, who decry down the Ministry, and
the proprieties of the church.

O but let us consider, when the Revenue of the Ministry is once taken off,
what itinerant piece of Homily, will venture the merchandise of his labor for
an uncertainty of bread? into what contempt and scandal would that glorious
calling crumble into, when every Clodpate shall sit in Judgment, whether a
Divine deserve his Sunday dinner? It Is true indeed, such pitiful shreds of
predication as the world may produce, may preach through plain song to the
humor of the Vulgar, and the people perhaps delight to have it so: but yet let
me tell you 'twill be a doleful Message, when judgments become their own
Prophets, and the plagues of heaven find no fore runners of their horrid
presence. O but these are times of revelation, and men are more familiar with
the Deity then in the days of old! I grant indeed there is abundance of
pretended intimacy with divine workings, else certainly the modern confidence
were a strange presumption; but nevertheless (with submission to the supreme
censure) the Widow would hardly have found her groat by putting out the candle;
neither we in slighting the Ordinances of God, which are the ministerial means
of our illumination, shall ever by the feel of our groping invention be able to
direct our straying feet in the ways of Righteousness, under the ridiculous
notion of prophetical inspiration.

FINIS.

