The Two Great QUESTIONS CONSIDERED.

I. What the French King will Do, with Respect to the Spanish Monarchy. II.
What Measures the English ought to Take.
LONDON, Printed for Charles Mount, near Holburn, 1700.

Price Two Pence.

The Two Great Questions CONSIDERD.
WE are told That the Deceased King of Spain has by his last Will, bestowed his
Kingdoms on the Duke D' Anjou, Grandson to the Present King of France.

Among^^ the many weak Actions of that Effeminate Prince, who hardly ever did a
Wi^e One, This is the most Ridiculous; if it be proper to give ^uch (...) to
the Actions of Soverign Princes.

(...) imigine the most Christian King would give any Regard to, or put (...)
upon such a Bequest, any farther than consisted with his other (...), or at
least with his Interest; must be a Folly none could be guil^^ of, (...) such as
know very little of the King of France, or of the Affairs of Europe,

2. To think that the Rest of of Princes of Chrestendom, would suffer the
Spanish Monarchy to be bequath'd by Will to a French Man, without any Title or
other Right than the Deed of Gift of the late King, and without any Regard to
the Right of the Lawful Pretenders, is also most Egregious Nonsense*

To make way therefore, to the Case in hand, and come at the Questions before
us with more Clearness; it is necessary to Examine the Nature, and probable
Consequences of this Last Will and Testament of the King of Spain.

1. As to the Nature of the Thing, it seems to be a Tacit Invitation to all the
Competitors to a Dangerous and a Bloody War; as if the King of Spain should
(...) said to his Privy Council, I Will be revenged on them all for attemping to
divid our Dominions; for I Will give it to One that has no Title, let the Rest
fight for it, and the longest Sword take all.

As to the Duke E' Anjou, he as no Manner of Title, but what is presumptive on
the Death of his Father and Elder Brother without Issue; if they should have
Children the Emperor of Morocco has as good, and perhaps a better Title to the
Crown of Spain than He.

The Dauphin of France has an Unquestioned Title to the Crown of Spain, if it
be True, that the Renunciation made by his Father and Mother at the Pyrenoean
Treaty; cannot bind the Children so as to deprive them of their Right, which
is the great Argument now used to defend their Title: Now if their Right be
good the Crown is the Dauphin's, and after him the Duke of Burgundy's and his
Heirs; and Dr. Davenant may spare himself the Labor of Writing a long
Discourse to defend the Dauphin's Title, for we will grant he has an
Undoubted Right of Succession.

But I should be glad to have it ansver'd, how the Duke D' Anjou can have a
Title while the other are alive? Is cannot be in the Power of the Dauphin to
say, I will give my Right to my Second Son, for I do not think it vvorth my
while to accept of it for my self or my Eldest. Because,

2. The Consequence of that will in all Probability be this, that the Duke of
Burgundy's Son when he has One will say again, My Grandfather had no Power to
give away my Right, I am the Undoubted Heir to the Spanish Monarchy, and so no
Question he will be if the present Dauphin has a Right; and if Power be in his
Hands to subdue it, he will have it. though the Possession be his Uncle's; for
Crowns know no Uncles, Brothers, or any Relations; when Power of Possession
joined with Right is before them.

So that the King of France cannot but see, that to take the Crown of Spain
from the Will and Testament of the late King, is Disclaiming the Right of his
own Son and Involving his Grandsons in Bloody Wars; the Issue of which a Wiser
Head than His cannot foresee. This leads me to Consider.

The First Question.
What Measures the King of France will take, with respect to the Succession
of the Spanish Monarchy?

By saying what Measures he will take, I mean, what He will in all Probability
take, or what his Intrest will lead him to take; for I suppose, no Man will
imagine I am of his Privy Council.

To debate this Matter, it is necessary to consider the King of France* wirh
respect to the Terms He stands in with the rest of Europe.

If the King of France were Absolute Master of his own Measures and had no
Leagues or Neighbors to regard; there is no Question to be made, but that
rejecting all Conditions of he would immediately enter upon the Dominions Spain
as his own undoubted Inheritance, or at least his Sons; annex the the same to
the Crown of Fran^e and make it one Entire Empire, and any Man else would do
the like.

But as He has Measures to take with Powerful Neighbors, who as Potent as
(...) is, are able to give him Diversion enough; and if He should embroil
himself with them, may make it a Hazard whether he should obtain it or no; He
is too Wise a Prince not to see that his Interest will Oblige him to act in
Concert with his Neighbors. as far as conveniently He can.

The Truth of this Argument is abundantly confirmed in the Measures He took,
and the Alliances He made before the Death of the King of Spain.

They who think the King of France so Magnipotent that He values none of his
Neighbors, and talk so big of him, that like Medal-makers they place him among
the Invincibles; must have forgot the Siege of Namure, and the Vain Effort of
the Power of France to relieve it; they must pass over his Deserting the Late,
and Acknowledging the Present King of England at the Peace of Resvvick; they
must overlook the low Steps he was obliged to make, to draw the Duke of Savoy
from the Confederacy, how he was unable to save Casall. which cost him so much
Money; how he delivered the Impregnable Town of Pigneroll, which his Father
called the Righ He and of France, and which cost him 100 Millions to fortify;
how he married the Fortune of France to a Daughter of Savoy without a Portion*
and bought ^he Duke of Savoy at the Price of his Grandstn's Dishonor; how he
surrendered the ^arge Dominions of Lorrain* and Luxemburgh, and above 100
Fortified Towns to ^he Confederates, which though he were always Master of the
Field, would cost him ^even Years to recover by the Ordinary Course of Sieges
and Attacks.

These are plain Demonstrations, that he found himself over matched by the
Confederacy; and he is not a Man of so little Sense, as not to know it.

Why else in the League now made for the Partition of the Spanish Monarchy,
should be content himself with the Dominion the Spaniards had in Italy, and
quit the Delicious Morsel of America to the House of Austria.

What Reason can any one assign for it, but that finding the English and Dutch
never to be brought to consent, to his being so very powerful at Sea, as that
Addition would make him; he was willing to accept so large a Portion as the
Italian Part assigned to him upon Easy Terms, rather than venture like the Dog
in the Fable, to loose all by coveting too much.

Upon these Terms therefore, in Consent with the English and Dutch, his Most
Christian Majesty has agreed, that on the Decease of the King of Spain the
Spanish Monarchy should be thus divided,

All the Dominions with the Spaniards possess in Italy to be given to the
French, Millan excepted, which is to be given to the Duke of Lorrain in
Consideration of the Dutchies of Lorrain and Bar, which are to be yielded to
the French, and all the rest some few Towns on the Frontiers of Navarr
excepted, to be given to the Arch Duke of Austria, with other Particulars
needless to repeat,

This League being Concluded, the King of Spain (as if had lingered out his
Days only 'till it was thus fixed) dies according to cur Account on the 22.
October last.

The Spaniards on pretense, that they would not have their Monarchy divided,
and taking no Notice at all of the Right of any Prince to succeed; has made a
Legacy of his Kingdoms, and given them all away to the Duke D' Anjou, a Prince
who has no more Right to it, or Pretense of Right, except as before, than the
Prince of Wales or the Czar of Muscovy.

Now it is a Mighty Disputed Point among our Politicians, what the King of
France will do in this New Juncture of Affairs, whether He will stand by the
Partition agreed on, or accept of the late King of Spains Bounty, and take the
Kingdom as a Gift to his Grandson.

What He will do, as is before noted, cannot positively be asserted; but what
Reason the State and Nature of the thing, and his own Undoubted Interest will
dictate, to be done by any Prince in his Circumstances, any one may judge.

If He be the same King of France that he has always been, who has very rarely
took false Measures, or baulkt his own Interest, if He be guided by the same
well-mannag'd Council as he used to be, He will certainly adhere to the
Posculata of his Alliance, and quietly accept the Partition of the Spanish
Monarchy, as it is agreed in the beforementioned League. For,

By this Acquisition of Italy He secures to Himself the whole Absolute Dominion
of the Mediterranean Sea; He entirely excludes the House of Austria from any
farther Concern in Italy, He has the Church so absolutely in his Clutches, that
He may make himself Pope if He thinks sit; and whenever He is pleased to be
displeas'tl with the Petty Princes of Tuscany, Parma, Modena, Mantua, etc. He
can blow them away with the Breath of his Mouth, they shall lay down their
Principallities at his Invincible Feet, and count it more an Honor to be
called Princes of the Blood or Peers of France, than to be Absolute Lords of
their own Dominions. So He shall whenever He thinks fit, re-establish the Old
Kingdom of the Lombards, and annex it to the Title of France and Navarr.

And all this without the Expense of Treasure or Hazard of his Armies, without
fitting out a Fleet, or fighting at Sea or on Shore; the English and Dutch
being assistant to put him into the Possession of it.

If the Emperor should be so weak to oppose Him, He must stand upon his own
Legs, and in the present Circumstance, his Power does not seem formidable
enough to make the Matter doubtful.

And now we are come to mention the Emperor, let us say a Word or Two to those
Gentlemen, who in his behalf speak big and say, be is able to baffle all these
Measures.

First, They tell you, how powerful the Empire now is by the Acquisition of the
Kingdom of Hungary, and the most advantageous Peace with the Turk.

They tell you his Imperial Majesty has an Army of 120 Thousand Men, besides
the Troops of the Circles which are 80 Thousand more that of these 50 Thousand
lie ready on the Confines of Italy, and all the rest of his Forces are drawing
down to the Rhine, that the Duke of Brandenburgh on Condition of being made
King of Prussia will join him with all his Forces that the Duke of Lunenburgh
on account of the Ninth Electorate, will maintain 30 Thousand Men at his own
Charge, and thus all the Princes of Italy, are on his side.

By these they tell you, the Emperor will immediately on the one side secure
Italy and on the other side make such a Vigorous Diversion on the Rhine, that
the King of France shall have Work enough to secure his own Dominions, while in
the mean time the Archduke Charles shall be sent into Spain, where the
Spanards who naturally hate the French, will immediately proclaim him King

Those are great Things indeed, and if the Emperor be so strong, he may cut out
a great deal of Work for the Confederates, and IN ll suppose, the Emperor
should be so blind to his own Intrest as to attempt it, yet seems not at all
probable, that his Impereal Majesty who has hardly been able to support himself
this War in Conjunction with the whole Confederacy of Europe, should imagine
himself capable of putting a Check to the Power of France, in Conjunction with
England and Holland; for whatever he might do in Italy and on the Rhine, he
would never be able to defend Spain and Flanders if he really had them in
Possession,

First, Flanders always which has been maintained by the Conjunction of the
Dutch, would immediately be entered by the Dutch on one side, and the French on
the other; and must fall into their hands with little difficulty.

Secondly, Spain could never hold out against the French by Land, assisted with
the Naval Forces of the Engilsh and Dutch by Sea, the Islands of the
Mediterranean must submit to the Masters of the Sea, and America would lie like
the Golden Garland to the Wrestlers, to be given to the Conquerors.

No man can imagine, but the Emperor, to whose Son so Considerable a Dominion
is allotted will accept of the Partition for his Part, especially when he sees
how impossible it will be to make better Conditions by force.

What the English and Dutch are to do, if he should; remains to be debated
under another Head.

I Will now suppose that which to me seems very unlekely, That the King of France
should accept of this Legacy, and claim the Crown of Spain for his Grandson the
Duke D' Anjou, and attempt th set up that Ridiculous Title of a Last Will and
Testaament, as the Foundation of his Pretension.

Let us Calmly consider the Consequences.

1. He inevitably renews the War with the whole Confederacy, that Peace which
cost Him so much to procure is immediately broken, upon the first Invasion He
makes on the Territories of Spain, who are a Branch of the Confederacy.

2. He renews the War under insuperable Disadvantages, such as are infinitely
greater than He lay under before, and such as loudly tell the World, He never
will venture to fight the whole Confederacy again. Viz. The Multitude of strong
Towns and Cities which he surrendered to the Confederates, which are a
sufficient Guar^^t^e of the Peace, and the Different Case of the Emperor, who
is more than 'twice what he was the last War, by his Peace with the Turks.

3. If He should make the Duke D' Anjou King, France would really get nothing
by the Bargain for in one Age the Race would be all Spaniards again; Nay, in a
few Years Property woul'd prevail, and he woul'd no more let his Brother the
Duke of Burgundy when King of France encroach upon him, than the late King of
Spain woul'd the present King of France, We do not want Instances in the World,
that Interest banishes all the Ties of Nation and Kindred, when the Duke
D'Anjou had been King of Spain some time, he would look upon Spain to be his
Own, his Native, his Peculiar, and be as far from subjecting himself to France,
because he was born there; as if he had never seen it: Possibly he might be
willing to join Interest with France, and it may be join Forces upon Occasion'
but it must be where the Interest of the two Nations did not clash then, and
that is almost no where, but if ever France encroach upon him, she would find
him King of Spain not Duke D'Anjou.

So that all the King of France could get by accepting the Crown of Spain,
would be a little present Satisfaction, to see a Son of the House of B^urbon on
the Spanish Throne, but as King of France he would not be One Farthing the
beter for it.

But this would not be all as is before noted, but whenever the present Duke of
Burgundy comes to Enjoy the Crown of France, it will in all Probability be an
Eternal Cause of Contention between them: For if the Family of France has any
Title to Spain it is in the Eldes^ Son of the Family, and there can be no Color
of a Title in the Second Son while the Eldest is alive, but what is founded
either in the Gift of the One King or the Other.

As to the Gift of the Dauphin to his Second Son the first being alive, it
cannot be valid; for he has no Power to give away what is his Son's by
Inheritance, nor can no more give the Crown of Spain from him than the Crown of
France; if Gift could be pleaded, the Grandfather gave it away from them all
before they were born: Nay, if the Duke of Burgundy should consent to it, His
Children if ever he has any, will declare* he had nothing to do to give away
their Right, any more than the present King of France had Power to give away
the Right of the Dauphin; for since the Deficiency of that Action in its own
Nature is the whole Ground of the Dauphin's Title now, it will directly destroy
the Title of the Duke D'Anjou, for what is a good Argument for him cannot be a
bad One against him.

As to the Gift of the Defunct King of Spain, I see nothing in it to build a
Pretense of Right on; If He had bequeathed it to the Right Heir, I presume, he
would not have thought his Title one jot the better for it. And if he had
bequeathed it to the Grand Seignior, the King of France would not have thought
his Title the worse for it: So that it signifies just nothing at all.

We come now to the grand Question proposed.

Quest. 2. What Measures the English ought to take in this Juncture.
The Answer must be in Two Parts.

1. Supposing the French King adheres to the Partition agreed upon by the
League before mentioned.

2. Supposing the French King for Reasons which we know not should think fit to
quit the Treaty, and push for the whole on the Pretense of a Will made by the
King of Spain.

It Is confessed England, since her Troops are broke, and her People more
divided in Temper than 'twas hoped they would have been under so mild and
gentle a Government, makes but a very mean Figure abroad; and were any King at
the Head of her Councils as well as Forces, but King William, hardly any Nation
would trouble their Heads to confederate with her.

But all the World does not yet see our weak Side, and the Reputation of the
King makes us more formidable a great deal than we really are.

But we are to act according to the Knowledge we have of what our Circumstances
really are not what other Nations may believe them, lest we let them know our
Weakness at the Price of our Destruction.

However I Will for the present suppose what all good Men wish: That we were in
the same good Posture as the War left us, united in Council, and ready for
Action, and willing to preserve the Character we had then in the World.

And First, Supposing the King of France adheres to the Partition of the
Spanish Monarchy.

If so, without Question England ought to put her self into such a posture as
to be able, in Conjunction with the Dutch, to force the Emperor and Princes of
Italy to comply with the Conditions.

At the same time so to maintain the Banllance in the Partition, as to oblige
the King of France to accept of, and rest contented with the Particulars
stipulated in their respective Leagues, without farther Encroachment, and to
make themselves Trustees for the rest, in Beha^^ of the Heir.

It is already started as a Query, what if the King o^ France does accept of
the Partition, and the Empero^ should continue to stand out, the King of France
is ther^ at Liberty to take the whole if he can get it.

No such Matter, I do not pretend to have been privy to the Debates, or of the
Council, in the contriving this League, nor to be acquainted with what
Provision is made, in case the Emperor refuses to come in, but in order to give
a Judgment as near as can be done without Doors as we call it. I shall briefly
state the Reasons, which in my Opinion should move the English and Dutch to
form this League: And the great Reason, which, as I conceive, gave Birth to the
first Project of this League, setting aside private Reasons of State, was the
maintaining the Balance of Power in Europe.

This has been the Foundation of all the Wars in our Age against the French,
and in the last Ages against the Spaniards and the Emperor.

A just Balance of Power is the Life of Peace. I question whether it be in the
Humane Nature to set Bounds to its own Ambition, and whether the best Man on
Earth would not be King over all the rest if he could. Every King in the World
would be the Universal Monarch if he might, and nothing restrains but the Power
of Neighbors; and if one Neighbor is not strong enough for another, he gets
another Neighbor to join with him, and all the little ones will join to keep
the great one from suppressing them. Hence comes Leagues and Confederacies;
thus the German Protestants called in the Assistance of Gustavus Adolphus to
much the Power of the Emperor Ferdinard the 2. and founded the famous League
called the Conclusions of Leipsick, which brought the Imperial Power to the due
Balance which it now stands at on the Foot of the Treaty of Westphalia; so the
French and the English assisted the Dutch to bring the Spanish Power to a
Balance in the time of Philip the II. when the Spanish Greatness began to be
terrible to Europe, which Balance was established in the Peace of Aix la
Chapel.

So the Power of France was brought to a Balance, but not so equal as it might
have been, had King Charles II. stood to his own Proposals at the Treaty of
Nimegune, the Defects of which Peace were in a great Measure the Occasion of
this late War, which has been the longest, most chargeable, and most bloody
that ever the French Nation has been engaged in since the Days of Francis the
I. their own civil Wars excepted.

This War has brought the power of France to a Balance, she had fortified her
Frontiers with a continued Rampart, a Line of strong Cities from Hunninghen on
the Confines of the Swiss, down the Rhine, the Mosell, and the Maes, to the
very Seaside, the greatest whereof she has been obliged to part with, to
enable her Enemies to be their own Guarantees; by which in some places she is
left so naked, that she is fain to build new Cities, or fortify old ones to
supply the Vacancy, as at Brisack, and in other she lies wholly open as at
Pigneroll; she has stooped to such a peace, as has made her far less formidable
than before.

Now the precarious Life of the King of Spain gave the King of England just
Umbrage, that this Balance in which our Safety so much consists, should
receive a Shock, to the prejudice of the Protestant Interest, by the Addition
of the Spanish Dominion to that of France. And here I place the Original of the
Project, as a probable Conjecture, at least drawn from the Nature of things
according to rational Conclusions from probable premises, when better Grounds
are made public, I shall own my self mistaken.

When the pretenders to the Spanish Succession are considered, they are found
to be the Emperor and the King of France, the Prince of Bavaria being dead
before.

To let the Emperor possess the Spanish Dominions, would be the overthrowing
the Balance made at the Westphalia Treaty, by which the House of Austria
already strengthened by the Conquest of Hungaria, and the peace with the Turks
would be too potent for the princes of Germany, nor would the French like well
that the Emperor the Eternal Competitor of France upon the Rhine should be
strengthened with such an addition, by which he would have been Lord of almost
half the World.

To let the French possess the Spanish Dominions, would overthrow the Balance
Purchased in this War with so much Blood and Treasure, and render fruitless the
Treaty of Reswick. It Would especially have been Fatal to the English and Dutch,
by the increase of Wealth from the Mass of Money returning Yearly from the
Empires of Mexico, and Peru, which the French would be better Husbands of than
the Spaniards, by their increase of Shipping which would make them too strong
for all the World at Sea, and by their ruining the Spanish Trade which is the
greatest and most profitable in Europe; 'twould immediately unhinge all the
Settlement of our Merchants and Factories, and turn the whole Channel of Trade;
for the ports of Spain being free to the French (...) Subjects, all our Negoce
that way would be destroyed, then their Neighborhood in Flanders, and in the
West Indies, would be intolerable and insupportable.

O 'twould fill a Volume to set down the Inconveni^ncies which England and
Holland must expect to feel, ^n Case the French were Masters of the Spanish
Monar^hy, the Streights-Mouth would be like the Sound, and ^ll our Ships should
pay Toll at Gibralter, as they do at Elseneur, your Fishing Trade from
New England, and New-foundland would perish, for the French from the Banks of
Newfoundland should go free, and you Pay 23 ^er Cent. etc. We must erect an
Admiralty in the West-lndies, or mantain a Fleet there, or our Plantations
would be always at his Mercy; our Collonies of Virginia, and New England, would
easily be destroyed while the French would lie on their backs quite through their
Country from Ganada to the City of Mexico.

These are some of the lesser Inconveniences, which as I presume, were the
first Motives to the Treaty.

The Consederats therefore not being willing the French ^houl'd have Spain, and
the French being resolved the Em^^^or should not have it, a Medium is proposed
that since it was not convenient for Europe, that either of them should have
(...) ^ll, and both of them had a Title to it, it should therefore b^ divided
between them in Manner and Form, as aforesaid.

This is the short History of this League, which really has more of Policy
than Right in it, for strictly Considered, the Right of Succession can devolve
but upon cue Person, let that one be who it will, is not the present Business.
But public good, the Peace of Kingdoms, the General quiet of Europe, prevails
to set aside the Point of nice Justice, and determine in favor of the Public
Tranquillity.

And I crave leave to make Two Observations here:

First, Our Jacobites-Protestant-Brethren, whose Understandings are so blind,
that they cannot see the Interest of their Native Country, have here fairly
represented to them the Condition England had now been in, and Europe in
General (...) a Papist and Consederate with France had been on the English
Throne; if England had not had a King who could so far Influence the Ambition
of the powerful Prince, as to prevent his seizing that Monarchy of Spain, which
none but England* could hinder him from.

Secondly, Our Non-jurants who hold the right Lines of Princes such Sacred
things, may also see that even among Hereditary Princes themselves, the Rights
of Succession are oftentimes infringed, and the private Interest of Princes and
Families set aside when the public Interest of Nations, the Preservation of
Peace, and the keeping a General Balance of Power among Princes, comes to be
the Question, and the Histories of all Ages and Nations give Instances to Prove
it as well as this.

Having thus run through the Reasons of this League of Partition, the Question is
answered of course, that if the Emperor should refuse to come into the
Partition and push for the whole, then the King of France is not thereby at
Liberty to possess the whole, if he can, for that would overthrow all the
Measures upon which the League of Partition is built.

The Emperor is not so weak a Prince to refuse the Kingdom of Spain with all
its etc's in the Ocean, Flanders, and America, but upon some Expectation to get
more; the Consederates therefore are to preserve that part which is Designed
him face, and then effectually to put it out of his power to obtain the rest,
and with all not to admit him into the part Reserved for him, till he agrees to
accept it on the Terms proposed; if he should absolutely refuse it, which is a
ridiculous Supposition, there are other Heirs of that Line to have recourse
too, there is no doubt the Crown of Spain, need not go a begging for an Heir.

It may be answered, if it be thus, it is the Emperors best Course to lay his
Measurer for the whole, and if he connot carry it, he may accept of the
Partition at last.

That Is more than the Objector may be able prove how far the Confederates may
think fit to bestow the remainder, if the Emperor after a War should be reduced
to accept of it, is more than any one can Answer, and more than the Emperor
will try, if he be not infatueted worse than ever a certain King was, who if he
had not might ha'been a King still.

The Second Branch of the Answer is supposing the King ^f France should so far
forget himself as to quit the League of Partition* and claim the Crown of Spain
for his Grandson Duk d'Anjou, by Virtue of the Will of the King Defunct.

It must certainly then be the Interest of England and Holand, first to put
themselves in such a Posture as may prevent ^he French King seizing of Spain it
self, and Flanders in Par^icular.

And upon the First Invasion of the Territories of Spain by the French King, to
Declare War against him in the Name of the whole Confederacy as an Infringer of
the Grand Peace at Reswick.

And then by appearing on the Frontiers in such a formidable manner as shall
give him diversion enought, that he not be able to enter Spain with any
considerable Forces.

The First of these things is to be done immediately by fitt^ng out a good
Fleet, which should so Scour the Mediteranean that the French would not be able
to do much on the side of Catalonio, for Experience has told us a Fleet at Sea
will make their War in Catalonia very uneasy to them, and by landing (...)
small Force of about Eight or Ten Thousand Men at Fonerabia, which should be
sufficient to Defend that side of the Country from the Invasions of the French.

But this Pamphlet is not wrote to direct Methods, but to Ara gue the general
Point.

The Conclusion of the Argument must come to that sort ^f People who have
appeared Champions for our English Liberty, as to Damn all kind of force, as
useless, burthensom ^o the Kingdom and Badges of slavery, and all Arguments to
^e only pretenses for supporting Arbitrary Designs

If the French should attack Spain, I am far from saying I ^m glad they will be
convinced; convinced; but I must say I am sorry ^he people of England have been
deluded by their specious ^retences.

F^^ if the French carry the Spanish monarchy for want of our being in a
Condition to (...) it; I am bold to tell those Gentlemen God Almighty must be
put to the trouble of working another miracle to save us, or we are reduced to
a very dangerous Condition.

But say they, we have. a great Fleet, and in that we are safe; it is true,
Gentlemen, so we are from Invasion, I believe we need not fear all the World;
but what is England without its Trade without its Plantation Trade, Turkey
Trade, and Spanish Trade, and where will that be when a French Garrison is
planted at Cadiz, and the French Fleet brings home the Plate from Havana.

What will the Virgina Collony be worth when the French come to be strong in
the Lakes of (...) and have a free Commerce from Quebeck to Mexico behind ye,
what will our Northern Trade be worth in a War, when the ports of Ostend and
Newport are as full of Pivates as Dunkirk and St. Malo.

A wise Man cannot patiently reflect upon the formidable power of France with
the Addition of the Spanish Dominion, and should he at last annex it to the
Crown of France, who can consider without Horror that all the ports from Sluice
in Flanders, to the F^r^ Messina in Sicily, should be in the Hands of the
French, which is a Coast of near 3000 Miles, Portugal, Genoua and Leghorn
excepted; and how long they will bold out, is easy to imagine.

I know God can prevnt Humane Contrivances, and I believe he has placed King
William on the English Throne, on purpose to dsapoint this Invincible Monarch
in these vast Designs. but no Thanks to our Gentlemen that have so weakened both
his Hands and his Interest at home, as to make him less able to perform for us
what is our own Advantage than His Majesty would be, and than the Case required.

As to Ways and Means I meddle not with them, I leave them to the wise Heads of
the Nation, but with Submission to their Judgment, this I am positive in, let
our Measures be what they will, if we do not keep the Enemy, the French, I mean
out of Spain, we are undone.

In all the Histories of Times and Wars, I never read of a General who would
not choose to be Master of the Field, and able to fight his Enemy, rather than
to be cooped up, and bound to defend the Walls of a Town.

If the French get the Spanish Crown, we are beaten out of the Field as to
Trade, and are besieged in our own Island, and never let us flatter our selves
with our Safety consisting so much in our Fleet; for this I presume to lay down
as a fundamental Axiom, at least as the Wars go of late, it is not the longest
Sword, but the longest Purse that conquers. If the French get Spain, they get
the greatest Trade (...) World in their Hands; they that have the most Trade,
will have the most (...) and they that have the most Money, will have the most
Ships, the best (...) the best Armies; and if once the French masters us at
Sea, where are (...) And though I would not lessen our Fleet, which I believe
is now the best in (...) yet he that looks back to the French Fleet before
their Misfortune, will tell (...) all our English was not able look them in the
Face if we had no Dutch on our side and hardly with the Dutch and us together.

FINIS.

