THE DECLARATION, Together with the PETITION AND REMONSTRANCE OF THE Lords,
Knights, Gentlemen, Ministers, and Freeholders of the COUNTY of HAMPESHIRE.

June 14th LONDON, Printed for H. W. MDCXLVIII.

The Declaration, etc.
MOre than this our humble Address at present we intended not, but having
received certain information, of late how the Essex Petition was though
seemingly accepted, yet indeed really slighted: And how barbarous an Answer
was returned to the Petitioners of Surrey, out of the mouths of Muskets, and
from the bloody hands of Sectaries; a president so full of horror, injustice,
and more than Turkish tyranny, that all the free Subjects of England ought to
look upon with with extreme detestation. And lastly considering that our
brethren of Kent were referred to receive satisfaction to their humble address
to the two Houses, only from the Lord Fairefax, and his insulting Army, we are
forced to annex this brief Declaration, to our humble Petition.

That if our Messengers by us entrusted receive not a full and satisfactory
Answer to these our modest Requests, that we will speedily arm our selves,
and associate with other Counties, and endeavor by Gods blessing to free our
selves from that slavery which this present Army, getting no small advantage by
the cunning and fraudulent delays of the Houses, threaten to bring upon us and
our Posterities.

TO The Honorable Houses of Parliament assembled at WESTMINSTER.
The humble PETITION of the Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, Ministers, and Freeholds
of the County of HAMPESHIRE.
Humbly Shows;
THat your Petitioners having taken into their sad and serious thoughts, the
pressing, and almost unsupportable miseries under which this whole Kingdom
groans: Religion in stead of being reformed, is metamorphis'd into so many
shapes, that the Synagogue of Rome does exult; and for the Divisions amongst
us, the truly Orthodox have great thoughts of heart; our heavy Taxes, and
other illegal ways of raising vast Sums, though none of the Royal party
have for many months appeared, unless in Prison, or under Sequestration, and
so far from being taken off, which was faithfully promised, that they are
rather increased, which we fear was really intended: Our most Gracious
Sovereign, notwithstanding your frequent Protestations of bringing Him with
Safety and Honor to His great Counsel, is under most barbarous Restraint; our
Laws are fallen into a Lethurgy, Arbitrary power, and the stronger Sword carry
all before them; but above all, the most formidable apprehension of this
Kingdoms being once more made an Aceldema, to the high provocation of Gods
severest wrath, if not utterly to ruin, yet at least to enslave us and our
Posterities to the prevayling party.

Do therefore in all humility hold forth to your grave wisdoms what by Gods
blessing, and your timely concurrence, may prove effectual for the speedy cure
of those maladies under which this bleeding Commonwealth is ready to expire.

And first, we do with submission to better judgments conjecture, that
together with the many sins of this Nation, that which has had an especial
influence in the ripening of these Judgments has been that little regard
given to, and the oversleight laying aside of his Majesty's many and most
gracious Messages, and most pious overtures for Peaee, and an happy
understanding between him and his people, and this occasioned as we do more
than probably opine by three sorts. First by th^se that think they have
monopoliz'd all truth, and would therefore square our Religion according to
their own confused modules. Secondly by those that ought to make audit for the
many thousands received for the public, as was pretended, but converted or
transported for their own private benefit. But thirdly, and principally by
those that had a design by taking away Monarchical Government, of making
themselves high and mighty States, and engrosing all Dominion over their yet
fellow Subjects into their own hands.

Having thus hinted upon the causes of our Having (...) misery, we do with all
submission present to the Honorable Houses what to our best apprehension may
prove sovereign for the Kingdoms recovery.

And first, that the true reformed Protestant Religion professed in the reigns of
Q. Elizabeth, and K. James of blessed memory be re-establisht.

Secondly, that his Majesty be speedily restored to a condition of Safety and
Honor, and enjoy according to the command of our blessed Savior, all his
indubitable Rights, who says, give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's.

Thirdly, that the Arrears of the Army under the command of the Lord Fairefax
be speedily audited, and they disbanded.

And lastly that an account being given to the kingdom how that mass of
Treasure that has bin raised is employed, that His Majesty be desired to pass
an Act of Oblivion, and that his most Princely proffer of ease to tender
Consciences be thankfully embraced, all which your Petitioners desire may be
speedily applied for the cure of this bleeding Commonwealth.

And we shall for ever pray, etc.

FINIS.

