THE DEFINITION of a KING, With the Cure of a King wilfully mad, and the way to
prevent Tyranny.

Also Papisticall Ceremonies that now are used in Baptism and Burial; which
ought to be abhorred and forsaken.

Sep: 21 Printed at London for Thomas Banks.

The Definition of a King, with the Cure of a King wilfully mad, and the way to
prevent Tyranny.
Also Papisticall Ceremonies that now are used in Baptism and Burial, which
ought to be abhorred and forsaken.
1 Concerning Kings:
Proverbs 21. Chapter, 1 Verse. As the divisions of waters, so is the heart of
the King in the hands of the Lord, he will bend the same which way soever it
pleases him.


Eusebius, Timotheus. TO omit (least I seem an ungentle entertainer) the
various or different conjectures which on this place are gathered by
Interpreters, I do conceive this to be the moral sense.

That other persons by admonitions, reproves, Laws and menaces may be beat or
persuaded, but the mind of a King (because he stands in awe of none) if you
resist it, is the more incenst, and therefore Princes, so often as they be
earnestly inclind to any thing, must be thereunto left, not because they would
always do what is best, but in respect Almighty God sometimes does use their
folly or malice to offend those that have offended, even as he forbad his
people to withstand Nabuchadnezzar, for that by his oppression he had decreed
to chastise them. Being perhaps the same which Job says, Who makes the
Hypocrite to reign for the sins of the people.

And hereunto happily belongs what David deploring his sin did utter. I have
sinned against thee alone, and have done evil in thy sight.

Not that Kings do not sin, to the great damage of their Subjects, but that
they have not over them a man by whose authority they may be condemned, where
no man how great soever can escape the judgments of God.


Tim. Your interpretation I dislike not, but what mean the divisions of the
waters?


Evseb. There a Similitude is used, by which the matter may be explained. The
provoked stomach of a King is a violent and unruly thing, neither can it be
drawn hither or thither, but is hurried by its own headlong force as one
incited with a Divine Fury. Even as the Sea does scatter it self upon the
Land, and suddenly changes its course, contemning fields, buildings, and
whatsoever does resist, in some place hiding it self under ground, whose force
if you endeavor to inhibite, or any other way divert, the labor is all lost.
The same has also happened in great Rivers, as Poets declare of Achelous, but
if you well obey them, less hurt is received than if you violently opposed
them.


Tim. Is there no remedy therefore against the wilfulness of evil Kings?


Eus. The chiefest perhaps will be to keep the Lion out of the City, the next,
by authority of the Senate, Magistrates and Citizens so to moderate his power,
that he may not easily break forth into tyranny; but the chiefest of all,
while he is yet a Child, and knows not himself to be a Prince, his mind with
holy precepts to fashion and instruct; entreaties also and advertisements, but
mild and seasonable profit much. But the last Anchor is, very earnestly to call
upon God, that he would incline the Kings mind to those things which are worthy
of a Christian Prince.


Tim. What meanest thou simple man? If I were Bachelour of Divinity, should I
not be ashamed of this interpretation.


Eus: I know not whether it be true it satisfies me that my meaning is neither
impious nor heretical; your (...) I have obeyed; now as in such meeting it is
meet I desire on the other side to be a hearer.


Tim. If unto these gray hairs you assign any thing, this spring seems to me
to be applied unto a more obscure or subtle sense.


Eus. I do believe you and desire to hear.


Tim. A King we may understand to be a perfect man, (who having his carnal
affections tamed and subdued) is directed by the only power of Gods Spirit. And
such a man it is not fit by humane Laws to be restrained, but to leave him unto
his L. by whose Spirit he is guided. Neither is he to be judged from these
things whereby the imbecility of those that are imperfect, howsoever is brouht
unto true godliness; but if he do any thing amiss, we must conclude with
Paul, the Lord has taken him unto himself, unto his Lord, he stands or
falls, likewise this.

A spiritual man judges all things, but is judged by none, let no man
therefore prescribe unto such, but the Lord, who has prescribed bounds to the
Sea, and rivers, holds the Kings heart in his hand, and turns the same which
way soever it pleases him; for what need have we to prescribe unto him, who
performs better things of his own accord than the Laws of man do require, or
what a rashness were it for us to bind that man unto ordinances, whom by sure
proofs we find to be governed by the motions of Gods spirit.


Eul. Now surely Timotheus, you have not only gray hairs- but a breast also
to be reverenced for gravity of learning. And I pray God amongst Christians (as
all Kings ought to be) there may be found many worthy of that name.


2. Concerning Papisticall Ceremonies.
Nephalus, Chrysoglottus. NEph. How many Christians have I seen very coldly
dying (not in flesh but in faith) some confiding in those things, wherein they
are not to confide, other for the guilt of their wickedness and scruples that
some unlearned dunces buz in the dying man's ear, dye almost in despair.


Chr. Neither is it a wonder, that they so expire, who have spent the whole
time of their lives in studying Ceremonies,


Ne. What mean you by that.


Chr. I Will tell you, but with this preface that I do not reprove, but rather
earnestly approve the Sacraments and rights of the Church. But some either
wicked or superstitious or (to use the mildest phrase) simple and unlearned men
that teach the people in these things to confide, letting pass these things
which truly make us Christians.


Ne. As yet I hardly understand whether you tend.


Chr. I shall give you to understand, if the common sort of Christians you
consider, are not their lives from head to heel consumed with Ceremonies, with
how much Religion are the hold rites of the Church represented in Baptism? the
Infant stays without the Temple doors, a Catechizing is performed, vows
undertaken, Satan with his pomps and pleasures abjured. At length the infant
is besmeard with oil, crossed, salted, dipped, charge to the witnesses is given,
that they shall have a care to see the child instructed, yet they, by money
given, are of this charge released, and then the child is called a Christian,
who in some manner is. Again he is anointed, at length he learns to confess,
receives the Eucharist, uses to rest on holy days, to hear Mass, sometimes
to taste and abstain from flesh. And these things if he observe he is esteemed
an absolute Christian. Takes he a wife? he a^^^res another Sacrament, if he
enter into orders, he takes new unction, and is consecrated, changes his
garments and says prayers. Now I allow that all these things be done: but that
these things be done more of custom then of zeal, I do not allow, but rather
vehemently condemn, because nothing else is applied to Christianity. For many
men while they trust unto these things, do nevertheless in the interim, by
right or wrong, heap up riches, yield to their anger, serve their lust, their
envy and ambition, and so at length expire.

Now here again new Ceremonies are prepared, Confession is used once and
again, Unction is added, and the Eucharist given; the sacred waxen Tapors be
there present with Cross and Holy Water, Indulgences are adhibited, the Popes
Bull is drawn forth, or there bought by the dying man, his Funerals are
ordered to be magnificently celebrated, again is made a solemn stipulation or
Covenant; There is one that cries aloud to the dying man, yea, sometimes if he
happen to cry shrill or be well tippled, kills him before his time.

As these things be used rightly, chiefly those which through Custom have
been delivered to us, so there be certain other things more hidden which will
perform this unto us, that with alacrity of spirit, and Christian confidence
we may wander out of this vale of misery.


FINIS.

