A DECLARATION OR DISCOVERY, Of a most horrible Plot against the City of LONDON
Also a Protestation made by the Parliament, concerning the safety of the
Kingdom in gererall, and the City of London in particular.

Also several Votes of the Lords and Commons concerning the said Protestation.

Resolved upon the Question.

Hen. Elsing, Cler. Parliamen.



December. 15 printed for J. Harris, 1642.

A Discovery of a Plot against the City of LONDON.
THe Grand Committee of the Parliament sitting about the weighty affairs of
the State of the King dome; There was notice brought unto them of a Letter
directed to a great Person of this City, the contents whereof was to this
effect.

Worthy Sir,
OUt of the care of your welfare, J make bold to Advertise you for your good,
that you would be pleased speedily to convey your self and Family out of the
City, and that you repair as far Northward as conveniently you may, for
there is a terrible blow expected to be given shortly against the City London,
etc.


The truth of which premises was delivered to the Court of Aldermen, from the
Commit.

The Declaration, and Protestation of the Commons House of Parliament,
concerning the the peace of the Kingdom.
WE the Knights, Citizens, and burgesses o^ the Commons house in Parliament,
finding to the great grief of our hearts, that the design, of the Priests and
Jesuits, and and other adherents to the Sea of Rome, have of late been more
boldly and frequently put in practice then formerly, to the undermining and
danger of the ruin of the true reformed protestant Religion in his Majesty's
Dominions, established: and finding also that there have bin* and having just
cause, to susspect that there still are even during this sitting in Parliament
endeavors to subvert the Fundamental Laws of England and Jreland, and to
introduce the exercise of an arbitrary and Tyrannical Government, by most
pernicious and wicked Councels, Practices, plots, and Conspiracies: and that
the long intermission, and unhappy breach of Patliaments has ocasioned many
illegal Taxations, whereupon the Subject has bin prosecuted: and grieved, and
diverse Jnnovations and supestitions have bin brought into the Church:
Multitudes driven out of his Majesty's Dominions Jealousies raised and fomented
betwixt the King and people, and two Armies brought into the Bowels of this
Kingdom, and lastly, finding great cause of jelousie, that endeavors have
bin, and are used to bring the English army into misunderstanding of this
parliament, with force to bring to pass those wicked Counsels: Have therefore
thought good to join our selves in a Declaration of our united affections and
resolutions, and to make this ensuing protestation.

I A. A. do in presence of Almighty God, Promise, Vow, and Protest to
maintain and defend, as far as lawfully J may, with my life power and estate
the true reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the Church
of England, against all Popery and Popish Jnnovations within this Realm,
contrary to the same Doctrine, and according to the duty of my Allegiance, his
Majesty's Royal Person, Honor and Estate; As also the Power and Privilege of
Parliament; The lawful Rights and Liberties of the Subject, and every person
that makes this Protestation, in whatsoever he shall do in the lawful
pursuance of the same. And to my power, as far as lawfully I may, J will
oppose, and by all good ways and means, endeavor to bring to condign
punishment, all such as shall either by Force, Practice, Councels, Plots,
Conspiracies or otherwise, do any thing to the contrary of any thing in this
present Protestation contained. And further, that J shall in all just and
Honorable ways endeavor to preserve the Union and Peace between the three
Kingdoms* England Scotland, and Ireland; And neither for hope fear, nor other
respect shall relinquish this promise, Vow and Protestation.

Resolved upon the Quuestion.

Resolved upon the Question. London, or of any other person whatsoever, for the
defense of the parliament, or the privileges thereof, or the preservation of
the members thereof, are according to their duty, and to their late
Protestation, and the Laws of the Kingdom. And if any person shall arrest or
trouble any of them, for so doing, he is declared to be a public enemy of the
Commonwealth.

At the Cmmittee of the House of Commons which are appointed to sit to consider
of the safety of the Kingdom, and of the City of London, and of vindicating
the Privileges of Parliament.

Resolved. London, or any other place, that shall wear any Colors or other
marks of division, whereby they may be distinguished from others, and known to
be of the malignant party, shall be examined* searched, and disarmed, as
likewise all those, who being able shall not lend or contribute toward the
public safety of the Kingdom, in this time of so great and imminent danger.

Resoved upon the Question

Hen. Elsing Cler. Parliamentrum.


