THE DEFINITION OF A PARLIAMENT OR, A Gloss upon the Times.

Jan: 21 LONDON, Printed for J. F. 1642.

The Definition of a Parliament.
I Must entreat the Readers patience, whilst I present unto him a ruff drawn
Mast of the jurisdiction of the high Court of Parliament.

And in doing it, I shall imitate a Lands Cape: first show it you remote and in
its primitive times, scarce discernable whether Land or no Land, whether a
Parliament or no Parliament, then we shall sail nearer until we come within
certain cognizance of our own times, nay to this present; and then if we
Shipwreck in the haven, if having bin befriended in the course of our
Navigation by our fails, we shall split in our anchor; I mean, if in the
computation of all times we have had a Parliament unquestionable in substance,
in form, in all necessary adjuncts, and now in our own time, even at this
present, (when ecclipsed justice, like the sun imprisoned under a cloud, breaks
out with luster) be concluded in defect of judicature, I shall say the stars
have had malignant aspects in our Horizon.

But first I shall do my best endeavor to satisfy them that hold the House of
Lords to be only interressed, so that the House of Commons might be thought to
make an inrode upon their privileges, and be pregmaticall without president,
though not without presumption: Let those know, that anima est tota in toto,
and tota in qualibet part: and judicature is the soul of this great compacted
body, the times were when, both Houses sat in one place and had one Speaker;
and since the power of judicature must be founded upon a preparatorie
impeachment, and this preparatory impeachment must be framed by the Commons
House; we must justify them not guilty of the Title of fools by the wiseman,
to lay a foundation and never consider by what means the structure is to be
finished, nay excuse them from that general Remonstrance of a general
grievance, extravidiciall proceedings.

The Lords are under his Majesty the chief, but the Commons must be admitted
for Members; and the help of those does much advantage the preservation of the
whole compound; nay on the contrary, the Gout is as mortal as the Headache.

Besides, the Commons commenced proceedings against the parties impeached of
high Treason (though seasoned with much moderation and temper) are of ripe age,
and blush to be kept in long Coats, though now unhappily suspended by reason of
unfortunate intervening occasions: and now by reason of a mis-interpreted rumor
of their jurisdiction, which is by some drawn into question; Let it be
proclaimed on their behalf to all the world, that facts of Treason are above
the cognizance of ordinary reason, and sometimes above the punishment of the
Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom, and yet never above the power of a
Parliament.

And it being in my apprehension out of dispute, that the Commons are deeply
interrested in that particular of judicature, I shall survey that high Court of
Parliament.

Parliament did I say? from what Radix? Parler le meant, to speak ones mind.
This must be attended with judgment and reason, but surely the House of
Commons speak with none of them, if they be not able to maintain their
jurisdiction, and know not their own power; this is its Etymology, which is
warranted by the best Antiquarie of his time; Vetusto nomine e Gallia mutata
Parliamentum dicitur.

This high Court has not bin confined to this individual appellation, but
has bin christened by several Godfathers: Majores nostri Anglo Saxones,
entitled it Prudentum Conventus, concillium, and magnus conuentus; succeeding
Historiographers Commune concillium, Curia altissima, Generale placitum,
commune totius Regni concillium presentia Regis: But certainly if they intended
these flourishing Titles to a Parliament without judicature, they spoke of
their riding to Parliament not sitting in it, an unhappy Parliament, like the
City Myndas, whose gates were so wide, that the City might run out of them.

To allow these to be Synonia's of Parliament, and to disallow judicature, were
but Jewish like to say all hail King of the Jews, and in the mean time
crucify him: Mulmuccius of some called Donwallo, did writ two books of the
Laws of the Britains, the one called Statuta Municipalia, the other Leges
Judidiariae, for so the same do signify in the British tongue, which is as
much to say as the Statute Law and Common Law, which books were written 441 years
before the incarnation of Christ, and how should there be Statute Laws without
a Parliament? King Alfred ordained for a perpetual usage that twice in the
year or oftener if need be, they should assemble themselves at London to treat
in Parliament of the government of the people of God, how they should keep
themselves from sin, live in quiet, and receive right by holy Laws and
judgments.

In the Heptarchy, the Parliaments had their continuance; witness the Style of
Parliaments in the time of Ina King of the West Saxons: Ego Ina dei gratia,
etc. Congregatione servorum dei, etc. Constitui rectum conjugium and justa
judicia pro stabilitate, etc. Et nullo Aldermano vel alicui de toto regimine
nostro liceat conscripta abolere judicia: So did Osfa King of the mercians, and
Ethbert King of Kent.

In the Reign of King Ethelston his Acts of Parliament are styled thus: Haec
sunt judicia Exoniae quae sapientes consilio Ethestam Regis instituerunt, and
iterum apud Frefresham, and tertia vice apud -- ubi haec definita simul and
confirmata sunt. Here I find a Parliament summoned, concillia Regis, prorogued
in those words iterum and tertia vice, the royal assent in those words
confirmata sunt, and the dissolution in those words definita simul.

The Parliament of King Canutus at Winchester bore this Title, Haec sunt
Statuta Canuti Regis Anglorum, Danorum, Norvegarum, venerando ejus sapien^em
concillio, habita in Sancto natali Domini apud Wintonian.

Here we begin to make Land, and descrie a visible Title to a Parliament, being
in substance and form nearly allied unto the presidents of these very times: In
one word, time out of mind this high Court and its Judicature has flourished
before the Conquest; in the Conquest although silent leges inter arma, and ever
since the Conquest until this present hour.

Bu^ now some may say to me, what need you waken so many sleepy Records, to
prove that Parliaments have been? who is it of so desperate an opinion, that
offers it in question? truly I cannot name him or them, but whosoever they were
that enstilled this jealousy of Judicature into His MAIETIES thoughts, did
ipso facto subvert Parliaments, and the undoubted rights thereof. Arictotle
bids us not to dispute utrum nix sit alba, and the like visible and apparent
truths: but if any man of an obdurate judgment, would have denied that there
was anima rationalis, then Aristotle must have proved there was homo, and than
anoma rationalis will be drawn in by consequence: prove homo, that is, prove a
Parliament, and anima rationalis which is Judicature, will be drawn in by
consequence; Besides Judicis off^cium est ut res, ita temporarerum quaerere.

Next I must show that which the Law has a tender respect unto, even the ends
of Parliaments exitus acta probat, and those I find thus capitulated by Sir
Edward Cook; primo, ad subditos a delinguendo declinandos, hoc est, ut delicta
tam bonis cautisque legibus, tam debita earundam executione anticiparentur; now
if debita executio legum can be in Parliament inflicted upon Delinquents
subditos, without legal proceedings and trial (except they will say nothing,
and so be pressed to death) I leave it to be argued amongst Children.

2. Ut tuta tranquillaque sic vita hominum; but certainly the the life of man
is not preserved by the impunity of offenders, which must pass sublata
judacatura.

3. Ut vixis quibusdam sanctionibus sanctisque judicijs vis unieunque fieret,
but whether jus implies not punishing malefactors, as well as relieving the
oppressed ( credelitas parcens being more destructive to the Commonwealth than
credulitas pumiens) let puisnies be the judges.

A Parliament in its Etimology is altissima curia, but how ill-favouredly this
name becomes it; if one Justice of Assize may hear and determine capital
offenses, and this altissima curia not have the power of a Grand Jury to him to
find billa vera.

The first man that ever suffered for Treason, if want of a president would
excuse him, might have begot Traitors to the third and fourth generation with
impunity; but we will impute it unto the integrity of those times that have not
fostered such unbounded spirits to attempt such crimes as might leave
presidents of this nature.

And thus I have mustred some few arguments in vindication of the Judicature of
the Parliament, and I think they are vallid enough for the intricacie of the
question; where tacks will serve what need is there of tenpenny-nayls? and now
I have spent some time in scanning a Parliament with Judicature, I will cast an
eye upon that pretty silken Bug-beare of State, a Parliament without
Judicature; for contraria contrariis opposita magis clucescunt.

Curia altissima if that be wanting, must be curia infima magna, becomes
curiaminima; whereas all Courts were derived from it, all Courts may insult
upon it; the high prized tincture of the Lords Robes begins to fade, the Eumins
lose their complexion, if they lose their Judicature; their Speaker may study
silence, and report to himself that which he never heard nor read off, a
Parliament without Judicature; the reverend Judges that sit Attendants on the
Lords House, in respect of those intricate mysteries in Judicature, that happen
to be discussed before this Tribunal (though most venerable in their own
Sphere) may sit like so many Plovers pricked down for stales, with this motto,
videntur and non sunt; and the House of Commons that were hitherto styled
prudentum conventus, may impeach with little wit, and be remedied with as
little power.

The Common-Laws speaks on Parliament and its Judicature, as you have seen;
your Statute Law confirms it, presidents strengthen it, reason even undeniable
reason fortifies it; what magic is there then, that the case is thus altered;
if it lies in the degrees of the persons impeacht, hear then the Statute of
Marlebrige, Provisum est concordatum and concessum quod tam majores quam
minores justitiam habeant, and recipiant in curia domini Regis; out of which
and the rest that I have told you, this may be drawn for a maxim to posterity,
concerning the high Court of Parliament; Si vitustatem spectas est
antiquissima, si dignitatem est honoratissima, si jurisdictonem est capacissima.

And by this time I suppose all men will be ready to confess that Judicature
does belong to that high Court of Parliament, but some will say with that
Pamphleteer, in his book entitled a Complaint to the House of Commons, is no
Court of Record, and therefore why should they commit men to prison, seeing
they have no right to Judicature?

To whom I return this answer, That both Houses make but one Court, so one
Court of Record; it is true, 'twas moved in the first Parliament of Henry the
Fourth, and debated, whether the Commons had right of Judicature? and 'twas
resolved afterward in the fixed year of Edward the Fourth, that they had; for
in that year the Duke of Clarence was sentenced by the Lords, the Duke of
Buckingham being then High-Steward, but the Commons Protested against it, which
shows that they had right; and though in the first of Henry the 4. the
Commons referred by protestation the pronouncing of Sentence of deposition
against Richard the 2. to the Lords, yet they were equally interressed in it,
as appears by the Record; for there were made Commissioners for the whole
Parliament, one Bishop, one Abbot, one Earl, one Baron, and two knighs, Gray
and Erpingham for the Commons; and to infer, That because the Lords
pronounced the sentence, the point of judgment should be only theirs, were as
absurd, as to conclude that there was no authority in any other Commissioner of
Oyer and Terminer, then in the person of that man solely that gave the Sentence.

In the second Hen. 5. The Petition of the Commons implied no less than a
right they had to assent to all things in Parliament, and so it was answered by
the King, when Adamour that proud Prelate of Winchester the Kings half Brother
had grieved the State by his over-daring power, he was exiled by just sentence
from the King, the Lords and Commons; and this appears expressly by the answer
sent to Pope Alexander the fourth, who sent a letter for his revocation,
because he was a Churchman, and therefore not subject to any censure, the
answer was Si dominus Rex and Regni majores hoc vellent, communitas tamen
ipsius ingressum in Angliam nubatentus sustineret; the Peers subsigned this
Answer with their names, and Petrus de Mountford vice totius communitatis as
Speaker of the Commons: And this is sufficient that there is a power of
Judicature belongs to that Court, and that both Houses are equally interressed
in it.

FINIS.

