A DECLARATION OF THE TREATY AT Newport in the Isle of VVight, between the
Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the Commissioners, declaring their unanimous
and joyful proceedings for peace, His Majesty's signing the Propositions, and
Knighting of Mr. Denzill Hollis, and Mr. John Glyn, Recorder of the City of
London. With the Earl of Northumberlands Declaration to the King, and His
Majesty's Propositions in Answer thereunto, and Declaration concerning the
Levellers of England.

Peace

signing the King's treaty at Newport

Imprinted at London, for R. Williamson, 1648. Sept ye 25th

A DECLARATION Of the proceedings of the TREATY AT Newport in the Isle of
wight; declaring, the happy Agreement and concurrence of the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, and the Commissioners on both sides, to the two first Bills,
and his Majesty's signing them.
Right Honorable,
HEre has been great disputations between the Commissioners, touching the
first Bill in the Proposals, of recalling all Declarations, and Proclamations,
published in his Majesty's name against the Parliament; which was debated
Monday and Tuesday last, and much time spent therein; but upon Wednesday
morning (we hear) that his Majesty gave his Royal assent to the said Bill, and
signed it, as also the Bill for Church Government, promising upon his Royal
Word, to leave no means unattempted that may conduce to the peace and welfare
of his liege people, and sheathing the bloodthirsty and devouring Sword, which
for these seven years has bin drunk with the blood of his innocent subjects.

The Commissioners proceed on to the rest of the Propositions, according to
their Instructions, and it his hoped there will be a mutual concurrence
thereunto.

His Majesty shows great willingness to comply with them in all things
propounded, so far as it may tend to the safety and preservation of the Laws of
the Land, the Discipline of the Church, and the peace and tranquillity of his
languishing, and distressed Kingdoms.

And has likewise declared his uncessant Desires for peace, and that for the
perfecting of the Treaty, he would grant a general pardon to all person or
persons whatsoever, that has assisted the Parliament in the late unnatural
war, except those under the present conduct of Col. Martin; yet rather then the
treaty should be obstructed, and the peace of the kingdom unferled, he would
freely and really forgive them also.

The right Honorable the Earl of Northumberland, as a testimony of his loyalty
and fidelity both to King and Kingdom, on Wednesday last declared to his
Majesty his sense and resolution for peace, which follows in these words.

The Earl of Northumberlands Declaration to the Kings Majesty for Peace.
That the honorable Houses of Parliament being deeply moved with the great
sufferings and oppressions of this languishing Kingdom, occasioned by the new
Commotions and Risings within several parts thereof, had commanded his
Lordship, and the rest of the honorable Commissioners, to attend his royal
person and to treat with his Majesty, and the Lords and Gentlemen on his part,
for a lafe and well-grounded peace.

Further declaring, That none could desire peace more then his Lordship, and
that to his uttermost he would labor a conclusion of peace by the Treaty.

That he had wronged no man, but would labor to be a friend to all in the
common peace ot this Kingdom.

His Lordship having thus declared himself, the King replied,

That nothing should be wanting in him, for promoting so great and good a
work, desiring a blessing from Heaven upon this present Treaty, begun for the
establishment of an happy peace, etc.

Newport 22 Septem. 1648.
Other Letters say as follows.

SIR,
THe Treaty goes on very succesfully (as yet) and it is hoped a good end will
follow so happy a beginning, his Majesty does very well approve of the
Propositions of both Houses, and so does the Lords and Gentlemen attending his
Royal person, here is a fair correspondency between the Commissioners on both
sides, and great hopes of a happy reconciliation.

They have made some progress into the two first Proposals, viz. Religion, and
recalling of his Majesty's Declarations, etc. and seem to go hand in hand, in a
mutual compliance and concurrence, for a final composure of all distractions
in these his Majesty's distressed Realms and Dominions.

And for the better effecting thereof, and removing of all jealousies, his
Majesty has declared his gracious will and pleasure to the Commissioners,
touching all his subjects in general, viz.

His Majesty's Declaration to the Commissioners.
That none could have more hearty desires of peace then he. How he had nothing
of ill will to any, but indeed was, and would to the utmost, endeavor to
appear a friend to all, especially to the languishing kingdom.

His Majesty and the Commissioners have sat close these two days, several
Objections and Queries are proposed by the Council on both sides, treat
moderatly, and with much amity. Mr. Palmer (one of His Majesty's Council) is
much applauded for the beauty of his excellence, by endeavoring to clear all
scruples.

Great is our expectations in these parts, touching the event of the Treaty,
the whole face of this Island being fixed thereon for peace, and the prayers of
each true subject echoed up to Heaven for a blessing thereupon.

All their proceedings (as yet) tends to Unity, in the beginning of this
their first part of the Treaty, and it is hoped their future consultations will
satisfy all our doubts and desires, and that the great Jehovah of Heaven will
be pleased to crown their endeavors with blessings of Peace, that so all the
sad differences between the King and his People may be removed, and the Head
and the Members firmly united, which God grnat, and bring to a sudden
perfection, that we may see sweet and comfortable days once again, by the
happy enjoyment of a final and everlasting peace.

There was a general report this day throughout Newport, and other places,
that there was great hopes of his Majesty's signing to the four first Bills,
namely, the recalling of his Proclamations and Declarations, Church government,
Militia, and the business of Ireland; these four are the first which they
insist and treat upon, and it is hoped few days will produce the hapyy event
and success thereof; which is the constant prayer of

Your devoted servant, G. CRESWELL.
Newport 19. Septem. 1648.

Semptemb. 22. 1648.
By an Express further from the Isle of Wight it is advertized, That the King
and the Commissioners are exceeding unanimous, concurring with each other, in
the two first Bills; and it is said that his Majesty has signed them; the one,
for settling Religion; the other, for recalling all Declarations, and
Proclamations, against his two Houses. The two chief Bills which they now insist
on, is the business of Ireland, and the Militia.

It is reported, that the King has knighted two of the Parliaments
Commissioners, viz. Mr. Denzill Hollis Esquire, a member of the House of
Commons, and Mr. John Glin Recorder of the City of London.


FINIS.

