A DECLARATION Set forth by the Lord LIEUTENANT GENERAL the GENTLEMEN of the
Council and assembly occasioned from the view of a printed paper.

ENTITLED. An Act Prohibiting trade with the Barbados, Virginea, Bermudes and
Antegoe.

HAGH Printed by Samuel Broun English Bookeseller. 1651. October.29.

18. FEBRUARY 1650.
A Declaration set forth by the Lord Lieutenant the Gentlemen of the Council
and assembly occasioned from the view of a printed paper Entitled an Act
prohibiting trade with the Barbados, Virginia, Bermudes and Antegoe.
THe Lord Lieutenant General together which the Gentlemen of this Council and
assembly having carrefully perused the said printed paper and finding therein
matter so highly concerning the freedom, happiness and wellfaire of this
Islande thought it their duty to Communicate the same unto all the Inhabitans
of this place together which their observations and resolutions upon the same,
and for the better and more methodical proceeding therein they have first
ordered the same to be publikly read as follows.

Thus far goes the said Act by which the meanest understanding may be
sensible into how low an abject a bondage, the force of it would (if not
prevented) reduce the Inhabitans of this Island.

I. For first they do Allege that this Island was settled at the cost and
charges of the People of England, and therefore ought to be subjected to the
people of England.

Certainly we all know that we the now Inhabitants of this Island were and
still are those People of England the which with great hazard of out persons
and at our great cost and charges have settled and inhabited this place and
shall we therefore be subjected to the wills of those that stay at home? Shall
we be bound by the regulations of the Parliament in which we have no
representatives no persons there chosen by us to propose or consent to what is
good for us or to oppose, or dispute what is not for our benefit or behoof?
certainly this were a Slavish imposition beyond what Englishmen ever yet
sufferd and we doubt not but those courages which have brought us so far from
our Native Soil and found us out a living in these wild woods will still keep
us freemen (whithout which) our lives will be but loathsome to us.

II. Secondly it is alleged you the inhabitans of this Island have by subtilty
and force usurped a power of Gouvernment.

Had we the Inhabitans of this Island ben heard what we could have said, this
allegation had never been printed. But those who are designed to be slaves must
not have the privilege otherwise we could have said and most truly can and do
averr that the Gouvernment now if of force amongst us is the same that has been
constantly adhered unto, and obeyed ever since the settling this place and given
unto us by the same Authority which gave New England theirs, against whom the
said Act objecteth nothing, and this Gouvernment now obeyed here is the nearest
moddell and ressemblance (now left in the world) of that admirable form under
which all our Ancestors of the English Nation flourished for at least one
thousand years past, and therefore we shall conclude the rules of logic and
discovrie to be strangly inverted, if the Continuance of, and Submission to the
settled rightful Gouvernment be adjudged an usurpation of new power, and on
the Contrary an Usurpation of a new Gouvernment and be held a Continuance of
the Old.

III. Thirdly by the said Act all Forraigners are prohibited from holding any
commerce with the inhabitans of this Island.

Whereas all the old Planters well know how much they have been beholding to the
Dutch for their subsistence, and how difficult it would have been (without their
assistances) ever to have settled this place and even to this day we are
sensible what necessary comforts they bring us and how much cheaper they sell
their Commodities to us then our own Nation; but this comfort must be taken
from us by them whose will must be our law: But we do Declare that we will
never be so ungrateful to the Dutch for former helps as to deny them or any
other Nation the freedom of our Ports and Protection of our Laws whereby they
may still (and if they please) embrace a free Trade and Commerce with us.

IV. Fourthly to complete our designed bondage, and make our necks willing to
receive the yoke our own Countremen are likewise prohibited from trade and
correspondency with us and none to come near us but such as have a particular
license, from some persons for that purpose appointed.

By which means it may come to pass that no goods or commodities shall be
brought hither but such as those licensed persons shall please to be sold at
the prizes that they shall impose; and no ships but theris arrive here, so that
no Inhabitants of this Island, shall be able to send home the Native
Commodities of this place for their own account but be as merely slaves to
that Company that shall have the said license as our Negroes are to us, they
making theirs the whole advantage of our labors and industries here. And
therefore upon the whole matter we do declare that as on the one side we will
not be wanting to use all the honest honorable, and moderate means we can for
the continuanc^ of a free trade and fair correspondancy with our native
country; so on the other side we will not so much degenerate from the ancient
candor of true Englishmen as to prostitute those Liberties and Fredomes (to
which we were borne) to the will and pleasure of any: Neither do we think our
numbers so contemptible or our resolutions so weak as either to be forced or
persuaded to so vile a submission.

And we can not imagine that there is so mean and base minded a fellow amongst
us, that will not perferre an honorable Death, before a Tedious and slavish
life:

20. of Februari 1650.
19. FEBRUARY 1650.
An Act for Defense of the Government Liberties and Freedoms of this Island.
WHereas the peacable Government of his Island together which the rightful
liberties of the Inhabitants thereof are in great and apparent hazard to be
lost, unless seasonnable and timely care be used to preserve the same, and
whereas no expedient can be more proper and more agreeable to reason and Justice
then that all those persons, who enjoy those Liberties and Privileges should
cheefully and unanimously Engage for the maintainnance and defense of the same.

Be it therefore Enacted and Ordained by the Lord Lieutenant General the
Council and Gentlemen of the Assembly and by Authority of the same, that all
Freeholders and Freemen living and abiding within this Island, shall at some
time before the 20 day of March Next ensuing the date hereof, repair to some
one of the Justices of the parish wherein they respectively shall live or abide
at such time and place as shall be by them appointed, and willingly,
cheerfully subscribe the ensuing Engagement, by setting their names and marks
unto the same, and be it further Enacted, and Ordained, by the Authority before
said, that all and every Person or Persons that shall not have repaired to some
one of the said Justices aforesaid, and subscribe the Engagement before the 20.
of March according to the true Intent and meaning of this present Act, that all
and every such Person or Persons shall be from thence forth disabled to be
plaintiff in any Action real or Personal, in any Court within this Island, and
from being heir to any man; or any man to be heir to him or in capable of
ever making a will, or being Executours, and his Person to be secured at such
time and in such manner as to the right Honorable the Lord Lieutenant General
and Council shall seem fit or convenient, unless the said Person shall
conform him self and show reasonnable excuse for his neglect therein, and it
is further Ordained and Enacted that the said Justices of every parish within
this Island be required and Authorized to receave the said Subscription and
after the said 20. day of March to make return thereof with the name of all
such Persons as have not subscribed the same unto the right Honnorable the Lord
Lieutenant General, or whom his Lordship shall apoint to recive the same. And
be it further Enacted and Ordained, by the Authority aforesaid that whatsoever
Person or Persons, so conforming and subscribing the said ensuing Engagement as
by this Act is required and shall fail to perform accordingly, shall be
counted and called upon, as an Enemy to the public peace of this Island and
being thereof convicted at a public Sessions by a Jury of twelfe men shall
suffer according to the nature of his offense.

Lastly be it Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that all
Servants with in this Island their times Expiring before or after the 20. day
of March as before said, shall within one month after such Expiration of their
said time repair unto the respective Justices in their several precints which
in this Island, and there subscribe to this said Engagement (and not
subscribing and failing to perform accordingly) be counted as aforesaid and
being convicted as is before mentioned shall accordingly suffer.

THE ENGAGEMENT.
WE whose names are here underwritten do whilst we live in this Island Mutually
Covenant and Engage each with the other, and with the uttmost hazard of our
Persons and Estats, to maintain and defend the rightful Government of this
place by Council and Assembly as also the Person of the Right Honnorable the
Lord Willughby. Acknowledged our Governor and Lord Lieutenant General by the
Consent and Approbation of the whole Island with all the Freedoms Liberties
and Privileges Justly belonging to the Lord Willughby or us the Inhabitants
hereof as well concerning our Laws Religion Persons etc Estates within this
Island, as also our free Commerce and Trade both at home and abroad in foreign
parts against all manner of Persons or Nations whatsoever that shall attempt or
Endeavor to Deprive us of the same,

20. February 1650.

