A DECLARATION OF The proceedings of His Highness the Prince of Wales, and the
Marquis of Newcastle, concerning their coming from Callice to Dunkirk, and
from thence to Barwick in the North of England, with an Army, for the defense
and preservation of the Kings Majesty's Royal Person, and to join with Sir
Marmaduke Langdale.

Likewise, His Highnesses Speech at Paris in France, before his departure from
the Nunneries, And the Duke of York's coming from Zealand to Campheer, and
from Campheer to Goring; His Highness to be Lord High-Admirall of the revolted
Ships, and the Lord Willoughby of Parham Vice Admiral.

Sent in a Letter from Burlington-Key in Yorkshire, June 29. 1648.





Printed for the general satisfaction of (...) Majesty's Loyal Subjects, 1648.

A DECLARATION OF The proceedings of His Highness the Prince of Wales, and the
Marquess of Newcastle, concerning their landing in the North of England.
Honored Sir,
Upon Sunday last being the 25. of this instant June, a Dutchman struck into
this Harbor, and the Master coming ashore, imparted several things of great
concernment touching this Kingdom, carried on by the Marquis of Newcastle, the
Lord German, and diverse others; and amongst the rest it was intimated, that
there are diverse Forces raised in the Kingdom of France, and in the Provinces
of Holland, Zealand, and other places, most of them being English, and that the
Marquess of Newcastle is appointed General, and has received Orders for
their transportation into England.

He further intimated, that the Prince of Wales, and the rest of the English
Gallants has taken their leave of the King of France, and are departed from
the Court, with a resolution to pass from Callis to Dunkirk, and so with their
new Army to Barwick in the North of England.

It is said, that before the Princes departure from Paris in France, his
Highness went to the grates of several Nunneries, and there gave the Nuns a
visit, where they appeared unveiled; and in the presence of several Lords and
Ladies of Honor, His Highness declared, That for their many respects and
favors vouchsafed to Him, since His coming into that Country, he were much
obliged to them, and thanked them for their great respects to his Mother, the
Queen of Great Britain, with many other civil expressions; and having
expressed himself in these, or the like words, took his leave, and departed.

Some report, that there are four Regiments raised in Holland, to join with
the aforesaid Army under the command of the Earl of Newcastle, and to be
transported over with them to join with Sir Marmaduke Langdale in the North.

It is further said, that when the foreign forces are united and joined, they
will amount to betwixt four or five thousand; which report causes a great
fear and jealousy amongst the Inhabitants in these parts, being sensible of
the inhumane cruelty of Newcastle and his Adherents, greatly fearing, that they
shall be left to the mercy of a foreign Enemy, if not timely prevented by the
great wisdom and providence of the high and honorable Court of Parliament.

We also hear that the seven revolted ships (which lately revolted from the
obedience of Parliament) are gone into Helfer sluice in Holland, and another of
the revolted ships (called the Flying Buck struck into Brill, who meeting with
a Parliament ship, boarded her, and turned out captain Nickson, the captain
thereof, and diverse of the Mariners, and manned her with his own men; and the
Captain of the Flying Bucke has declared, That such ships as he meets with
that is not of his side, he will tie the men back to back, and turn them into
the Sea.

And about the 22. of this instant June, the Duke of York came from Zealand to
Campheer, accompanied by the Lord Willoughby of Parham and diverse other English
Gallants; from Campheer they came to a place called Goring, where some of the
revolted ships lay; and from thence he returned again to Campheer, with his
English train.

We further hear, that the Duke is made High-Admirall of the revolted Navy, and
the Lord Willoughby of Parham Vice Admiral, and that if his Highness can
obtain from the Prince of Orange Money and Ammunition, they intend for England;
for the Captain of the Flying Buck does speak as if they intended for Yarmouth.
It is likewise reported, that above 100. of the English Royalists are gone into
the revolted ships that ly at the Brill.

Burlington-Key, 26. June, 1648.
SIR,
THis morning a party of the Enemies sallyed forth at the South gate, and
approached near our horse Guard, but were quickly beaten back, and pursued by
our party to the turn-pike, where they kept a Court of Guard, who upon our
approach gave fire and fled away. So we entered this Guard, took such arms as
were left there. This Guard of theirs was kept near the Almes-houses, at the
entrance of the Suburbs of the town: in this action three of the enemy were
killed, and many wounded. We also took 12. prisoners, and 15 or 16 horse with
arms, two horses of our were killed, and one man cut in the head, but the wound
not mortal, nor any one of the rest of our men receiving any hurt at all.
Provisions begin to grow scarce in the town, especially bread, and how they are
provided with corn I know not, but I am certain they are ill provided of mills
to grind it if they have any. For this day we have fired and burnt down their
Wind-mils to the ground, diverse soldiers steal away from the enemy daily, and
come into us, especially since the Lord General sent in a Letter, proferring
conditions to such as should come to him, and unto all, if they would embrace
and yield up the town, which conditions were. 1. That within 24. hours after
the receipt thereof, the officers laying down their arms, should have passes
to travel beyond Sea, etc. 2. That the common soldiers, and all men of that
rank, shall have liberty to depart to their own homes, submitting to the
authority of Parliament. 3. That the Inhabitants of the town shall be free
from plunder and violence.

These conditions not being accepted of, the Lord General is resolved not to
offer so good again to those which are the chief in action amongst the Enemy.
Our army is in a very good condition and full of resolution, and although the
Genesis is very unwilling to storm the town (for that as much as in him is, he
would avoid the shedding of blood.

Abot four of the clock this morning another party of the Enemies forces
sallyed out of the town upon the Suffolk forces on the North-East side, but
Col. Whaley joining with them, charged them, killed two, and put the rest to a
disorderly retreat, took ten prisoners, and some very good horses. This Evening
another party of the Enemy attempted to go out on Harwich road, to fetch in
provisions, and were fallen upon by a party of ours, which routed them and took
diverse prisoners, one of which that was wounded says, that they begin to be
exceedingly straightned in the town for provisions, especially for horse meat:
three of their Wind-mills are burnt down, they have two Watermils which we are
cutting off, and have scaling Ladders ready to storm, but the Mortar piece is
not yet come up.

Yesterday morning 3 troopers came out of the town with horse and arms, and
proffered their service to the General, they report there are in the town about
600. horse, and 3500. foot. and about 3 of the clock in the afternoon, Sir
Charles Lucus drew out 8. companies of foot, and 4 troops of horse, close under
their Works, whereupon a party of ours were commanded out to charge them, and
after some exchange of shot, our forces beat them in, set their Guard house on
fire, killed two, and took some prisoners.

From the Leaguer before Colchester, June 28. 1648.
POSTSCRIPT.
SIR,
Upon the close of this Letter, here happened further action; A party of the
Enemy returning from Tendering Hundred with much plundered provision, were
intercepted by a considerable party of the Generals; at sight whereof they fled
into the Hundred, leaving the provision behind them, which was convoyed into
the Leaguer, and the aforesaid party are advanced into the Hundred to engage
them, if possible. This day the Suffolk Forces had another sight with the
enemy, killed two and took ten prisoners.

From the Leaguer, 28. June, 1648.
On Tuesday June 27, a paper was read in the House, subscribed by diverse
Citizens and sent to Dr. Burgess, desiring him to give God thanks (in his
Pulpit) for preserving his Majesty from poisoning, and to pray for the forces
under the command of the Earl of Norwich, and Sir Marmaduke Langdale, and after
some debate thereupon, it was ordered that the parties whose names were
subscribed should be sent for.

FINIS.

