THE DECLARATION Of the Officers of The Garrison of Hull: In order to the Peace
and Settlement of the KINGDOM.

Presented to his Excellency the Lord General, and the General Council.

Also a PETITION, presented to the Parliament of England, By the Officers and
Soldiers of his Excellency the Lord Generals Regiment of Horse, For the
speedy calling of all public Treasurers to an Account, and for the speedy
taking away of that heavy burden of FREE QUARTER.

With the Result of the General Council upon the same.

By the Appointment of the Officers at a general meeting,

Signed, Jo. Hemingway.

London, Printed for John Playford, and are to be sold at his shop in the Inner
Temple. March 1. 1649.

For his Excellency the Lord Fairfax at his Headquarters in London, These.
My Lord,
AMongst others, we are not the least nor last in our rejoycings, to see your
Excellencies and your Armies unanimous moving (by serious considerations and
real actings) toward the discharge of that great engagement which lies upon
us all for the settlement of the Affairs of our Nation, the promotion whereof
we have so solemnly covenanted to assert, in order to those ends of Justice and
Righteousness, now no longer to be left to the fruitless and ineffectuall
proceedings of a private and prevailing party in the Parliament, who had they
proceeded to act, or your Excellency to forbear, all our former endeavors for
Freedom had but in-fine effectuated our misery or servitude, and with fuller
force then ever crowned the Temples of a conquered King, giving our Children
after us cause to curse our bones for betraying their Birthrights: and leaving
us like so many guilty Felons with ropes about out necks, to receive the reward
of wickedness at their hands, who could have been content to sacrifice our
Carcasses to the Fowls of the Air, our Estates to Tyranny, and our
Consciences to Turcisme.

The consideration hereof (some few weeks since) drew us of this Garrison by a
Letter to your Lordship, and a Petition to the honest party in the Parliament,
to devote (as now to declare) our resolution to live and die with your
Excellency, and your Army in what you have so mutually remonstrated, or shall
proceed upon in opposition to all those actings which we have hitherto found
too narrow to comprehend, and too weak to conform those Freedoms which we
still pursue.

But it may be objected, that Counsel in the settlement of the Affairs of a
State, is a work belonging rather to the long Robe then the short; few Armies
having ever been trafted with such undertakings; yet if providence has put us
upon it, I trust it would better become us to stand like steadfast Rocks for
defense of Common Freedom, then after all our endeavors to digress for base
and by-ends, to follow fortune (in her fickle flatteries) who lends her smiles,
as Exactors do money, to undo the Debtor.

But I trust we shall no longer agresse into reluctuall and turbulent times;
Conscience and a good cause will keep up the depressed scale in every
condition; In the Interim, we cannot over-indulge the care of our Country,
whilst no other Law is left, but blotted and corrupt Commons, made forth by
men of private spirits, who eye our best actions by misrepresenting
prospectives. These shadows (as we may call them) have at the noontide of our
distress crept behind like Dwarfes, in the evening stalked by us like Giants,
and (instead of helping) have hunted our honest endeavors to a sunset.

Yet some may say: who stops the high attempts of State, lets loose the reins
of Government; but to me my Lord it seems much better to perish in a good
performance, then basely to prostitute the well-being of a Nation to those
principles of abused Power, in the darkness of whose deeds secret accusations
will suggest sad and solitary considerations.

I could therefore wish that the great Trustees of our times would rather
incircle themselves in a Character not commacculate with the deserved dashes of
disgrace, then spend their envy upon those faithful Agents for Common
Freedom; but if otherwise, your Excellency may assure your self the great and
high God will not always allow the crafty cunning of contriving bosoms to
divest this Army of that honor it has bought with the blood of so many
Princely Spirits.

I speak not this, my Lord, to arrogate any thing to your own or your Armies
actions, for we have seen enough to make us forsake ourselves in our strongest
valuations; all successes are unsanctified where ambitions boast a merit;
therefore in this last act of our Age, let us not as men (my Lord) but as
Christians, relate our resolutions to the goodness of our cause, not the
greatness of our courage. Thus let us stand (though fatally resolute) to fall
under, or finish that Freedom for which your Excellency dares to be so good
in these bad times, or to resolve rather to perish with your honest Officers
and soldiers, then otherwise to enjoy the Genius of a temporal happiness.

We have hitherto experienced, the power and policy of the greatest Potentates
cannot divert the decrees of God against the Injustice of their actions; all
concurrences fall forth to the furtherance of those fatal commutations, for
the effectuating whereof, the piety of our natures are pricked forward, and the
counsel of our Adversaries (like Achittophels) infatuated and confounded. Yet
such is the pride of many spirits, that they will still strive to cast so much
malice upon the story of our times, as cannot consist with the style of a
modest pen to reply upon, as if they intended not to forget us in their graves,
or to be equally cruel to our memories: Therefore all our best actions or
intentions are by their malicious Alchymy subtracted into Crimes, or where
(they should be honorably mentioned) either scornfully transmitted, or by
injurious constructions perverted; but if hereafter their injustice suffer
under a more deserved Doom, they may say, this observation has the virtue of
an Oracle in it. In the Interim, I shall leave them to their own delusions;
because no argument has virtue, nor virtue argument enough to avoid them.

Pardon my Lord, that I have deviated from my more immediate instruments and
intentions; in pursuance whereof Major Waterhouse (as the representative of
this Regiment and Garrison) is appointed to present your Excellency and your
General Council with our particular concernments, and mutual concurrences, as
also that by admission to your Counsels, he may administer his assistance
toward the accomplishment of those remonstrated principle, whereunto we not
only pray your Excellency speedily to proceed, but also (as we have
accordingly declared) promise to attend those ends, which will not only render
you the full honor of your Arms, but (even in these worst times) give you
Characters amongst the miracles of worthyest men; in the Interim it shall be my
honor to remain,

Hull January 9. 1648. Your Lordships most obedient and Faithful Servant, R.
Overton.

From your Excellencies Garrison of Kingston upon Hull, 1648.
SIR,
YOu owe not more to us then to your own virtue, that we make bold to request
your acceptance of our compliance with your Remonstrance, as to present our
Petitionary Appeal to the Parliament: in public pursuances, none are to be
omitted but you in so particular a concernment (on our parts) especially to be
sought unto, for that our actions have hitherto prospered under your unequalled
Conduct: And (which is more) that you appearing a first mover to what we have
approved and comported with, it lies, we hope, in your power not only to
accept our service, and therein to pardon our slownesse, but through the
goodness of Almighty God, to make this Kingdom and all Europes Protestant
party happy: If to your other Excellencies which have drawn a shade over the
actions of greatest Princes, you be pleased but to add an unwearied
perseverance toward the attaining of those ends, without which we had better
when we struck our Enomies, have turned our swords upon our own throats; We
cannot in the limits of a Letter make rehearsal of the particulars expressed
in your Lordships late Remonstrance, with every tittle whereof we totally
comply; neither is it needful herein to denote how or by whom they have
hitherto been made frustrate unto us and the Kingdom. We do now most cordially
agree to what we could sooner have received, but we hope, what was formerly
foreseen and forethought, is now more seasonably and successefully sought. We
rest confident the Remonstrance will both satisfy the world, and convince our
Adversaries of the Justice and necessity of our present undertakings, to which
if the searcher of all hearts vonchsafe his accustomed directions, your
Excellency need not doubt but by his blessing on our loyal hearts, to attest
unto the world your willingness to put a period to the miseries, and to
perfect the peace of your oppressed Contrymen: And seeing your Lordship has
dared to be good in bad times, we are confident you will not leave us when they
grow worse; and though with your Lordships leave we might in this place with
folded hands sit down with as much probable security as others, yet we cannot
imitate those unworthy Champions who hoped their fish should swim f^^e when the
Republike sunk. Your Excellency knows well how much herein our consciences,
honors and safeties are concerned, to manifest the justice we assert, which we
can never do whilst we leave greater Monsters unquelled then as yet we ever
grapled with, from whom without any breach of Prerogative or Privilege, we may
borrow or use that expression unfainedly which they did hypocritically, that if
men fail us herein we expect our reward in heaven. And to this end we beseech
the God of Lights so to open our eyes, that in this our day of visitation we
may truly understand what belongs to our peace, since it is so much
endeavored to be hid from our eyes, and to the God of peace we recommend your
Excellency, with an absolute tender of our utmost endeavors toward the
restoration of this dejected, bleeding, dying State, that for the future fear
may wait close on all the plotters of mischief, and that comfort may be
confirmed to afflicted virtue.

Sir, we are Your Excellencies obedient, faithful Servants and Soldiers, etc.

The Declaration of the Officers belonging to the Garrison of Hull.
Presented to his Excellency the Lord General Fairfax, and his General
Council, in order to the Peace and settlement of the Kingdom.
WE doubt not but the unsatisfied party of this abused Kingdom will wonder
that we still renew our reiterated Declarations, as if we intended to turn
State Reformers in their steads who have therewith hitherto been entrusted. It
is true, we never expected to be put upon such employments; nor find we any
felicity therein: but having by all means submissively showed our conformity to
the old rule of Cuncta prius tentanda, etc. yet instead of redress, finding
nothing but delay, we are constrained to search into the ground of this
ingratitude, and to expose or display it to the view of the world.

Herein we conceive our selves sufficiently authorized by the practice of the
best State, and the precept of the best of Orators, who in his Oration against
Verres, has taught us, that in public crimine quilibet non debet non esse
accusator, and where such practices shall appear inconsistent with the welfare
of a Nation, opportunity to check them and provide for a remedy.

Nor can we any ways doubt of a success suitable to the rest of our
undertakings, being assured, that our prosperous Armies were never supported by
a better Cause; and therefore that you be no longer held in suspense, what it
is that we (as well as others) declare against, or do desire, be pleased in the
first place seriously to consider your condition before these Wars; secondly,
The reason of our engaging in them; thirdly, The promises of our Public
Trustees in case our successes enabled them to a performance; and lastly we
having rendered them such as they desire to be, how well they have acquitted
themselves of their promises and trust.

In several Declarations, especially in that of December, 1640. they have
represented to us the state of this Kingdom, groaning under the arbitrary
pressures of an unlimited Sovereignty by Ship-moneys, Monopolies, innovations
of Prelates in Church Discipline, interruptions of Parliamentary proceedings by
the Regal dissolving Vote, with the other illegal Tazes and tyrannies, which
we only point at in this place.

For these no cure was held out so catholic as a Parliament, though even
General Counsels have foully erred in matters of Faith, and that of the
highest nature, yet we hoped better things from our National Convention,
insomuch that never any people so thirsted for a free Parliament as we; never
any people so assisted a Parliament in theirs and the public necessity. Have
we not rendered their Counsels successful, and (through Gods assistance)
enabled them to restore us to all those bene^^^s of safety in person, propriety
in goods, and purity in profession, which they so frequently declared to assert?

And though we are not ignorant how remote our condition is from those ends, or
how little our pressures are abated, yet can they not deny but that we have
discharged our parts in the field; which if gainsaid, Pulpits and printed
Gratulations would convince them: Had they in their sedentary devoirs been so
successful in the service of the State, by whose authority they act, out
pressures had by this time been abated, reformation settled, debts paid,
Ireland relieved, and the stream of the public disbursements reduced to its
proper and ancient channel.

But on the contrary, to our great grief we see, our distractions grow greater,
and our wounds wider, by the unrestrained appetites of self-seeking parties
both in Church and State, as if the enemy of mankind did despair to accomplish
his designs against Christianity by the Romish Jesuit, without a Protestant
Priest and pestilentiall Politician; the little fingers of whose insolency and
avarice are grown heavi^ ^hen the loins of Sovereignty or Episcopacy. For,
besides what our State-mongers have perverted to private ends, some of the Long
Robe, who have preached against Pluralities, have annual salaries amounting
almost to 1000. l. per annum. If we inquire what their employments are to
answer such in-comes, we shall find amongst many little besides the preaching
of themselves and their own authority over their fleeced flocks: yet
whatsoever some of them decree in the Church, or the Parliament in the State;
must (as if infallible) be received with an implicit obedience, no dispute, no
Petition, no Remonstrance, unless it speak the sense of a prevailing party in
the Parliament, and be ushered in by a total resignation of our selves, can be
accepted.

To this tamenesse have we suffered our selves to be brought, and might so
perhaps have continued, had not the late actings of our Trustees sufficiently
informed us, that war cannot be too much suspected which is obtruded upon
terms not to be looked into. And therefore if the attempts of such lawless
usurpers run so high whilst we have a faithful Army on foot, what will they
do when we are disbanded, and they backed with an indisputable power! If they
once dare to declare us enemies for but intending to Petition for due pay and
deserved indemnity, how boundless would they be (if under private and popular
Notions) they could without control pursue their own interests and appetites!

Is not therefore the present actings of our Officers and Army proper to settle
Peace, as to disappoint the pursuances and plots of private spirits? would it
not better become us to die with our swords in our hands, then (after we have
vindicated the public Liberty against the power and pride of Princes) to
succumb under the servitude of our fellow subjects, how great soever? for which
of our good deeds do we deserve to be destroyed? are they angry because we are
about to expedite the peoples Peace and preservation? are we not therefore
properly provoked to snatch the wreath from off their brows, which (by the
mercies of the Almighty) our late conquering swords have crowned them with! is
this the requital and income of all our difficulties undergone, perils past,
lives lost? Is this the fruit of our victory acquired? have we for this so
frequently removed their foes and fears, secured their safety, or rendered them
capable of the full execution of due, but deferred Justice? Was it not for this
cause we covenanted, hazarding our lives ao preserve our Liberties? yet after
all must we sit still to see oppressions unsupprest, Justcie perverted,
grievances augmented, and Tyranny Re-inthroned?

In this so sad a condition may we not with Adrian the Emperor cry out,
Multitudo Medicorum me perdidit? may it not properly be applied to the late
prevailing party in our present Parliament, whose apparent declinations from
their honored undertakings (whether we eye their private leterests, or
unparliamentary proceedings) look with so foul a face upon us, as we may
justly question, whether there be not as great a necessity of transferring that
Trust from its abusers, as erst to make use of their undertakings? Nay, we may
boldly assert their carryings on for pretended preservations, have been so
costly to us, and so commodious to themselves, that there is no capacity so
weak, but too aptly apprehends it for a truth, that it is better to be stung
with one Hornet, then a whole nest; better one Pope, or one Tyrant then a
multitude: may never so malignant a Genius possess a Parliament as to render
our endeavors to regaine true liberty useless.

Yet how is the State of England altered, and from the pity of its enemies
become the envy of her false and feigned friends, for whom our care and
conscience gave us courage to engage; our courage begot their present power,
their power our servitude and calamity. A strange kind of requital some will
say, that those heads should cut off these hands, by which they have climbed to
that dezelling greatness, from whence they but giddily discern either
themselves or us, whom they still strive to thrust even with the hazard of the
Nation and their own ruin, beneath the honor of our Arms into a condition
of servitude, beggary and baseness; witness the contemptible price of blood
paid to some, whilst other impoverished Petitioners are constrained to stand
perpetual Centinells to want and wrong, whilst some of their own indeered
darlings lie stowed in plenty and secure reposes, being in as deep Arrears for
service to be done, as others are for pay that is due.

Certainly, the free and faithful Commoners of England did not entrust them
thus to act their own ends, or to accumalate and divide such vast proportions
of treasure amongst themselves and Sycophants, whilst worthier Members, and
more public spirited persons are famished and defrauded: this is so clear a
truth, as he that runs may read. Have we any thing desirable here more then the
care of our consciences, the freedom of our persons, community of friends, and
propriety of goods? In all which should we declare how much both our Country
and we have suffered in a patient expectance of a happy issue, we should add
to our calamities one vexation more then ever our Trustees intended us; for had
they believed that any durst have been so bold us to arraigne their actions, we
may charitably think they would have been more wary in disobliging those for
whom they are and ought to act.

For those last six years, what has been the constant cry of the prime
Potentiaties in our great Council, but the Liberty of the Subject, and the
Privilege of Parliament; the former whereof we now see is almost swallowed up
of the latter, witness the Goale-books of Newgate, the Tower, the Gatehouse,
and other places of Purgatory, where public spirited persons lie impoverished
and imprisoned in a hopeless and helpless condition, languishing after a
legal trial: Be assured all ye native noble English, that the same
contrivance which provides mannacles for their hands, would in time see that no
fetters should be wanting for your feet.

But must the Medium whereby we are conveyed into this pretended blessedness,
and by which so many millions have been serewed forth of seduced purses, be no
other then that old and ancient Qualepipe, public necessity; Oh invincible
argument! endless necessity, which perhaps our abusers did never resolve to
have done withal whilst we had either juice to squeeze, or tamenesse to
suffer it: Is any Art either ancient or modern omitted to exhaust the treasure
of these times? witness the reported dividend of some hundred thousand pounds
amongst some select Members, to recruit not so much perhaps their pretended
losses, as their cracked estates, whilst the public debts of the Kingdom with
our dearly earned Arrears, are thrown in amongst things most fit to be
forgotten.

Surely strangers might think the Parliamentary Revenues were at a low ebb,
when they are seen, and seem compelled to shuffle off their friends and the
peoples supporters; but were some of the Receipts accounted for, it would
happily strike amazement into all that have but slightly considered it; for
setting aside all the rooking Committees both in City and Country, whose names
and natures might almost call the profession of Christianity it self in
question, do but consider the vast Contributions of Associated and reduced
Counties, Deanes and Chapter Lands, Pole-moneyes, Sequestrations, old and new
loanes on Public Faith, Seizures on the whole Revenue of the Crown and Miter,
fifty Subfidies at once, fifth and twentieth part, Adventures, free gifts,
Taxes for British moneys for almost ruinated, and (if some say true) cheated
Ireland, besides the vast accumulations of treasure by Compositions and
Pardons, there being, as we are informed, at the end of the first War about
or above 8000. Compounders, whose Compositions if computed but at 200. l. a man
one with another, which in the general is much undervalued, and their pardons
at 36. l. a piece, the total when levied, which undoubtedly was long since
done, according to the exactest Computation, would almost amount to eighteen
Millions, to which the Customs and Excize throughout the Kingdom adds many
thousands more weekly: And yet some of our Stewards have been pleased to put on
such a vizard of poverty, that two hundred thousand pounds could not be paid to
our Brethren the Scots, without the sale of Bishops Lands; thus a new device
and tax must always do the work in hand, still to secure and increase the
sacred heap; a bank doubtless were it brought together into one bulk, which
some of them have courteously carved to one another, would vie the treasure af
all the Jews in Spain or Italy.

Can we then believe that these our friendly Feoffees after the contraction of
so much guilt would ever patiently return to their private fortunes? or give up
their accounts to their fellow-Commoners of England, whose Stewards they are,
and erst had the modesty to acknowledge, that the power was ours by which they
acted? which if true, as undoubtedly it is then are we certain that the last
appeal and resolution must be to and from us. Notwithstanding this they would
become our gront Lords, some of them having besides the corrupt acquiring of
their Burgesseships, sat so long as to bring in their children to sit at the
Stern of State, meaning no doubt to transmit this new principality from
Generation to Generation. But have we in the interim any assurance of either
Law or Liberty, save what proceeds from their arbitrary breathings? What did
ever any Nation undergo by a foreign conquest, which has not in this last
eight years been practiced upon this?

Tacitus the wisest of the Roman Historians sew forth, that the times were so
base and bad under Nero and Domitian, that none durst complain of them, the
people being grown so tame with sufferance, that they had almost lost their
memories. But it may be objected, there was never any Government which pleased
all, or has not upon trial and experience had its inconveniences. The
several States of Sparta, Athens, and Rome it self, thought they had well
provided against the Tyranny of their Princes by their Ephori, Decemviri, etc.
yet these found such a venery in exercising their several powers on those that
gave them, as in fine a new public necessity was discovered which way to put
those down, who had deserved no better whilst they were up.

We might draw the Parallel nearer to our times, should we examine whether some
of our Representators have not transcended in their tyrannies, whatsoever has
been acted by those forementioned names of infamy: or secondly, whether the
injured Freemen of England may not justly reassume their misimployed power, and
call the Authors to account for acting contrary to common trust, safety, and
satisfaction: but it will be more benificiall to pitch upon expedients for
Peace and Freedom, or for the future to secure our selves against all
arbitrary Powers, whether Regal or Parliamentary.

But by the way, peradventure some may object and say, suppose this ill
compacted body of Parliamentary power, be by the present moving of the Army
either extinguished or reduced to a better temper, and that the disposal of
the Supreme Power suffer under the Sword, what assurance is there that the
soldier will not misimploy the power which we have entrusted with those whom
you are about to take it from?

This is Argumentum ad hominem, and seeing that the intentions of men cannot be
looked into, our best conjecturall light must arise from precedent actions, and
in this particular we dare stand the attest of our most crying adversaries; we
neither have nor desire better witnesses touching our deportment, then your
selves, we wanted neither presidents nor opportunities to have enriched our
selves by secret fraud or open violence ever after our Army appeared so
considerable at Naseby; what might we not have done when we marched from
New Market through London, or what can hinder us now that we are in it from
making our selves Masters of that whereby others become both wretched and
miserable? but we trust, that power which has hither to given us so many
testimonies of Mercy, will to the end actompany us in all our deportments,
which if compared with the tyrannical fleecings of several Trustees or their
substituted Committees, we doubt not but reason will promp you rather to
embrace a protection from those for the present, whose civilties have oredone
expectation, then longer to lie under their insultings which have hitherto so
foully falsified.

Besides, if we had been so base as to chaffer for your Freedom, temptations
to take us off have not been wanting, even by some of those who have formerly
been fo fierce against us; we speak not this to kindle a firebrand to tie
Sampson's foxes together by the tails; but rather to stir you up to take
notice in time what danger you are in to be undone: let Westmimter witness it
by the many red eyes and wet handkerchiefs of poor Widows waiting for the
wages of their deceased husbands, besides halfe-starved Officers attending the
Returns to their Petitions, with charges great as the success is little,
whilst kindred and creatures have their suggested services rewarded, and their
pretended losses plentifully repaid; the account whereof is frequently cast up
false by kindred, airy Courtiers, and oily mouths, and formal flatterers; yet
in the mean time those of more weighty and substantial worth have neither
Orators nor Advocates to mention their merits, or to write Narratives of their
neglected necessities.

Oh! whether is Astrea fled? what is become of Common Justice, that most
essential part of Magistracy! have our politic Bodies lost all the
life-bloud of Love? can these Philistines put forth Sampson's eyes, and not
expect that a free people enraged by the less of their dear purchased
Liberties should pull down the Pillars of their abused power? When Magistracy
degenerates into Tyranny, are we not disobliged from our obedience, and put
upon the freedom of natural endeavors for preservation? Surely the Sword of
Justice was not committed to their keeping to cut our throats: He is highly
ignorant and blind, who thinks humane obedience binds us to slight a public
preservation. In this respect a free people never want a full power. Tyranny is
Tyranny in whomsoever, and wheresoever resistable. Nature in the inferior
creatures fortifies her self defensively, and has her nobler peace of wonder a
less privilege?

Their own Deciarations have taught us, that all power (...) ^^stive and
conditional on our part; therefore King Jan^^s (...) he had as great an itch
of Monarchy upon him as other (...) proclaimed in open Parliament, that, Nihil
aliud patest Rex quam quad Iure potest. And Bracton de Corona tells us, Quande
Rex (...) per Legem r^git, non amplius Rex est, sed Tyrannus. The best of
Primces ever kept their bounds, acting to Gods greatest glory, knowing the
Soveraig^^ power to be the Peoples, from whence they derive their
Principalities, next that great Lawgiver, who assures u^* That the service due
from man to man is not coercive, or distinguished from equal nature, save for
safety sake. It is but the overflowings of Fancy, or an Optique mistake that
lets loose the reins to the sense of a lawless Sovereignty, provoking Princes
to suppose themselves greater then their Maker ever meant. Surely Parliaments
cease to be Parliaments, when they cease to be just Powers; as Kings cease to
be Kings, when by overstretching the reints of Government, they forget to be
good and just: therefore Justice defines Magistracy, as law lesnesse does
tyranny and arbitrary usurpation.

How much then are we concerned to oppose all illegal proceedings? how much
more as Soldiers obliged, who have been more desperately engaged, and (for
ought we yet find) so dangerously deluded, in being made the unhappy
instruments of advancing private interests with public spirits. Seeing
therefore we have hitherto been perverted, as to promote their private projects,
who care not if we died like dogs, so they might live like Prinees, who give us
cause to despair of any good ever to proceed from them. And in as much as none
can merit the title of true Patriot, who endeavor not to deliver their
country from all her calamities; we do therefore see how necessary it is we be
no longer blinded in our obedience, or shackled by our Fellow Subjects, in
subordination to their lawless lusts, who in the nature of their employments
are the Kingdoms Servants to manage its Interest, not their own, further then
conjoined with ours, which they have hitherto too much contemned or trampled
upon.

Since therefore to their Papal predominance, they would have added a Popish
infallibility, whose Decrees admit no dispute or rejection, but resolved so
remain the everlasting Land Marks of out dre^d, in reference to their own
^^^^^^eries and our blind obedience. It will behove us now at last to pray
Almighty God to restore us to our wits, for if he make us wise (through his
goodness and merey) we may make our selves happy.

Now that the world may know we strike only at the persom of offenders, not at
the Parliament, but the corrupted party in it; we do therefore in the presence
of Almighty God whose presence we expect, according to the sincerity of our
souls) publish and declare to the whole Kingdom, That upon serious thonghts and
due can mination, we have found and do believe a prevailing party in the
Patliament to be the propagators of many miseries and calumities which now sit
heavy on this Kingdum, and that their long continuance in this usurped
Sovereignty is litterly inconsistent with all our sufeties; not that we are
ignorant of, or unwilling to acknowledge the special power of Parliaments, or
that we believe all the Members to have deserved this so severe a centure, for
we are confident of the contrary: Yet inasmuch as it is rather frequency of
Parliaments then perpentity, that must make us happy, the latter being too
great a temptation to Tyranny; we with the rest of our fellow subjects and
foldiers (who by the confession of our Trustees, have within our selves the
supreme and original power to provide for the Common Safety, when we find, as
now we do, our trust abused and betrayed,) do therefore declare;

1. That, together with the King and his Capital Creatures, the evil Members of
both Houses have justly forfeited their Power and Privilege; and to the end
therefore that others who shall succeed in the managements of this Trust, may
know that they act not only their own business, but ours; therefore that this
Kingdom may at last acquire its banished peace and welfare, we do in the first
place, with the rest of the Army, desire the speedy execution of due and
distributive Justice to all and every Capital Offender.

2. That all inferior Delinquents do submit to the present judicial Power.

3. That a speedy period be put to this present Parliament, and a new Election
of faithful Members made.

4. That there be a succession of free and future Parliaments, with secure
provissions for their meeting, sitting and ending; such neither electing, not
to be elected, as were in Arms or other ways pre-engaged against us.

5. That so many of the old Members as have not crept in by corruption, (and
against whom there shall not appear crimes sufficiently scandalous to make them
incapable,) may be encouraged and continued, until the dissolution of this
present Parliament.

6. That all Elections may be according to due and equal distributions.

7. That by an universal and mutual Agreement, it be enacted and decreed, in
perpetuam rei memoriam, that the power of all future Representatives may be
inferior only to that of the people, in order to the preservation of them in
their just and proper Rights, and that the observation thereof be added to the
oath administered to every Member upon his admission into the Parliament.

8. That henceforth the things of Common Right and Justice be left to the Laws
well Regulated, and proper Officers being appointed for ordinary matters, a
Council of State may more aptly apply themselves to those extraordinary
administrations of Parliamentary Power.

9. That the public Petitions of the people may be more seasonably
considered, and speedily dispatched (as is forementioned in the large
Remonstrance) it will be requisite to afford Liberty of entering dissents
against such Representatives as appear either unfaithful or unpliant to the
Trust of the People.

10. That all future Kings be hereafter elected by the Peoples Representatives
upon conditional trust, or without claiming any negative voice against, or
beyond the power of Parliaments.

11. That the succeeding Parliament may remember the self-deing Ordinance, and
speedily pursue an impartial account of the Kingdoms imbezelled treasure, which
being discovered we doubt not but sufficient will be found to discharge the
public debts of the Kingdom, and speedily to make Ireland pay the price of
that blood which it has so inhumanly shed.

12. That the matters of general Settlement be proposed by the Parliament, and
agreed unto with the subscriptions of the People, the like Award may be made,
and in the same case required to be performed by all succeeding Kings, and
other public Officers of State or Trust.

13. That no future Convention of Parliamentary Power be above Biennial, or do
henceforth presume to exempt their persons from being liable to discharge their
debts, or to satisfy their Creditors by this means. if hereafter we should be
so unhappy as not to be acquainted with Parliamentary Justice, or if future
Parliaments should prove like this, yet their domination being circumscribed
within a limited time, they will (as it is well observed) be afraid to commit
those insolences, which will be avenged them at their return into a private
condition.

14. And foreseeing the dis-joynedness of the times, and the opposition we
stand in to Ireland, and other domestique and foreign enemies; it will be
requisite that a standing Militia be continued in experienced and approved
hands.

15. That in order to the removal of jealousies and fears, it is further by us
desired, (as more conducing to a speedy and perfect Peace) that an Act of
Oblivion may be past for inferior offenders, from the benefit whereof we only
exclude those whose Crimes are Capital, of which number we put in the forefront
the corrupt Members of this present Parliament, with their deputed Creatures
and Committees, who either cannot or will not give account of the public
treasure by them purloined; these in the first pla^e we desire may be driven to
Restitution, or to make their persons satisfy, if they shall not discover upon
their own oaths, or of any other whom they shall be required to bring in for
the further discovery of their estates, in order to the intended satisfaction:
though our professions do not qualify us to new-mold a State, yet necessity
having cast it upon our care, providence puts us to point at these general
conducements toward so necessary a work, which we cast in as our mite with the
more full and effectual Remonstrance of the Army.

16. That such of the Assembly as claim their Authority in the Assembly Jure
Divino, may be speedily abrogated Jure Humano, unless they can make it appear
they have not illegally intruded upon their place and power; And that we may
hereafter (by all their great expense of time and treasure) be as much
satisfied as themselves. Amongst some of whom the Church Revenues have been
parcel'd forth into such large portions as might enable them to maintain the
pride and luxury of Cardinals, whilst their forsaken and fleeced Flocks are
forced to attend the Alms of others, perhaps more precious for parts and piety,
and yet but pensioners to their pride and pluralities, though exceeding them as
far in grace as they do others in good livings: Such Lackwings are the
Cankerworms of our souls, as corrupt Committees are the Horsleeches of our
Estates, the (...) devours our goods, the other our good names: The Tenants of
(...) one (in matter of Regal Supremacy) are inconsistent with the known Laws
of the Land, and the other, in point of traitorous practices, for profits sake,
are perfectly principled against them.

17. Now, to the end we may live at unity amongst our selves, the stronger not
insulting over, but bearing with the weaker, and both glorifying God by an
unblameable conversation; there is another sort of public persons that
deserve to pass under as strict a Reformation as any we have yet had to do
with, they are such as receive their name from the Law, which they make a nose
of wax; these are the great and close suckers of our State, and such as have
contributed so much to the honor of Christianity; that the pens of men of honor
and quality have delivered to the world, that the grand Signior of
Constantinople has more Justice done his Subjects in one months time, then
all the Christian Princes in seven years: These are the men for whom (if they
may be suffered) our swords have cut out pleading work for generation to come.
And therefore since their abstruse sense in a barbarous Dialect, which they
expound as they list, carries with it the monumental badg of our Normane
servitude, and the profit the Kingdom receives by it, no way countervails the
mischief that is does enact: It is our earnest desire, that all the
Constitutions of this Kingdom, both penal and others be abreviated, and clad in
the homespun language of our native Nation, that every man might in some sort
be able to understand and plead his own Cause.

18. That some strict course may be taken for preventing that horrid practice
of Attorneys in putting men out of the protection of the Law, by out-lawing,
before notice be given them of the Suite, though never so causless: And that
all such undue proceedings may make the Suite null, etc. that the Remedy be not
worse then the Disease.

19. That to avoid corruption of Lawyers or their adherents, and to take off
men's minds from litigious contentions, some Expedient of determination of
differences may be provided, by the appointment of men of known integrity; and
parties authorized in every considerable Town or Hundred to decide ordinary
Controversies, so that no man be admitted to commence a Suite (save in grand
Causes) without their concession.

20. As also that both Judges and Pleaders may have their respective Salleries
from the Public, upon penalty of (...) all b^^^es o^ understand obligations
Whereupon that example of Cambices (...) happily be renewed, and put into
execution: We need not doubt then but every Tribunal in England will have
something to hang over it, that shall better instruct its several Judges then
all the Letters of Princes or Potentates, or all the Dividends betwixt them and
their purse-bearing Broakers at the end of the Term.

But in case we now are in, what Justice can we expect from any civil
Judicature, where the Members of Parliament, who should be Lawmakers, descend
for gain so far as to be Pleaders in eath common Court? and seeing no Judge
stands but by their Vote, what dares any of them do in asserting the old
known Laws, when upon every Appeal to the Parliament their Pleaders become
their Judges? And how valiant such Justices have been in acqui^^ing themselves
where they feared their sitting besides their Cushions, their behavior in the
case of Ship-mony sufficiently ded^^^. The several abuses throughout the
Kingdom for want of faithful Magistrates and for lack of (...) execution of
Justice and Judgment, does not only distrust the Army, but also very much
discourage and disaff^ct our best friends; for ^^^^by differences are
undecided, because good and godly County-Commissioners are not chosen, nor
according to our legal Custom and Constitutions empowered to impeach persons
pecc^nt, of to present the Parliament with the occasions of their County.
Wherein, (...) Courts of Judicature were established throughout the several
Hundreds, and Lawyers appointed to plead at a set allowance, Causes might be
(...) justly and speedily determined, and all opp^sitions (...) lessened or
prevented.

We might in this sense enlarge our selves in several respects, wherein the
condition of this Kingdom is so un^^^fortable: But, though we take no pleasure
to take in the kennel of so much confusion, yet would we take the pains to
clear and cleanse it, that at the last we may attain the true eaj^^ ^^nt of
what we have purchased at so dear a price; that so the Authors of our
Calamities may receive their wages according to that Justice which their
Actions do make them fear. But we hope, by what has been already said against
others, that we have innocence in our hearts and hands toward the Peace of
this Nation, for whose freedom we will both fight and pray. We intend not in
any kind to continue our Countaies Misery, but to pursue its Peace and
preservation, in prevention of those oppressions sit to be repealed, in regard
of those great Engagements which are given by us all, rather to make good the
happy issue of the old, then the beginnings of another new and wasteful War.

We have fought for Justice and Freedom, the inheritance left us from our
forefathers, and it is now become our purchase and price of our blood, spilt in
opposition of tyrannical attempts, wherein supremacy of power cannot legitimate
scorn or cruelty. And though greatness may make injuries more great, Power too
much improved sometimes provokes the Peasant to brave the Prince. Indeed it is
casie for boundless ambition to aspire, but not ever to continue uppermost.
Love and Justice are the lasting Conquerors, the truest Supporters of a State,
without which the most transcendent Acts of Magistracy stand tottering, and do
either by the wounds of separation bleed to death, or very rarely perpetuate a
power to posterity. But if, by Gods blessing upon our loyal hearts and
endeavors, this Kingdom shall receive its wonted Peace and Vigor in the condign
punishment and suppression of all our opposers, and the Arch enemies of our
common Safety; we shall no sooner see Peace and Truth established, the Liberty
of our Consciences, according to the Word of God, in Doctrine and Discipline,
secured (for we abhor an universal Teleration:) but we shall be willing
immediately to acquit the happy Management of our hitherto successful Arms, and
betake us to such other employments as the great Creator shall call us to.

All we shall in the Interim desire, is, That the great and wise God may be
ever more glorified, for working the deliverance of his people by such poor
despised persons; and that they my receive such fair acceptance and
acknowledgment, for all their faithful performances, that no age hereafter
(looking over their neglects) receive discouragement to sacrifice their lives
in vindication of the public Liberty.

HVLL, January 1648. By the Appointment of the Officers at a General Meeting.
Signed, JO: HAMINGWAY.

To the Right Honorable the Supreme Authority of the Nation, the Commons
assembled in Parliament. The humble Petition of the Officers and Soldiers of
his Excellencies Regiment of Horse.
Humbly shows,
THat your Petitioners, out of a tender respect to the work, they have been
employed in, and ever since this War entrusted withal, (by Authority derived
from you) have been very cautious of offering any thing that might have the
least appearance of seeking out selves (though sufficiently known to be our
rights) by several Engagements, Promises and Declarations of this Honorable
House, fearing least by that means we should impead that service, (the
preservation whereof was more dear to us then our lives,) upon which
consideration we have waded through all difficulties and dangers we have met
withal, resolving, that whatsoever might seem of nearest relation to our
selves, should bring up the rear of our desires to your honors, nor should we
at this present have troubled you, had we not been conscions that the neglect
thereof would have been of very ill confequence. And now seeing it has pleased
God so to own our endeavors, (with the rest of the Army,) giving testimony
thereunto by many wonderful successes, bringing down all power whatsoever that
lifted up it self against those just and righteous things you declared for; and
that you, being the supreme Authority, having now a seasonable opportunity put
into your hands, to answer our expectations more fully, although we cannot but
acknowledge that God has inclined your hearts to accomplish many of those just
things which we have long time waited for, some things yet retraining undone,
which we humbly take boldness to be your Petitioners for.

1. That all persons that have been employed in public Treasuries may be
speedily brought to an account, and that approved persons may be empowered for
that purpose. 2. That our Accounts, in the several Commands we have been under,
may be presently stated, and debenters given us, which debenters may be allowed
of as others that have lent many upon the Public Faith of the Kingdom. 3.
That our Accounts so stated, visible security may be speedily given out of
Deans and Chapters Lands, or otherways. 4. That where as diverse Soldiers have,
through the tediousness of the late Services, lost and spoiled their horses,
that therefore care may be taken for their satisfaction; some having dishurst
more many in buying horses to serve the State in this last Expedition, then
their pay has amounted to, and that there may be provision made for their
future supply with horses. 5. That Free Quarter may be wholly taken off, and
that (...) effectual course may be taken for a constant supply of pay to enable
us to discharge our Quarters, and that the intelerable abuses we suffer in
clips money may be prevented.
The Premises we earnestly desire may be taken into your speedy and serious
Consideration, and effectual care had for our satisfaction herein.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.

THis Petition was presented to the General Councal of the Army, sitting at
Whitehall on Thursday the 22. instant, (his Excellency the Lord Fairfax
present,) read and approval of by the whole Council, and it was agreed, That
several Officers should consider of the particulars of the said Petition, and
prepare a Draught against next Council of such things as might be presented
from them to the Parliament, both for easing the burdens of the Commonwealth,
as to Free Quarter, etc. and for provision of such things as are due to the
Army.

Some Officers were also appointed to desire such others as were Members of the
Parliament to present an Act which is drawn for taking the Accounts of the
Commonwealth, and that it may pass the Parliament as soon as may be, in
respect of the great consequence of it, and the many Expectations that are upon
it: And besides, that it will raise several sums of money hither to concealed or
not accounted for.

FINIS.

