A DECLARATION OF THE NORTHERN ARMY: WITH Instructions concluded at a Council
of War, concerning the Northern Forces.

ALSO A Letter concerning the Countries resolutions in relation to the Scots.

December. 30. 1647.
I Approve, ratify, and confirm these Orders of the Council of War, and
require all Officers and Soldiers, of the Army under my Command duly to
observe the same; And all Field Officers (in their several places) to see that
they be made known to all under their respective Commands, as other the
Articles and laws of War; and to cause them forthwith to be published in
every Parish Church within the Quarters of each Troop and Company, that they
may be the better made known to the Country.

Given under my hand the 30 of December. 1647. J. LAMBERT.



Printed at York by Thomas Broad, And Reprinted at London by Robert Ibbitson
in Smithfield, near the Queens-head Tavern. 1648.

A LETTER Concerning The Countries resolution in Relation to the SCOTS.
Sir,
I Have sent you here enclosed, the Declaration of the Northern Army, commanded
by our General to be published, with his Warrant for publication thereof, all
things are quiet hereabouts, and the Country unanimous, Peoples minds run much
upon the Scots, they galled their backs so much before, that now they begin to
winch before they are touched.

York the first of Janua. 1647.
WHereas by the blessing of God upon the faithful endeavors, and the great and
difficult services of the Armies, raised by the Parliament, for the defense and
preservation of the Laws, Rights, and Liberties of the Kingdom, from
oppression, injustice, and slavery, some ease and relief has been brought to
the people, as well in these North^rn, as other parts of the Kingdom, to their
great comfort and benefit, after a long suffering, by a cruel and wasting
War; and yet nevertheless (as the rest, so) these parts in particular do
still lie under great burdens and oppressions, notwithstanding the great care
and means used (as much as could be) to ease and relieve them, both by a late
earnest endeavor and solicitation for obtaining of moneys from the Parliament
for the payment of these Forces, the preventing and punishing of the
mis-demeanours and disorders of the Soldiers; and for the equal and just
distribution of them into quarters, through the whole Assotiation, in such
manner as that each County, Ryding, Wapontake, and also each Town and
Inhabitant might bear their equal proportion in quartering, that thereby the
general charge (which for the present cannot be removed) might be equally and
orderly disposed for the greatest ease of the country, and the enormities and
disorders of the Soldiers might be corrected and redrest, (as much as could
be) for the pence and quiet thereof: In the prosecution of which intent, Orders
were agreed upon, and published by the Commander in Chief, and Council of
War at Wakefield the ninth of September last; and since that other Orders
issued at Rippon, by the Commander in Chief, for a more equal quartering then
was in the former provided. Notwithstanding which diverse Complaints are daily
made not only of the unequal distribution and allotment of Quarter, in the
several Wapontakes, Parishes, and Towns; but also of the several disorders,
and misdemeanors, (by extorting of mo^^y from the Country, and otherwise)
committed by diverse Soldiers and inferior Officers of the Army; being chiefly
occasioned by reason some Officers have not been so careful in the discharge
of their Duties in their respective Places, as (out of obedience to Authority,
love to equity, and common good of the Country) they ought to have been.

For remedy and prevention whereof (and of all other of the like nature) for
the time to come it is ordered by this Council as follows;

Concerning the inequality of Quartering.
I. That forthwith a review be made of the several Quarters of the Army, and
that every Colonel, Major, Captain, Lieutenant, Ensign, Cornet, and
Quartermaster of Horse, Foot, and Dragoones, shall (on sight hereof) procure of
the High-Constables of the Divisions or Wapontakes within the Quarters of their
respective Regiments, Troops and Companies, a Book or List of the Rates of
each Town, Parish and Place within the same, and thereby make inquiry within
their said Quarters, what inequality of Quartering there is; and shall take
care that the Officers and Soldiers of his Regiment, Troop or Company now be,
(and hereafter shall be) equally and justly distributed and divided, in and to
the several and respective Hundreds, Towns, Parishes, Places and Persons,
allotted (or hereafter to be allotted) to them for their respective Quarters,
according to the said Chief Constables Rates upon every Inhabitants Estate, in
Lands, Goods, or other profits in the Town or Parish where it lies, according
to the Ordinance of Parliament for the Association; and in case any inequality
or partiality shall be found in the distribution of Quarters, through default
of the High-Constables, Constables, Quartermasters, or other Officers, that the
said Officers, together with the said High-Constables and Petty Constables of
the respective Divisions and Constableries, shall again proportion the
Allotments, and use their utmost endeavors to regulate the same, so as every
Division, Town, Parish, Place, and Person, may bear their equal and just
proportion.

II. That all Towns and Parishes (where any part of the Army shall be
appointed to quarter) shall be equally proportioned by such Assessours as are
or shall be chosen by the Inhabitants, (or the major part of them, (as in the
like cases has been used and if any Inhabitant shall refuse to pay or bear his
or her proportion, justly assessed by the Assessours, for Lands, Goods, or
other Profits for the charge of Quartering, then the Captain (or other
Commission Officers of the Troop or Company in whose Quarters it shall happen
to be, shall (upon Complaint made to him or them) appoint so many Soldiers to
quarter at the dwelling house of such Refusers as comes to their Proportion;
provided in be within the same Riding of this County, or within the same County
in other parts of the Association; and if not, he is to certify the Commander
in Chief thereof. Provided also that if any Town or Parish shall either out of
malice, or other sinister end, oppress, or overassesse any particular Person
in habiting therein, the said Person so oppressed, shall be relieved as is
provided in the next ensuing Article, viz.

III. That in case there now is (or hereafter shall hapren to be) any
difference, between any Inhabitants of any Town or Parish, concerning their
just Proportion in Quartering (or in Assessment for the charge of Quartering)
the Captain, or (in his absence) the next Commission-Officers of each Regiment,
Troop or Company in whose Quarters that difference happens to be, shall examine
the matter on both Parties, and use his utmost endeavors by persuasions and
fair means to reconcile the same; which if he cannot effect, he is to bring
the Parties before the next Justice of the Peace, who is by us earnestly
desired to be assisting to such Officer in ending the difference, and if by
this means a reconciliation cannot be procured, by reason of the
refractorinesse of one or both Parties, the said Justice of the Peace is
further desired by this Council, to join with the said Officer (who is hereby
thereunto required) in certifying the case in Writing to the Commander in
Chief. And what Officer soever upon the desire of any Plaintiff or Party
aggrieved herein, desiring to have justice and relief, shall wilfully neglect
or refuse to bear, and endeavor to reconcile the same, as is before expr^st)
shall be proceeded against as an enemy to Discipline and Service.

IV. That whereas great complaints are made, that (notwithstanding all former
Orders to the contrary) diverse Officers and Soldiers do by threats, and
otherwise forcibly and unjustly I avie and collect moneys upon the Country, It
is therefore (for prevention of all inconveniences, irregular courses, and
charges of that kind) Ordered, that no Officer or Soldier shall demand or
receive any moneys as aforesaid; But in case the Town appointed to quarter,
shall rather desire to pay the Soldiers in money, to provide themselves
quarters, then actually to quarter them, (and the Soldiers likewise be content
with the rates and allowances in the List ensuing,) notwithstanding the Rules
set down in these present Orders, It is desired, that each Constable in his
respective Constablerie, may collect the rates and allowances set down in the
said List, (according to the equal proportion quartered upon them in each
Constablerie) being for the necessary quarters of each Officer and Soldier
both for themselves, their Servants and Horses; and each Officer and Soldier,
shall be fully satisfied and contented with the said Rates and Allowances for
their own, their servants, and Horses quarters: And if any person shall
presume to demand, receive, or force any Constable (or other) to collect or pay
above the proportion and allowance therein allowed and agreed upon, shall be
proceeded against according to the Articles of War for Extortion: And the
Officers and Soldiers may be assisting to the Constables in the raising and
collecting of such Allowances, being Assessed for that purpose by Assessors, as
is provided in the second Article.

Foot.
Each foot-Souldier 6 d a day. Each Gentleman of Arms 7 d a day. Each Corporal
of Foot 7 d a day. Each Drummer 7 d a day. Each Sergeant of Foot 9 d a day.
Each Drumm-Major 9 d a day. Each Quartermaster of Foot 3 s 6 d a day Each
Ensign of Foot 2 s 4 d a day. Each Lieutenant of Foot 3 s a day. Each
Captain-Lieutenant of Foot 3 s 6 d a day. Each Captain of Foot 5 s a day. Each
Mayor of Foot 6 s 6 d a day. Each Lieutenant Col. of Foot 7 s a day. Each
Colonel of Foot 8 s a day.
Horse.
Each Trooper mounted 1 s 6 d a day. Each Trooper unmounted 9 d a day. Each
Officer of Horse not in Commission, viz. Trumpetter, Corporal and
Chirurgion-Mate 1 s 8 d a day. Each Quartermaster of Horse as a day. Each
Cornet of Horse 5 s a day. Each Lieutenant of Horse 6 s a day. Each Captain
Lieuten. of horse 7 s a day. Each Captain of Horse 8 s a day. Each Mayor of
Horse 8 s 6 d a day. Each Colonel of Horse 9 s a day.
Dragoons.
Each Dragoon mounted 1 s 4 d a day. Each Dragoon unmounted ^ d a day. Each
Corporal and Drummer of Dragoons 1 s 6 d a day. Each Serieant of Dragoons. 1 s
7 d a day. Each Quartermaster of Dragoons 3 s 4 d a day. Each Cornet of
Dragoons 4 shillings a day. Each Lieut. of Dragoons 4. s. 6. d. a day. Each
Capt. of Dragoons 5. s. 6. d. a day.
Staff Officers and General Officers.
Each Gunners Mate one shilling a day. Each common Gunner 10. d. a day. Each
Matrosse 8. d. a day. Chief Gunner 2. s. a day. Each Wagon Master 2. s. 6. d.
a day. Each Marshall to a Regiment 3. s. a day. Each Chaplain 5. s. a day. Each
Chirugion 4. s. a day. Each Deputy-Mustermaster 3. s. a day. Joint Commissary
of the Musters 3. s. 6. d. a day. Marshall Generals Lieutenant 3. s. a day.
Marshall Genesis 4. s. 6. d. a day. Seven Marshalls men, each 1. s. 8. d. a day.
Judge Advocate and Secretary to the Council of War; 7. s. a day. Mustermaster
Genesis 7. s. a day. Scout Master Genesis 12. s. a day. Surgeon Genesis 7. s. a day.
5. That each Soldier and Officer, with the said allowance and proportion set
down, shall provide quarters for himself, his Servants and Horses as aforesaid,
as he shall think fit, without any further charge at all to the Country,)
provided, that each Officer be quartered within the quarters of the Troop, or
Company to which he does belong, and that each Soldier do not quarter himself
out of the Town or Parish where he is allotted to quarter, without the special
leave of his Captain, or other Commission Officer) But if either the Officers,
or Soldiers shall not think fit to accept of the same Rates aforementioned, in
lieu of their quarters, in regard the Country may exact unreasonable Rates and
prises for ma^s or horse provisions, or the Towns do rather desire to give
quarters then the aforementioned Rates, It is Ordered, that the Sould^ers shall
be appointed and settled by the Quarter master, or other Commission Officer of
the Troop or Company, with the Assistance of the Constable of the Town or
parish, in some convenient houses of the same; and the persons with whom they
shall be appointed to quarter, shall be satisfied by the Constable, and
Inhabitants of the Town or Parish, for their quarters both for Horse and men,
as they shall agree.

6. That if any Town or Parish shall not think fit to make the said allowance
in lieu of quarters, or any Officer or Soldier do not accept nor receive the
same, to provide himself quarters, as before mentioned, every such Officer and
Soldier shall be content with such dyer, as tho e with whom they quarter
usually afford themselves and their Families, and not absent himself from his
quarters, without special leave by Ticket, viz. the Soldiers and Officers not
in Commission (...) from the Captain or Field Officer, and the Officers in
Commission from the Commander in Chief, which Ticker shall express the place
he is to go to, and the time allowed for his stay: And if any such Soldier or
Officer shall absent himself upon his own occasions, without leave (...) said,
he shall not demand (and his Landlord shall not pay him any money for his
absence. But if any such Officer or Soldier shall be absent upon the public
Service, or with leave as aforesaid, w^^ch is to be allowed by the Officers but
upon real and urgent occasions only, and for as little time as can be, such
Officer or Soldier during such his absence, shall be allowed according to the
Rates, for his quality, mentioned in the said List, one moietie whereof is to
be paid upon his departure, and the other at his return.

7. That if any Soldier or Officer, receiving his said allowance, shall refuse
or neglect to pay his Landlord for his quarters, according as he shall agree,
upon complaint thereof to the next Superior Officer in Commission, such
Officer shall cause the Neglecter or refuser to make present payment to his
Landlord of the sum due, or do his endeavor to give just satisfaction to the
party wronged therein: which if he shall neglect or refuse to do, he shall upon
complaint thereof, pay the Landlord out of his own purse, the double of what is
due from the Soldier, besides satisfaction for the Landlords necessary charges
of prosecution.

Against the disorders of the Soldiers.
8. THat to prevent the Soldiers and all others from committing of disorders,
contrary to the intent of these Orders, and other the known Articles of War
used in the Army, and for that the quarters of the Army are dispersed over the
whole Association, and every parish or person that is a greeved, cannot without
great charge, trouble and loss of time, make his complaint to the Commander in
Chief; It is Ordered, that the Captain, Lieutenant, Ensign, or Cornet, Quarter
master, Sergeants, and Corporalls of each Troop and Company, shall be
appointed, divided, and allotted by their superior Officers, to quarter in the
most convenient places of their Troop or Company, for the more convenience of
hearing Complaints, and redressing the disorders of the Soldiers. And further
for the better ease of the Country in bringing in their Complaints, and for
the more eff^cta^ll^ and (...) of all ^^orders, misdemeanors, and offenses to
a trial, It is ordered, that every Captain of a Troop or Company shall appoint
some convenient town or place in or near the Center of his quarters, and also
a certain day weekly, where he or some Commission Officer of the Troop or
Company, shall be present to hear, receive, and examine all complaints from the
Country within his quarters, of which place and day he is to give notice to
the Inhabitants within his quarters respectively, by procuring them to be
proclaimed in every Parish Church the next Sunday, within 10 days after the
receipt of these Orders, and to do his endeavors to rectify all such
disorders and grievances; which if he cannot do, he is to transmit the
examinations, and also the offenders to the next Regimentall Council of War,
as is appointed in the next ensuing Article: And in case the offense or
grievance be of such nature, as if cannot be punished nor redressed at the said
Council is then to treasure the examinations to the Judge-Advocate of the
Army, and give him notice of the names of the Parties and Witnesses, the place
of their abode, and the time and place of the Facts committing, to the end it
may be brought to the next Council of War, held at the head quare^^, whose
small determination and redress shall be had, and the Offenders to be sent to
the Marshall General in safe custody, if the matter require it; and whatsoever
Off^^er shall be found wilfully neglecting the due ex^^c^^ion hereof. he shall
be accounted as unfit, and made incapable of his Office or Command.

9. That the Field* Officer, or Officer in chief of each Regiment, both of
Horse and Foot, shall have power, and are hereby required to call a Council of
War upon any complaints or misdemeanors committed b^ the Soldiers, except
in such matters where Life and Limb is concerned, in which case no proceedings
are permitted without the pretense of, or some speci^ll injunction from the
Commander in chief. And to that end the Field Officers (or one of them) shall
appoint a particular curtain; and convenient place about the Co^^er of the
quarters of each Regiment to keep the said Council at, once every mon^h, or
oft^er, as occasion shall require.

10. That no Officer or soldier shall presume by threats or otherwise, to d
ter mine discourage or hinder any person from complaining, or from prosecution
of his complaint; nor shall ^ffer any violence, or put any burden, injury, or
wilful prejudice upon any so complaining upon pain of cashering.

10. That each Offi er whatsoever to whom any complaint shall be made, or who
shall know of any misdemen our or disorder committed by the Soldiers, and shall
not give all due encouragement and assistance to each person complaining, in
the prosecuting and obtaining redress of their complaints, according to
justice, and also use all means to prevent and compose differences in the
soldiers or the Countery, as is before expressed, shall be made unapable of
bearing any command in the Army,

11. That if any Officer or person whatsoever shall demand or receive quarters
(or Money for quarters) for any more then are of his Troup or Company, and not
mustered the last Muster or shall countenance, permit, or (if he know thereof)
not discover the same, shall be proceeded against upon the Article of War for
making false Musters.

12. That in regard some Officers and soldiers, do, or may demand and receive
their aforementioned Allowance for quarters in more places then one, it is
therefore Ordered, that no Member of the Army shall presume to demand or
receive the said allowances [or any other whatsoever] in any more places then
where he is justly allotted and appointed to be quartered.

13. That in regard the Allowances in the List before mentioned, are not
sufficient for the maintenance of each Officer, with the number of Horses
allowed them by the Est^blishment, It is hereby declared, that the intent
thereof is only for the ease of the Country, and no to the prejudice of their
pay; and if in case there shall be a Muster du^ing the time these Orders a^^ in
force, and the Officers shall not be able to bring to the Muster, so many
Horses as are allowed them in the Establ^shment, notwithstanding these Orders,
each Off^cer shall receive pay upon that Muster, and his Arreares be accounted
to him, as if he had mustered his full numbers according to the Establishment.

14. That no Off^cer shall list or enroll any more Soldiers in his Troop or
Company. And such as (contrary to the Order of the 9. of September. last at
Wakefield, have been listed or enrolled since that day, excep^ such as have
been o^ shall be particularly ordered by the Commander in Chief to be listed
shall be forthwith discharged.

15. That from the Date of these present Orders, the Orders set down and agreed
on the 9. of September last, at Wakefield shall cease and be no longer in force.

Signed THO: MARGETTS. Advocate.
York 30. December 1647.
I Approve, ratify, and canfirme these Orders of the Council of War, and
require all Officers, and Soldiers of the Army under my command duly to
observe the same; And all Field-Officers, Captains and other Officers, (in
their several places) to see that they be made knewne to all under their
respective commands, as other the Articles, and Laws of War; and to cause
them forthwith to be published in every Parish Church within the quarters of
each Troup and Company, that they may be the better made known to the Country.

Given under my hand the thirteenth of December, 1647. I Lambert

FINIS.

