SIXTEEN ANTIQVAERIES PROPOUNDED To the Catechiser of DIOTREPHES.
The PREFACE.
LEst the Reader should be in a maze about the intent of these Antiquaeries, he
may please to take notice, that the Author conceived it the fittest way of
answer to Mr. Prynns Sixteen Questions: Partly, because the chief of them are
already propounded by the Honorable House of Commons to the Reverend Assembly
for their resolution, whom to anticipate by his shallow endeavors, might be
counted little better than a presumption. Partly, because diverse of Mr. Prynns
Quaeries seem to be little better then captious, as requiring that to make a
thing of Divine right, (namely, a clear proof from Scripture in express
terms) which no rational man not engaged will demand or expect. Now a
captious Question cannot well be answered better than by a Question; for which
the Author wants not a good president, Mat. 21.23. to the 27. Yet he has not
so bound himself up to Quaeries, but in some matters of difference, he takes
liberty of dispute; especially about that great question of suspension from the
Lords Supper; and that new Paradox of Mr. Prynns, that the Lords Supper is a
converting Ordinance; which mistake arises frrm confounding those things that
should be distinguished; and attributing that to one Ordinance, which is the
proper effect of another. For example, in the Lords Supper four Ordinances
usually meet; namely, Prayer, Preaching, (at least in opening and applying the
words of Institution) singing of Psalms, and the administration of the
Sacramental elements.

Now we deny not but Prayer and Preaching are converting ordinances: But the
great question is, whether the actual receiving of the Sacramental elements
be a converting Ordinance. This we deny, and unless Mr. Prynn can make this
good, he speaks nothing to the purpose: but may as well prove Marriage,
Ordination, or Burial of the dead to be converting Ordinances, as the Lords
Supper; since at all these the Prayers and Sermons that have been in use, no
doubt have been effectual means to convert diverse; and in particular,
Marriage teaches us admirable things about the love of Christ to his Church,
etc. Yet I think never any was so mad, as to call any of these three
converting Ordinances. The same reason is thereof the Lords Supper. Therefore
we deny not but a scandalous person, yea, an heathen may be present at the
Lords Supper, and hear the Prayers and exhortations, see the Elements
consecrated, and all the Sacramental actions, and this with a great deal of
profit, if the Lord please to sanctify all these unto him: which is further
apparent in the other Sacrament of Baptism, the present benefit whereof
usually redounds more to the standers by, than to the party Baptized. But that
the actual receiving of the outward elements by a graceless scandalous person
does never convert him, I conceive may be clearly proved by this argument He
that eats and drinks damnation, that discernes not the Lords body, that
murders Christ, certainly at that instant, and in that particular act is not
converted: but so does every unworthy receiver. Therefore a Father says well,
that wicked men in the Lords Supper do receive panem Domini, but not panem
Dominum; but certainly, at what instant a man is converted, he receives panem
Dominum; nor can any possibly be converted, but at that instant he must of
necessity receive Christ. If Mr. Prynn answer, he may be converted by Prayer
preceding, and the words of institution opened and applied. I answer, 1. Then
although he have the worthiness of person, yet he wants the worthiness of
actual preparation; and so is still unworthy in that respect at least. 2.
Though upon the former supposition he be really worthy, (as having truth of
grace) yet he is visibly unworthy, till he have given satisfaction to the
Church for the particular scandal whereby he has offended them, and
dishonored the name of God; and if he be truly humbled (as no doubt every true
convert is) he will leave his gift at the Altar, and first go and be reconciled
to his brother; and then come and offer his gift, Mat. 5.23, 24. If he be not
so fit to eat the Passover the first, God will accept him in the second month.
And for my part, I can apprehend no way like suspension, to prevent the double
danger of an unworthy receiver; for if he neglect to come to the Lords Supper,
he slights it. If he come unworthily, he eats and drinks his own damnation or
judgment. But being kept from the Sacrament, he is preserved from both these
guilts. And further, by this penalty may be brought to athrough sight of his
error, and so be sitted better for the Sacrament against the next opportunity.
But enough, and too much by way of Preface. I fear I have made too great a
Porch for so little an house. Yet I see not how it could well be spared, as
being a necessary explication of my ensuing design. I leave it to thy judgment,
and both thee and it to Gods bl^ssing.

R. D.

Sixteen Anti-quaeries; Propounded to the Catechiser Of DIOTREPHES.
I. WHether no scandalous Sin belong to Ecclesiastical cognizance: If so, why
then did the Apostle, and Church of Corinth presume to judge the incestuous
Corinthian, 1 Cor. 5. and 1 Cor. 2. Or why has God given his Ministers the
greatest abilities to judge of all sins, if they must only see with other men's
eyes, and judge nothing scandalous, but what the Magistrate judges so? If they
may judge of any scandalous sin, why not of all? and that this is more then a
judgment of dislike or reproof, see 1 Cor. 5.12, 13. for so I may judge him
that is without, who yet falls not under the sentence of excommunication, nor
is capable of it.

II. Whether they who were the fittest and ablest judges of cases dubious and
too hard for inferior Magistrates, Deuteronomy. 17.8, 9. (according to Mr. Pryns own
grant) might not lawfully judge of ordinary cases also? Surely, Jethro Exodus
17.17, 18. did not think Moses sinned simply in judging lesser matters, but
counseled him rather for his own and the peoples ease to refer pety matters to
inferior Judges. Further, if the High Priest might judge of civil matters,
why not also, yea much more of spiritual, being more within his sphere as a
spiritual person? Else the Magistrate, being a mere civil power might judge
both of civil and spiritual cases; but the High Priest being a spiritual
power, might judge only of civil cases. We deny not the judging of scandalous
sins to the Magistrate; and rest consident he will never be so far catechized by
Mr. Prynn, as to deny the judging of scandals to the Ministry, etc.

III. Whether the cases of Leprosy and Jealousy were the only cases wherein
the Priests were appointed to be as Judges in the Old Testament; see the
contrary, Deuteronomy. 17.8, 9. which is also confessed by Mr. Prynn himself in his
second question immediately foregoing.

IV. Whether any deny the Parliament and their Lay-Commissioners power to
enquire after, and punish scandalous sinners, (though I find not where they
have any power by the Ordinance to punish) and whether that may not go very
well hand in hand with the censures of the Church, and their enquiry. But the
great question is, whether Lay-Commissioners have power from the Word to
suspend Church censures against scandalous persons. If so, let Mr. Prynn show
an express place of Scripture for such a suspension, and we shall soon yield
the cause. Otherwise he must pardon us if we receive not this his Catechize for
an Oracle.

V. Whether any Minister claim power jure Divino to examine witnesses upon
oath: And whether Mr. Prynn think the evidence against the incestuous
Corinthian was made good upon oath. If the Parliament out of their care to
prevent misinformation, require an Oath of the Witnesses, I hope that does not
scruple his conscience: and if any Minister scruple it, the ruling Elders have
jus humanum, and so by consequence jus Divinum to examine upon oath.

VI. Further, whether the not mentioning, or not appointing of ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction in the Old Testament (if granted) be proof sufficient against the
exercise of it in the New Testament: Yet if Mr. Prynn please to consult Ez^k.
23. v. 28, 29. and Ezekiel. 44.7, 9. I believe he will find that not only
ceremonial, but also moral pollutions defiled the house of God; and that
therefore such were to be kept back.

VII. Whether Ministers under the Law had equal Jurisdiction with Ministers
under the Gospel; and whether Magistrates either under the Law or Gospel had
properly any Ecclesiastical power. If the former, then Priests might
excommunicate under the Law for scandalous sins, which both may be done, and
has been done under the Gospel, 1 Cor. 5. and Tit. 3.10. If the latter, then
let Mr. Prynn give us an express Scripture-evidence for the Magistrates power
to excommunicate: or that the Church might not excommunicate (when once it had
Christian Magistrates) till it had order from them.

VIII. Whether there be any express text in all the New Testament, giving
Jurisdiction by Divine right to all Ministers, Presbyteries, etc. to suspend or
excommunicate all scandalous persons; yea, though they profess and protest
they will never repent. If so, let Mr. Prynn produce those places, and we shall
make them good also against those that being convinced of scandalous sins, do
externally pretend and profess repentance in general, but give not the Church
offended particular satisfaction for a particular scandal. If he can produce
no such positive text, then let him speak out, that a visible Devil, though he
openly profess he will live and dye in his abominations, yet ought not to be
denied the Sacrament, if he desire to have it: or else let him give us leave
to prove our assertions by good consequences, which himself must be forced to
use, for proving far greater matters than Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.

IX. What rules or presidents there are in Scripture to determine matters
controverted between particular Churches, or in a particular church; and if the
Officers of several Churches may meet for that end, Act. 15. Why not also for
relieving of parties wronged by any particular Church in way of censure; and
otherwise, what relief could the Primitive Churches have had for 300 years
after Christ. Who denies the last appeal to the Magistrate in case the Church
either cannot, or will not do their duty; or having done their duty, yet
cannot prevail with obstinate Churches or persons to reclaim them?

X. Whether that power of censuring may justly be suspected, which of it self
alone, is not fully able to redress all abuses and corruptions: and since the
Magistrate cannot fully reform all abuses, and the Church power may reform all
abuses, or cut off all unreformable persons from their communion, which is all
God requires of his Church. In which case, if the party censured obtrude
himself forcibly upon the Church and Ordinances, the C^^^^^ cannot be counted
either irreligious or uncivil to repel such force with force, and therein to
crave the Magistrates assistance, which he cannot in conscience or equity
deny. The Officers of the High Priest knew this well enough, and therefore were
afraid to apprehend the Apostles forcibly, Acts 5.26.

XI. Whether the Church, Mat. 18. v. 15, 17. being meant of Presbytery, (which
Mr. Prynn seems to dislike) may not much more censure gross sins committed
against God, then lesser sins committed against my brother: and whether a truly
pious soul be not more offended with gross sins committed against God, than a
particular wrong done unto himself. If it be meant of the Civil Magistrate, or
Jewish Sanhedrin (as he pretends) there is no doubt but complaint might be made
unto them of gross sins as well as of personal wrongs. And although I cannot
forgive the wrong done by a scandalous sinner to an whole society; yet if his
repentance appear to me being a member of that society, I both may, and ought
to forgive him for my own particular: as when my brother wrongs me, I ought to
forgive him the injury done my self, though I cannot forgive the wrong he does
God by the same offense.

XII. Whether they, who have right and power to determine controversies
authoritatively, have not also right to censure and suppress scandals:
Otherwise those Seducers might still have gone on to trouble the Church of
Antioch, notwithstanding the decrees of the Synod, had there been no power in
the Church to suppress them: And if the Church had power then to judge Heresies
and scandalls, let Mr. Prynn show where they lost that Charter; and where
Christ said the Church should have that power no longer then till he sent them
Christian Magistrates; or that civil censures give a supersedeas, to
Ecclesiastical censures.

XIII. Whether that precept of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5. for casting out the
incestuous Corinthian, be not a clear and constant president for the like
censure to be past upon all scandalous sinners. Otherwise let Mr. Prynn give us
a reason why one scandalous sin should be censured by the Church, rather then
another. He that bid them purge out the old leaven, and not to eat with a
scandalous brother, I think speaks plain enough, that such a person ought to
be cast out. Does not the Scripture by instancing in one particular, include
all of the same kind; and must not every text be interpreted in the largest
sense, unless there be some just ground of limitation? I thought it had been a
good rule both in Logic and Divinity, A quatenus ad omne valet consequentia.
Otherwise if his blaming them for not casting out the incestuous Corinth^n be
not a just item for the Church to cast out all scandalous persons then his
blaming them for not mourning for that scandalous sin, is no warning for any
Church to mourn for scandalous sins committed by any of their members, 1 Cor.
5.2. I cannot see why the censure of a Magistrate should hinder
Church Censures, more than the reproof of a Magistrate should hinder
Church-reproof and admonition. The same offense committed both against Church
and State, may justly be reproved and censured both by Church and State. As for
Suspension, which he so much stickles against both in this and other places;
let him show me a reason why they who have power to do the greater, may not do
the lesser. He that has power to hang; (...) also power to mulct or scourge;
and why should not they have power to suspend from one Ordinance, that have
power to cast out of the Church, and so to keep back from all Ordinances?
(according to Mr. Prynn:) Though for my part I see not where he can clear it
by Scripture that an excommunicated person must be kept from all Ordinances. To
instance particularly in hearing, where is it said an excommunicated person
shall not have so much as the privilege of one that is without, 1 Cor. 14.24,
25. Might an Infidel hear the Word for his conversion, and shall an
excommunicated person be denied the benefit of that Ordinance? I grant by
excommunication he is as an heathen, but why he may not have the privilege of
one that is without, I desire Mr. Prynn to instruct me, and I shall thank him
for it. For my part, I believe this opinion of his is as true as that other
formerly vented by him with so much confidence, namely, that the Lords Supper
is a converting ordinance. But I pray, where is there any clear Scripture
evidence, either by way of precept or example, that the Lords Supper was
appointed to convert, or has converted any. We deny not but the meditation of
Christ's death, the words of institution, and the Sacramental elements and
actions may do much, and let Mr. Prynn show me in Scripture, why either an
excommunicated person, or an infidel may not be present at all these, yet
neither of them may be admitted to partake of the Ordinance, and who knows what
a prevailing argument it may be for their conversion to see the children of God
sitting at his Table, and themselves shut out as dogs, Luke 13.28 That which
shall work confusion at the day of judgment may now work conversion in the
day of grace: yet I dare not say, every thing that may convert, is a converting
ordinance; the works of God, an holy conversation, and the sufferings of the
martyrs may possibly convert, and no doubt have converted many: yet whoever
called them converting ordinances? They well may be occasions of converting,
but it must be an express word of Institution that makes a converting
Ordinance; or at least to make a thing properly a Divine Ordinance, there must
be a strong and clear consequence from Scripture. And here by the way I
humbly conceive that jus Divinum is of a larger extent, than either a Divine
Ordinance, or a Divine institution: There is no lawful or good action, but
has a jus Divinum to justify it; and that either mandatorium, or permissivum,
either in express terms, or by good (though not immediate) consequence; but
this is not enough to make a Divine Ordinance. This I note the rather to take
away that cavil against diverse things in the Presbyterian government, as
pleaded for jure Divino: the meaning is not, that every particular in that
Government has express words of Scripture immediately to make it good: nor
can any Church government in the world, plead by such a Charter: but that what
is held in it as of Divine right may be cleared by good consequence out of
Scripture, and has no just Scripture evidence against it. But I crave pardon
for this long digression. Only I desire the Reader to observe how importunate
Mr. Prynn is for us to bring express proofs of Scripture for our tenets; and
yet neither has, nor can bring one express place to prove the Lords Supper a
converting ordinance; but is glad to fly to consequences, and those both weak
and erroneous.

XIV. Whether the Magistrate punishing of an obstinate offender (at the motion
of the Church, make him a mere servant or executioner to Presbyteries,
Congregations, or Church Officers. If one particular Minister may in the name
of God, command a Magistrate to do his duty, whether it be in matters of
Religion or Justice; I see not why a company of Ministers, etc. may not desire
him to punish a malefactor, which he ought to do, whether desired by them or
no. It seems by Mr. Prynns inference the State of Scotland is a mere Servant
and executioner to the Church; and the Presbyterian Government is like to prove
as bad as that of the Pope and Prelates: such odious comparisons might with far
more honor and conscience be buried in silence.

XV. Whether may I not desire Authority to settle that jure Divino, which
indeed is so (although not so apprended by diverse in Authority) and which both
Parliament and people have covenanted the settling of, according to the word of
God. And whether most of the Reformed Churches have not this (unlimited,
arbitrary) power, as (he calls it) to censure all scandalous sinners, and that
without any enumeration of particular sins, or appeal to Lay-commissioners: and
so (according to M. Prynn) are in a worse case then if they were under the
domineering of the Lordly Prelates.

XVI. Whether the former abuse of the Magistrates favor, with all the evil
consequences thereof, be a safe ground to deny that just power wherewithal God
has invested his Church, and of the exercise whereof we have examples in the
new Testament. And whether by the same argument Magistracy it self might not
be cried down, since there is no form of Government, whether inferior or
superior, but has been too too much abused to tyranny, etc. Yet I wonder
withal Mr. Prynn does not bring one instance of tyranny under the Presbyterian
Government in any of the Reformed Churches: who I hope do not deserve the name
of Diotrephes, nor need to be catechized by Mr. Prynn.

To conclude therefore with him, I grant Christ's yoke is easy, but not to a
carnal heart. And I desire Mr. Prynn to give one instance in practice, where
the Presbyterian Government, has been an hard yoke, unless to such who
stickle for a lawless liberty of doing and speaking what they please under the
notion of a pretended liberty of conscience.

If I should make bold to add one Question more to the sixteen; namely,
whether by what Mr. Prynn has written about this and other subjects; it does
not appear that he is far better versed in Law than Gospel: it might happily
be offensive; and therefore I forbear: only I shall add this, that if the
Gospel prevailed more, the Law would ^^ in far less request: and wish heartily
the fear of this did not make too ^^^^y stickle so much against the
Presbyterian Government, which if once rightly settled, I dare venture to
prophecy it would cut off many needless Lawsuits, and prevent many a bitter
potion. I honor both Law and Physic; yet wish with all my heart that every
man were so conscientious and peaceable as there might be no need of Lawyers:
and so temperate and healthful, as there might be no work for Physicians.
And he that at is of another mind, I shall be bold to tell him he is in the
number of those that eat up the sin of Gods people, and set their hearts upon
their iniquity, Hos. 4.8. How ever, I cannot but wonder at Mr. Prynns
overweening confidence both in this and other writings of his about church
Government. He cannot but know that the Honorable Houses of Parliament after
consultation had with the Assembly of Divines, and a solemn Covenant entered
into to reform the Government according to the Word, have past an Ordinance for
suspension of scandalous persons from the Sacrament. And therefore it might
well have become him not to write so magisterially, as if the spirit of God had
left all them to come to him. Had any, being not a professed Lawyer, past as
confident a vote against any Law matter determined by an Assembly of the ablest
Judges and Lawyers, I should not have blamed Mr. Prynn, if he had said, Ne
suitor ultra crepidam. Let himself then judge whether it be not a presumption
for one that is not a Divine to vote so peremptorily against an Assembly of the
most able and godly Divines in the Christian world. Has Mr. Prynn been present
at all the debates about this argument, and heard all that was argued for it in
the Reverend Assembly? He might at least have suspended his Catechize, till he
had seen what answer they could have given to the Quaeries of the Honorable
House of Commons, but since he is so confident in particular against
suspension: Let him answer me directly, whether none are to be suspended from
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. If he say some may be suspended, let him
show me an express place of Scripture to warrant it, and what persons may be
suspended, and in what cases. If he hold the universal negative, then it will
necessarily follow that Infants, fools, madmen, persons actually drunk, yea,
very heathens and infidells ought to be admitted to the Lords Supper. If he
say, all these are visibly incapable of that Ordinance: I ask him why? for the
Scripture says not in express terms, admit no infidel, madman, etc. The
ground then of their non-admittance must be cleared by way of consequence,
because such cannot receive worthily. It Is apparent then, that visible
unworthines is a just ground of non-admission to the Lords Supper. As therefore
real unworthiness should make the party forbear, so visible unworthinese is a
just ground for the Church to suspend him: and that whether this unworthiness
be personal or preparatory, and this latter be negative by natural
incapacity, or privative by neglect, or positive by the guilt of some
scandalous sin unrepented of; any of these, if known, make a person visibly
unworthy. If then visible unworthiness be the causa formalis, of
non-admission; then a quatenus adomne, etc. all that are visibly unworthy must
be suspended. Nor can Mr. Prynn prove it by Scripture or good Logic that a
general outward show of repentance, can make him visibly worthy, who by a
scandalous sin has made himself visibly unworthy; nay, did he truly repent,
unless that repentance were visible, (as the scandal was) I should question
his admission. He that is really worthy, may be visibly unworthy; as he that is
really unworthy, may be visibly worthy.

London, Printed by R. Cotes for Stephen Bowtell, 1646.


