A DECLARATION OF THE REPRESENTATIONS OF THE OFFICERS of the NAVY.

CONCERNING The Impeached Members of Parliament, Transported beyond the Seas.

WITH A Charge against some Officers, who had Commissions to raise Forces to
disturb the peace of the Kingdom.

ALSO The KINGS MAJESTY'S PROTESTATION, Sent by Collonell WHALEY.

Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson, 1647.

A Declaration of the Representations of the Officers of the NAVY, Concerning
the Impeached Members of Parliament Transported beyond the Seas.
A Diurnall came to our hands on Monday August 16. which has a passage, as we
apprehend it, that has done us unsufferable wrong, we bless God, our ways
are open to him that knows our Innocence: And to Vindicate our selves, we have
upon serious thoughts, not to add to the sad differences of the times, We had
rather suffer quietly; but however we desire to clear our selves, to those who
are our friends, of those scandalls which so much tend to the prejudice of us.

Those Gentlemen are now aboard, who have seen and heard the Truth, and will no
question satisfy accordingly, when they return: In the mean time we shall
faithfully, as in Gods presence certify the Truth.

The Members five of them took Bark at a Town by Quinborrough: Gave one Green
10 li. in hand, and were to give him 10 li. more at their Landing at Callis,
and to secure his Barque out and in at 60 li. Upon which he having received the
money, put another to sail in her as Master; himself went and got a VVarrant,
saying the Members were gone without his consent in his Barque: And with his
VVarrant came to Feversham, and there told the Inhabitants that some Parliament
men were gone away with 16 Chests and Portmantles full of Treasure: upon which
one Lamming, Master of a Doger-boat caused Drums to beat, thinking to gain the
money, and came after them, they taking in a Pilate here, he came by Captain
Pacy, Capt. of a small frigot, and told him that some Parliament men were run
away with a great deal of treasure: Upon which Captain Pacy let slip his
Anchors, set Sail and made after them, and the Doger-boat never came near
them: but Capt. Pacy shooting one shot, they came in to him, and he brought
them into the Downs: Sir Philip Stapleton very sick of a flux (who since is
dead of the sickness at Callice:) They lay aboard us all night. The
Vice Admiral sent Capt. Lamming, for Mr. Green, to see what they had to show
for their leaving the Kingdom, and to see if they had any thing against them:
but they not returning till a^ (...) Clock next day, he judging they were
ashamed of making such an untrue story, be called a Council of War: and there
they produced their several, passes, Dated two days before, grounded on an
Order of the House of Commons upon their first Impeachment; which by the
Council of War was perused: and at last it was resolved to send Sir George
Askue, Capt Crawley, Capt Pacy, and Lieutenant Penrose, and diverse others, to
search their Vessel, which was accordingly, and exactly done, to their very
pockets, and there was not much found, (only they had Bills of Exchange).

So the Viceadmirall and the Council of War not daring, having no Order to
the contrary, and seeing Mr. Speakers Pass so lately Dated, did dismiss them:
in their little Vessel to pass.

About two hours after their dismission comes Lamming and Green,: and the
Vice Admiral being at Dinner sent for them in: Saw a VVarrant from the Captain
of the Block-house, Directed To all Constables, etc. He asked them which they
thought would most direct him to act by? a private Captains VVarrant, or an
Order of both Houses of Parliament, and Passes under the Speakers hand? And
that he was accountable for what he had done to both Houses.

He also sent Major Keme to entreat Collonell Twaselltons Trooper to come in
and drink a glass of Wine, which he did: and we refer to him, if he had an
uncivil word aboard.

Only Major. Keme told Capt. Lamming, were he in the Army of the Council of
War, he would Vote him to be hanged, and he gave him this reason, that he
knew he had a Commission in his pocket, signed by some of those Members to
raise a Company of Seamen, to oppose the Army, and that he had received ten
pounds to that purpose.

His Commission he showed the Vice Admiral and as aboard in Parchment, and
this was all the reviling language.

Then for Threatening; this we know, that he has been out in a Dogerboate all
the Summer: And has when he should have kept Sea, been lying a Shore at
Shoarum, Hastings, etc. Drinking drunk and has abused, and had not the
Viz-admirall found out his Knavery have cheated the State; upon which he sent
him in. We as diverse Captains and other Officers, and Chaplins that stood by
to the number of one hundred can testify. And God is our record it is truth:
And further I can assure this.

1 That Collo Hollis was not there then as is reported, but Sir William Waller,
Sir Phillip Stapleton, Sir John Clotworthy, Sir William Lewis, and Col: Long.

2 That Captain Lamming is only Pot-valient, preferred from slavery in Argeire
to be Master of a Doger-boatc last year, and he nor any with them ever fired a
Musket.

3 That the dismission was not by the Viz-Admirall but by a clear voce of a
Council of War.

4 That we neither reviled him nor threatened him for that Act, Major Keme told
him he having such a Commission about him he might be hanged for beating up
Drummer in the Country without other order.

Signed by the appointment of the Officers of the Navy.
From Aboard the St. Andrew Admiral in the Downs, Aug. 26. 1647.
THere is a Paper of the 27 instant, (Entitled His Majesty's Declaration) made
public, it is patronized upon the King, but I assure you His Majesty is much
abused in it: he has many time to my self and others, expressed, not only his
dis-avowing, but utter dislike of it; at first it something troubled him, but
is being so unlike any thing of his, and so contrary to his known intentions,
be was confident it would not gain credence with any; yet since, hearing that
diverse both in City and Country, and Army, were so fondly credulous as to deem
it to be His Majesty's, and so were much offended at it, it was the Kings
Command I should certify my friends how extremely he is wronged, and truly
Sir, you would do the King but right, and discharge I conceive no more then
your own duty to endeavor the finding out the Author, and making him exemplary,
and I am confident the King expects so much Justice therein.

Here is little news in Court more then this, that the King yesterday was a
hunting in New Park, killed a Stag and a Buck, afterward dined at Syon,
stayed three or four hours with his Children, and then returned to Hampton,
where there is great resort of all sorts of people to him, but not so many
Cavaliers as is reported, it is confessed, no Gentleman is debarred the liberty
of kissing the Kings, hand, yet no stranger stays tongue, we have fresh and
fresh appearances, the faces which appear in the morning, you seldom see in
the afternoon; at the farthest, but the next day. The Lord Conoway has taken
his leave of the Court for present, I have no more to acquaint you with; I
shall only again mind you, that to vindicate the King by discovering and
punishing the Libeller, cannot but give great satisfaction to his Majesty.

Hampton Court. Aug. 29. 1647. Edw. Whaley.

FINIS.

