A DECLARATION OF THE Presbiterians; Concerning His Majesty's Royal Person, And
the Government of the CHURCH of ENGLAND. WITH Several Propositions touching the
Solemn League and Covenant, and the setting up of Bishops.

LONDON: Printed for T. Dacres, 1660.

A DECLARATION OF THE Presbyterians, CONCERNING His Majesty's Royal Person, and
the Government of the Church of ENGLAND.
WHereas there has arose several Disputes touching the great and weighty
Concern of the Discipline of the Church of England, upon the sense and solution
of the Solemn League and Covenant, so far as it relates to the Government of
the Church by Episcopacie: And whereas the sense and very Letter of the
Covenant is clear against the unjust and Antichristian frame of Government; so
are they not against the absolute extirpation of Prelacie; but it is the abuse,
not the thing; the adjuncts, hot the subject; the defects and excesses, not its
Fabric, is covenanted against; but that they are willing to become
instrumental, to cement the sad differences in the Church; desiring all such
who have adhered thereto to produce those clear, pregnant, and constant beams
of right reason, and true Religion, which shines in the brightness and
stability of Divine and humane Laws, which may be the Pillars of this truth,
firm supports of duty, sure bounds of obedience, and safe repose of Conscience
in this point; greatly darkened by the many disputes of Bishops and ^resbyters,
Papists and Protestants: nay by the possitive assertions of both Papists and
Protestant Divines, and determinations of Schoolmen, who have concluded Bishops
and Presbyters to be Ministers ejusdem ordinis, equal in Office and Authority,
and in this very case of Government.

And we doubt not, but all on the contrary shall find every conscientious
Covenanter enjoy the comfort of his accomplished Oath, when ^n his place he
has seasonably advised, humbly petitioned, and lawful^y endeavored, to remove
Englands old Hierachy; and to restore such an Episcopacy, to be exercised by
the Officers of the Church in common and good order, as is nearest the
Scripture, primitive practice and persuasion of sober, grave, pious, and
learned men, such as was the late Primate of Armah; but if either his most
sacred Majesty, or any other in Authority fail in the exercise of their
capacity to effect the ends of the Covenant, we hope it shall be no offense to
mourn for their iniquity, and the iniquity of the Land; nor will it be
inconsistent to that humble submission, a^^ive or p^ssive, we confe^s we all
owe unto his most sacred Majesty: what ever shall be the establishment in the
Church (though never so corrupt, yet) whilst consistent with Salvation, though
it may occasion to my suffering, and a suspense of my Ministry, by Gods grace
it shall not effect in me, or such on whom I have an influence, Schism from the
Church, or resistance of his Majesty's just Right and Authority; for whom as we
have not suffered the l^ast, so if God should so far leave him (which God
forbid) we are ready by him to suffer the utmost, in adherence to the Solemn
League and Covenant, until it be discovered a band of iniquity, a snare and gin
for Schism and Sedition to act by, to the dishonor of God, and reproach of
reformed Religion: Yet we cannot but most heartily pray for the honest and
ingenuous reformation of Episcopacy beyond the former defective or excessive
constitution or execution of it; which I doubt not will satisfy the
expectations of all that Covenanted.

We confess every conscientious Covenanter owes his Justice and Duty;

1. To God, to approve, love, desire, and use what is good, not being within
his own power, and excluded by his Oath or Covenant; may, and must, are things
very indifferent.

2. To obey the King as chief Governor of Church and State enjoining things
lawful and honest (so not covenanted against) though not the very best.

3. To pity the Bishops and Fathers of the Church who have been there too
injurious, or injuriously used, and pull down all proud Prelates, and paternal
Authority over Presbyters, which abuse their Brethren, and debase their
Ministry because in a Black Coat.

4. To encourage Ministers, and endeavor the rescue of them from dividing
Factions, and popular insolences which have befallen them for want of the
King, and Ecclesiastical Order, but may be enjoyed without a Bishop advanced in
power above his Brethren.

5. Love to the Church, in endeavoring its unity, peace, and prosperity in the
ruin of Prelacy and Establishmens of an Episcopacy and oversight duly
constituted and carefully executed.

6. Care to his own soul, inward and eternal peace, not to be couzened by
glones, courted by Rhetorical flourishes, no^ ^udgelled out of his Covenant by
most bitter sufferings, but to ^leave unto it with care, constancy, and
diligence, and take heed of all sophistical solutions, and subtle
reconciliations, which endeavor to baffle the Covenant, and break in pieces
the very power of Religious Bonds. And we can not but further declare, That
Covenant Breaking is so direful a God-provoking sin, that we tremble to think
of Englands least tendency to it; whatever men fancy to themselves of the
Covenant being the Rock of his late Majesty's shipwreck, it is visible that the
violation of it has been the destruction of our late Usurpers, who laid it
aside that they might leap into the Chair of State; and it cannot be denied to
have been the chief and only means of his Majesty's most just and honorable
Restitution; and an adherencie to it (We doubt not) will prove the
establishment of his Royal Throne.

And to the end, that the Cause of the Covenant may be pleaded, We desire it
may be weighed in the balance of Reason and Religion, whilst we are resolved
to approve our selves no less zealous in the Religious than he has appeared
in the Political or Civil part of the Solemn League and Covenant; and make it
his care to give God the things that are Gods, as Caesar the things that are
Caesar's.

And so

God save the KING.
FINIS.

