THE DECOY: OR, A Practice of the Parliaments, by the Perfidie of the Earl of
Holland, To discover and destroy the Loyal Party; MANIFESTED By the whole
conduct of the Design wherein the Lord Duke of BUCKINGHAM, the Earl of
PETERBOROUGH, and the Lord FRANCIS lately engaged.

And the manner and causes of the defeat given unto their Party at Kingston,
described.

Printed in the Year 1648.

The Decoy.
THe stupid neglect and oversight of practices destructive unto us, is wholly
inconsistent with a Christian ingenuity, which requires due circumspection in
the conduct of action, as well as integrity in the intention: This consideration
may now seasonably direct us unto a view of, and an enquiry into the late
treachery of the Earl of Holland against the Lord Duke of Buckingham, the Lord
Francis, the Earl of Peterborough, and those Knights, Commanders, Gentlemen
and Soldiers, who for the service of his Majesty were drawn unto them. The
wisest of men affirms it, that the heart of man is deceitful above all
things; and he who was more then man, and best knew men, would not commit
himself unto man, because he knew what was in man. Faithfulness gives us many
sweet resemblances of the divine nature, but perfidie in men shows them of the
complexion of their Father the Devil, who is falsehood it self.

It was held most necessary by the Grandees of the private Junto, and now high
time to discover and destroy at once the Kings Party at home, before they
should have an opportunity to join with Forces raised for his Majesty abroad.
This plot would exceedingly contribute unto the continuance, and so much
labored for eternity of this Parliament: the affections of the people were
suddenly and strangely altered from them, they much feared that upon the
approach of his highness the Prince, or any other in a condition to declare
for His Majesty against their proceedings, many who now appeared not, would be
very active against them; these if it were possible must be found removed out
of the way, in that the suppression of them, as it would much strengthen
themselves, so it would also exceedingly weaken the Royal party: Holland is
designed to undertake this task, nor could they have pitched upon a person more
fit to promote this purpose; this (Mushrome of honor grown up in a night or
two one of the over-liberall and thick dew of his Princes favor) was one who
derived from his Parents more then original sin, yet inherited nothing but
their vices, luxury and inconstancy, his whole Patrimony was his Princes
bounty; yet was he one of the first that began to smite his fellow servants,
Laud and Strafford, and to conspire against his Master, whom he only followed
for the laoves, and loved for his own livelihood; and therefore was it that in
his greatest adversity he deserted his Sovereign, who from nothing had raised
him unto the chiefest honors of the Kingdom, and adhered unto his enemies in
the Parliament, yet had his Lunary affections many wainings and increases, and
so various revolutions betwixt King and Parliament, that he shifted his parties
as often as his mother did her husbands, and yet played loose with both: but his
turn was now to own the Kings quarrel and party, he must join with them to
give them more blows and deeper wounds, then he could do at a distance from
them: he was put upon the practice of a base kind of Chemistry, to extract the
resolutions of heroic, yet youthful and credulous spirits, the Lord Duke, and
his brother, unto whom it was even natural and hereditary to honor and serve
their Prince; they add the Earl of Peterborough unto them, and upon these
young and tender plants of honor, he operates his design (being principally
assisted therein by that English Jezabel, the Countess of Carlisle, and
persuades them, who had money and means to advance his Majesty's cause, to
engage all they could to arm with them; he shows them the honor and
easiness of the work, offers himself to act a chief part in it, and
heightning their courages with large Carowses, persuades them over a cup of
wine (for so it was carried) unto the undertaking: And thus was this deliberate
consultation first drawn forth, how he further managed it to improve the
Parliament-purposes, may be discerned from his march and the passages in it.

Upon Tuesday July 4. the rendezvous was appointed upon Hownslow heath between
12. and one of the Clock at night; where about 120. Horse appeared: The second
rendezvous was between the two walls near Kingstone, where appeared the Lord
Duke with his brother, and the Earl of Holland, who made a short and hollow
speech unto the Cavalry, unto this purpose, and (if I remember) in these words:
Gentlemen, we are met together about a good work; to reestablish his Majesty;
for our Liberties and for a Parliament, you have persons of honor engaged with
you in the Action, who will live and dye with you in it, and you will find the
Countries very firm unto you. Hereupon order was given to take up the
serviceable Horse were in Hampton Court Park, and the places adjacent; and so
having seized upon some Committee-mens horses at Kingstone, we marched that
night to Rigate where we arrived very late, and somewhat increased our number
there in the morning, when some few of the Enemies horse discovered themselves
unto us from the distant hills, and upon our approach retreated.

Upon Thursday from Rigate we marched unto Darkin, whither we came also very
late, there we found some Arms, yet little care was taken to arm the foot that
came in unto us, or to mount some Gentlemen that waited for that purpose.

Upon Friday on our march from Darkin we were told that 400. of the Parliament
Horse, and 200. foot were come to Rigate; near unto which we marched, and with
so great security and disorder, (no care being taken for setting forth of
Scouts, forlorn hopes, or Rereguards, as might have given assurance unto any
acquainted with military affairs, that no Enemy was in that Country; yea we
used the same signal, and marched with it and one and the same word for two
days march in case we were to fight: Yea the confusion amongst us was so
great, that we gave accidentally Alarm unto, and routed our selves; for that
afternoon a Parliament Man, Sir John Eveling, expecting to parley with the
Earl of Holland, some in the Head of Colonel Legs Troop, seeing a party
whom before they had not noted, gave the word face about, whereupon ensued such
a rout, that diverse quitted their horses, the foot their arms, our wagons
were overthrown, diverse betook themselves unto the adjoining woods; and a
Committee-man had the leisure to mount himself upon a good horse that was cast
of: Being redeemed from the inconveniences this mistake put us into, and
rallied again, we marched as carelessly as before, unto, and almost through,
Nonesuch Park, there another Alarm, but a truer came unto us, that some
Skirters of the Enemy fell upon our Rear, and were beaten back with the loss
of three of theirs, and one of ours taken prisoner; whereupon an halt was made,
our foot, and Carriages drawn off, and sent into Kingstone before us: Some few
of the Enemies horse were scouting abroad in the Park, we sent some to piqueire
with them, and discovering more of the Enemy, sent more of ours against them,
it grew in this time to be somewhat dark, so that discovering still more of the
Enemy, then we had before, we were drawn up in 3. divisions against them; the
Enemy had in the mean time lodged some Dragoones and Musketeers in the
brakes, and bushes, who upon our advance unto that party we saw of Horse, fired
their long shot upon our front so thick, that there fell down some 12. men in
the front and Rear, upon the pouring out of which double volley of shot upon
us, their whole Horse suddenly showed themselves for their best advantage,
advancing toward us, upon which some amongst us cried out, the Army, the
Army, we are all betrayed, no stop could be made of our running, until we
came unto Kingstone (although it was endeavored) where we met with out foot
who cried shame at us, and threatened to fire upon us, in Kingstone it was often
propounded that we should rallie, but never effected, yea after the Bridge was
stopped by our own Wagon, the horse drew over in a file; and then for the
greater part every man shifted for himself.

In the whole carriage hitherto, the Treachery of the Earl of Holland (who
gave forth all Orders) appears in these particulars.

His transaction with so young and heedlesse judgments, whose years and
experience rendered them unfit to manage a design of that importance.

The open carriage of the design in London before the taking of the field.

The neglect of a place of retreat, the maine thing in such a business as
whereunto all Loyally affected Horse and Foot might repair unto us.

The want of a Magazine for victual, Arms, and Ammunition.

The present defect of Arms and Ammunition, the 500. Horse drawn together
(the Dukes party not exceeding that number) having not above 120. Case of
Pistolls amongst them all.

The want of Dragoones who were most useful in such a march.

The want of due notice given unto the Countries to join with us; diverse
Gentlemen telling the Commanders they never heard of such an undertaking for
his Majesty.

The great neglect of all intelligence, and in observance of all motions of the
Enemy.

The carelessenesse used in the whole March, in four days not marching above
10. Miles from our first rendezvous, and so near London.

In abandoning the Party engaged unto want, the greater parts being poor
Gentlemen that had served the King, wanting money to buy them victuals or to
shoe their Horses; not one penny being disbursed amongst the Soldiers.

No Commission or Authority from his Majesty or the Prince showen for such an
undertaking, to satisfy the Gentlemen engaged; or the nature of carrying on
the design, shown, or intimated.

The offering to fight the Enemy in the infancy of such a design, and at such
a time (the Night) as the Enemies force could not be discovered, or an orderly
Retreat made.

The Lord of Hollands Parleying with Eveling, a sublimated Parliamentarian, a
little before the defeat.

If any allege that all these are but presumptions; (besides the jealousy,
and distrust of the whole party in him, which could not in such an
undertakeing, be but of dangerous consequence) they are such as the Law calls
violent ones, and summed up together make strong evidence; But that which will
leave no place to doubt of this man's treachery; is the testimony of diverse
persons of Quality, who relate that at a Conference wherein this brave Earl
made one, the matter on foot being the reestablishment of his Majesty, and the
ways propounded Accommodation or force, he could not hide himself, but with
an impetuous earnestness said; If the King be restored by force all England
will be to little for the Cavaliers: A fit man to be trusted with Cavaliers
lives. Add unto this, that some Parliament Men said, (speaking of this matter)
that Holland had carried himself well and wisely; But I leave both the
Parliament and him unto the reward of Treachery; the hatred of God, and man,
and advise all Loyallists to beware of such Carpet Knights as Holland, and how
they be decoyed into their destruction. for if you compare this with his
practices to entangle the Kentish men, and the Gentry of Essex, it will sum up
all evidence to sentence him a most perfidious person, and one employed by the
gracious State: for his own sweet brother Warwick (if he be so, his mother
were she alive, and God only are able to solve the Question) has under
pretext of debt and the special Order of the House, seized upon Kensington;
All men know how little Warwick was able to lend money; and that his brother
Hollands debts were scores for the greater part; for his carriage at S. Needs,
it was such as his honor lies at stake for (if he forfeited it not before.) And
if Holland were such a strong Cavalier and Kings man, why was he not brought to
London to be examined of the fatal plot against the State? No they design him
an instrument of further mischief; He is hereby, if he be innocent, challenged
unto a public clearing of this charge; otherwise, beside future vengeance,
let him expect Dolbeirs fate, and by the same hand. Adieu Holland.

FINIS.

