The Decoy Duck: together with the Discovery of the Knot in the Dragons Tail
called etc.



^^^^^^d at London for F. Couls, T. Bates, I. Wright, and T. Banks. 1642.

The Decoy Duck.
GEntle Reader,
I am not minded to trouble you with a long Preface to a short and true story,
or to make a door bigger than the whole House: therefore I come to the subject
now in hand: there be 3. sorts of Decoyes, viz. Knights of the Post, or
Setters, Pimps, and Decoy-Ducks themselves: The first is to give false
testimony in suits of Law, and to betray men into the Sargeants claws: The
second do commonly bring in wandering peccant wenches to Gentlemen's Chambers:
and the third, is the Decoy Duck it self, for bringing always store of gain
to his Masters profit, as they do in many Fen-Countries, both in England and
Holland: But in this our witty age, of deeper speculation, there is found out a
fourth sort of Decoyes; to wit, a Bishop Decoy, who was highly fed at Bugden,
and thought fit to have taken his flight of late to Cawood, but storms
arising, and the wind being contrary, took wing for Westminster, etc. where
being fatned, he began to quack too loud, and too often, and flutter too much,
or too little: till at last he was cooped up, and his black and white wings
pinioned, till he was grown tame, and held fitting for use and service: This
Lincolnshire Duck thus held at length fit for flight, and strongly opinion'd,
boasted like the Decoy Duck unto his feeder, that if once he was permitted to
fly abroad, he had that skill and knowledge in all parts and fenny Countries
and seacoasts, creeks, Ponds, Marshes, and Rivers, and so much as the very
Rivulet from from the Sea of Rome, etc. So having like a Decoy Duck, got his
breakfast, and liberty in a serene calm time, intended to bring Praise and
L^ud to himself, or he with other of the same feathered Fowls unto him.

Suppose this our Decoy Duck is flowne, and let loose in a fair bright and
Sunshine day, the wind sitting fairly for his purpose: at first flight he did
light upon a small parcel of young Ducks, who at first (at his fair feathers,
and beautiful aspect) the younger Ducks began to rise and fly away: But he
being a skillful Quacker, courted them in their own Tone, quacking and saying,
I am your Countrie-man: What are you afraid of me, my young pretty Ducklings?
I am of the same feather, and flight as you are: but are there no more of our
own flock and kind hereabouts in this fair season? to whom they answered, oh
yes, brother Foul: But where keep they, and where feed they? they old him on
Lambeth side, etc. So at length they being taken with admiration, with his
comely feathers and good quacking, brought him unto the whole flock, where they
(as well as the other) stood at first amazed, some Dacks fearing him to be a
Goose-Hauke, others a Faulkon; some imagined him to be an Eagle, so not daring
to stand any longer, took wing and flew compass, to see what would become of
the Residentiaties that quackt with him; they that were flowne aloft scenting
him by the wind, smeld he had been some housed Duck, because he smelt so
strong of his former Coop, having not had the liberty of air and wing, as they
themselves had: diverse were different in their conceits, some took him to be
a Buzzard in Quarto, others a Peacock in Folio; but at length all fears being
laid aside, and great flocking being made about him, they that hovered above,
left the wing, and mixed themselves with the whole flock. Being all then
settled, the Decoy begins thus in quacking language; Good Brethren of a Feather,
as I fear not but that you are, I desire you all of the stronger Wing to
declare in what Coast you feed in, and in what nest you were hatched in: and
because I see so many of you so lean, that you are not able to fly and
maintain any length of flight, some greedily feeding and swallowing down
gravel, grass, and weeds, and worms and such poor food that I am sorry for
to see such lean carcasses, and thin bodies amongst my Brother Ducks.

The first quackt, I am Durham bred. The second quackt, Lichfield and
Coventrie. The third quackt, Norwich. The fourth quackt. Asaph. The fifth
quackt, Bath and Wells. The sixth quackt, Hereford. The seventh quackt, Oxford.
The eighth Ely. The ninth Gloucefler. The tenth Peterborough. The eleventh
Landaffe. And I confess, fellow Fowls, I was of Lincoln.
Upon which Confession, they all clapped their wings, and quackt for joy of their
long absent brother: Then said the Decoy Duck, I thank you for opening and
declaring your breasts and spreading your wings so freely to me. I protest unto
you, that if you will follow my advise and Protestation, I will bring you from
this gross feeding where you now are, unto a place wherein you shall have
variety and plenty; in stead of want, you shall have fullness, in stead of
worms you shall have when instead of Grass, you shall have wild Oats; in
stead of Duck-weed, you shall have Ducks meat; in stead of Gravel, you shall
have Gravee, and Graves Wine; instead of Paddocks, you shall have Pullets and
Pancakes; and in stead of Froggs, you shall have Fritters.

Hereupon the miscelenous Ducks for want of meat, desiring to surbaite
themselves, as also desirous of case, and not to fly for every days food so
far as they used, resolved with clapping of wings, and quacking of Bills to
whatsoever he their said brother. Duck should write, declare, and protest. So
they consenting to his Will and Protestation, resolved to soar a high flight;
where being all alighted and conglo merated in a secret and convenient place,
which was after their first flight, be declared his whole mind unto them
freely: where he made a pirscription what he intended; enjoining them that they
should never reveal who discovered this dainty Diet, pleasing Rivers, warm
Climate, safe Creeks; upon which they all consented, and made a general
resolve whatsoever he their brother Duck should determine, they would
willingly subscribe unto.

I know, quoth the decoy Duck, all the parts of this Climate; East, West, North
and South; the Civil and Common Laws of the Country, and know how to avoid
and wave all the Fowlers gins and snares, though never so closely laid: Be not
afraid, nor do you quake my brethren, I do protest unto you all, that I will
accompany you whither soever you will go; my life and feathers, brother Ducks,
is as good, and as trim as any of yours: I can tell you when we come near any
Keeper, or Master of the Game, I can smell him by his powder and slint;
especially if he have a purse by his side: O bravely protested, and most
freely declared, quackt all the Ducks; come let us remove from this barren
soil and take wing: Although this our brother Duck (quackt all the Ducks) has
not frequented our company of late, or has bin of our gang; yet he leading the
way, and in the first range, is subject to the most danger. I, I quoth the
Decoy, I will secure you all, seeing you have subscribed and protested as I
have done, for I know which way the wind sits, when I turn my Mill, to grind
my Corn: imagine they are all upon the wing, and follow this their Leader and
Decoy Ducks Rule, Prescript, and Protestation: avowing they would aid him in
whatsoever he undertook or propounded: believing that this Decoy quacked as he
had bin some Oracle: yet some of these Ducks being more subtle then the rest,
doubted and feared very much: yet as the old Proverb says, Birds of a feather
will fly together, so they did for company; and coming near to the stately
Pond, or River, which the Decoy told them of, whereon grew upon the banks all
sorts of grain fit for their pallets, which having viewed and tasted, they all
liked this place exceeding well; which made the rest of the Duckes which were
fearful, and loytering behind. and hovering upon the wing, and seeing all
safe and secure and sure from company, to light and take their pastime with the
rest of their fellows: where they fell a feeding, and washing and dabling
themselves, in such a manner; some quacking, some clapping their wings to see
such a pleasant River, and such variety of meat: The old Decoy still drawing
them on, and swimming before them like a valiant Leader: At length some of the
for most Ducks which had good eyes, espyes a stately House; at which being
amazed and affrighted, quacks, and flies back, and asks their brother Duck
what stately place that was which had so many brave Towers and Pinacles upon
it: The Decoy Duck quackt again to them, and said they need not fear, there
was no body did lodge in it, nor no danger could come unto them: Nay, then go
forwards quackt all the Duckes, for we have subscribed and protested to follow
you our Captain: So on they swam in a stately manner, diving, and ducking, and
pruning themselves; And being come to the place of their abode and safety, not
regarding what Arches were over their heads or what Bridges they swam under,
still looking forwards; At that very instant the Floud-gate of the aforesaid
River was clapped too, and a Net flung over their heads: then they all began to
quack, and to make such hidious cries, what with their clapping their wings,
that it was heard even like an Echo round about the Country: especially to the
Family of the aforesaid House, which newly arived there at the same hour: who
came to the River side, and beheld those Creatures with an amazement, because
of their faces and several shapes: some of the family asked why they made such
a breach, and trespassed against the custom of that place, saying, could they
not keep within their own limits, but contrary to all Rights and Privileges
commit this outrage: Others asked them how came they hither; then came some of
the Owners of the place, and questioned with them, and asking them who enticed
and draw them to this eminent place: They all quacked and said; Our brother
Sugden Duck, he Protested he would bring us to a safe, and a secure place,
and we his brother Ducks think he has done so indeed: Then quoth the
Owners of the River, he has played the Decoy Duck with you all, and has not
only brought in you, but himself also in the same danger. O Sir, he promised
he would be our Leader, and venture his life, and all his Feathers, if any
hazard or danger come on it: Moreover, that h e would be our defender and
Keeper, though he sealed it with his blood: Sure said the Owners you are all
of a Nest, though not at the same time hatched up, your white wings, and black
lists down the back: does manifest the same: though you, faces be like men,
yet you have foul bodies: Quack, quack, quack, quoth some of them, and said,
we are of several Climates, though feathered all alike; but merely brought
in hither by our Captain Duck, who now shows himself a plain Arch Decoy
Duck: I never heard said the Owners, but of one Arch Decoy Duck before that was
ever taken, but he came in all alone, and brought no body with but himself:
But this your Captain Decoy Duck, he has brought in good store, five Couple,
and one odd Duck besides himself.

Call the Poulterer hither, some of you, that he may view these fair Flock
of Ducks, and see which is for Service, and which is for the Dish: and put the
rest into the White House: Quack, quack quoth all the Ducks, when they heard
that; saying, we are all betrayed, and made young Ducklings of.

O mercy, quoth some of the Ducks, show mercy; I was brough in by a wild:
Another quackt, and said, he thought it only a matter of custom, and
Protested for form sake: Another quackt and said, he did subscribe only that
he would be conformable to the rest of his brother Ducks; Another, that he
thought he had been in Armenia, where all things are at free will and at
liberty; Another, amongst the rest said, that they depended and trusted upon
their brother Duck for their Ke^per; Another whose over hot zeal bad taken
such a cold, that he could not for seven years together be heard quacking
in a Pulpit; Another could make no Answer to clear himself, but his eyes
directed as to his Leader, and seemed to say, Thy wicked persuasions has
undone us, proud Arch Duck; One above the rest Petitions that he might send for
a friend and kinsman to bail him, and being demanded who he would send for,
quackt, and said his Cosen Doctor Duck: Answer was made that he was sick of
the Gout, and could not come; besides it was cold weather, and dangerous for
his health to sly abroad: quack quoth the Duck, and said, he will come forth
in all weathers for a double Fee; especially if he be lapt in a Lambs skin.
Come, I say you must go with my Poulterer, come leave your ducking, diving,
and bowing, and your cringing to me; do not take me for an Altar: Some of you
speak like Diocestors, and thought your faces resemble men, yet you have foul
bodies and dangerous reservations within your hearts. But what is that paper
which is about your Brother Ducks neck, let me see, O it is a Copy of the New
Oath: let me see it, that I may understand the contents, and view the substance
of each particular. And so I leave you and your brother Ducks, to the next
flight, which will be suddenly to Westminster.

depiction of a six-headed dragon

A Diologue between two Zealots concerning etc. in the new Oath, Devised by the
Bishops to deceive their Brethren.
SIr Roger from a zealous piece of Freeze,
Raised to a Vicar of the Childrens threes,
Whose yearly Audit may by strict account
To twenty Nobles, and the vailes amount;
Fed on the Common of the female charity,
Until the Scots can bring about their parity;
So shotten that his soul like to himself
Walks but in Quirpo, this same Clergy Elfe;
Encountering with a Brother of the Cloth,
Fell presently to Cudgells with the Oath:
The Quarrel was a strange misshapen Monster,
Et c. God bless us; he aid construe
The Brand upon the buttock of the Beast,
The Dragons Tail tied on a knot, a Nest
Of Young Apocripha's, the fashion
Of a new mental reservation, whiles Roger thus devides the Text, the other
Winkes and Expounds; saying, my Pious Brother,
Hearken with reverence, for the point is nice,
I never read on it, but I fasted twice:
And so by Revelation know it better,
Then all the learned Idolaters of the Letter.
With that he sweld, and sat upon the Theme
Like great Goliath, with his Weavers beam.
I say to thee etc. thou lie;
Thou art the Curled lock of Antichrist:
Rubbish of Babell for who will not say
Tongues are confounded in Et Caetera;
Who swears etc. swears more Oaths at once
Then Cerberus out of his tripple sconce;
Who viewes it well with the same eye beholds
The old false Serpent with his numerous folds;
Accursed etc. now now I scent,
What the prodigious bloody Oysters meant.
O Booker, Booker, how came thou to lack
This Friend in thy prophetic Almanac?
It Is the dark Vault, where the infernal Plot
Of Powder against the State was first begot:
Peruse the Plot, and you shall soon descry it,
By all the Father Garnets that stand by it
Against whom the Church (whereof I am a member)
Shall keep another fifth day of November.
Nay here is not all, I cannot half untrusse,
Et Caetera it is so abominous.
The Trojan Horse was not so fully lined,
Unrip etc. and you shall find
Ogge the great Commissary, and which is worse,
The Apparitor upon his sky-bald horse:
Then finally my babe of grace forbear,
Et Caetera will be too far to swear;
For it is (to speak in a familiar style)
A York-shiere Way-bit longer then a mile.
Here Roger was inspired, and by godds diggers,
He Will swear in words at length, and not in Figures;
Now by this drink, which he fetched off as loath
To have Et Caetera in his liquid Oath:
His brother pledged; and in that bloody wine,
He swore he will be the Syn^ds Cataline:
Thus they drank on, not offering to part
Till they had sworn out the Eleventh Quart;
Whilst all that saw, and heard them, then did pray,
They and their Tribe were all etc.
FINIS.

