A DECLARATION OF THE NORTHERN COUNTIES.

SHOWING Their diligent care, and willingness to oppose all Forces that shall
endeavor to enter into this Kingdom against the Parliament and General.

ALSO, The Effect of the Generals Letter to Colonel Hammond Governor of the
Isle of Wight.

TOGETHER, With his Majesty's Desires to both Houses of Parliament, for the
settling of a firm and well-grounded peace, within his three Kindgdomes.

November. 26. Imprimatur Gilb. Mabbot.

London, printed by B. Alsop, and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange. 1647.

THE LAST NEVVES From the Isle of WIGHT.
SIR,
I Have received yours of the 21. of this instant, and thank you for those
Books which you sent me, which has sufficiently furnished me and my friends
with news: you still delight in obliging such as are most beholding to you: I
am witness of it, and your late courtesy is the trial; so that I am ashamed
to be always engaged, without so much as the hope ever to acknowledge the
favor rightly. Nevertheless to satisfy your desire, I have sent you herein
enclosed a copy of Colonel Hammonds Letter, which will sufficiently inform
you of all or most of the proceedings in this Island, thus for the present I
remain

Yours engaged R. W.

A Letter sent from Colonel Hammond, to the Speaker of the Lords House.
My Lord,
THis morning I received by the hands of a messenger from the General, a paper
of Votes and Resolutions of both Houses of Parliament, bearing date Die Martis,
16. November, 1647. relating to the security of his Majesty's person, which
although they came not to me with directions from the Houses, yet I thought it
my duty to take notice of them (by what hand soever received) as their
commands, and accordingly to see them put in execution.

As concerning that Vote, not permitting such as have been in Arms, or acted
against the Parliament to come into this Island; it tending much to the
security of his Majesty's person, and the preserving the peace of the Island, I
have (as I acquainted your Lordships in my last letters, before I received
these Votes) given orders to that effect (which are carefully put in execution)
commanding all masters of Boats belonging to Hampshire and this Island, that
they land neither persons nor goods, in any part of this Island, save only at
Yarmouth Castle, Cowes Castle, and Ride, at which place I have also appointed a
guard to whom order is given (as to the other two Castles) for the examining of
all persons so landing, and to detain and secure any that cannot give a very
good account of themselves or their business.

As concerning your Lordships other Votes (now they are come to my hands) I
shall with the best of my endeavors see them put in execution.

My Lord Yesterday there came to me an Officer, belonging to the Serjant of the
House of Commons, with particular warrants for the apprehending and bringing up
in safe custody the persons of Mr. John Ashburnham, Mr. William Leg, and Sir
John Barkley who came hither with the King. The said warrants requiring my
assistance to him in the execution of them but with no order to me from either
or both Houses to that purpose.

And finding the matter to be of very great importance, I have desired the
messenger to forbear the execution of his said warrants till I have given the
Houses to understand that in case the said warrants should be served and put in
execution, it would be impossible for me to answer the expectations and
commands of the Parliament in preserving the person of the King in security to
be disposed by them, unless I should keep him close prisoner, which is a
business of the nature, that it is neither fit for me to do, especially of my
self.

The grounds from whence I gather this, are plainly thus.

The King has declared himself to me, That he came from Hampton Court for no
other cause but for the preservation of his person, which was (as he
apprehended) in such danger, that he could not with safety continue longer
there: That if he could have been there with safety, he would not have departed
thence, nor from the Army: And that he chose this place rather then any other
(when he was at liberty to have gone whither he pleased) that he might still
continue under the protection of the Army (my self being a member thereof) and
that he might have convenience of free intercourse between himself and the
Parliament for the settlement of a general peace, to which he professes
greater inclinations and desires then ever, and that there shall be nothing
wanting on his paat, that may be reasonably expected from him.

He further says, That in case these Gentlemen be taken from him, and punished
as evil doers, for councelling him not to go out of the Kingdom, but rather
to come to the place where he now is, for the ends aforesaid, and for their
endeavoring accordingly in attending him hither, he cannot but himself expect
to be dealt with accordingly; his case being the same.

And from such apprehensions your Lordships may easily judge, what he will do,
by his former actins: He having that liberty which has ever been allowed him
since he has been disposed of by the Parliament.

My Lord, I shall further let you know, that besides the care I shall always
have of these Gentlemen, they have engaged their honors, not to depart from
me, so that I am most confident of their security.

And truly were not their ends the same with their pretenses (in relation to
the peace of this Kingdom) I am confident they would never have advised nor
conducted the King to this place.

Besides, were they at this time removed from the King, there would be none
left for his attendance, which (besides the offense) how great the
inconvenience would be to him, your Lordships cannot be ignorant.

And further give me leave to add (if so unworthy a servant of your Lordships
as I am (and that which concerns my honor were at all worthy your
consideration) whether it would not much reflect upon me in case these
gentlemen should be thus removed from hence: The King and themselves having
freely thrown themselves upon me for safety upon confidence (as they please to
say) of my honor and honesty, and the satisfaction they expected it would have
given the Parliament, The King being necessitated to remove.

My Lord, My duty to you and the Kingdom, whose good and peace I most desire
and shall most faithfully endeavor, calls for this account, which with my
self and these Gentlemen, I leave to your Lordships consideration with this
conclusion, That whatsoever is commanded by Authority, especially that of
Parliament, though never so contrary to my sense or honors shall never be
disobeyed by

My Lord, Your Lordships most faithful and humble servant, TO. HAMMOND.
Carisbrook Castle, Nov. 19. 9647. My Lord, Since the conclusion of my letter,
I received the letter, and Votes of both Houses, of the 16 present, which shall
be carefully put in execution, by

Your Lordships most faithful and humble servant TO. HAMMOND.



His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax has likewise written a Letter to Col:
Hammond, the effect hereof is as follows: That he should with all speed and
convenience send up Sir John Barkley, M. John Ashburnham, and M. William Leg,
and the Gentlemen that went with his Majesty from Hampton, now residing in the
Isle of Wight, that they may give an accompnt to the Parliament of his
Majesty's proceedings, and carriage in his journey, from Hampton to the Isle of
Wight; and in case he should stand in need of men to guard them up, or the
like, His Excellency has ordered Captain Pecks Troop to Redbridge near
Southampton.

From the North we have received intelligence as follows; Sir,
YOurs of the 18 instant has given me ample satisfaction, and I am still more
and more obliged unto your goodness; for you still overcome me with your
courtesies, which though I cannot requite, I shall never forget. For news, in
these parts we have little but what comes from London, only this for the
present. There is great fears and jealousies in these parts, that some
ill-affected persons, should raise or bring in forces against the Parliament;
whereupon, there has been several meetings in diverse places, and the
inhabitants have unanimously declared, That they will rise as one man, in case
any forces from [ Scotland, or] foreign parts, should enter to oppose the
Parliament, or their General. We are in good hopes here, that there will be a
speedy accommodation between His Majesty and the Parliament, which that there
may, Sir, is the prayer of

Your obliged friend* Rich: Soaresby.
Craston, Nov. 22. 1647.




