A DECLARATION OF The proceedings of the Kings Majesty at Carisbrooke Castle in
the Isle of WIGHT, touching the Engagement of Sir Charles Lucas, and his forces
at Colchester, with the Parliaments Army.

WITH Another great Discovery of a most horrid and bloody Design against the
person of the King; showing the manner how he should have been bereaved of his
life, and his Royal blood spilt upon the ground.

And in the Honorable House of Piers, and their proceedings thereupon,
touching the chief Actor

^ikewise, the Lord Generals Letter to a great Commander in Colchester, and
his Answer thereunto, in R^lation to the KING.

depiction of an armed gentleman depiction of King Charles I C R


LONDON, Printed in the Year of Discovery 1648

Another Message from the Lord General Fairfax, to the Earl of Norwich, and Sir
Charles Lucas.
SIR,
THis day his Excellenci^ sent in a letter, signifying, That the Parliament
being sensible of their se^sing of Sir Will. Massam and others of the Committee
(no^ being p isoners of War) had sent down the Lord Capels Son, with others
that he might be sent in exchange for Sir Will. Massam. His Excellency
therewith sent 2. affidavi^s upon Oath, by which i^ appeared that by the Earl
of Norw^ch and the Officers directions, the Soldiers chewed bullets and cast
with sand delivered out of the stores whence they usually received their
Ammunition, which being a thing contr^ry to the Law of Arms, he required the
like might be forborne for the future, or to expect what will follow.

To that concerning the Lord Capels Son: This evening his Lordship made a
particular Answer, That he conceived it in humane, and that if all the
Committee had been offered for him, he would have disdained the motion, and
that he joyed to see any of his, (if no other way) yet by their sufferings, to
pay that duty they owe to the King, and known laws to the Kingdom. To that
concerning Bullers the Triparite Generals returned Answer, denying any such
command or practice; but for rough cast Sluggs, they were the best they could
send on the sudden.

This day we have been very quiet; not one horse or man of the enemy appearing
out of their works: Our men have secured Grinstead Church, and the pass from
the Heath, so that now both the East and North passages are so stopped, that they
can make no incursions into Tendering Hundred or any part for provision. The
works near the Alms houses began the other night is now almost finished, the
graft so high that they are forced to make use of Ladders or the perfecting
thereof. Our perdues lie so near the Enemy as to hear them discourse, drink
healths, etc. Some of our Musketeers go so near the Town toward Headgate that
the Enemies M^sketiers fire out of the windows upon them; The enemy has this
day opened 3. of their sallyports, and left only Headgate blocks up, which as
is conceived is in relation to an escape.

As soon as it was day this morning, the enemy played their great Guns against
ou^ Horse Cu^rds, and new work near the Alms house, but when they saw how
deep our men were in their Trenches that the shot could not hurt, they
desisted shooting with great shot, and fel^ to annoy us with small shot out of
Mr. Grimstons house, but our great Cannon shooting through and through the
house, cutting off the legs and Arms of many of them that were glad to fly
into the Town, and in a malicious humor set the house on fire, and burnt other
houses with it.

Colchester June 3. 1648.
A most horrid and bloody Plot against the Kings Majesty in the Isle of Wight.
My Lords.
J Am ready to make an Oath that Mr. Richard Osburne, told me, the Kings person
was in danger, and that the said Major Rolph; had a design for conveying his
Majesty's person to some place of secrecy, where only three should go with
him, and where they might disp^^se of his Majesty's person as they should think
fit, Which i^formations from Mr. Osburn, and the assurance I had of his
Majesty's intentions forthwith to come to his Parliament, was the cause of my
engagement in this business.

I am ready likewise to depose, that the said Rolph came to me, when I was a
prisoner in the Castle, and in a jearing Manner aked me why the King came not
down according to his appointment. And then in great indignation and fury said,
he waited three hours under the Plat form with a good pistol ready charged,
to have received him if he had come.

Your Lordships servant, Abraham Dowcet.
Westminster the 3 of July, 1648. Mr. Abraham Doucet, delivered this upon Oath,
to be all truth, before their Lordships.



Major Rolphs Letter to the Lords.
My Lords.
KNowing my self (I speak in the presence of that God who searches all hearts
to be perfectly clear and innocent of that foul and horrid crime charged upon
me that I abhor the very thoughts of it: Earnestly desiring an opportunity of
appearing for vindication of my innocence, or what ever else malice in wicked
men can lay against me; resting fully assured that whatsoever award I shall
find at the hands of men, I shall enjoy the happiness of an upright and
peaceable conscience with the same God in whose presence I stand.

Edward Rolph.

Die Lunae 3 of July, 1648.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament that it be referred to the Kings learned
Council to bring in an impeachment of High Treason against Major Edward Rolph.

The enemy sallied out the last night on the other side the leagure toward
Suffolk, which our horse discovering, lined the hedges with Dragoones, and went
on with a party of horse, as if they had meant to charge the enemy, and then
faced about running away as if they had been afraid of the enemy who pursued
them, and as soon as they came up to the Dragoones, did so gall the enemy with
shot that they forboore to advance further there being at that time a Lieut.
Col. and 4 other Officers of the enemy very desperately wounded, and some sl
in, as some who came out of the Town this day affirmed: And this morning they
sallied out again with three Troops of horse, 500. foot, and a Drake, our horse
guard that were upon the Rode from East gate toward Tendering Hundred
perceiving the drawing out both horse and foot toward Grinsted Church;
whereupon the passage being narrow, the horse could not engage them, foot were
sent for to come to the assistance of the horse, but before our foot could come
up from the Suffolk forces, the Enemy had taken up thereabouts and driven in
some Cattle, and killed one Mr. Sanaford at Brittlesea that had interest in the
Cattle, though as it is said he was their great friend. And this night we
designed to fortify Grinsted Church nea^ the Hive with foot and a piece of
Cannon; so that they must take their farewell of any more provisions, had
Suffolk Fort been finished sooner, we had foot as well as horse to have secured
that hundred.

Four Companies of Col. Ingolsbies Regiment and some horse are marched to secure
that Church, which commands the causey, and gives passage over Hive bridge into
Tendering hundred.

There was this day taken prisoner in or near Harwich a Colonel that came out
of Colchester who upon examination called himself Col. Smithson; but some
Townsmen who saw him there in Town, say that his soldiers called him Col. Bard,
but those that have seen him it is not Sir Henry Bard.

This day the enemy in Colchester gave out that 700 London Apprentices with
fore gunes were this night come to Chelmsford for their releife, that the
Parliament men are driven from Westminster into the Army. The enemy have this
night burnt M. Barringtons house on the other side the Town: They give out that
they will fire the Subburbs, they are fortifying the L. Dacres his house in the
Town, it being moted round, and are resolved to keep that to the last, so that
nothing but ddstruction is expected to this poor Town.

July 3. 1648.
SIR.
SInce my last, dated June 24. we have received intelligence, that the English
revolted Ships which lie at Gor^th in Holland, are almost ready to put to Se^,
and that there are some whisperings, touching a design against this Island; As
for His M^j. he is not altogether so merry and pleasant as formerly, by reason
of the sad commotions which daily happen, throughout several Counties within
his Majesty's Realms and Dominions, his heart bring much inclined to peace, and
desirous to prevent the further effusion of Christian blood; And his Maj. has
further declared, that he desires nothing more, then a right understanding
betwixt himself and his two Houses of Parl. that so Religion may be settled,
and all differences composed; And further it is intimated, that his Maj. does
not in the least countenance the late Rising within the County of Kent, and he
present distractions in the County of Essex, but does absolutely protest
against the same; as also, against the proceedings of Si^ Charles Lucas and his
adherents; we are fortifying of this Island in several places, and repairing
of the Works; As for the Fleet before spoken of, by the next, you shall hear
further from

Carisbrook Castle the 1. of July 1648. 4 in the morning. Your obliged friend
and Servant William Calum.

FINIS.

