A DECLARATION SET FORTH By the Presbyterians within the COUNTY OF KENT.

WHEREIN, They declare their Resolutions and Determinations concerning the
Independent Government, and the Church of ENGLAND.

Also, the apprehending and examination of diverse Independent Ministers, by a
Committee of the House of Commons, being taken preaching at a Conventicle near
White Hall. With their answer and reply to the Articles objected against them.

This Declaration is ordered to be published, and to be read in all Churches
throughout the County of KENT.

January 12. Printed for F. Brown, 1647. 1646

THE EXAMINATION OF Diverse Independents and Separates taken at their
Private-Meetings near Charing-Crosse, and examined by a Committee of the House
of Commons,
THe great Business which at this instant lies in agitation, about a matter
of great concernment, and the chiefest particular which the whole Kingdom
desires to be resolved in; it being the Kingdoms chiefest Work upon which
they have now fixed their eyes.

And having for many years bypast, desired a firm and well-grounded
Government in Church and State, have now in some part their desires satisfied:
For, having obtained a full and positive answer from both Houses of Parliament,
for the speedy suppressing of all Sects and Sectaries, are in some measure and
satisfied, and does begin to execute the Parliaments Commands against all such
persons, which shall assemble themselves together, either for preaching or
expounding the Scriptures, at any place or meeting whatsoever. Insomuch, that
many thousands of Citizens and others are grieved to the very soul;
especially, diverse men of emineney, who has hazzarded both life and limbs in
the Parliaments cause against the enemies of England, whose trust and fidelity
has been performed with much alacrity and faithfulness; as has apparently
been made manifest, by their gallant service, and heroic actions, obtained
against the potent enemy of this Kingdom.

But because I cannot dispense too much with time, I shall here briefly
communicate unto you, some passages worrhy your observation, viz.

Upon the 4. of this instant Month of January, a Report was made to the House
of Commons, that some certain persons were apprehended, which were met together
at a Conventicle, namely, one Mr Wayt and Goff, Who were taken preaching in
Harts-horne Lane near Charing-Crosse, which parties were examined by a
Committee of the house of Commons, in the queens Court, and after some time
spent, and diverse Arguments laid open before them, for confuting of their ways,
and convincing them of their erroneous Opinions, and being strictly examed
about one prrticular point, concerning their presumption, in undertaking so
great a Charge, which belonged chiefly to Learned Divines, and Orthodoxe
Ministers.

They replied, and began to express themselves, as follows:

That whereas they were pleased to lay open this accusation against them for
preaching, they endeavored to vindicate themselves saying, that they had only
Bibles in their hands, and were reading.

Then Wayt was accused to say, that the Parliaments Declaration was made at
twelve a clock at night when above half the Members were away, and that he
knew the knavery of it. But they intend to prosecute the Ordinance of both
houses against all such persons whatsoever, and has ordered that it shall be
executed throughout the whole Kingdom of England. Which Ordinance, the
Kentishmen are resolved duly to observe, and to put in execution, as will
appear by their late Declaration, which I shall here insert, and give you
verbatim.

WHereas we understand that several Petitions are set on foot, and promoted by
diverse persons within this County, wherein they take to themselves a liberty of
venting their own private thoughts, and desires, in matters concerning the
public and great affairs of the Church and State, which can produce no other
effect, then the raising and countenancing of contrary parties and factions
within the County: We do hereby declare, and admonish all sorts of persons
what soever, within this County, that they forbear to give any countenance or
furtherance to any such Petitions, upon what pretense soever; and that they
avoid all such occasions of new distractions in the County; as they tender the
welfare thereof. And we do hereby require all Ministers of the several Parish
Churches, openly to read this signification in the Parish Churches upon the
next Lord's Day, after the receipt hereof, before the end of the Morning
Exercise.

Thus having given you the chiefest particulars of the great business in
agitation within the Kingdom of England, I shall advance Northwards, and give
you the proceedings of the Parliament of Scotland, reflecting upon the
Government of both Nations.

Amongst other things, If his Majesty shall have thoughts of coming to this
Kingdom at th s time, he not having as yet subscribed the League and Covenant,
nor satisfied the lawful desires of his loyal Subjects in both Nations, We
have just cause to fear that the consequences of it may be very dangerous,
both to his Majesty and these Kingdoms; Which therefore we desire may be timely
prevented.

For so long as his Majesty does not approve in his heart, and seal with his
hand the League and Covenant, we cannot but apprehend, that according to his
former Principles, he will walk in opposition to the same, and study to draw
us unto the violation thereof and the dissolution of the Union so happily begun
between Us and our Brethren, to weaken the confidence and trust, and to
entertain jealousies, and make divisions amongst our selves.

Neither is it possible but that our receiving Him in this present posture of
affairs, will confirm the suspicions of the English Nation, of our underhand
dealing with Him before his coming to our Army; and make them, not without
cause to think that We purpose to dispose of him without their consent, and to
their prejudice: Which is contrary to the Profession of these that were in
trust at his Majesty's first coming to the Scots Quarters, and overthrows
all the Arguments that have been used by the Commissioners of our Parl. in
their Papers concerning The disposing of his Maj. Person by the joint advice
and common consent of both Kingdoms given into both Houses of Parliament in
England, nor do we see how we can vindicate such a practice from a direct
breach of our engagements to them by Covenant and Treaty, which were not only
to expose us into the hazard of a bloody war, but to involve us in the guilt of
Perjury. And what greater disservice could be done to his Majesty and his
Posterity, then to g^ve way to a course that might prove prejudicial to their
interest in the Crown and Kingdom of England.

Our carriage now for many years past, in the midst of many tentations, has
put us beyond all suspicion in the point of our Loyalty.

Nor have we the least thoughts of deserting his Majesty in a just and good
Cause, being bound by our Covenant in our several Vocations, to endeavor with
our estates and lives, to preserve and defend his Person and Authority, in the
defense and preservation of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms;
And so far as his Majesty shall be for these, we really are, and we trust
the rest of his Kingdoms will be for him: Yet we cannot deny, but openly avouch
it,

That if his Majesty (which the Lord forbid) shall not satisfy the just
desires of his People, Both Nations stands mutually obliged by that inviolable
Covenant to pursue the ends therein expressed (which cannot be divided) against
all lets and impediments whatsoever.

FINIS.

