A DECLARATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS Of diverse Knights, and other Gentlemen in
Glamorganshire, who declare themselves for the King, and Sir Thomas Fairfax.

Their Representations to the Country, and the Proceedings of the Committee at
Vske; And their Prepositions to the Parliament, and Addresses to his Excellency
Sir Thomas Fairfax. And the Discovery of a great Plot Agitated by Judge
Ienkins, and other Malignants in the Tower.

June 26. 1647.

THese Papers being of great concernment to the Kingdom to be known, are
appointed to be Printed, and published through the Kingdom of England, and
Dominion of Wales. L. Harruney Cleric.

LONDON Printed for I. COE, and A. COE, and are to be sold at Cropplegate, and
in the Old Bailey. 1647.

A Letter from the Committee at Vske.
SIR,
I Thought fit to acquaint the House with a late Commotion in our Nighbour
County of Glamorganshire: The warrant for summoning the County, is for the
King, and Sir Thomas Fairfax: The design intended does appear to be contrived
by Ienkins, and other Delinquents in the Tower. All persons affected to the
Kings Service, were to rise, and seize on all the faithful Religious people in
the several Counties, and (particularly) such of the Committee, that acted
most eminently for the Parliament: declaring (withal) as if the King, and Sir
Thomas Fairfax were joined together, and marching to London, against the
Parliament, to carry the business on with most applause. The chief actors in
the County are, Sir Richard Basset, Sir Edward Thomas, (men I take it, that
have compounded at Goldsmiths-Hall) Sir Thomas Not, Major Weeks, and others,
who have been in Arms on the Kings side. Their first Randezvouze was but
small, not yet above 1000. men unarmed: Common people seeming very averse to
new divisions, having had a sweet taste of Peace already: They are marched
within 2. miles of Cardiff, where the Governor, Col. Pri^chard, and some
Gentlemen of the Committee act faithfully, and valiantly. They sent to this
County of Monmouth, for aid in this distress: whereupon the High Sheriff of
this County, sent a summons for the Committee to meet at Vske, at which
meeting we resolved, according to the enclosed Paper. And the High Sheriff is
resolved to raise the posse Comitatus, and with his one horse and (such as can
be got elsewhere) endeavor the relief of our friends. We are resolved and
declare that whoever acts o^ stir^s in this Commotion, to leave them to the
mercy of the Soldiery: That seeing that the lenity and goodness of the
Parli^ment, and Committees, (here to their enemies) will not prevail; severity
we hope will keep them in awe, and (by Gods blessing) quiet, and still all
distempers in th^s^ parts.

Truly Sir,

The Foundation of this insurrection was misch^eviously plotted, as pretending
to oppose illegal Committees: And to join with ^he King, and Sir Thomas
Fairfax. The Reputation of that Army is great in the Kingdom, and especially
in these parts, who have such large and ample experience, of the civility and
valor of that Army, as not to be forgotten: And many (I may say) thousands,
that honor the Parliament, and that ever have, and still will oppose the
Cavilerish design, ^ill stick to that Army. Some intimation came to the people
of a difference between the Parliament, and the Army, to our enemies
rejoicing: But I hope Hell it self will not be able to divide them, whom God
has so joined, honored, and blessed together in all designs, for the good of
this poor Kingdom: yet there is very ill use made of these seeming
differences. I have sent you some proposal s of desires, for the furtherance in
order to the safety of these parts: Colonel Birches men seem willing to come
to our assistance, had they power to dispose of themselves, Colonel Kirle is
ordered to march for securing of M^nmouth: but more forces will be requisite,
thoroughly to quash this Commotion: for there will be found some false
brethren: I am now going with the High Shriefe abroad with our Horses, to
secure some desperate Delinquents, if they be not fl^d, we narrowly missed some
that are gone from Glamorganshire, to the King, what their intent is we know
not. If the Parliament would send us a little moneys, it would do us a mighty
pleasure, for we want it much; our godly Ministers are threatened with
destruction; But God that has preserved their work wonderfully, will not
(doubtless) expose them to such villainy. I have here enclosed sent you some
passages, between the Governor of Cardiffe, and those up in Arms. Major
General Laughorne is sent to, and marching toward that Country, the Irish
forces have offered their service from Summersetshire; multitude of businesses,
and have, will not permit me further, then to subscribe my self

Vske June 19. 1647. Yours, most affectionately to serve you.

Resolved by the Committee at Uske, in order to their one security, and the
safety of the Country.
1. Resolved upon the question.

That such places of strength as are best, for the security o^ the Country, be
forth with secured, and that volu^tiers be rased and listed under faithful
Officers.

2. Resolved upon the question.

That all Papists and Delinquents be disarmed, and their houses searched.

3. Resolved upon the question.

That all desperate persons be seized on, and s^cured by the High Sheriff of
the County with such assistance as can be rased to assist him.

4. Resolved upon the question.

That some Gentlemen be chosen, and sent from the Committee to Gloucester, and
H^r^ford: And in case any attempt be made on Cardiffe: the High Sheriff to
raise the posse Committatous.

5. Resolved upon the question.

That this Committee do declare: That all such persons as act or adhere to
continue this Commotion, they shall be lest to the mercy of the Soldiery.

According to these votes of the Committee. The places of strength are secured,
and men are raised and listed under Officers. The High Sheriff^s Troops are
securing dangerous persons, and searching suspected houses, disarming Papists,
and Delinquents. His Troop will (in few days) be made up 100. Horse.

Vske 19. 1647. Proposalls of the desires of the Committee at U^ke, in order to
the safety of the Country.
1. To acquaint the Parliament herewith, and desire relief herein. (viz.)

2. To acquaint the Generals Excellency, Sir Thomas Fairfax and the Army, how
their names have been abused: And that his Excellency (if thought fi^) may put
forth some Declaration, to undeceive the people, or rather

3. That 120. or 200. of his Excellencies horse be sent hither, which would be
a more real Declaration.

4. That Colonel Birch his Horse in Herefordshire, may have order to march to
our Assistance, if thought fit.

5. That some moneys be sent down, by order from the Parliament for the
encouragement of the Soldiery.

6. That a supply of Ammunition, be speedily sent them.

Propositions to Colonel Prichard Governor of Cardiffe, from diverse Knights and
Gentlemen at Cardiffe, sent by a Gentlewoman.
Landaff. June 15. 1647.
THat the Arbitrary unlawful proceedings of the Committee, well known to the
County, by sad experience, and which are expressed, as Articles ready to be
produced; and the assurance, that the Committee did further intend, to make
captive several Gentlemen here, of fortune and integrity. And because the
country have no place of appeal for redress of their grievances; they have
assembled themselves for no other intention, but for the safety of men's persons
and estates, from such exorbitant Committee courses.

However to avoid shedding of Christian blood, the Country are content,

That upon good assurance of what follows, presently to disband, and every man
to repair to his home, (namely)

That the inhabitants of this County, Laick and Clergy (living according, and
conforming themselves to the known laws of the Kingdom) may be permitted to
repossesse their liberties, and estates, in such manner as was before the
setting up of that Committee here. All taxations, other then such to General
Laughorne, to be respited; and this to be inviolably observed, until it be
clearly manifested what the issue will be, between the King, his Parliament,
Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Army, which God grant maybe to his glory, and the
peace of the kingdom.

The King, Parliament, Sir Tho. Fairfax, and the Army.

It is not certified what composure, or otherwise, is between the parties,
which a little time will manifest. That being cleared, all that are interessed,
may apply themselves, as God shall direct them. In the mean time, the business
being dubious, persons being differently affected.

Quaerie.
Whether upon assurance of faith, as Christians and Gentlemen, subscriptions
interchangeably, such intermissions may be on both sides, to stay the shedding
of Christian blood, as that there be no acts of hostility: And it may be (Gods
blessing such) that the interim may produce a wished-for-Agreement between the
King and his Parliament; whereby the Kingdom and people may be happy in their
Religion and Laws.

A letter to Col. Prichard, Governor of Cardiffe (requiring an Answer to the
former Papers) sent by a Drummer.
SIR,
THere were for a good accommodation between us) sent by a Gentlewoman, some
overtures in writing: we desire you will be pleased to return your speedy
answer by this Drummer unto

Your servants, John Stradling, Henry Stradling, Tho. Stradling, Robert Thomas.
Edward Thomas. Thomas Not. Charles Kemes. Richard Basset.

Landaffe, June 16. 1647.
For the Governor of the Town of Cardiff.
A copy of Col. Prichard (the Govrner of Cardiffe) his answer is the letter
from the Gentlemen at Landaffe.
Gentlemen,
I Received your letter by your Drummer: whereas you are pleased to own a Paper
delivered to me by a Gentlewoman, which belog unsubscribed by you, and
undirected, could not rationally challenge an answer from me. But Gentlemen,

Before I shall conceive my self to be in a posture of further intercourse
with you, I shall desire to propound this question to you.

By what authority you have disturbed the peace of this county, and assembled
the inhabitants thereof in a ^^^^iall way: and what commission you have to
invade a Garrison held for the service of the King and Parliament.

And having received a satisfactory answer to this demand, I shall make a
further answer to your letter. In the mean time, I subscrib my self

Your servant Edw. Prichard.
Cardiff. June 16. 1647.
For Sir Edw: Thomas, and the rest of the Gentlemen at Landaff.
A Reply from the Gentlemen of Landaffe, sent to Col. Prichard Governor of
Cardiff.
SIR,
WE have heretofore showed our selves very willing to bring on that conclusion
for which we have justly raised these Forces, which you then declined: we are
therefore resolved (God willing) to pursue our ends, by the most peaceable and
advantageous ways, to the disburdening of the afflicted country; and
vindication of our Rights and Liberties, which if you resist, you must appear
before the world, to be guilty of that blood which shall be shed.

Landaff. June 17. 1647. these Your servants. John Stradling H^n. ^^ tradling
Edw: Thomas Tho: Not. Rich: Basset.


For the Governor of Cardiff.
Col. Prichards Reply to the Gentlemen of Landaffe.
Gentlemen,
OUt of my cordial affection to my country, and your selves, (as my friends
and kinsmen, and the great desire I have that there be no more effusion of
blood, I do desire and require you forthwith to disband your Forces, that the
peace of this Kingdom may be preserved, and utter ruin of our Country
prevented. Otherwise you will occasion me to embrace the present opportunity,
and (by Gods providence) to call in those who are able to repel your illegally
assembled Forces in this county) who tender themselves to our assistance, for
the reducing of this country to their do obedi^^^^ (...) the King and
Parliament. So expecting your speedy answer, I remain, Sire

Your servant, Edw. Prichard.
Vera copia (...).

Luke Ha^r^^y Cleri^.


Cardiff, June 17 1647.
For the Gentlemen and Comment assembled at Landaffe.
FINIS.

