A DECLARATION OF THE Protestant Clergy Of the City of DUBLIN, Showing the
Reasons why they cannot consent to the taking away of the Book of Common
Prayer, and comply with the Directory.

Presented To the Honorable Commissioners for the PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND, July
9. 1647.

printer's device, consisting of the Irish harp surmounted by a crown

July 22th. Printed in the Year 1647.

To the Honorable Commissiomers from the Parliament of ENGLAND, The humble
Answer and Petition of the Protestant Clergy of the City of Dublin;
Humbly showing,
THat whereas we have received from your Honors by Anthony Dopping Esquire, a
message consisting of two branches; one of a Demand, Whether the Ministers will
officiate in their several Churches, not using the Book of Common Prayer.

The other a Concession to this effect; That such as will officiate, may use
the Directory, or such service as is agreeable to the Word of God; but not use
the Book of Common Prayer.

We hereto with all meekness and lowliness of minds return this our joint
Answer.

1 That forasmuch as we see and know, that the Protestants of this City, for
the most part, are much grieved in heart for the want of the daily accustomed
Service of God in the two Cathedralls, and the Parish Churches of this City,
and for their late being deprived of us and our Ministry, which they have long
enjoyed: We are very much troubled, and are very sorrowful in our souls for
their grief: We acknowledge our selves bound to preach the Gospel of Christ
unto the People, and are so far from a voluntary desertion of our Churches,
People, Ministry, and the exercise thereof, as that we shall rejoice in
nothing more, then that we may finish our course with joy, and the Ministry
which we have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the grace of God.

2. That we have been and still are effectually debarred from our Churches, and
the exercise of our Ministry by your Honors Injunction and Command, bearing
date the 24. of June, 1647. (...) you require the discontinuance of the Book
of Common Prayer, and the receiving of the Directory, etc. which injunction
lies still upon us, with the danger of non-protection in case we disobey the
same.

3. That we cannot consent with a good conscience to the discontinuance of the
Book of Common Prayer, and receiving the Directory in lieu thereof, or any
other private form of public service, for the reasons exhibited, and alleged
in our Answer the 22. of June last; whereto we humbly annex these reasons
following, amongst others which we debated upon in our mutual conference the
25. of June, and on the same day touched some of the heads of them before your
Honors.

I. We all at our Ordination or being made Presbyters, have (among other
things) made this solemn promise before G^d, which we account the same with
or little different from an Oath, that we would so minister the Doctrine and
Sacraments, and Discipline of Christ, as the Lord has commanded, and as this
Realm has received the same.

II. We have often taken the Oath of Supremacy, and sworn that the Kings
Highness is the only supreme ^overnour of this Realm, as well in all
spiritual or Ecclesiast call things, or causes, as temporal, and that we
shall assist and defend all Jurisdictions, etc. granted or belonging to the
Kings Highness, his Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm. Now should we receive a Directory printed, or
any other form without royal Authority, we do not conceive how this can
stand with this our Oath.

III. As the Act of Parliament 2. Eliz. still in force in this Kingdom,
expressly commands the use of this Book of Common Prayer, so it forbids
Common Prayer or Administration of the Sacraments, otherwise or after any other
manner or form, with any private dispensation whereof we cannot comply, we
being bound to the obedience thereof, not only for fear of penalty, but for
conscience sake, Romans 13.5.

IIII. Whereas the Book of Common Prayer is one maine part of the Reformation
established in the Churches of England and Ireland, the laying aside thereof
and the receiving of the Directory or any other form would be, we conceive
(considering the present state and circumstances of things) a departing in this
from the Communion of the Church of England and Ireland.

V. It is evident, that as the Constitution of a Law in any matter
Ecclesiastical, the order ever observed in the Church since Kings became
nursing fathers thereto, was, is, and ought to be this, That it first pass the
consultation and determination of a lawful Ecclesiastical Council; and then,
that it receive the sanction and confirmation of the civil supreme Magistrate;
for this gives it the formal strength and vigor of a Law outwardly obliging,
and that gives it materiality and substance, and supplies ground sufficient to
make it a Law inwardly obliging Christian People to receive it. So in the
promulgation and execution of that Law, concerning a matter Ecclesiastical,
there was and is this order observed: First, the supreme civil Magistrate
remands and recommends it to the Ecclesiastical Governors, and they deliver
it to the rest of the Pastors, and they to the People. So that the immediate
actual reception of an Order Ecclesiastical by the Ministers, is from the
hand of the Bishop or Ordinary. And upon this is founded that solemn promise
made before God by every Minister at his Ordination, That he will reverently
obey his Ordinary, and other chief Ministers, unto whom the government and
charge over him is committed, following with a glad mind their godly
admonitions, and submitting himself to their godly judgments.

Since then in this matter concerning the Book of Common Prayer, all the
required premises were fulfilled, and that any other form, that for the
present we can use, wants all of them, we cannot without breach of our promise
forementioned, and disordered anticipation or neglect of the judgment of our
Ordinances, receive any such or other form, considering the Kings command
concerning the only use of the Book of Common Prayer expressed in the Act of
Parliament is still in force, and the commands and constitutions of our lawful
Convocation of the Bishops and Clergy, still live and speak unto us, in the
Canons made in the year, 1634. whereof the third thus expressly, That Form
of Liturgy or divine Service and no other shall be used in any Church of this
Realm, but that which is established by Law, and comprised in the Book of
Common Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments. Which Canon with all the
rest is confirmed and published by his Majesty's Authority under the great
Seal of Ireland.

VI. It may be added, that the Reformed Church of Ireland, under the Government
of our dread Sovereign the King, is and ever was reputed a free National
Church, and not subordinate unto or depending upon the convocation of any other
Church. And hence it was, that till the convocation held at Dublin, Anno, 1634.
the Articles of the Church of England were not held, or reputed the Articles of
the Church of Ireland, and when they were received, they were not received in
any acknowledged subordination to the Church of England, but for manifestation
of our agreement with that Church in the confession of the same Christian
Faith, and the Doctrine of the Sacraments, as is expressed in the first Canon.
Hence it is, besides that our Canons were not imposed by the Church of England,
nay when somewhat highly the Clergy was invited to submit to the Book of
English Canons, the Convocation utterly refused the same, and framed a new
Book of Canons for the Church of Ireland. Should we therefore receive or
admit of any other form, without the Authority of this Church, we should be
held and esteemed before God and the world, guilty of unconscionably betraying
of the Liberty of the free National Church of Ireland.

VII. The Book of Common Prayer has been in use in this Church from the
beginning of the Reformation, we have preached for it, and recommended it to
the people as a form of Gods public Worhip and Service: the people of God in
this City for the most part, generally do love it, have been edified by it,
are loath to part from it, and earnestly desire the continuance of it. Now
should we consent to the taking of it away, and receive or use any other form
not established by Law, we should not avoid the guilt of sin, it being all one
to destroy that which is well built, as to build that which a man once
destroyed, which in the Apostles judgment ( Gal. 2.8.) renders a man a
transgressor.

And withal we should, as matters stand, give great offense and scandal to
the consciences of our brethren, and so sin against them, who deserve better at
our hand, and for whom Christ dyed.

VIII. Lastly, that reason given by the Uuniversity of Oxford in this point is
not to be forgotten, that by our leaving of the Book of Common Prayer and
receiving any other Former, we should condemn the Church and State for the
penalties and censures against Recusants, and justify them in their
accusations and imputations of injustice and tyranny, wherewith they boldly
charge both our Churches of England and Ireland.

The premises considered, as we hope your Honors discern hereby, that we have
not lightly or obstinately or out of faction, or any spirit of opposition for
borne the exercise of our Ministry since your Honors injunction; so we do now
with all humility present these our fervent Petitions to your Honors.

1. That you would be pleased, in pity and compassion to the Protestants of
this City and to us the Ministers, who else by your Injunction aforesaid, are
endangered to be exposed to banishment, loss of estate, and of present
subsistence, with our wives and families, to restore us to our Churches,
Ministry and exercise thereof, by permitting of us to use the Book of Common
Prayer, in our several Cathedral and Parish Churches, as formerly we used the
same, before your Injunction aforesaid, and to grant us your Protection
therein, till such time as further order be taken by a Convocation of the
Clergy, and an act of Parliament in this Kingdom, and in the mean time we
shall endeavor to demean our selves in the whole course of our Ministry,
with such Christian faithfulness and moderation, as that we shall (by the
help of God) give no just occasion of offense.

2. That in case your Honors shall be pleased to grant this Petition, which we
hope you will, if after our stay and residence here, we, or any of us shall by
the imposall of any thing against our consciences be forced hereafter to depart
the Kingdom, we may then respectively have free passes and convenient time to
remove our persons families and goods.

3. That during the time of our residence here, we may enjoy the profits,
benefits and means of our several Church Livings for our subsistence, which
are due or allotted to us by the Law of the Land and Acts of State.

4. That whereas the monthly fast observed hitherto by command of authority on
a Friday, was grounded upon the horrid Rebellion of the Irish Papists, begun,
and the danger we were all in, as on that day, wherein the Rebels came to this
City to surprise it, and the evening of that day, was the time wherein that
bloody treachery, and conspiracy was disovered, that we may be permitted still
to keep the monthly Fast on that day, being a day of preparation for the
monthly Communion according to our custom these five years past.

And we shall ever pray etc.

Delivered the 9. day of July, 1647. Subscribed as follows. Ed. Laonensis.
Jer. Margetson. Ben. Culme. Ambr. Anngier. In. Sybald. Godf. Rhodes. Hen. Hall.
Ios. War. Io. Brookbank. Gilbert Deane. Dud. Bo^well. Rob. Parry. Joan.
Creighton, Can. Edw. Sing. Rob. Dickson. Rand. Ince. Henry Byrch. Rich. Powell.



