A DECLARATION OF The Princes Navy, CONCERNING The Parliament of England and
the Army; and their Remonstrance and Resoluti^n delivered to prince Rupert;
with the particulars of a great and bloody fight at Sea, and prince Maurice his
Letter to the prince of Wales.

Also, the Queens Majesty's Message to the Prince at the Hague, concerning the
present transaction of Affairs, in relation to England, Scotland, and Ireland.

^CH DIEN printer's device, consisting of the coronet of the Prince of Wales
adorned with three ostrich feathers

Imprinted at London, for G. Wharton, May 1. 1649.

A DECLARATION Of the Princes Fleet at SEA AND Their Resolution touching the
Parliaments Navy with their present Design and Intentions touching the
Parliament and Army.
Honored Sir,
UPon the 26. of this instant, here arrived (...) Messenger from Prince
Maurice, wi^^ a Letter to the Prince of Wales, where (...) he gives an account
to his Highness (...) the present transactions at Sea, purpo^ting, That
without a speedy supply of Moneys, and ^ther Necessaries appertaining
thereunto, for acco^modation of the Mariners, a great distraction would
suddenly break forth amongst them new Coals being already kindling, which are
ready to break forth in a visible flame.

For we hear, that they mutiny exceedingly, and have declared, That they will
not engage against the Parliaments Navy without assurance both of present and
future satisfaction; insomuch, that many of them have undantedly remonstrated
to Prince Rupert, and other superior Officers, that they will rather die and
suffer martyrdom, then be enslaved and ruled by a usurping power and arbytrary
Government.

This strange allarum sounds in the ears of many like a terrible echo, and
puts a great demur to the proceedings at Court, many of the Grandees declining
Engagement; especially since the receipt of the Intelligence, that the
parliaments Navy are put forth to Sea who are jointly resolved to hazard the
encounter, and to bring them to obedience and subjection, who have perfidiously
deserted, and betrayed the trust reposed in them.

And by an Express from Helver-sluce it is further intimated, that upon the
lanching forth of the parliaments ships to the Ocean, they soon espied a
Squadron of the princes Fleet, all under sail, being about sixteen in number,
who making toward them, and coming within shot, gave them a broad side, which
by reason of a second Volley from the assaulted, a hot conflict began, being
disputed with great resolutenesse and gallantry on both sides, the Victory
seeming a long while doubtful, but at last it fell to the parliamenteers, who
sunk one of their Combitants, chased the rest many leagues, and are now become
Masters of a great part of the British Seas.

This is reported here with great confidence, and it is verily believed, the
rest will not stand a fight, diverse of them fearing, that they shall be made
exemplary, if ever they be taken. Col. Popham one of the parliaments Admirals,
has cleared the Western Coast near the Isle of Portland, and forced many to
fly before him. The other two Admirals, Col. Blague, and Col. Deane, are upon
the same motion on the South west point.

Hague 27. April, 1649. Postscript,
Sir,
Since the writing of my last, the two extraordinary Ambassadors from Sweden
and Denmark have had audience with the titufar King of Scotland, representing
the personal appearance of their Masters, and promising him assistance for the
obtaining of his Birthright. But truly we cannot discern any visible Force as
yet in Arms, and the Princes Propositions to the old Soldiers of the United
Provinces are much slighted and rejected, having unanimously declared, that
they will not any ways intermeddle with the affairs of England, in relation to
the erecting and setting up of Monarchy or any other Government whatsoever.
Here is a great demur happened, at Court, by reason of the Parliaments Navy
putting forth to Sea, which causes many who at first seemed very forward to
promote the Royal Design, to desert any further Engagement, taking a president
by the late headless members, who acted against the Commonwealth of England.

Hague 27. April 1649.


The Queens Letter to the Prince.
SIR,
THe Queen of England is much perplexed and sore troubled in mind, the Fountain
and Rise whereof, taking its first derivation from the present streams or head
of the Royal Off-sp^ing at the Hague; for having sent a Letter to her Son
Prince Charles, to advise him to a Treaty with her Majesty, and to meet her at
Amians in France, but hearing that his affections had taken Center another way,
and that he could not meet her there, she resolved not to m^ke any further
address unto him, but returned back ^o Paris, condoling much the loss of her
late endeared Sovereign, and the present proceedings of the Prince, in
reference to the work in hand touching his restoration: And after some few
days spent in serious meditations, watering her Princely bed with tears of
sorrow, she desired a conference with Mr. He^^y Jermin, at which she declared,
That she had received several Dictates in a Dream, and that ma^y things were
revealed to her thereby, by Apparitions and Visions, to wit;

First, that if her Son Prince Charles did any ways alienate his affections
from going to Ireland, and cast himself upon the Kingdom of Scotland, He was a
lost Prince, and that they would serve him as they had done his Father, to sell
him for a sum of money, and so deprive him of all Earthly felicity, which might
abundantly flow from his three Crowns and Kingdoms.

Secondly, That if his vigilance were not perspicuous to those in power, in
playing of his Game at Sea, that his Design would be soon frustrated, and all
hopes of restoration wholly expiated, etc. Having dictated unto him these
prophetical expressions, Her Majesty desired, that they might be forthwith
communicated unto his Highness, which was asserted to, and a messenger
immediately dispatched from thence to the Hague:

Leyden 26. April, 1649.
A Yorkshire Gentlewoman coming out of Cleveland, to present some things to the
House of Commons, delivered a paper to Lieut. Genesis Crumwell, containing matters
which she says she had in command from God in a Vision, viz. 1. That the
Parliament reform the Clergy, and only settle such Ministers as promote
holiness and the glory of God. 2 To make the Laws of the Land plain and just,
grounded upon the Word of God. 3 To make speedy and effectual provision for
the poor. 4 That differences be composed at home, before the breaking out of
further distractions abroad. These things she says that she being as dead for
a time were revealed to her by God, she beholding the glory of Heaven and the
Alm^ghty Jehovah.

Sir, Our dependence here is, what his gracious Majesty will do, all desire his
coming hither, but the professed downright Royalists would have him come w^^h
a force for there instituting him in his Right; the other party, such as real
for Presbytery, would also have him come with a new heart. We hear that the
vulgar sort of people do cry him up exceedingly; an^ say they ^u^t and will
have (...) King though it cost them never so much: here are ^ly risings in
several parts of the Country the Marquess of Hunt^^^s Son is again in arms
with 2000. Gourdons to revenge his Fathers death, they have declared for
Charles the second, and have set forth their Invitation, for all persons to
come in to their assistance. Col. Car, and diverse other English Officers, are
likewise very active in raising of Forces, and have sent Letters of invitation
into Northumberland, Cumberland, and Westmerland, for others to come to them,
promising great matters of preferment, but it is more then they are able to
perform, for the well affected party are both vigilant and active in
suppressing of them.

The Committee of Estates sit daily in consultation, and are exceedingly
discontented at their new Kings refusal to grant their desires, and reject a
compliance with them; whereupon many of them have declared their assent for a
message to be sent to the parliament of England, in reference to a Treaty,
touching prince Charles; but many of the great Ones are divided in that
particular, and the Commoners cannot endure to hear of the subversion of
Monarchy.

Berwick 27 April, 1649.

FINIS.

