A Declaration, Or Resolution of the County of HEREFORD.
Whereas the Kingdom for many years past has groned under Taxes of Loans,
Shipmoney, and the like dismal^ effects of an Arbitrary Government, and a high
stretched Prerogative: for the cure of which distempers a Parliament was held to
be the only good old way of Physic to cleanse the Body Politic from
oppressing Crudities (which was heartily desired) but not by over-strong
Purgations to weaken it in the principal Part, charging it to receive a
disposition to the like distemper, or a Relapse into the same, or a worse
Disease, which in stead of restoring it to its primitive vigor and health,
must needs drive it to a fatal Period. Such is our misery, such the just
judgment of God upon our Sins.

This wholesome Physic has not wrought in us that blessed effect, as was
either believed by some, or hoped for by all men: but as if God had answered
our importunity for a Parliament, as he did the old Israelites for a King in
his anger; we drive on with much more haste then good speed to the other
extreme, which portends no less Symptoms of ruin and destruction than the
former. So that having maturely considered what has proved destructive to this
or other Parliaments, we may the more easily avoid those Rocks upon which
others have split themselves, viz. 1 The venting of particular ends of Avarice
and Ambition in the public Cause. 2 Private Combinations or Chamber
conventicles to resolve beforehand what shall be done in the House. 3 Hindering
the freedom of speech by imprisonment of their persons. 4 Denying information
by the humble way of Petitions from the County, as that most excellent Orthodox
Petition of our Brethren of Kent, and of rejecting information of Letters to
our Knights and Burgesses. 5 The ready swallowing of informations and jealous
rumors against his Majesty, the styling them the malignant party and enemies
to the State, which were only, truly and conscionably his friends 6 The
private if not public mutinous rabble, which ill Spirit was ready at all times
to be raised by a whisper from any of those worthy Members, Emphatically so
called, if not exclusively, as if all Justice, Reformation, and Government were
only to be expected from them. 7 The now unheard of State-law and Logic to
style and believe that a Parliament that is divided in it self, is severed
from the King the Head thereof: if they may be remedied (as we hope they are
not past cure) we shall rather desire to change some of our Physicians then
Physic, there being no better way, nor more necessary to preserve the health
of a Commonwealth, than a well tempered Parliament. Wherefore we as faithful
Subjects to his Majesty, as freeborn Englishmen, do join in an unanimous
resolution to maintain.

1 The Protestant Religion, 2 The Kings just power, 3 The Laws of the Land, 4
The liberty of the Subject.
For the first, The Protestant Religion; we cannot but with grief of heart
remember how it has been assaulted in the In-works and skirts of it, the
Liturgy, and decent Ceremonies established by Law; yea, in the very Body of it
the 39 Articles. In what a danger this Church of England has been, to be
overcome with Brownisme and Anabaptisme, let all the World judge. For the
second, The just power of the King; God knows he has been so far unable to
defend that from violence, as it was Gods great goodness rather then his own
power which secured, or rather preserved his person from violence, What their
aim was, who to please the vulgar Rabble would uphold and not punish them for
their insolences, as we fear and imagine for the present; so we cannot but
with horror and amazement doubt the consequence.

Nor can we conceal our joy of heart, or thanks to his Majesty's good Subjects
of the County of York, for endeavoring to secure his person with a Guard (being
of much more value then many thousand of us) and putting him in a posture of
defense, which some have ignorantly or maliciously interposed by suggesting it
an intension of War against his Parliament, whereby it is plain enough his
Majesty's desires are only to secure himself and servants from prodigious
tumults and disorders as have endangered his sacred person: Nor can we blame
him considering Sir John Hothams Act at Hull, and Sir Henry Ludlowes Speech in
Parliament.

For the two last, The Laws of the Land, and The Liberty of the Subject, which
must not be separated, how have they been violated after by some of those who
were chosen to be Conservators of them, by imprisonment of men's persons,
contrary to the Petition of Right? assisting of the Clergy without a Body of
Magna Charta; shuffling the Convocation into a Synod, or an Assembly, or
Conventicle, without the choice, consent, or election of the Clergy; as if they
were neither the Kings Subjects, nor Gods servants.

As we conceive our selves obliged by the Law of God, the Law of the Land, by
the Dictates of Nature and reason to maintain all these; so by Gods grace
assisting us, we hope we shall not be terrified or compelled to yield any
active obedience to any dis-joyned part of Parliament without the consent of
the whole (which we heartily desire may be united) or to any uncertain
Debates, Votes or Ordinances, that are not digested or settled into Laws: nay
which seems to contradict former Laws, and yet are tendered to us with so
much earnestnes, as some dare hardly deny them with safety, or obey with
Conscience.

Nor shall we ever yield our selves such Slaves, or so betray the liberty
purchased by our Forefathers blood, and bequeathed unto us as to suffer our
selves to be swayed by any Arbytrary Government whatsoever, or stand with too
much contention of Spirit to cast off the yoke of our Tyrany to endure many
worse,

And seeing his Majesty is graciously pleased to maintain the true Protestant
Religion; His own just Power, The Laws of the Land, The Liberty of the
Subjects and that these waters of Reformation, having been long stirred; we
want only the favor of his Princly Majesty to let us in and heal us: So we
do reciprocally declare that we conceive our selves bound to maintain him in
all the Premises with our lives and Fortunes

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by a printed Copy. 1642.


