A DECLARATION Scnt from Several Officers of His Majesty's ARMY, To the Lord
General of the same.

Wherein is declared their great want of Money, they being not able to
maintain the Field any longer, without present supply.

Also the Copy of a Letter, sent from John Wiat, one of his Majesty's
soldiers to his Wife, dated November 26.

Wherein he declares, the great misery that they are in for want of means so
that they dare not sleep, for fear of having their throats cut, by certain
Welsh, and Irish women which follow the Army.

LONDON. December. 1. Printed by T. F. for L. W. 1642.

French fleur-de-lis flanked by the Scottish thistle on one side and the Tudor
rose on the other
A Copy of a Declaration sent to the Lord General of the Kings Army, from
several Officers thereof. etc.
May it please your Excellence,
WE are extremely sorry to trouble your Excellency with more complaints, but
this grievance so much concerns all in Honor, that we most humbly beseech
your Excellency to releeve it, and on the behalf of your poor servants, to
represent it to his Majesty, for his opinion of our force, and number, and his
distrust of our integrity in our Musters, we presume by his own course he now
takes, will suddenly show him how reports have abused, and injured us. But
first we complain as we are Gentlemen, that by the long neglect of sending our
Pay, we have been enforced contrary to our former lives, to oppress a poor
Country, and live up on the discretion of Strangers, which both they and we are
weary of; Next as we ate Soldiers, the season puts us in mind of drawing out
of the Fields, and we know that some of his Majesty's Army has already
removed, though in pretense of enlarging their quarters, yet Jealousy is no
species in our profession, of fear but wisdom, and though we want neither
courage nor will to oppose our Enemy, if they advance, but rather desire to
seek and find them, yet the long want of pay, has so distressed both Officers
and Soldiers, that for that reason only, we are very unable to march, and to
subsist in the field far worse, but our chiefest discontent is, that our
humble address formerly by Petition, has neither brought remedy to our
sufferings. We are very sensible, that we were unfortunately foiled in the
first part of this Action, but we hope so to manage what is left, that our
future proceedings shall neither deserve blame nor reproaches, and we are
confident that if the resolution of his Majesty, with his Excellency the Earl
of Newcastle, please to comply with our endeavors, and restore our Armies to
their former height of glory, in all our progresses we shall both with
willingness and humility, embrace the pleasure of his Majesty's Council,
either to add or take from us that which we have received, and are also sworn
unto, but upon a serious deliberation, we find that many of our Officers are
unexperiencd, which must needs produce great inconvenience in this Service, for
these and many other Reasons, we humbly beseech his Majesty's Council to
prevent these endeavors that would impose such confusions upon us, as must
necessarily deprive us of the chief privileges and right of our command, thus
we humbly take leave, and remain,

Your Excellencies obedient Servants, Friar, etc. Venner, Mills, Hill, Smith,
Forster, Hodson, Johnson, Vaughan, White, Jackson, Eaton, West, Morgan, Gorge,
Fleetwood; Fitzjames, Gifford,
Cum multis aliis* etc.

A Copy of a Letter sent from the Town of Redding, by James Wyat, a soldier
in his Majesty's Army, to his wife, dated the 26. of November.
LOving Wife,
my love remembered, I pray let my Cozen William Watson peruse these few Lines,
and I doubt not but that all my Friends do marvel at my long absence,
nevertheless wheresoever my person may be, my heart is with you, and my
Friends, I make no question but there has been scandalous reports of some of
our Actions, and that we are branded with the name of Cowards, it makes no
great matter, for I have well feathered my nest, if I can keep it, I could
wish my Money, Rings, and other good things with you, for I fear I shall
hardly keep them, though I take as great care as any man can, and refrain
tippling, because I would be sencible of what I do daily undertake.

Here is great disorders, Theeving, and pilfering, one another, we can hardly
take our rest, nay durst not over sleep our selves for fear of being ransackt
or stripped of all we have, our Officers have authorized any to pilfer and steal
if they find one the other sleeping, that thereby to keep us in readiness to
prevent danger, there were three or four of our own company supposed to have
money and other Treasure, in their sleep their throats were cut and their Legs
cut clean off, supposing their moneys to be in their Boots as it so happened,
others lost their Coats and Cloakes, and complaint was made to Collonell Pinder
who caused a privy search to be made amongst the Welsh and Irish Quarters,
and there was ten Irish apprehended who were found with store of Gold and
Silver, and for certain they* have thus massacred those Soldiers, and we
imagine they shall be hanged in the way the next March, for they are already
adjudged; so there is another of our Soldiers to be Harquebushierd, for
pillaging and striking his Captain, I hope I shall not long remain with this
Cruel and murderous people, if I can find any opportunity I will give my
Captain the bag, there be many of our Foot soldiers almost famished for
want of food, especially our English; for the Irish and W^lsh they have their
Trulls following them and does more spoil then the whole Army besides.

There was since the 18. of November that I came into the Kings Army at
Redding, diverse complaints made to our General of our Officers, whereby some
are imprisoned, other some he fined a Months pay; His Majesty at this present
is at Oxford, and within two days he goes for Theobalds, for One thousand
Horse and fifteen hundred Foot are gathered together for his Majesty's Convoy
to Theobalds. There was six Captains stripped and sent to Redding, my Captains
name is Sir John Wagstaffe, so J leave you until I shall see you, and rest

Redding, the 26.th of November, 1642. Your loving Husband, JAMES WYOT.

FINI^

