A DECLARATION OF The Right Honorable the Lord Major, Aldermen, and
Common Council of the City of LONDON, CONCERNING The great and apparent danger
of the said City, and the Desires and proceedings of the Common-Councell-men
therein, in behalf of the Citizens.

ALSO, Their present Summons and Directions (in His Majesty's Name) to the
Trained Bands and Citizens, touching the preservation of the Peace, defense of
themselves, the City, and the Magistrates thereof.

AGreed upon by the Honorable Court at Guild Hall, on Tuesday last, April 25.
1648.

MICHEL.



blazon of the City of London

LONDON: Printed for R. W. MDCXLVIII.

A DECLARATION OF The Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Common Counsel of the City of LONDON: IN The Name of the Kings most Excellent
Majesty; c^nceming their present Resolution to preserve and defend the said
City and Inhabitants.
Upon the 24. and 25. of this in stant April, 1648. the Right Honorable the
Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London, had a general
meeting at Guild Hall where they spent much time, upon debates and
consultations touching the preservation of the peace, defense of themselves,
the City, and the Magistrates thereof; as also concerning the apparent danger,
that the city is now in at the present. Therefore, according to the desire, and
direction of the said Court, the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor agreed upon
this ensuing Declaration, and ordered that it should be printed and published,
to the end, that all upon sight thereof, do so order and dispose of their
servants, and all others under their charge, that they be not only kept from
committing any outrage or misdemeanour; but that they and their servants be in
a readiness according to their several capacities, with Arms, Weapons, and
Ammunition, for preservation and defense of the said City; a Copy of the said
Declaration I shall here give you verbatim.

BY THE MAJOR.
FOrasmuch, as it is conceived and apprehended by the Common Council, that the
City at the present is in great danger; These are therefore, according to the
Desire and Direction of the said Court to will and require you in his Majesty's
Name, That presently upon sight hereof, you respectively, with the Constables
of your several Precincts, do repair to every Householder within the same, and
give them strict charge and command, that at their perils, they do so order
and dispose of their Servants, and all others under their charge, that they be
not only kept from committing any outrage or misdemeanour; But that they and
their servants from time to time be in readiness, according to their several
capacities* with Arms, Weapons, and Ammunitions for preservation of the Peace,
defense of themselves, the City, and the Magistrates thereof: And also, that
all Persons who are of the Trained Bands of this City, Do from time to time
upon the beat of the Drum, repair with all speed to their Colors: And therein
demeasn themselves as may conduce to the safety and welfare of this City.

And that you do from time to time certify unto me, or some other of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace, the Names of such Constables, and others, as
you shall find to be remiss or negligent in the performance of their
respective Duties in this behalf, to the intent, that they may be punished
according to the same. And hereof fails you not, as you tender the safety of
your selves and the City, and will answer the contrary at your peril.

This 25. of April, 1648. MICHEL.

To the Deputy, Common-Councell-men, and Constables in the Ward of (...)
BY Letters from Scotland it is further certified, That at Edinburgh the
expectation of the malignants are great, and reports variable, but little
concluded on: only we hear that they are resolved, that an army shall be sent
into England, and although many will not be persuaded to believe it, yet it may
now more easily be gathered, that such a thing is intended, and will speedily be
effected, if not prevented; for the Scots army draws Southward, and many of
them are ordered to be quartered near the Borders, the Lord Belcarouse Troop
have taken up their quarters within five miles of Berwick, having order so to
do. Many other Troops have quarters assigned them in the South of Scotland,
and especialy in the Towns and Villages nrer adjoining to England; also from
other parts of Scotland we perceive the Scots Forces to creep Southward, but
they are wary, and do it by little and little, the better to avoid suspicion,
but if their intents are, as is suspected, England may chance to frustrate
their designs, and the Scots after all their juggling be deceived of their
expectations.

The Parliament of Scotland have given answer to the English Commissioners
papers, but it is said to be very unsatisfactory* and that they refer the
substance of all to their own Commissioners who are coming into England, of
whom the Lord Lec is one to treat with the Parliament, and have Propositions
and instructions given them, to treat about settling Religion according to the
Covenant for the King his removal to one of his houses, and a personal treaty
with him; as also for disbanding the Army, and other Propositions that I have
not as yet; the certainty of the difference between the Clergy and state is as
great as ever, they will by no means consent to the raising of men, although
listing in diverse parts of this Kingdom; it is supposed 'twill be speedily
effected; and because many of the Commanders of the standing Forces of this
Kingdom do not concur with them in this design, those Forces are to be
disbanded, and the Earl of Calender is to be General of their new Model;
insomuch, that the Cavees and English Fugitives grow very high, treating ruin
and destruction to the Parliament and their Adherents.

But indeed, some days there are great hopes of an agreement, and other days
the distance is so far, as scarce any man shall know how near they are to have
an Army: many English men are at Edinburgh, and they do daily increase.
Another great ship came to Leeth Rode on Friday night last; what she is, is not
yet known, but a flying Report of the Prince being in her, but no certainty.
Some Irish Rebels are come into some of the Scots Islands, and the Marq. of
Argyles Regiment are directed, with some others, to march toward them. This is
all, I earnestly request a correspondency weekly, and where I shall direct my
Letter unto you, that I may take the occasion to subscribe my self.

Your obliged servant, R. V.
Barwick 19 April, 1648. SIR,
Since the writing hereof we hear that the Parliament of Scotland have given an
answer to our Commissioners papers, but it is said to be very unsatisfactory,
and that they refer the substance of all to their own Commissioners which are
coming into England to treat with the Parliament.

IN the Marq. of Argyles Country, there is risen up in Arms one commonly
called Kolkittoh, which has caused some of the Forces that lay in the South of
Scotland to march Northward for the suppression of them, all the Officers in
the standing Army of Scotland except Lieutenant General Middleton) have
petitioned to the Parliament, and presented these Proposals, viz. 1. That they
will be pleased to consult with the Ministers of the Kirk, in relation to their
proceedings touching the Kingdom of England. 2. That they will be pleased not
to engage in a War against England, unless the Kirk of Scotland do concur
therein.


yours, etc.



Sir,
Since my last, we have received further intelligence from South Wales, that
Col. Horton, and Col. Lewis with their Forces have straightened the enemies
quarters, and forced them to a narrower distance, but not without some blows;
for, as it is said, they have had a very hot skirmish, and resolutely
maintained by both parties, upon several charges and conflicts; and afrer some
dispute Poyers party retreated, our men pursues; some are wounded, but no great
hurt done. Col. Flemming has lately fell upon the enemy, and took diverse
prisoners. Col. Okeys Dragoons are joined with Col. Horton, they have had a hot
skirmish with the enemy. By the next you shall hear further, from

Your most affectionate friend, T H.
Carmarthen 19. April 1648. Imprimatur

G. M.



FINIS.

