A DEEP SIGH BREATHED Through the Lodgings At WHITE HALL, Deploring the absence
of the COURT, And the Miseries of the PALACE.

LONDON, Printed for N. V. and J. B. 1642.

A DEEP SIGH BREATHED THROUGH THE LODGINGS AT WHITE HALL.
A Palace without a Presence! A White Hall clad in fable vestments! A Court
without a Court! These are mysteries, and miseries, which the silken ages of
this peaceful Island have not been acquainted with, That the Field should be
turned to Court, and the Court in to a desert! Majesty had wont to sit
enthroned within those glorious Walls, da^ting their splendor with more awful
brightness then the great Luminaries in the Firmament, And with the same life
and vigor Cherishing the hearts of their admiring followers, And creating to
those Favorites on whom their beams of grace reflected, names of honor, and
estates to maintain it till the Worlds end, and now all things as in a Chaos,
involved and wrapped up in the black mists of confusion, and desolation.

To begin at the entrance into the Court, where there had wont to be a
continual throng, either of Gallants standing to ravish themselves with the
sight of Ladies hansome Legs and Insteps as they took Coach; Or of the tribe
of guarded Liveries, by whom you could scarce pass without a jeare or a saucy
answer to your question; now if you would ask a question there is no body to
make answer, no nor to stop a pursuing Bailey, if you should take that for your
Sanctuary.

If you have no more manners of your self, you may piss in the Porters Lodge,
and never fear the loss of your Hat, for neither the Giant that stood there
to be seen, nor he that stood there to take gratuities, are now in rerum
natura.

Being entered the Courtyard which had wont to be a School of Complement,
where the young Courtiers used to show their new brought over French cringes,
and the whole body wrigled into a gesture of Salutation; Now if you have a mind
to exercise there is room enough, you may complement against the Lenten pulpit,
and no body to laugh at you.

You may without a rub, walk into the Hall, for surely there are no strong
smells out of the Kitching to delight your Nostrells with all, no Provision to
be sold, nor the greasy Scullions to be seen over Head and Ears in a
Kettle full of Kidneys, nor any thing else to stop your progress into the
House. And when you are in the Hall, for ought I know, you might as well have
kept you out on it unless you would discourse with Mistres Echo, or play at
Shitle-Cocke by your self, for there is no body to play with you.

If you step up Stairs to the Guard Chamber, where His Majesty's great
Beefe-eaters had wont to sit in attendance on their places, which was nothing
but to tell Tales, devour the beaverage, keep a great fire, and carry up
Dishes, wherein their fingers would be sometimes before they came to the Kings
Table, now they are all vanished, nothing left but the bare Walls, and a cold
Harth, from whence the Fire-irones are removed too, and as 'its thought
converted into shoes for light Horses. The great black-Jackes set under the
Table, all full of Cobwebs, and the drinking Dishes being pocket carriage you
cannot but divine their fate.

You may walk into the Presence Chamber with your Hat, Spurs, and Sword on,
And if you will presume to be so unmannerly, you may sit down in the Chair of
State, and no body say blacks your Eye, for now a days common men do sit in
the Chair of State.

If you be minded to survey the Lodgings and withdrawing rooms, you shall find
those rich and costly hangings of Persian Arras and Turky-worke, (like the
Bishops) for their pride taken down, And some (like the Bishops) thrown in the
Tower, and the rest clapped close Prisonets in the Wardrop, unless it were those
that (like the Bishop) made escape to York before the wars began, The very
walls as if they were sensible of this calamity, do weep dowre their
plaster in grief that their Ornaments should suffer so hard a fortune.

I should lead you into the Bedchamber, but that the Genlemen, and Grooms of
it would take me for a saucy fellow, besides it may be a question whether there
be a Bed left there or no, for the Chamber to be called so by.

But you may employ your time in peeping into the out Offices, And lest the
close-house should offend your stomach, you may please to walk out upon that
Exchange of Projectors, the Tarras, where th'Attendants upon the Council Yable
had wont to cool their toes, and by their whispering consultations digest
every trade into the form of monopolies, and invent arguments of the Kingdoms
good and his Majesty's benefit to put forward the same, Now you may walk a
whole day and not a great Ruff, a Satin Cap with ears, and a bag of
informations by his side, (the Emblem of a Pattenree) to be seen.

There is no use of the Council Board it self, a bare Vote of the House of
Commons is of validity to frustrate or at least controwle an Act of State.

The compting house which used to have a constant attendance of importunate
suitors, is a place grown out of remembrance; And though you would give a
Cofferrer's Clarke 20. l. to help you to 30, your Debentur will not be
accepted, unless you please to leave the bribe with him till such time as
Jupiter come down again in a shower of Gould: And then upon the faith of a
Courtier, you may believe you shall receive your money, in the mean time if
you be minded to wait, you will not be discouraged, for there is no body left to
give you a surly answer.

At the Lodgings of the several Lords and Gentlemen, where the smell and odor
of the persumes and tinctures of a mornings curling, and dressing, made your
attendance not to seem tedious but gave a delight to your frequent and long
solicitation, now there is nothing but the raw sent of moist walls, and all as
silent as midnight.

If you love fasting you may go to the Chapel, but as for praying there is
no such thing within those walls, unless you can pray for your self, which if
you can do according to the way of praying now used, it is then a question
whether you will be drawn to go into so superstitious a place as that is, if
there were any Service, as there is none.

In the Cockpit and Revelling Rooms, where at a Play or Masque the darkest
night was converted to the brightest Day that ever shined, by the luster of
Torches, the sparkling of rich Jewels, and the variety of those incomparable
and excellent Faces, from whence the other derived their brightness, where
beauty sat enthroned in ^o full glory, that had not Phaeton fired the World,
there had wanted a Comparative whereunto to parallel the refulgencie of their
bright-shining splendour, Now you may go in without a Ticket or the danger of a
broken-pate, you may enter at the Kings side, walk round about the Theaters,
view the Pullies, the Engines, conveyances, or contrivances of every several
Scaene And not an Usher o'th Revells, or Engineere to envy or find fault with
your discovery, although they receive no gratuitie for the sight of them.

There is no press at the Wine-Sellor Doors and Windows, no gaping noise
amongst the angry Cooks in the Kitchings, no waiting for the opening of the
Posterne-dore to take water at the Stayres, no racket nor balling in the Tenis
Court, no throng nor rumbling of Coaches before the Court Gates, but all in a
dumb silence, as the Palace stood not near a well peopled City, but as if it
were the decayed buildings of ruined Troy, where scarce a passenger is known to
tread once in twenty years.

The Officers in ordinary since they knew the price of Victuals by experience
at their own charge, are grown wary husbands, and seldom seen in Tavernes,
because a great part of their Revenew which had wont to be spent there, is now
bestowed the other way.

The Rangers, and Keepers of the Parkes, do say that instead of Shoulders,
Heads and Umbles for Fees, they are feign (poor souls God help them) to take
whole Dear to themselves, And therefore you may cease your admiration at the
miracle of so great store of Uenison, to be sold at the Cookes-shops about
London this year.

The Pages and Gentlemen-Ushers, who had wont to receive bribes for preferring
of Dancing Masters, Persumers, Jewelles, T^re-Women Confectioners, Glovers,
Silkemen, etc. to Court custom, have now less money then the grooms, in
respect the Lords and Ladies being retired from the Court have abated much of
the changable Gallantry whereunto they had wont every day to metamorphise
themselves.

It Is thought the Maids of honor will now be content to take Country Esquires
for their Husbands, and that of less estates then a thousand pounds Per Annum,
because they imagine the King and Queens Favor to be no perpetual inheritance.

The waiting Gentle-women whose wits were so sharp set that you could not
deliver a message without a scoff, and were sure to have a full relation made
to her Lady of your form, your carriage, your garb, language and whole
deportment, and it served to make sufficient discourse to keep favor, being
now in the Country are grown into green sicknesses, and deep consumptions,
with very grief that the Tenants are so dull headed that they cannot
understand Court-jeasts, whereby their wits are deprived of their proper
commendations.

The Sticklers or Women of trust, that held favor by keeping sweetmeats from
the whole Family, and eating them themselves, and by giving inteligence of the
faults of the household, are grown reasonable honest of their bodies, because
the Country affords no provocatives above Turkey Eggs, Artichokes, Butter'd-Ale
and Hony-sops, which certainly are not so great incendiaries of rebellious
blood, as Muskadell Caudells, and Amber possets, wherewith their fine chaps
were so fed that they were grown to such a height of body as required private
conference with the Groom o'th Chambers to tame it, And yet a stranger might
not aproach them without a reverent complement, and kissing their white hands
though they were forsooth but newly come from off the close-stoole.

The Chambermaides and Damsells of the Napery too are all dispersed, some are
gone down to the Ditchers, and Herds-men their Fathers, there to wear out the
Silks, the Scarfes, and broad Laces, and then return to honest russet, and
dressings wrought with Coventry blue again, some are eene feign to accept of
the honest Coachmans motion, and clap up a match with him, and so be enabled to
keep a Country Alehouse, and live by the sins of the Yeamonry, and others
for their more peculiar qualities dispersed into London and entertained by the
Citizens Wives to teach their Parakeeto's to talk, which is all they are good
for.

If at any time you desire to see any body in, or near the Court, that belongs
to it, go just about the shutting in of evening, And then perhaps, you may see
one creeping away with a Sack of Coals on his back, another with a bundle of
Fagots, another with bottells of Wine, another bartering with a Vinegar man
about certain Vessels of decayed beer, etc. for every thing would live by
i'ts own element as long as it can: But when all is gone, they will be all gone
too, and will be within a very short time If the times do not alter.

Thus you see poor White Hall is miserably deserted of all its darlings, from
Majesty to muckery, forsaken and left in the most solitary condition that ever
any Princes Court of so great eminence and Hospitality in the whole World was.
Now I should proceed to give you the reasons of this great alteration, And
perhaps had this been printed at York I might have done it, But as the case
is I forbear, I would be loath to have the House pulled down where it is
printed, and besides I have no stomach or affection to be torn to pieces in
Cheap Side, and though my brains be muddy I would not have them washed in the
kennell, And therefore as silence is the true sign of mourning, I will grieve
inwardly for this distraction, and leave prating of it.

FINIS.

