A DECLARATION published in the Scots Army, Proclaimed by Order from General
LEVEN at Durham, May 13. 1646.

WITH A DECLARATION and ORDERS from the Estates of Scotland, Dated at
Edenborough, May 8. concerning the KING, and those that repair to him.

With the Heads of other Papers from Newcastle, concerning the manner of His
Majesty's entertainment there, and the posture of the said Garrison upon His
Majesty's coming thither.

With two Victories against the Enemy in Scotland.

Two of Colkittoths Brothers slain.

These Papers are perused, and commanded to be printed.

LONDON: Printed for Matthew Walbanck, May 21. 1646.

Heads of Papers from Newcastle, concerning the King and the Scottish Forces:
With a Declaration published at Durham, and Orders from the Estates at
Edenborough.
AS the coming of his Majesty was strange and unexpected to the General and
Commissioners of the Scots Army, so it was admired by all the Officers and
Soldiers; yet seeing, that it has pleased Almighty God to throw his Majesty
upon them, they tell us, that they will use their uttermost endeavors to make
the best improvement thereof that God shall enable them to, for the good of both
Kingdoms, the maintaining of the Covenant, the settling of the Church, and
procuring of a safe and well-grounded peace to both Nations.

Since His Majesty ^^me to Southwell, there came diverse Malignants to the Army,
which number daily increased, so that by that time the K. was marched to
Durham: there were many mixed among the Scots soldiers, and some came thither
also afterward.

But his Excellency, the Earl of Leven, and the Commissioners, taking into
consideration the dangerous consequence thereof (if not timely prevented) and
advertisements being had about the same, (both to maintain the Covenant, and
the peace of both Kingdoms) they thought fit that a Declaration should be
published, That all persons whatsoever, that have done any dis-service against
the Parliament, shall not remain in, or come near the Army, before they have
submitted to the Authority and all Ordinances of Parliament.

And accordingly on wednesday, the 13. of May, 1646. the said Declaration was
drawn up, and signed by His Excellency, with the advice of the said
Commissioners, and commanded to be published throughout all their Quarters: And
the same day His Majesty being to pass away from Durham to Newcastle, the
Proclamation was accordingly proclaimed in Durham, as follows:

By his Excellency the Earl of Leven, Lord General of the Scottish Armies,
and with the advice of the Right Honorable Committee, residing with the Army.
THese are strictly to require all Officers and Soldiers under my command, to
forbear to have any dealing, or entertain any correspondencie, or bear
company upon the march, or in any the quarters with any person whatsoever,
formerly in service against the Parliament of England, nor to have the least
compliance with any disaffected thereto: But upon notice of their being in the
Army, forthwith to signify the same, that they may be removed, and that we
may be justified in the integrity of our intentions, and the better to prevent
all misunderstanding of our ways*

It is hereby Declared, That no such persons apply themselves to come near to
this Army, but to separate and depart, until they give all due obedience to,
and submit to the Ordinances and Authority of Parliament, certifying them, and
every of them, That if after publishing of these present Orders, they be found
in the Army, in manner abovesaid, they are not to be protected, but reputed and
esteemed as Enemies, their persons to be seized on and delivered by you: And
hereof all persons whatsoever, are to take special notice, as they shall
answer the contrary upon their peril.

For all Officers and Soldiers under my command, and for all other whom these
may concern. Signed LEVEN.
Dated at Durham the 13 of May, 1646.
And the Estates of Scotland have discharged all persons whatsoever, to seek or
receive any Gift, Pension, or mark of honor from His Majesty, and appointed,
that no other desire be propounded to him, but to satisfy the joint desire of
both Kingdoms, in settling of Religion and peace.

When the Declaration was published in Durham, it did no little vex the
Malignants, of which sort there are good store in those parts, who hoped to
have found better acceptance, and from thence encouraged themselves (as they
supposed and much wished) that the Parliament of England and their Armies, and
the Kingdom of Scotland and theirs would have begun a new war; and to kindle
these coals, many were very active, not only verbally, but in public action;
but blessed be God, the Cockatrices were crushed in their shells.

The General made many fair and full expressions (before he left Durham) of
the integrity of the Kingdom of Scotland toward the Parliament of England,
and especially in the observance of the National League and Covenant; And the
Committee of Estates for the Kingdom of Scotland, sitting at Edenborough, have
published this Order and Declaration throughout the Kingdom of Scotland.

By the Committee of Estates, for the Kingdom of Scotland.
THe Committee of Estates, taking to their considerations the present condition
of the public affairs of this Kingdom, do find it necessary, in regard
thereof, and for diverse causes, much importing the advancement of this Cause,
and good, and peace of this Kingdom, that a restraint be upon all the Subjects
of this Kingdom, from going out of the same without public Warrant.

And for that effect, the Committee does Ordain and command, the Lion Herald,
and his brethren Heralds and Pursevants, to pass to the Market-Crosse of
Edenborough, and there, by open Proclamation, to command, charge, and inhibit,
all his Majesty's Subjects, of what degree and condition soever they be, that
none of them presume nor take upon hand to go out of this Kingdom, by Sea or
Land, without Warrant of the Committee of Estates, under the pain to be
pursued and punished, as public enemies and contemners of the public Orders
of the Kingdom, with power hereby. And Ordaines this restraint, to continue
till the first day of June next coming.

To all Governors of Garrisons, and all Officers, Judges, Magistrates, and
others to whom it does belong, to take and apprehend all such persons as they
find going out of the Kingdom, without a Pass as aforesaid.
Dated at Edenborough this 8 of May, 1646.
Also for the Army of the Scots, they marched very long and hard marches from
New-ark; and his Majesty was on the said Wednesday the 13 of May instant
(about five of the clock in the afternoon) received by the Governor of
New Castle into the town, without any solemnity, or ringing of bells, shooting
of Cannon, or acclamations of the people, as some would have had it done.

His Majesty entered the town in a general manner, the Soldiers standing to
their Arms from Gateshead to the place where his Majesty was to quarter;
where the Governor takes care that the King may be attended with all the
circumspection he can, that the disaffected have no access unto his Majesty.

And the better to prevent the same, there are appointed Burgesses to wait, two
at every port in the town, and there is not a Scottishman to be received from
Scotland, without a Pass from the Estates; and no Englishman from any place
of England, except they be men of trust and fidelity, and approved of by the
Parliament, their Commissioners, or the Deputy-Mayor of New Castle. And since
his Majesty, and the Scottish Nobility came to New Castle, they have
discharged diverse Cavaliers of the Kings attendants.

Something more is referred to this following Letter.

New Castle the 14 of May 1646. Noble Sir,
LAst night being Wednesday in the evening the King came to Newcastle, his
Majesty's entertainment was briefly thus (...). A lane of muskets, and pikes
was made (by order from Sir James Lunsdale the Governor) from Gateshead (the
place where his Majesty entered this town) all along the streets, to the
Generals own quarters, where his Majesty now lies; there came with his
Majesty about 300. horse, or scarce so many, and very few or none of the
Country Gentry come with his Majesty into the town, of any quality, which
was prevented by Inhabitants of trust, which were placed both at the Gates, and
before the Court, ( viz. the Generals Quarters where his Majesty still is)
and these did very carefully discry and prevent the entrance of all
Delinquents, and admitted no suspected English persons, to enter into the
Town, and upon search, they found none that were of any esteem or repute.
That watch was continued not only that day, but still is to continue from day,
to day; and they have secured some, and feared the malignant party in these
parts, and kept them in awe, that they dare not presume to attempt to come near
the King.

General Leven has received a Letter from the English Commissioners from
Lincoln, to whom it was directed, with their desires to acquaint the rest of
the Commissioners of Scotland (residing here with the King) therewith, which
accordingly was this day done. The substance of which Letter is;

That to prevent the coming of Malignants to the King, upon his moving
Northward, they desire that no countenance, nor any encouragement at all should
be given to the Malignant party (which shall come near the King, by his
Majesty. And the said Commissioners do also desire the accommodation of the
Scots, in what they shall represent to them, in relation to that business, and
for the better observance thereof.

This Letter being delivered to the General, his Excellency acquainted the
rest of the Lords therewith, who taking the same into consideration, gave their
consent thereto, and what has been observed therein produces good effect, and
the chiefest of the Scottish Nation that are here, do assure us thus much:

That the Parliament of England will not be denied what they shall desire,
concerning the Malignants of these parts.

And whereas there has been Proclamation made at Durham, by order from the
General, and the rest of the Commissioners, that whoever upon the Kings motion
or residence in these parts, shall refuse to submit to the Orders, and
Authority of Parliament, shall be punished according to their demerit, which
also I believe will be published in this place, where they have kept from the
King diverse persons, concerning whom they have received advertisements from the
Commissioners, (...) Lieutenant Colonel (...) K^^ and others.

Now for the manner of his Majesty's march into Newcastle, with the horse that
came along with him and his attendants, it was in brief in this manner.

1 There marched in a party of Horse into New Castle town by the way of
Gateshead, who marched through the Lane made from thence along the streets to
the place appointed for his Majesty, which was the Generals quarters.

2 Some that attended upon his Majesty, rid before all bare.

3 Then his Majesty marched with the General, and some other Scottish
Officers, diverse of whom also that were near the King, rid bare.

4 There went none out of the town of New Castle to meet his Majesty, neither
the Scottish Lords that were in the town, nor the Deputy-Mayor thereof; nor
any other, either Inhabitant or other.

5 His Majesty was not received in any triumph (as some would have had it to
have been done) nor did they in any solemn manner take notice of his Majesty.

6 The King rid in a sad colored plain suit, and alighted at the Generals
quarters (now the Court.)

7 There were no guns discharged, neither by land nor by water, by way of
triumph.

8 There was no acclamation by shooting with muskets, sounding of trumpets, or
beating of drums, and yet there were both Kettle-drums, and trumpets good store
in New Castle; yet were they so far from any public way of triumph, that they
did not found or beat so much, as when one troop of Scottish Horse march into
New Castle.

I pray God that things may be accommodated, according to the Parliaments
desires, and that a right understanding may be on both sides, that so all
unlucky jealousies may be removed, and unity, love, and peace, be confirmed
according to the National League and Covenant.

Now concerning the Kingdom of Scotland, seeing that it has pleased God to
give good success to the Scottish forces there, as appears by Letters from
Edenborough, bearing date May the 10. instant; I shall communicate to you the
particulars of those expresses that we have received from the ^nconcerning the
same, which is briefly thus.

1 That the Marquess of Argile has sent over to Argile and Eilah a party of
1200 men, who found part of Colkiltoths Forces before Eilah, and marched up to
them to releeve the Castle, and fell upon them, and after a sharp encounter
killed 140 upon the place, routed the rest, and slew one of Colkiltoths
brothers, who had the command there, and releeved their own friends in Eilah
Castle. The said 1200 were most part Volunteers, and such as fled out of Argile.

2 There were 1600 men more of the Marquess of Argiles Forces (from the West
of Scotland) sent to releeve Skipinoth Castle, where Colkiltoth himself then
was, who hearing thereof, as also of the raising of the Siege, and routing of
his Forces before Eilah Castle, every one moved Alastor Mac-Do^ell (who is
called Colkiltoth) to attempt to storm, that place before Argiles forces came
up, who first sent in a summons, and had a positive denial, and then drew up
his men to storm, which he did very fiercely; but was beaten back with great
loss, and in this fight Colkiltoth lost (another) his eldest brother, who was
slain upon the place with diverse other considerable men, and the place is
relieved, and the siege raised, Colkilt^th and the rest being fled.

3 Colkiltoth was pursued by the 1600. men of the Marquess of Argile, who
still followed him so close, that he with those he has left, was forced to
retreat to the Hills, and the Country of Argile is now totally cleared of
them, they being all fled with Colkiltoth up to the Hills.

4 Major-Generall Middleton is gone up to Mon^^^^e, with a resolution to fight
with him, and the Estates in Edenborough write, that they expect every day to
hear that he is engaged with him, which it is probable we shall hear by the
next: for at the date of the former Letters they were then very near
engagement.

Newcastle, May 14. 1646.

FINIS.

