A DECLARATION OR, REMONSTRANCE OF The Office of a PRINCE, and his COVNSELLORS.

ALSO, The Duty and Obligement of the People, and Subjects; collected and
extracted forth of the most Divine and Politic AVTHORS, that have treated of
the same SVBIECT.

NEWLY Sent from York, by a Gentleman now residing there, to intimate a
Loyalty to his Majesty, and love to his Country; with an humble desire for a
true understanding between our King and his People.

Whereunto Is annexed the Kings Majesty's five last Propositions to the
Parliament; with their determinate Answer by way of Resolution in three
distinct VOTES.

August 3d LONDON, Printed by John Hammond, and Math: Rhodes. 1642.

A Declaration or Remonstrance of the office of a Prince and His Councillors.
THE Council of a Prince, is a certain congregating or meeting together of
select men, to advise the Prince in the time of War or Peace. Whose Office is
to be mindful of time past to look to the present and to foresee those to
come, the success of their Consultations are happy shunning inconveniences or
at last they find some means to extenuate them.

A Counsel (their respect to the Prince preserved) do by course play the part
almost of all his senses as his understanding, memory, eyes, ears, speech,
hands, and feet. But to the People they are a Father, Tutor, and Governor; If
a Prince and Council be Unanimous they are God Vicegerents on earth, from
hence by the constitution of good Counsel the Prince receives his essence the
Counselors their due honors the People their Protection under good Laws
giving honor both to Prince and Councillors as to the true Ministers of GOD
called lawfully to govern them, But on the contrary by bad Council, or by
misunderstandings or dissentions between the Prince and Council, the Prince
honers not only hourly blemished and his estate and dignity in dainger of
subvertion but the People also to be destroyed and Country to be laid wast by a
foreign Invasion, or by Civell Dissension to be utterly ruined.

These things are of that weight that I do not think any thing in this life
can be found of greater moment, and therefore in my Judgment, it is not the
least duty of a Prince to be diligent in finding, circumspect in electing, and
cautions in constituting and authorizing so needful a part of himself as is a
Council, least choosing such as are more fraught with honors then wisdom, or
those that are rich in the goods of Fortune, wanting the richer endowments of
the mind, the one should prove co^etous to add wealth to his honors, and the
other ambitious to add honor to his riches, and so whilst either perpetrate
their own Designs, neglecting the chief end for which they were chosen, the
whole Commonwealth fall into a most dangerous hazard, till at last finding
their own errors, and being unwilling to publish their own frailties to the
worlds public knowledge, they are enforced to inngulfe themselves in the
justification of most dangerous falsehoods, and still in what they may to lay
the whole burden on the innocent Prince, or at least on some pretended
Counselors about him, still urging and pretending new doubts and fears, those
iealousies being firmly grounded on a malignant Party, which indeed is to be
found (and that nor seldom) amongst themselves.

Many Counselors when by their own ambitions and malignant practizes they
find the State disturbed and out of order, and things not to succeed according
to their desires, they usually command their Bid-dayes to be kept, and the
People to fast for the Sins of the Council, alleging to them, that God
Almighty for Sin does punish the Nation; and in this (indeed) I verily believe
they speak the perfect truth; for Envy or Ambition, Mistrust or disagrements
in or between a Council and their Prince and such Sins as bring not only to
themselves, but even to the whole Commonwealth ruin and calamity; in
consideration whereof, I would advise the Council to ask nothing of their
Prince but what is sit for him to grant, and the Prince to deny them nothing
that is sit for them to ask; for it is the duty both of Prince and Counselors
so to be have themselves toward the Commonwealth, that the Justice of the Law
may not only be equally distributed, and the poor defended from the
oppression of the rich; but also that peace may be maintained with foreign
Princes, and public Commerce increased, to the profit of the Subject, and
honor of the Kingdom.

It is the duty of the Council, who are the Members of the Body Politic, in
all humility and obedience, to advize and treat with their Prince the head of
that Body; for as in a Body natural it would appear altogether preposterous
to see the feet to spurn at the Head, or the hands ready to strike at it; so
it is a thing altogether as uncomely, and of far more dangerous consquence,
to have any Member or Members of the Body Politic to presume to rebel
against their Head the Prince.

A Prince ought to look on his great Council as on the representative Body of
the Kingdom, being lawfully called together and elected by the People general
Suffrages: But that Council ought to look on their Princes as on the
representative soul of the whole Commonwealth elected and authorized by the
power or God himself, his Government being established by his lineal
Succession, and confirmed by the Laws of the Land being invested and received
with the general applause of all his Subjects. Should a Prince after his
election and confirmation prove wicked in all those horrid degrees, Men's
imaginations are able to apprehend yet ought not his People or Council to
presume to go about to enforce him to ought otherwise then by humble entreaty
and advice.

David though anointed by the Prophet Samuel durst not presume to lift his hand
against the first anointed Saul: Saint Paul commands Christians to obey those
Heathen Princes to whom they were naturally borne Subjects, showing obedience
to be due from Subjects to their Princes as from Princes to God.

Kings are Gods earthly Deputies and no man can rebel against the one but he
is doubtless a Traitor to both; Kings ought (as God) to be entreated not
compelled; If a Prince be mislead by bad Counselors or by the advice of
malcontented persons yet it were much better for the good of the Commonwealth,
to cover and palliate the Princes errors or neglects then to discover or
declare them to the knowledge of his Subjects for the Majesty of a Prince can
hardly endure those opprobrious indignityes as may in any likly hood render him
odious to his people.

Counselors being summoned and elected by the Power and authority of the
Prince only may at his pleasure by the same Prerogative be discharged and
dispersed nor is it in the power of the Prince to part with (especially for a
time unlimited) any part or title of his Prerogative Royal, As for a
president. The second Richard King of England parting with his Prerogative
Royal as in farm to Bushy Baggot and Gree^e were adjudged to be executed as
Traitors.

The Parliament then adiuding it not to be in the power of the King to
disinvest his Successors of any part of his or their due Prerogative, the
dissension that was between this King and his Parliaments, and miserable Events
and bloody massacres that succeeded them, and his Deposing might me thinks deter
all Christian Princes and Counselors from the like occasions thereby to eschew
the like effects. As for Deposers of Princes and Usurpers, I think there is no
man doubts but they may have an equal share of Damnation be their pretenses
never so fair.

Religion and a care of the public good, are two easy stepps to popularity,
and the best and safest cloakes to hide black, treacherous and mischievous
intents. I hope the consideration of what has already past in England, and the
present miseries of Germany with the knowledge of Tunc tua res agitur paries
cum proximus ardens. will make every true Englishman so wise, as reflecting on
the miseries past not to be our hasty to become engaged in new mischiefs least
the loss should prove insupportable or the wounds incurable. And for my part,
for the prosperity and safety of this Kingdom I shall every pray to God to
continue the People in their due obedience, the Councillors and Nobility in
constant Loyalty and his Sacred Majesty in love and amity with his Peers and
People.

FINIS.
A true Copy of the Kings Majesty's five last Propositions to the Parliament:
with their determinate Answer, by way of Resolution, in three disticnt VOTES.
His Majesty's Propositions were these following; viz.
FIrst, That they would recall the Ordinance made by the consent of both Houses
of Parliament concerning the Militia, whereby his Majesty has been enforced
to make these his Preparations. Secondly, That they would deliver up his
Majesty's Magazine taken from Hull, be forthwith put into hands in which His
Majesty may confide. Thirdly that His Navy be forthwith surrended by the Earl
of Warwick to Sir John Pennington. Fourthly, That all Arms, Leavies, and
Provisions for War, made by the consent of both Houses be immediately laid
down. Fifthly, That the Parliament might be adjourned to some place where His
Majesty might with security come near them, and join with them in their
consultations.
The Parliaments Resolutions in three Votes; viz.
FIrst, That an Army should be forthwith raised for the safety of the Kings
Person, defense of both Houses of Parliament, and of those that have obeyed
their Orders and Cammands, and preserving of the Religion, the Law Liberty,
and Peace of the Kingdom. Secondly, That the Earl of Essex shall be General.
Thirdly, That in this Cause for the safety of the Kings Persons, defense of
both Houses of Parliament, and those who have obeyed their Orders and Commands,
and preserving of the true Religion the Laws, Liberties, and Peace of the
Kingdom; They will live and die with the Earl of Essex, whom they have
nominated General in this cause.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament that this be Printed
and published.

Hen. Elsynge* Cler. Parl. D. Com.


