A DECLARATION Of the taking away of Sir William Waller, Sir John Clotworthy,
Major General Massy, and Colonel Copley, Members of the House of Commons,
from the Kings head in the Strand, to St. Iameses: Together with their
Protestation read at their removal.
With a Copy of the Lord Generals Order for the same.
Tuesday 12. December. 1648.
MArshall Lawrence came and acquainted Sir William Waller, Sir John Clotworthy,
Major General Massy, and Mr. Lyonell Copley, Members of the House of Commons.
That he had Orders from the Lord General and the Council of the Army, to
remove them from the other Prisoners to St. Iameses; they replied to him, That
they desired to see his Orders; the Marshall answered, they were only Verbal;
but the Gentlemen insisting to see a warrant for their remove, the Marshall
went to the General, and from him about six a clock brought an Order, a true
Copy of which follows: (Viz.)

You are upon sight hereof, to remove Sir William Waller, Sir John Clotworthy,
Major General Massy, and Collonell Copley, from the King's Head Inn (where
they are now in Custody) to St. Iameses; And for so doing, this shall be your
Warrant:

Given under my hand, the 12. of December 1648. T: FAIRFAX.
To Marshall General Lawrence.



This Order being showed unto the aforesaid Gentlemen* Sir William Waller
produced a Paper, desiting that the same might be presented to the General,
which Marshall Lawrence refused to receive, upon which the said Sir William
Waller and the other three Gentlemen, desired the said Marshall and all the
Gentlemen there present, to attend and witness to that Protestation which they
did there make in behalf of themselves and all the Commons and Free borne
Subjects of England; so with a distinct and audible voice read their
Protestation, as follows;

We whose names are hereunto subscribed, being Members of the House of
Commons, and Free men of England, do hereby Declare and protest before God,
Angels, and Men, That the General and Officers of the Army, being raised by
the authori^y of Parliament, and for defense and maintenance of the Privileges
thereof; have not, or ought to have any power or jurisdiction to apprehend,
secure, deteine* imprison, or remove our persons from place to place by any
color or authority whatsoever; nor yet to quest^on or try us, or any of us by
Martial Law, or otherwise, for any offense or crime whatsoever, which can or
shall be objected against us; And that the present imprisonment and removal of
our persons is a high violation of the Rights and Privileges of Parliament,
and of the Fundamental Laws of the Land, and a higher usurpation and exercise
of an Arbitrary and unlawful power, then has been heretofore pretended to,
or attempted by this, or any King or other power whatsoever within this Realm;
notwithstanding which, we and every of us do Declare our readiness to submit
our selves to the Legal trial of a Free Parliament, for any crime or
misdemeanour that can or shall be objected against us:

In witness whereof, we have hereto subscribed our Names, the 12. of December
1648. At the Kings head in the Strand. WILLIAM WALLER. EDW: MASSY. JOHN
CLOTWORTHY. LIONELL COPLEY.


Printed in the Year 1648.


