A DECLARATION Wherein is full satisfaction given concerning Sir Edward
Deering: With the just vindication of him from the scandals cast upon him by
Malignants, and the reasons of his return.

depiction of Sir Edward Dering, 1st Baronet (1598-1644)

With a true Relation of the Scots proceedings about the surrendering of
Newcastle.

feb: 14 1643 Printed by Andrew Coe according to Order. 1644.

THe Declaration of the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland have produced some
effects in giving time to those who have stepped out of the way to come in by the
first of March, as appears by Sir Edw. Deering, Mr. Murry and orhers, who
submitting themselves to the mercy of the Parliament accordingly do receive
the benefit of the Declaration. And no doubt there will be many more here
before that time, in the mean time heae is presented a Declaration of what has
proceeded against Sir Edward Deering.

WHereas Malignants, and some evil disposed people have censured this return
from Oxford to the Parliament, to be either because to be pricked Sheriff of
Kent by the King could not be obtained, nor yet the Deanerie of Canterbury,
and last of all to be turned out of the Parliament at Oxford; it is nothing but
the malice of the envious brood that faigns these false calumnies to blemish by
unjust reports.

The true reason of this return from that unfortunate Army, (unfortunate
indeed, by misleading just intentions, to walk out of the way) are these.

1 That because it was so cleerlie manifest, that whatsoever resolutions or
advice the Nobility and Gentry had taken and given to his Majesty to follow,
he from time to time was led the contrary way by a secret Juncto of Popishlie
affected councels, who continually crossed the designs of the moderate party
about the King.

2 For advising his Majesty to show some mark of disfavour upon the papists,
and not to put them in trust in places of such concernment, as he does, but
found no acceptance.

3 For declaring plainly at Oxford how to take up arms under the Earl of Essex
was better grounded upon better reason, for satisfaction of conscience: then to
take up arms against the Parliament, and to join with the papists and Prelates
in their Cavalrie.

4 For saying at Oxford before the sitting of the Junctos. That if they offered
to sit there as a Parliament. that it were just with God to throw some
judgment down upon them.

Sir Edward Deering, considering the ways of the enemy, as is expressed in the
Declaration, laid down his Commission in November last.

On Wednesday, February the seventh, Sir Edward Deering presented an humble
petition to the House of Commons. For every one that comes in by virtue of the
aforesaid Declaration, must petition the Parliament, and thereby claimed what
is promised by the same.

1 SIr Edward Deering did acknowledge it a great weakness in him, that he had
deserted the Parliament: and leave that just and legal way which he was in
with them to join with the wicked proceedings of the enemy.

2 That he is fully convinsed that the Enemy seeks all possible ways to
destroy the liberty of the Subject involved in Parliaments.

3 That he has bin much troubled in conscience, for that he having formerly
taken the Protestation to maintain and defend this Parliament, has bin so far
deluded to appear in arms against it, and could not be in quiet until he had
returned.

4 That although he will not tax his Majesty with breach of promise, yet he
sees there is a deficiencie somewhere, since the Papists are not only in Arms
against the Parliament, but in chief command in the Kings Army.

5 That the preferring of Papists before Protestants in the Kings A^mie, has
been a great grief to him to see.

6 That whereas there he see them about to affront the Parliament, by forging a
pretended one at Oxford, which proceedings were clean against his aproba^ion,
he was exceedingly desirous to leave them.

7 That he thought it a great happiness to see the Declaration published, the
benefit whereof he was now returned to claim.

And accordingly he took the Covenant, and is at liberty.

WHereas there are twenty thousand Scots already in England, and there are
twelve thousand more mustering in Scotland; they have already possessest
themselves of all the Fast part of Northumberland and the Forts and Castles
between Barwicke and Tinmouth. They have taken the Isle of Cocket: and the
Garrison thereof, with seventy Commanders and other common Soldiers: seven
pieces of Ordnance, and all their ammunition, and have placed a Garrison of
their own men therein.

The Inhabitants of that County come into them daily, and the more because the
Gentry of the Country join with them and take the Covenant, so that indeed
all Northumberland is pretty well reduced to the obedience of the King, and
Parliament; Newcastle, Tinmouth, and the Sheelds only excepted, which it is
very probable by this time are in their hands too, especially Newcastle.

The Scots lie quattered about Morpeth, Seaton, Hepam: Ogle Castle, Prude, and
those parts about Newcastle: and have laid a strong siege about Newcastle also:
and ly close under the very Walls, the Malignants are for the most part all of
them gone into Newcastle, when they first heard of the Scots approach, whether
they carried such treasure and other goods as they most esteemed: There is no
certainty whether General King be in Newcastle or not, but the Scots had
besieged it eight days: which is to this time above a fortnight: There are a
great number in the Town; but they wish that all Newcastles Army was there,
that they might make short work with them, for they did not expect the taking
of Newcastle to be much troublesome to them.

General Lesley sent a Messenger to the Town to the Governor thereof: to
require the delivery thereof to him: for the use of the King, and Parliament,
and that for their so doing, the Town should be free from plunder, and
themselves in person secured; with other propositions as was by the General
thought f^t.

The Messenger having delivered his Message to Col. Glenham, who received it in
the name of the Town, the Town was summoned, and a parlie was held concerning
the same, and it was agreed upon, that an answer should be returned to Generll
Lesley: to desire him only to grant five days respite, and then a full answer
should be given him.

This answer being brought to General Lesley he was very willing to condescend
thereunto, and the more rather because he had not then his murdering pieces
ready, by reason the illness of the ways hindered them, but by that time (at
the farthest) he expected them, resolving that if they would not deliver up the
Town the^y would storm it, but it was then believed by the Scots Army that it
would be surrendered to them, so that there is no question but that by this time
it is in their hands.

And as for the Shields they are not yet taken, but being only but houses they
do expect that it will be no great matter to take them, they can do it when
they list, The greatest matter next unto the taking of New castle Town, is
Tinmouth Castle.

They are not yet over Tyne, but in case they are forced by any occasion to
stay before Newcastle they in end to leave a strong siege there and to march
into the Bishopric of Durham.

They do carry themselves so sivelly and orderly that the Country do even
admire them, taking not the worth of a penny from any man but what they pay
fully for, and they are not come unprovided, for every soldier has 2 or 3
pieces in his pocket, and there has thousands come in to them, and taken the
Covenant, and their Army does exceedingly in crease.

The Ships that were laden in the channel with malignants goods, were stopped in
by 4 Parliament Ships which the vice Admiral appointed to ly before Tinmouth,
but the last week about Thuasday and Friday there fell such storms that our
ships could not ride there, but were forced to sale away from thence for fear
of being shipwrackt, at which time they took their opportunity, and saled out of
the channel, and have carried away their fraught, it is supposed for Holland.

This is Published according to Order.

FINIS.

