A DECLARATION TO The Kingdom, OF The Armies general Survey of the Income of
the Excize, the profits of the Customs, the benefit of Compositions, and other
Moneys raised in the Kingdom: And concerning Committees in London and the
Country which have received moneys for the State.

Also a particular Letter from his Excellency the Lord Fairfax to the
Commissioners of Excize, concerning their proceedings in levying and receiving
the same, and such sums of money as they have in Cash, and already received.

Signed by his Excellency, and published for general satisfaction.

London: Printed for R. B. 1648.

A Declaration to the Kingdom, of the Armies general survey of the accounts
of the Excize, the Customs, the Kings Revenue, the Compositions of Goldsmiths
Hall, and the Receipts of Committees in London, and several Counties of this
Kingdom.
HAving by Gods blessing and the endeavors of this dispersed Army overcome the
most visible actors of their own and the Kingdoms ruin, it pleased him to put
into their thoughts to use such ways and means as he shall dictate to them in
a time of extremity and danger, for settling this long oppressed Nation in their
just Rights and Privileges, and upon the approach of some Regiments of the
Army into the City of London, his Excellency with the advice of his General
Council of the Army, gave Orders for the seizing of certain Treasuries within
the said City, (they being as yet much in arreare for the Assessements to the
Army) and coming to Weavers-Hall they found a considerable sum of money, which
in probability was part of the money collected upon the Assessements to
aforesaid, however it might be otherwise pretended, which money by his
Exeellencies Declaration (that not only the Kingdom, but the whole world may
judge of the justness of his proceedings,) is to be restored again without
loss, or to be made good out of that which is yet due to the Army, and was
paid in by the middle sort of people, which we hope will satisfy all
reasonable men that the intent of this Army is not to take or act any thing by
violence, but what is theirs and the Kingdoms due; for however it may be
alleged that this act was to make provision to pay the private soldier, yet
is it not without special regard to the peoples interest, for it is too well
known that if the soldier has not his pay he is unable to discharge his
Quarters, which causes many deep sighs and groans from the poor Farmer in
the Country, who (with us) have long had a particular aspect on the City of
London in hopes of redress, for that it is notoriously known, that it is the
only place of receipt and the public treasury of the Kingdom. And when we
examine the income of the Excize only, it amazeth us to think that the Estates
of Holland should maintain a far greater Army then this in constant pay (the
Excize being no higher there then it is there) by that alone. But when you
consider the other vast sums of money, which for several years together
have accrued out of this Office, the Custom, House, (and other the Kings
Revenue) Composition money, the sale of Bishops Lands, sequesterations in all
parts of the Kingdom, etc. and yet all too little either to satisfy public
debts, or pay the deerly earned wages of the soldiers, it must necessarily
follow that a great part of such moneys were converted to a contrary use, or
not that improvement made thereof as might best advantage the public; which
has caused us and our friends to consider of these perticulars following.

1. That the Assessements for this Army were either not gathered, or detained
on purpose to bring the Army into disdain, and render them odious unto the
Kingdom. 2. That the accounts of the Excize are unperfect, or not kept in that
form which is requisite for that and other Officers of like nature, the
experience of the later too plainly appearing by the delays that have commonly
been used, when they have been called on to bring an account which could hardly
ever yet be perfected, or brought to just estimate under 6. Months; within
which time there commonly happened some extraordinary oceasion for a great
sum, and if this upon earnest request were advanced, it must be repaid with
8. l. per centum, which together with the large allowance to the Commissioners,
and Sub-Officers, there comes not de claro above one moitie to the State. 3.
That the Customs taken, or Tunnage and Poundage and the revenue of the Kings
Land, brings a vast profit to the State, and some part thereof is unaccompted
for, and the Customs which were heretofore declared to be for the maintenance
of the Navy, not sufficient to defray that charge, but large sums of
Compositions, and otherwise have been added toward that service. 4. That
before the time of the rising in Kent (and the Earl of Hollands party) there
was at least threescore thousand pounds due, from such as had already made
their compositions and entered bond to pay it at such a day, which moneys not
being brought in was made use of as an inablement to those persons in whose
hands it remained, the more deeply to engage in the last War, and of that which
was brought in, many great sums thereof were given away as a recompense or
reward to particular persons which had no need thereof, whilst others which had
faithfully served the Parliament were ready to famish with hunger. 5. That for
Bishops Lands if they have not been sold at an under value, yet has not that
benefit been gained thereby as suited with the necessity to supply the public
affairs, for it is a thing which few are unsenfible of, that some men being in
equipage and condition to purchase, have made that good to themselves which
others have had ltttle cause to esteem any better of then desperate debts. 6.
It is not to be forgotten that as these places before mentioned are chiefly to
be dived into, yet does it no ways excuse Committees in the Countreies or
other Cities, or any person or persons of what sort or degree soever which may
justly be charged, neither is it to be understood that every Member or
particular person officiating or appertaining to any of the Officers or
Committees aforesaid, are faulty or blameworthy for any miscarriages therein,
For he that does well shall be accepted both of God and man.
These things premised as so many generals, wherein is conceived there might
be great redress, nevertheless it is hereby fit likewise to be declared, that
the Army do not take on them by force or violence to regulate these or other
matters of the same kind, but freely leave it unto the honorable House of
Commons, and others in place of trust and judicature; and no sooner shall it
please God to settle this Kingdom in peace, the Army secured by good and
undoubted ways from those which have and will at all times hereafter (if it
I Will in their power) seek their utter ruin, and bring a new disturbance upon
the whole Kingdom; and our dearly earned wages satisfied or secured, we shall
most readily and willingly disband, and betake our selves to our former
callings.

And further, forasmuch as a Party of Horse did by mistake march to the grand
Excize, although no violence or injury offered, or money by them taken or
secured, yet many false reports were raised, whereupon the Lord General, to
preserve a right understanding, sent a Letter to the Commissioners of Excize in
these words.

Gentlemen,
WHereas upon this present eight of December, a party of horse and foot came to
the Excize Office in Broadstreet, which perhaps will occasion some to think the
Army came thither with a purpose to interrupt any more levying of the Excize.
These are to assure them that the said forces came thither by a mistake, and
that there was not any intentions to give interruption unto the due levying of
the Excize, or to seize upon any money in Cash, and that you may proceed as
formerly according to those Ordinances and Orders of Parliament, which you have
received concerning the same,

December. 8. 1648. Your very assured friend, Fairfax.

For my worthy friends the Commissioners of the Excize and new Impost.

FINIS.

